The Theory and Practice 
of Ontology
Edited by Leo Zaibert

The Theory and Practice of Ontology

Leo Zaibert
Editor
The Theory and 
Practice of Ontology

ISBN 978-1-137-55277-8        ISBN 978-1-137-55278-5  (eBook)
DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-55278-5
Library of Congress Control Number: 2016957454
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s) 2016
The author(s) has/have asserted their right(s) to be identified as the author(s) of this work in accordance 
with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether 
the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of 
illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and trans-
mission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or 
dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication 
does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant 
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book 
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or 
the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any 
errors or omissions that may have been made.
Cover illustration: DNY59/Getty Images
Printed on acid-free paper
This Palgrave Macmillan imprint is published by Springer Nature
The registered company is Macmillan Publishers Ltd.
The registered company address is: The Campus, 4 Crinan Street, London, N1 9XW, United Kingdom
Editor
Leo Zaibert
Union College Department of Philosophy
Schenectady, New York, USA

The contributors wish to dedicate this collection to Barry, in friendship and 
admiration.

vii
Contents
1	 Introduction
  1
Leo Zaibert
2	 Ontologia Utens and Beings in Time
  9
Peter Simons
3	 Against Fantology Again
  25
Ingvar Johansson
4	 On Drawing Lines Across the Board
  45
Achille Varzi
5	 Social Reality, Law, and Justice
  79
David Koepsell
6	 Acts of Terror as Collective Violent Acts
  95
Alessandro Salice

viii 
Contents
  7	 Letter of Pharisaism
  115
Maurizio Ferraris
  8	 Just Organic Wholes
  135
Leo Zaibert
  9	 ‘Pain’ in SNOMED CT: Is There an Anesthetic?
  157
Werner Ceusters and Jonathan P. Bona
10	 The Structure of Standard Music Notation
  187
Roberto Casati
11	 Attitude: How We Learn to Inhabit the Future
  203
Mariam Thalos
12	 Parental Love and the Meaning of Life
  223
Berit Brogaard
13	 Foolishness and the Value of Knowledge
  241
Kevin Mulligan
Index
  269

ix
Jonathan P. Bona  State University of New York, Buffalo, NY, USA
Berit Brogaard  University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA
Roberto Casati  Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Paris, France  
Ministère de la Recherche, Paris, France
Werner Ceusters  University at Buffalo, State University of New York, Buffalo, 
NY, USA
Maurizio Ferraris  University of Turin, Turin, Italy
Ingvar  Johansson  Department of Historical, Philosophical and Religious 
Studies, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden
David  Koepsell  Comision Nacional de Bioetica & Universidad Autonoma 
Metropolitana, Xochimilco, Mexico
Kevin Mulligan  University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
Alessandro Salice  University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
Peter Simons  Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland
Mariam Thalos  University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA
Achille Varzi  Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
Leo Zaibert  Union College, Schenectady, NY, USA
Notes on Contributors

xi
Fig. 9.1	
Historical subsumption hierarchy of the SNOMED  
CT concept “405154001: level of suffering (observable  
entity)”. Relationships are annotated with the period during  
which they were active
173
Fig. 9.2	
Partial historical subsumption hierarchy of the SNOMED  
CT concept “102597005: unpleasant odor of feet  
(finding)”
182
Fig. 11.1	 (a) Phase 1, the “I” in isotropic time; (b) grown-up phase,  
“I” and others tracing arcs in anisotropic time
214
List of Figures

xiii
List of Tables
Table 9.1	
Examples of SNOMED CT concepts related to pain
162
Table 9.2	
Examples of historic relationships
164
Table 9.3	
Historic information about three SNOMED CT concepts  
for “pain” accumulated in the PHIS table
169
Table 9.4	
Changes in semantic tags over different SNOMED  
CT versions
174
Table 9.5	
Evolution of semantic tags over different SNOMED  
CT versions
175
Table 9.6	
Semantic tag changes in SNOMED CT concepts in  
whose FSN a pain term (or lexical variant thereof) is  
directly used, compared to semantic tag changes in the  
SNOMED CT concepts contained in the PHIS table  
not directly related to pain
176

1
© The Author(s) 2016
L. Zaibert (ed.), The Theory and Practice of Ontology, 
DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-55278-5_1
In one way or another—and often in various ways—all the contributors 
are indebted to Barry Smith. Some of us were Smith’s students, and took 
our first steps in academia in the context of collaborative work with him. 
But even those who have never been, technically speaking, Smith’s stu-
dents, have nonetheless immensely benefited from his penetrating intel-
ligence. As a matter of fact, in connection to Smith, the categories of 
“student”, “colleague”, and “collaborator”, exhibit remarkable overlaps. 
All the contributors are equally grateful to Barry and they dedicate this 
volume to him, in friendship and in admiration indeed.
In terms of number of publications, Smith is one of the most prolific 
philosophers of his generation. In addition to his prodigious output, 
the articles contained in this volume reveal another impressive aspect 
of his career: the number of disciplines in which the influence of his 
work has been felt: biology, computer science and informatics, cogni-
tive ­science, economics, genetics, geography, law, neurology, and phi-
Introduction
Leo Zaibert
1
L. Zaibert (*) 
Union College, Schenectady, NY, USA
e-mail: lzaibert@gmail.com

losophy itself. Smith has published important articles in all of these 
areas, and he has also received prestigious awards by the professional 
governing bodies of these diverse disciplines. He even holds profes-
sorships in six of these fields. Few scholars have ever materialized the 
real value of interdisciplinarity in anything like the way Smith has.  
The wide-ranging relevance of his work thus constitutes another, 
­perhaps even more powerful, reason for publishing a volume such as 
this.
Smith received his BA in mathematics and philosophy (First Class 
Honours) from Oxford University in 1973—a degree which was subse-
quently converted to a MA in 1977—and his PhD in philosophy from 
the University of Manchester in 1976, with a dissertation titled “The 
Ontology of Reference: Studies in Logic and Phenomenology”. He has 
held academic posts at the Universities of Sheffield and Manchester, at 
the International Academy of Philosophy (in Liechtenstein), and, since 
1994, at the State University of New York at Buffalo. He has been an 
invited professor in dozens of universities across the globe, and he is a 
member of the editorial board of dozens of peer-reviewed publications. 
His work has been funded by the National Institutes of Health, the 
National Science Foundation, the Department of Defense, the European 
Union, the Volkswagen Foundation, and the Alexander von Humboldt 
Foundation, to name a few. No philosopher comes close to Smith in 
terms of the number of grants he has received, or in terms of the financial 
significance of those grants.
Smith’s early interests, captured in the title of his dissertation, have 
remained at the center of his investigations during his long and fruitful 
career, and they are key in helping us understand how Smith has been able 
to contribute to so many diverse disciplines, and indeed how his influ-
ence is to be appreciated in the contributions to this volume. Above all, 
he has been preoccupied with the fundamental structure of the universe: 
with what philosophers have traditionally called “metaphysics” or “ontol-
ogy”. Given the ebb and flow of human intellectual pursuits, and given 
the progressive specialization of human knowledge and the subsequent 
proliferation of different disciplines and sub-disciplines, this important 
branch of philosophy became just that—a branch of philosophy, with-
out much connection to the sciences or practical affairs. Interestingly, 
2 
L. Zaibert

however, it was nothing other than metaphysics that, say, the early pre-­
Socratic philosophers thought they were doing—and they did not see 
this focus as separate from their concern with what throughout different 
periods in human history have been labeled “purely” scientific endeavors. 
While in the Renaissance we witness efforts to emphasize the connections 
between philosophy and the sciences, these connections were particularly 
significant in the twentieth-century school of phenomenology, particu-
larly in the work of Edmund Husserl. Smith has been greatly influenced 
by Husserl (he has published considerably on Husserl, and is the co-­
editor of the authoritative The Cambridge Companion to Husserl). Steeped 
in this phenomenological tradition, Smith sees his investigations as at 
once ontological (and thus philosophical) and scientific.
There is, of course, nothing objectionable about projects in, say, the 
philosophy of medicine, or the philosophy of music, and so on. But it 
is important to emphasize that this is not what Smith has done. Rather, 
he has mobilized philosophical tools and methods so that he can con-
tribute to medicine itself, music itself, and so on. It is not that philoso-
phers, qua philosophers, are familiar with the specific facts of medicine 
or music (etc.)—they are clearly not (hence the need for collaborative 
approaches such as those which Smith often directs). But philosophers do 
know better than physicians and musicians (etc.) how to conceptualize 
some abstract features of these very disciplines, and how to understand 
the relations between the different entities which fall under the purview 
of these disciplines. Philosophy, in the sense Smith practices it, is not a 
meta-discipline that hovers over other disciplines: it is, rather, the quint-
essential infra-discipline, which lives within these other disciplines.
That philosophers are better equipped to investigate and analyze the 
fundamental structure of the universe than any other professionals or 
academics has been Smith’s animating conviction throughout his career. 
It is, after all, philosophers who are trained to deal with metaphysical 
or ontological questions. And it is philosophers, too, who are trained 
in formal logic, and thus likelier than others to approach these onto-
logical questions with the rigor and systematicity that logic presupposes. 
So, in Smith’s opinion, it is precisely in virtue of their expertise with 
those essentially philosophical tools that philosophers are so well-suited 
to come to the help of other disciplines. Smith’s work shows that this help 
1  Introduction 
3

goes much farther than conceptual clarity. The use to which Smith has 
put the philosophical tools afforded by ontology and logic in the service 
of other disciplines has been truly revolutionary.
Chronologically listing the title of some of Smith’s influential publica-
tions provides hints as to why the preceding assertion is not hyperbolic 
at all. “The Ontogenesis of Mathematical Objects” (1975), “Logic, Form 
and Matter” (1981), “The Substitution theory of Art” (1986), “Textual 
Deference” (1991), “Putting the World Back into Semantics” (1993), 
“Formal Ontology, Common Sense, and Cognitive Science” (1995), 
“Geographical Categories: An Ontological Investigation” (2001), “The 
Metaphysics of Real Estate” (2001), “Husserlian Ecology” (2001), 
“Quantum Mereotopology” (2002), “Do Mountains Exist? Towards 
an Ontology of Landforms” (2003), “Biomedical Informatics and 
Granularity” (2004), “On Carcinomas and Other Pathological Entities” 
(2005), “Referent Tracking for Digital Rights Management” (2007), 
“Framework for a Protein Ontology” (2007), “Foundations for a Realist 
Ontology of Mental Disease” (2010), “Towards an Ontology of Pain 
(2011), “How to Do Things with Documents” (2012). As can be sur-
mised from the titles above—some of which have appeared in leading 
publications outside of philosophy—Smith has contributed concrete, in-­
house advancements in many disciplines.
In addition to the indirect evidence we could glean from these titles 
and from the sheer output of Smith’s work, consider one example of the 
sort of strategy which Smith has employed in bringing philosophical 
tools to bear on other disciplines: the case of medicine, and in particular 
through the lens of the work of the Institute for Formal Ontology and 
Medical Information Science (IFOMIS), which Smith founded in 2001, 
after he was awarded the two million Euros attached to the Wolfgang 
Paul Prize, with which the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation hon-
ored him. Imagine a team of physicians who undertake to collate and 
systematize data surrounding a certain disease, in order to, for example, 
develop software that may render the diagnosis and treatment of this 
disease more efficient. It is of course common knowledge that physi-
cians cannot undertake this project alone—computer scientists would be 
needed in this enterprise. What is not commonly acknowledged is that a 
4 
L. Zaibert

team of physicians and computer scientists working together would still 
need ontologists—that is, philosophers.
Neither physicians nor musicians (etc.), after all, are likely to under-
stand—and at any rate are not trained to understand—the sometimes 
subtle but nonetheless important differences between the sorts of relations 
that may obtain between the fundamental entities with which their dis-
ciplines deal. For example, there are important differences between parts 
and proper parts; and there are important differences between something 
being either a part or a proper part of something else, on the one hand, 
and it being caused by that something else, on the other; between two 
entities overlapping and two entities underlapping, amongst many oth-
ers. Smith’s efforts in this area have both highlighted the ways in which 
philosophically uninformed approaches to medicine have failed, and have 
helped his team of researchers develop conceptual apparatuses better able 
to capture the ontological foundations of medicine. The results of Smith’s 
efforts at the helm of IFOMIS can be appreciated not only by looking  
at the many academic publications that the institute has produced, but 
by the fact that other organizations—form the Volkswagen Foundation 
to the National Institute of Health—have continued to support his proj-
ects in this area, to the tune of many millions of dollars.
This volume is not conceived only as a celebration of Smith’s work. It 
is also a stand-alone testament to how genuinely fruitful the work has 
been, and how the contributors take insights or interests prompted by 
his work in different directions. While not all of the contributions are 
about Smith’s work directly, they all resonate well with topics to which 
he has devoted attention. The general theme that pervades the volume is, 
of course, connected to ontology. But the range of specific topics covered 
herein reflects the dizzying breadth of Smith’s own career, and of the 
value of ontology. Preferring to let them speak for themselves, I shall only 
offer one-line summaries of the chapters, merely in order to offer at once 
a glimpse on the richness of the volume.
The volume opens with Peter Simons’s “Ontologia Utens and Beings in 
Time”, and with his investigation of the connections between “ontology” 
in the classical Aristotelian sense and the sort of novel applied realms to 
which Smith, above all, has put it to use. In “Against Fantology Again”, 
Ingvar Johansson takes on Smith’s attacks on a widespread assumption in 
1  Introduction 
5

contemporary philosophy whereby the fundamental elements of ontol-
ogy track the fundamental aspects of logical syntax. Achille Varzi, in “On 
Drawing Lines across the Board”, turns our attention to the implications 
of Smith’s work on the distinction between fiat and bona fide boundaries, 
not only regarding geography itself but regarding the surprisingly many 
other general areas of investigation in which it applies as well.
In “Social Reality, Law, and Justice”, David Koepsell further highlights 
the scope of Smith’s ontology by exploring its connection to some central 
worries of jurisprudence and to the burgeoning field of social ontology. 
Some of these concerns are further explored by Alessandro Salice’s “Acts 
of Terror as Collective Violent Acts”, in which an analysis of the elu-
sive notion of terrorism is advanced. Maurizio Ferraris, in his “Letter of 
Pharisaism”, discusses the implications of Heidegger’s Nazism (particu-
larly in light of the recent publication of the Black Notebooks). In “Just 
Organic Wholes”, Leo Zaibert pays attention to the ways in which what 
Smith has dubbed the tradition of “Austrian Philosophy” may offer an 
unusually penetrating lens through which to look at the problem of the 
justification of punishment.
In “‘Pain’ in SNOMED CT: Is There an Anesthetic?” Werner Ceusters 
and Jonathan P. Bona offer an example of the sort of practical applications 
to which ontology can be put to use by examining the ways in which the 
Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine—Clinical Terms deals with pain. 
Similarly, in his “The Structure of Standard Musical Notation”, Roberto 
Casati discusses both some principles that govern the representation of 
time in standard music notation, and some cognitive consequences of 
such notation. In her “Attitude: How we Learn to Inhabit the Future”, 
Mariam Thalos offers a phenomenological account of the perception of 
time, and of how humans experience it at different stages of their lives. 
In her “Parental Love and the Meaning of Life” Berit Brogaard discusses 
some unsavory aspects of motherhood, by considering how mother-
hood conflicts with other valuable aspects of existence such as autonomy 
and welfare. And in “Foolishness and the Value of Knowledge” Kevin 
Mulligan closes the volume by presenting an analysis of foolishness in 
which it is importantly distinguished from stupidity, and in which it is 
seen as a form of an intellectual vice.
6 
L. Zaibert

As it turns out the last note of the last article in the volume can be put 
to use in concluding this brief introduction as well. For not only does 
it appropriately conclude Mulligan’s piece, but it offers an invitation to 
consider some of the multifarious ways in which Smith’s seminal work on 
ontology—both theoretical and applied—yield fruit in the contributions 
contained herein.
This tribute to Barry Smith has touched on only a few of the topics he has 
illuminated over a long and extraordinarily productive career, a career 
driven by an unusually large range of strong interests pursued in a very 
determined fashion. Barry Smith, his friends and admirers all agree, is in 
many ways an epistemic hero.
1  Introduction 
7

9
© The Author(s) 2016
L. Zaibert (ed.), The Theory and Practice of Ontology, 
DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-55278-5_2
2
1	
Useful Ontology
Ontology, despite the relative newness of its name, goes back to Aristotle’s 
principal definition of metaphysics as the science of being as being. 
Christian Wolff divided metaphysics into ontology or general metaphys-
ics on the one hand and three branches of just slightly less general special 
metaphysics on the other. Husserl renamed the two sides as formal ontol-
ogy (general) versus regional ontologies (special), while Donald Williams 
called the former analytic ontology and the latter speculative cosmology. 
Amid this terminological plethora it is sensible to stay with ontology as the 
name for the general part. But as the most general part of the most gen-
eral discipline, how could ontology ever be useful? To see how useful it 
indeed is when understood sensibly and deployed as a general framework 
for database ontologies, it suffices to look at Barry Smith’s work, not only 
Ontologia Utens and Beings in Time
Peter Simons
P. Simons (*) 
Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland
e-mail: psimons@tcd.ie.

his philosophical articles but more particularly his impassioned advocacy 
of realist philosophical ontology as the best framework in the construc-
tion and conceptual structuring of databases in all manner of subjects 
from genetics, medicine and other biomedical sciences to geography and 
the military. To achieve this penetration, Smith brought decades of work 
and experience in philosophy and its history, all conducted from a robust 
realist perspective and drawing on an encyclopedic knowledge of scien-
tific philosophy from the last 150 years, including many of its less well-­
known corners.
It would be otiose to add further injunctions to take scientific ontol-
ogy seriously and apply it as Smith has done to all of his well-argued 
articles. Those who have benefitted from the sensible and well-designed 
Basic Formal Ontology (BFO) can attest to the improvements wrought 
by taking this tool in designing computer ontologies. Since Smith and I 
agree on nearly all important philosophical matters and likewise on the 
need to apply ontology in the interest of clean and efficient data, in this 
paper I shall focus on one area in ontology in which we have a (fairly 
minor) difference of opinion, namely the relationship between objects 
that persist in time, continuants and occurrents.
2	
Continuants and Occurrents: 
The Distinction
Consider objects in time. Perhaps there are some that exist instanta-
neously, for example a particularly shaped shadow cast by two objects 
that cross in front of one another in the sun, but aside from these, all the 
objects we encounter (and any of whose existence we can be sure) last 
for a period of time, even if a very short one. We shall confine attention 
to these. Following W.E. Johnson, we make a fundamental distinction 
between two ways in which objects that persist are in time. Some persist 
by getting longer and longer in temporal extent. These are occurrents, so 
called because their typical exemplars are events and processes, which 
occur or happen or go on. A popular kind of occurrent is a race, of which 
there are many kinds, involving humans, animals and machines: exam-
10 
P. Simons

ples of these three genres are respectively a marathon, a greyhound race, 
and a Formula One motor race. A race lasts for a certain time, from the 
moment when the competitors are set off to the moment the last com-
petitor to complete the course does so, and the winner is, of course, the 
competitor that completes the course in the shortest time. That stretch 
of time gives the clue to the nature of a race: it has a beginning, lasts for 
a period after that, and comes to an end. The temporal interval from 
beginning to end is its duration, and this can be subdivided into shorter 
sub-intervals, such as the first five seconds, or middle third, or the second 
half. Some of these sub-intervals are arbitrarily like these, others may 
be determined by physical features of the race, for example the period 
between the leader starting and completing a certain lap. Races are some-
times abandoned before they finish, for a variety of reasons, and when 
this happens, the incomplete or abandoned race itself has a duration, 
which is shorter than would have been the duration had the race pro-
ceeded to completion. All of this is well known, but the point is to illus-
trate the fundamental property of occurrents: that they last for a certain 
time, or, as Smith and his collaborators say, they span an interval of time. 
Ontologies dealing with such items are called by them SPAN ontologies.
Because occurrents span intervals, they have longer and shorter parts 
which span sub-intervals of the total interval. Another way to put this is 
to say that occurrents have temporal parts, that is to say, parts of the total 
occurrent which last a shorter time than the whole but which, when they 
are occurring, comprise all of the occurrent as then happening. A salient 
example is the first half of a football match, which comprises everything 
that happens in the match before the half-time interval. This is to be 
contrasted with the play that occurs throughout the game in one of the 
halves of the football pitch, which is a spatial part of the game. There 
are of course parts of the game which are neither spatial segments nor 
temporal segments like these, for example the part played by a particular 
player in the game, which may or may not endure throughout the whole 
game but which certainly does not take up the whole volume of the game 
at any time.
In addition to temporal parts that occupy a sub-interval of an occurrent, 
there are two other candidates for temporal parts. The first are topologi-
cally disconnected temporal parts, for example the play in the five min-
2  Ontologia Utens and Beings in Time 
11

utes either side of half-time in a football match. These are ­occasionally of 
practical and theoretical significance. In many sports there are interrup-
tions because of injuries and time-outs, but despite these we consider the 
event as a whole despite its intermittent nature. Similar remarks apply to 
say musical performances with short pauses between numbers of move-
ments. The other case concerns the temporal boundaries of occurrents: 
the moment of beginning, the moment of ending, the half-way moment, 
and so on. Assuming we treat these as genuine items in our ontology, 
and nothing we have said either includes or precludes them, they are best 
treated as limiting cases of occurrents, because they are approximated by 
extended occurrents of arbitrarily short duration. As stated above, we 
shall not be much concerned with such cases.
The other basic kind of object in time are continuants, so called because 
they continue to exist for a period. Examples of continuants are famil-
iar and legion. The earth, the heavenly bodies, geographic features, the 
organisms on the earth, including ourselves, our many artefacts such as 
buildings and means of transport, bodies and masses of matter, and much 
else that interests us are continuants. They comprise what Aristotle called 
substances and what are often called just things or objects, if inanimate, 
and animals, plants etc. if living. They include the parts of these things, 
such as the rock strata of a mountain, the organs and tissues of an animal, 
the bricks of a house, the wheels of a car, etc. They also include social 
and collective things like families, clubs, orchestras, firms, governments, 
nations and dynasties, as well as their individual members, officials and 
so on. They comprise enduring qualitative and quantitative properties of 
continuants, the white color of this wall, the mass of this apple, the shape 
of this vase, and so on. Since these are items which are also in time and 
which depend for their existence on the substantial whole to which they 
belong, these are individual accidents, moments or tropes, not the univer-
sal kinds to which they belong.
Whereas occurrents endure by acquiring later stages or temporal parts, 
continuants endure by simply “hanging in there”, remaining in existence. 
Of a continuant we may be able to state when it came into existence, 
how long it existed for, and when it went out of existence. For instance 
Napoleon Bonaparte was born on August 15, 1769 and died on May 5, 
1821. Leaving aside by convention the months when he was develop-
12 
P. Simons

ing in his mother’s womb, we count the period of Napoleon’s existence 
as being between these dates, though with greater strictness and accu-
racy we should take the developmental period between conception and 
birth into account. We do not in ordinary parlance and ways of thinking 
regard continuants as having temporal parts or phases like occurrents. 
Thinking of Napoleon, while we might say he has spatial parts like his 
left arm or his top half, we do not say he has a first half or a middle third. 
That to which we refer such talk is not Napoleon himself but his life, 
which does have temporal parts, for example the part when he attended 
the École Militaire, or the part spanning the period of his marriage to 
Joséphine de Beauharnais. There is of course a uniquely intimate relation 
between Napoleon and his life, as attested by biographies, which consist 
in descriptions of both the man and the events in which he participated. 
The same goes for other continuants. Stretching the term somewhat, we 
may call the temporal whole consisting of all the events, states and pro-
cesses intimately involving the continuant that continuant’s life, or, if we 
prefer, its history (to use the BFO term). This is not alien terminology: we 
often hear about the life of a star, a building, an institution, and everyone 
recognizes the metaphor as appropriate without being led to think that 
stars, buildings and institutions are ever literally alive. A continuant’s life 
goes on when and only when, and for as long as, it exists. Provided we do 
not confuse an object’s history qua events involving it with the story or 
account of its history, that terminology is equally apt.
3	
Some Consequences
Both continuants and occurrents vary across time. A party which started 
quietly gets louder, the fall of a body gets more rapid, a tree which is bare 
in winter puts forth leaves in spring and loses them in the fall. In the 
case of continuants like the tree we call this variation change. Typically 
there are three components to change. One is the thing that changes. The 
other two are characteristics or properties that it has before and after the 
change. For this to be a change, and not just variety, the properties have 
to be analytically incompatible, such as being quiet and being loud, or 
being leafless and being leaved, but more importantly, there is the ques-
2  Ontologia Utens and Beings in Time 
13

tion whether that which varies itself changes, in that the very same thing 
has first one property then another, or whether the incompatible proper-
ties can be ascribed to parts of the whole thing. A river which is swift and 
narrow near its source but sluggish and broad near its outlet does not 
itself change from being narrow to being broad; rather, different parts of 
the river are narrow and broad. Likewise, a party which starts quietly and 
ends noisily varies in that early phases of the party are quiet while later 
phases are noisy. It is true that we may use the same word, “change” for 
both kinds of alteration, but in the case of continuants, since they lack 
temporal parts, there is nothing but the continuant itself to which the 
properties can be ascribed. For that reason only continuants change in 
the strict sense, occurrents vary over time but do not change.
As a result of the difference, predications about continuants and predi-
cations about occurrents differ in the way they treat time. Because con-
tinuants themselves exist and have properties at different times, when we 
talk about them and their properties, we generally need to specify the 
time at which the continuant has the property, and we do this using tense 
and/or some other temporal specifier, for example
Sally was happy yesterday but is unhappy today
Hong Kong was a small trading post in 1850 but a huge metropolis in 
1990
By contrast, since an occurrent extends over time, predications ascribing 
different properties at different times can be referred to temporal parts:
The first half of the game was dull but the second half was exciting
The battle started with artillery exchanges but moved to massed infantry 
assaults
There is in particular a radical asymmetry concerning location. While a 
continuant can be first here, then there, an occurrent which “moves” does 
so only in that different phases are in different places. When a wedding 
starts in church but ends in a marquee it is the guests that move, not the 
wedding.
14 
P. Simons

4	
The Problem
It appears then that we have a fundamental distinction between these two 
kinds of entities in time, but there are also clear and intimate connections 
between them. As a biography demonstrates, the person and the events 
which constitute his or her life are inseparable. The person cannot exist 
without at least some occurrents going on in their life, namely those vital 
processes which constitute being alive, and conversely, no occurrent in 
which the person is involved or is a participant would be the occurrent 
it is were they not to be so involved. The involvement can be peripheral, 
as being a spectator at a tennis match, or it can be essential, as being one 
of the players in the match. It is questionable whether there are any clear 
cases of occurrents which do not involve some continuant as a partici-
pant. Fluctuation and propagation in fields such as electromagnetic or 
gravitational fields may be candidate cases. In such cases it might be said 
that the field is the requisite continuant bearer of changes, but again it 
is not clear whether fields should be reified in this way. At all events, the 
majority of continuants and occurrents with which we are concerned 
come together in reality.
That raises the question as to the nature of the relationship between 
occurrents and continuants, and whether one category is essentially 
dispensable, or whether both are required, and if so, whether one has 
ontological priority over the other. That gives us a total of five possible 
positions, metaphysically speaking:
	1.	 There are only continuants and no occurrents.
	2.	 There are only occurrents and no continuants.
	3.	 There are both, and neither is prior to the other.
	4.	 There are both, and continuants are prior to occurrents.
	5.	 There are both, and occurrents are prior to continuants.
This excludes two other positions, neither of which is I think to be 
taken seriously. The first is that there are, ultimately, neither continuants 
nor occurrents; the other, that both are reducible to or posterior to some 
third neutral category. As far as I know, this last option has not been 
taken, while the former only makes sense for sceptics, monists, or other 
2  Ontologia Utens and Beings in Time 
15

philosophical extremists. In this chapter I shall not address answers 1 and 
4, although they have been upheld. They are minority positions usually 
associated with some form of Aristotelian substantivalism. By far the most 
commonly supported views in contemporary metaphysics are answers 2, 
3, and 5. In his insistence on the indispensability of both continuants 
and occurrents, and the equally important suggestion that reality is too 
complex for a single theory or perspective to capture all its aspects, Smith 
is a supporter of answer 3. My own preference is for answer 5. Answer 
2 will be considered because it is perhaps the most favored view among 
contemporary metaphysicians. We consider it first.
5	
Process-Only Philosophy
For a variety of reasons, philosophers have concluded not only that occur-
rents exist, but that, of objects that persist in time, only occurrents exist. 
Often called by the not especially helpful name “four-dimensionalism”, 
this is a kind of process philosophy in which one of two similar attitudes 
is taken in regard to continuants, namely
2a. There really are no continuants, there are only processes and other 
occurrents.
2b. What we consider continuants are, in fact, occurrents: they have tem-
poral parts.
It is hard to make a clear distinction between those two positions. It may 
turn on matters of rhetoric, as when someone says, “There are no trees, 
there are only tree-processes”, in which case they are exponents of 2a; 
or whether they say, “Of course there are trees: they are just very slow-­
moving dull processes”, in which case they uphold 2b. We might call 2a 
Continuant Eliminativism and 2b Continuant Revisionism. The differ-
ence may also turn on whether the proponent thinks we could paraphrase 
talk of continuants into talk of occurrents (2b) or should for metaphysi-
cal purposes get rid of talk of continuants altogether (2a). I am skeptical 
in regard to the possibility of eliminating continuant-talk and equally 
skeptical in regard to being able to reduce it or paraphrase it by suitable 
16 
P. Simons

occurrent-talk. I am one with Smith in thinking that ontology must, if it 
is to be taken seriously and do a useful job, maintain its contact with the 
language and practice of science, which is thoroughly saturated with both 
continuant and occurrent talk. For that reason I shall not even consider 
language revision. But for the same reason I do not think there can be 
any clear separation between what the people and the scientists, engi-
neers, doctors etc. say, and what the metaphysicians say. If metaphysi-
cians are happy to talk with the vulgar outside the Philosophy Room but 
talk a wholly different and disconnected idiom inside it, they are already 
undermining their own subject and turning it into an irrelevant glass-­
bead game that deserves all the scorn of positivists.
For practical purposes, then, there is little to choose between 2a and 
2b, so let us consider whether there is any sense in holding that stars, 
planets, islands, plants, animals, bacteria, houses, and aircraft have tem-
poral parts. If we do so hold, we will have to admit this would entail a 
radical linguistic revision, but maintain that it can “in principle” be car-
ried out. The question is rather whether it makes metaphysical sense to 
embark on the revision.
The attraction of a process-only metaphysics is that it reduces the 
number of basic categories of entity. Its disadvantage is the mentioned 
disconnection from extant ways of speaking and conceptualizing. Most 
proponents seriously underestimate the amount of upheaval required to 
revise our thought in this way, but if the metaphysical payoff were worth 
it, that would not be a final obstacle.
Perhaps the major shortcoming of the non-eliminativist position 2b 
is that it collapses the distinction between a continuant and its life. If 
Napoleon is a long drawn-out process extending from 1769 to 1821, 
then the biography has only one kind of subject: Napoleon-processes, 
their parts such as his marrying Joséphine, or his right-hand-process; 
and the wholes of which they are part such as Austerlitz, which is itself 
already an occurrent, but also France between 1769 and 1821, which 
would have to be a larger nation-process. No one should seriously deny 
that Napoleon existed, the question is, what was he?
It would be easy if we could somehow show that the assumption that 
Napoleon has temporal parts is simply analytically contradictory. For 
example, we may claim that Napoleon was present himself, as a whole, at 
2  Ontologia Utens and Beings in Time 
17

the battles of Austerlitz and Borodino, while only parts of the Napoleon-­
process were compresent with Austerlitz and other parts with Borodino. 
The proponent of four-dimensionalism will however adjust the talk so it 
is right to say that parts of the total process were present first here, then 
there, but that because they are both parts of the greater whole we can 
say, if in a somewhat Pickwickian sense, that the whole process was also 
around at both Austerlitz and Borodino. Parts of it weren’t. If that is 
being Pickwickian, since we can equally well say that parts of the whole 
process were neither at Austerlitz nor at Borodino, we have no clear rea-
son to think Napoleon himself as a whole was at either, or indeed any-
where else, provided he moved around. So was Napoleon himself present 
at both battles? The reasons given to say he was are also reasons to say he 
was in many other places as well. This falls just short of holding that he 
both was and was not at Austerlitz (without qualification), and so falls 
short of a contradiction. It may be awkward, but is not inconsistent. The 
problem turns on how to interpret not especially helpful terms such as “as 
a whole” or “himself”, and the different interpretations, favoring oppos-
ing positions, might be considered question-begging.
Likewise, saying, for example, that Napoleon has a childhood part and 
a twenties part may be barbarous, inelegant or out of keeping with how 
we ordinarily speak and think, but that is precisely what is at issue. Later 
we shall see that with a theory of how continuants are related to occur-
rents we can give a constructive account of why such talk jars, but again it 
is hard to find an independent reason to prefer this view to alternatives. I 
conclude that it is hard to convict position 2 of any cognitive defect worse 
than being radically revisionary.
6	
Continuant–Occurrent Dualism
By contrast, the view that continuants and occurrents are coeval, equally 
basic categories, upheld by Smith and favored by myself in earlier times, 
is positively straightforward. We call it continuant–occurrent dualism. It 
emerges in the requirement enshrined in BFO that both a SNAP ontol-
ogy (dealing with continuants at a time) and a SPAN ontology (deal-
ing with occurrents over time) be part of an ontology with any serious 
18 
P. Simons

applications. There have to be both categories in any serious ontology 
applicable to the real world, because we have to meet people, especially 
scientists and practitioners, where they conceptually are, and they are 
using modes of thought in which both continuants and occurrents are 
vital. Precisely because it is conservative rather than revisionary, it raises 
fewer questions of principle.
But not none. The main question is how continuants are related to 
the occurrents in which they participate or are involved. There are here 
terms used to describe the relation. Continuants “participate in” events 
and other occurrents, these “happen to” or “happen in” them, they “are 
involved” in them. Napoleon participated in, was involved in, the Battle 
of Austerlitz, as of course were many others, his various breaths and heart-
beats during the battle happened in him, his actions and orders involved 
him as agent, and so on.
The standard view of involvement (as I shall preferentially call it) is 
that it is a sui generis, indefinable primitive. It is hard to see what other 
option there is for a dualist. Indefinable or primitive relations are not in 
themselves bad: there have to be some indefinables in metaphysics of all 
sciences. On the other hand, if there is an alternative theory in which the 
supposedly indefinable primitive is defined or explicated, and in a way 
which preserves and/or explains its principal characteristics, that is—on 
that count—preferable. In this case, I think there is a better alternative, 
and to that we proceed.
7	
Existence at a Time
Together with Smith, Kevin Mulligan and numerous others, I consider 
that one way to approach metaphysical questions is by considering truth-­
makers for various salient propositions. The basic idea is that contingent 
truths about the real world are in some way answerable to that world, 
they do not float free. That does not mean, as truth-maker maximalists 
hold, that every truth has a truth-maker, but it does mean that there has 
to be an account of why contingent propositions are true or false which 
turns on what there is or is not in reality. A truth-maker for a proposition 
p is an object or objects A such that p is true because A exist. The true 
2  Ontologia Utens and Beings in Time 
19

statement “RMS Titanic collided with an iceberg on April 14, 1912” is 
true because of the existence (occurrence) of a collision at 23:40 ship’s time 
on that day between the ship and one particular iceberg. That the sentence 
uses the past tense is because we are speaking about it afterwards: some-
one who correctly predicted such a collision would use the future tense, 
while someone describing it at the time would use the present tense.
Because of the nature of the truth-making relation, one between an 
entity in the world on the one hand and a truth-bearer on the other, the 
most straightforward and indeed almost trivial case of truth-making is 
one that pertains between an entity and a truth-bearer to the effect that 
that entity exists. So the famous collision makes it true that that colli-
sion as referred to exists (using the verb here in a non-tensed sense) and 
so, by the principle that what makes something true makes any logical 
consequence of it true, makes true that such a collision exists, and that is 
equivalent to the true statement above, modulo the use of the past tense.
An event like a collision has its time of occurrence built into it, it 
essentially occurs when (and where) it occurs. But when we are talking 
about a continuant, to say it exists is to say it exists at some time, but 
not necessarily at this or that time. If we wish to be more specific about 
when a continuant exists, we have to bring in the time explicitly, so we 
say Napoleon existed (i.e., was alive) on December 2, 1805, as also later 
on June 18, 1815. That he did so was in neither case necessary or essen-
tial to him: he might easily have died earlier of a childhood disease or at 
some previous battle. But the force of truth-making is that the existence 
of the truth-maker necessitates the truth of the truth-bearer in question: 
it cannot be the case that the truth-bearer exists, and the truth-maker 
exists, but the truth-bearer is not true. Clearly Napoleon himself does 
not necessitate that he be alive on December 2, 1805, since he might 
have died earlier. Therefore something else must be the truth-maker for 
the temporally specific proposition “Napoleon existed on December 2, 
1805”. Occurrents have their time built into them, so if we can find an 
occurrent or occurrents from December 2, 1805 which make it true that 
Napoleon exists then, we have our truth-maker. And there are such: they 
are the vital processes which sustain Napoleon on that day. They are not 
Napoleon, but they are essential to his existence then, and can thus serve 
as truth-maker to the temporally specific singular existential proposition.
20 
P. Simons

While not entailed by this analysis, the solution strongly suggests 
that Napoleon exists because such vital processes exist: this is something 
we know anyway from biology as well as from common experience. 
Heartbeats, blood circulation, breathing, oxygenation, brain and nervous 
activity, all are needed for life to persist. Now we ambitiously generalize 
from this example to the suggestion that any continuant exists because 
certain essential constitutive processes go on. What nature these processes 
are may vary widely from one kind of continuant to another. For a star it 
will be a complex of nuclear reactions, gravitational and electromagnetic 
interactions, while for a quieter continuant like a pebble it will be a pleth-
ora of minute nuclear and electromagnetic interactions which ensure its 
continued existence and integrity.
8	
Continuants from Occurrents
If this is right, then we still need to account for the relationship between a 
continuant and the occurrents that constitute it. So far all we have done is 
to trade one indefinable, “involve”, for another, “constitute”, and that is 
no advance over dualism. However, help is at hand. The hallmark of con-
tinuants is precisely that they continue, they persist, not by the accretion 
of temporal parts, but by “hanging in there”, and this must somehow 
turn on the continuation (with accretion) of constitutive processes. Let us 
assume then that what keeps Napoleon going are the constitutive occur-
rents which sustain his life from one time to another. These processes 
etc. then form a sort of chain, a Napoleon-sustaining chain. Consider 
then the totality of such Napoleon-sustaining processes at a time, or over 
an interval. It is then a temporal part of the whole Napoleon-sustaining 
process from 1769 to 1821. It is related by a particular kind of ancestry 
to other such temporal parts, and we call the relation between such tem-
poral parts which do not overlap mereologically, following Kurt Lewin, 
genidentity. Genidentity is an equivalence relation, but it is obviously not 
identity. However, where we have an equivalence relation we may abstract 
and consider what is invariant across all members of the equivalence class. 
That which alone is invariant across all genidentical Napoleon-sustaining 
processes is nothing other than the man himself. Note that despite the 
2  Ontologia Utens and Beings in Time 
21

use of the term “abstract”, Napoleon is not an abstract object, in the 
sense in which numbers and other mathematical objects are. He is indeed 
paradigmatically concrete, having a position, causal capacities and mate-
rial characteristics at any time he exists, but the idea is that he owes these 
to the position and causal characteristics of his sustaining processes, to 
which he is therefore metaphysically posterior.
When abstraction occurs, some characteristics are invariant under the 
equivalence, others are not. So for example the processes sustaining the 
multiple strands of DNA, hormones, proteins and other organic materi-
als in Napoleon invariantly assure his humanity and masculinity, so he is 
throughout a human male. By contrast he is not throughout a general, 
or an adult, or in Austria. When we ascribe invariant properties to the 
outcomes of abstraction, we sometimes use the same word for both con-
cretum and abstractum, but there is an adjustment of sense required. So 
it is invariant of a class of equiform expression tokens that they are tokens 
and are located somewhere, but their abstracted type is not a token, nor 
is it located anywhere. Likewise, it is invariant of Napoleon-sustaining 
processes that they are occurrents and have their locations essentially, but 
Napoleon is not an occurrent, nor is his location ever essential to him. 
When properties vary across concreta, it requires a restrictive modifica-
tion to say something related of the abstracta: the Grey Wolf is near-­
white in Arctic regions but brown, grey, black and other dark colors 
further south. Likewise, Napoleon was vigorous and alert on December 
2, 1805 but torpid and unwell on June 18, 1815. That explains why 
property ascriptions for continuants, for variable properties, require tem-
poral specification.
9	
Upshot for Ontology and Ontologies
If it is right that occurrents are metaphysically prior to continuants, that 
does not give us the right to declare that continuants don’t exist, or that 
they have temporal parts after all. Our analysis constructively explains 
why there are continuants, albeit not as metaphysical primitives, and why 
they do not have temporal parts, while their sustaining occurrents do, 
since having this or that temporal part is one of the things abstracted 
22 
P. Simons

away from under genidentity. So continuants are in time, but do not 
extend over time. This is a metaphysical theory, and as such is subject 
to the usual warnings and caveats about metaphysical theories. On the 
other hand it precisely does not require us to revise either our view that 
continuants exist, or the language, vernacular, scientific and technical, 
that we use to describe them. So the linguistic pluralism characteristic of 
BFO (Smith’s Formal Ontology) is upheld. In this regard it is one with 
dualism. On the other hand it offers more of an explanation of the rela-
tionship between continuants and occurrents, and to that extent is to be 
metaphysically preferred.
2  Ontologia Utens and Beings in Time 
23

25
© The Author(s) 2016
L. Zaibert (ed.), The Theory and Practice of Ontology, 
DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-55278-5_3
The term “fantology” has not yet (August 2016) entered The Stanford 
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, the world’s most up-to-date philosophical dic-
tionary. This being so, one has to ask: what is fantology? Barry Smith, 
who coined the term, starts his paper “Against Fantology” by introducing 
it with this paragraph:
A dark force haunts much of what is most admirable in the philosophy of 
the last one hundred years. It consists, briefly put, in the doctrine to the 
effect that one can arrive at a correct ontology by paying attention to certain 
superficial (syntactic) features of first-order predicate logic as conceived by 
Frege and Russell. More specifically, fantology is a doctrine to the effect 
that the key to the ontological structure of reality is captured syntactically 
in the ‘Fa’ (or, in more sophisticated versions, in the ‘Rab’) of first-order 
logic, where ‘F’ stands for what is general in reality and ‘a’ for what is indi-
Against Fantology Again
Ingvar Johansson
3
I. Johansson (*) 
Department of Historical, Philosophical and Religious Studies,  
Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden
e-mail: ingvar.johansson@philos.umu.se

vidual. Hence “fantology”. Because predicate logic has exactly two syn-
tactically different kinds of referring expressions—(F), (G), (R), etc., and 
(a), (b), (c), etc.—so reality must consist of exactly two correspondingly 
different kinds of entity: the general (properties, concepts) and the particu-
lar (things, objects), the relation between these two kinds of entity being 
revealed in the predicate–argument structure of atomic formulas in first-
order logic. (Smith 2005, 153)
His view is not meant as a criticism of first-order predicate logic with 
identity understood as a logic; it is only meant as a criticism of directly 
corresponding ontologies. His paper fell dead from both the press and the 
Web. My paper is a new attempt to put the notion of fantology on the 
philosophical agenda. It is done in the hope of making clear a danger that 
is intrinsic to philosophical-ontological work (N.B. not ontologies in the 
information sciences).
I will not summarize Smith’s paper. Instead, I will make two moves 
that hopefully will cast new light on the importance of its central notion. 
First, I will present fantology in the light of a more general and in itself 
ontologically neutral operation that I call a default ontologization of a 
language; also proposed in Johansson (2013). Then, in the second and 
third sections, I will discuss Willard van Orman Quine’s views, since he 
is the most outspoken fantologist in the second half of the twentieth 
century. I think his lasting high philosophical status explains much of 
today’s lingering fantology in analytic metaphysics. Smith only hints at 
Quine’s explicit proposal for a canonical notation when in passing he 
states:
Fantology sometimes takes the form of a thesis according to which the 
language of standard predicate logic can serve the formulation of the truths 
of natural science in a uniquely illuminating way (its syntax mirrors, after 
all, the very structures in reality which such truths represent). So Quine, 
with his doctrine according to which the ontological commitments of a 
theory become evident only when the theory has been regimented in fan-
tological fashion. (Smith 2005, 156)
26 
I. Johansson

1	
Default Ontologization
The Sapir–Whorf hypothesis says that a certain community’s natural lan-
guage either determines (strong version) or influences (weak version) how 
the members of that community think and perceive, and thereby also partly 
how they act. One of Whorf’s classic presumed yet contested examples is 
that the Hopi Indians are anti-realists about time because their language 
lacks tensed words; instead of the words “past”, “present”, and “future” 
events they use “recalled”, “reported”, and “anticipated” events.
It is only the weak version that can be taken seriously. When Whorf 
became multilingual he did not become totally immersed in the new 
languages he learnt, and Hopis can learn English. Even if true, the weak 
Sapir–Whorf hypothesis only states that the default key to a community’s 
lived reality—its experienced ontology—is its primary language.
This hypothesis is about the semantics of natural languages. Smith, 
however, is concerned with the syntax of logical languages. On the one 
hand, we have to distinguish between default ontologizations of natural 
and logical languages, respectively; and, on the other, between default 
ontologizations of a semantics and a syntax, respectively. All default ontol-
ogizations look upon the language in question as if it were unchangeable, 
but, of course, all languages, natural as well as logical, are malleable.
All languages can be given at least one default ontologization, that is, 
the central terms are hypothetically taken pretty straightforwardly to rep-
resent (in a wide sense of the term) something in a reality outside of 
the linguistic speech-or-writing and listening-or-reading acts; I do not 
regard parenthesis symbols as central terms. A default ontologization 
does not in itself say anything about how the actual language users in 
question conceive of non-linguistic reality, since they may move from 
language to language-independent reality in a more roundabout way. 
But it might deliver a good point of departure when trying to find out. 
Ontologizations that allow even purely spatial relations between terms to 
be ontologized, I call non-default ontologizations.
A default ontologization of a logical language is mainly an ontolo-
gization of a syntax, since in a logical language semantic content is by 
­definition abstracted away or never put in. However, a default ontologi-
zation of a syntax can only give rise to a pure structure, since a syntax is 
3  Against Fantology Again 
27

just a structure, but normally we want more from an ontology. Therefore, 
some abstract content must also be inserted into some of the non-logical 
symbols. This means that a logical language may allow for more than one 
default ontologization; a fact that will be exemplified in due course.
Also, it may be discussed whether a certain logical constant allows for 
an ontologization or not. Bertrand Russell and David Armstrong have 
argued that some constants do and some do not. Armstrong, for instance, 
thinks that the conjunction symbol allows for ontologization, but that 
the disjunction and the negation symbols do not (Armstrong 1978 II, 
chs. 14–15). If need be, one may call an ontologization of all central 
terms a primary default ontologization, and one where some of the con-
stants are put aside as not being possible to ontologize a secondary default 
ontologization.
Fantology can now be characterized by means of the following state-
ment: only a default ontologization of traditional first-order predicate logic 
can display what the world is like. It can be explicitly put forward, as by 
Quine, or merely be implicitly taken for granted, as Armstrong seem-
ingly does (Smith 2005, sect. 5). If fantologists cannot express their ini-
tial ontological thoughts in first-order logic, they dismiss them. Since, as 
pointed out above, a logical language can allow for more than one default 
ontologization, this does not mean that all fantologists agree in onto-
logical matters. But, in their hands, first-order predicate logic neverthe-
less functions as a norm that prohibits many ontological positions to be 
stated. (Default ontologizations of logics such as modal logic and Prior’s 
tense logic do not count as fantology.)
Since all logical languages can be given at least one default ontologi-
zation, so can Aristotelian subject–predicate logic. Also, of course, each 
default ontologization can in a second step be claimed either to express 
the true ontology or to hide it. And Russell has claimed that (in my 
terms) all default ontologizations of subject–predicate logic seriously hide 
the true ontology. I will use his claim to give some more contents to the 
abstract notions of fantology and default ontologization presented so far.
The fundamental sentence of subject–predicate logic is “S is P”, and 
Russell claims that if subject–predicate logic is regarded as the one and 
only logic, then its ontologization leads to the false position of monism. 
That is, to some kind of monism. Since nothing in “S is P” has semantic 
28 
I. Johansson

content, no conclusions about whether “S” refers to something physical, 
something mental, or something else, can be drawn from the subject–
predicate logic alone. Russell, therefore, calls it “logical monism.”
I think Russell’s reasoning can be reconstructed as follows. All entities 
in the world are either directly or indirectly related to each other. Now, 
if between two entities in the world, a and b, there is a relation R, then 
the natural symbolization of it is, as in predicate logic, “Rab”. However, 
in order to turn this logical form into the form “S is P”, one has to write 
either “a is Rb” or “b is Ra”. In what follows, I will reason as if the second 
alternative always applies. Assume next that there is a relation between b 
and c (predicate logic: “Rbc”); it must then be given the form “c is Rb”. 
The conjunction “(c is Rb) & (b is Ra)” shows that c certainly is at least 
indirectly related to a, too; and if the copula relation is transitive, then c 
is directly related to a just as much as to b. The reasoning can be repeated 
with new entities d, e, f, etc. entering the scene. This means that if the 
copula relation is all-embracing, as it is if the subject–predicate logic is 
taken to be the only proper logic, then there must be something of which 
all the entities a, b, c, etc. can be regarded as being properties. Russell 
himself says:
Spinoza’s metaphysic is the best example of what may be called ‘logical 
monism’—the doctrine, namely, that the world as a whole is a single sub-
stance, none of whose parts are logically capable of existing alone. The 
ultimate basis for this view is the belief that every proposition has a single 
subject and a single predicate, which leads us to the conclusion that rela-
tions and plurality must be illusory. (Russell 1974, 559–560)
In this quotation, only Spinoza is mentioned, but Russell is of the same 
opinion with respect to the monisms of Hegel and Bradley (Russell 1974, 
703; 1910). And, in the quotation below, he accuses Leibniz of inconsis-
tency when Leibniz puts forward his pluralist monadology, but nonethe-
less regards the subject–predicate logic as the only logic. Leibniz claims 
that each monad is one single completely self-enclosed substance that has 
no relations to other substances, only a number of properties inhering in 
itself. This view fits well the sentence “S is P”. But how can one express 
the view that there are many distinct monads?
3  Against Fantology Again 
29

Whether any valid inferences are possible from language to non-linguistic 
facts is a question as to which I do not care to dogmatize; but certainly the 
inferences found in Leibniz and other a priori philosophers are not valid, 
since all are due to a defective logic. The subject–predicate logic, which all 
such philosophers in the past assumed, either ignores relations altogether, 
or produces fallacious arguments to prove that relations are unreal. Leibniz 
is guilty of a special inconsistency in combining the subject–predicate logic 
with pluralism, for the proposition “there are many monads” is not of the 
subject-predicate form. To be consistent, a philosopher who believes all 
propositions to be of this form should be a monist like Spinoza. (Russell 
1974, 575)
The Russell quotations above are from his History of Western Philosophy, 
which was written during World War II. But in The Philosophy of Logical 
Atomism, written during World War I, he thought it possible to create 
a logical language that would depict the ontology of the world much 
better than either a natural language or the subject–predicate logic can. 
He sometimes called it a logically perfect language, but I think that the 
expression “ontologically perfect language” is more appropriate as soon as 
a vocabulary is added. He says:
In a logically perfect language the words in a proposition would corre-
spond one by one with the components of the corresponding fact, with the 
exceptions of such words as “or”, “not”, “if”, “then”, which have a different 
function. In a logically perfect language, there will be one word and no 
more for every simple object, and everything that is not simple will be 
expressed by a combination of words. … A language of that sort … is set 
forth in Principia Mathematica. … It is a language which has only syntax 
and no vocabulary whatsoever. … It aims at being that sort of language 
that, if you add a vocabulary, would be a logically perfect language. Actual 
languages are not logically perfect in this sense, and they cannot possibly 
be, if they are to serve the purposes of daily life. (Russell 1986, 176)
Needless to say, Russell could not possibly start by believing (to quote 
Smith) “in the doctrine to the effect that one can arrive at a correct ontol-
ogy by paying attention to certain superficial (syntactic) features of first-­
order predicate logic,” since he was among the creators of this logic. He 
30 
I. Johansson

came to his ontological positions independently of first-order predicate 
logic, but when it had been created, he meant that others could arrive 
at parts of the true ontological structure of the world by looking at its 
syntax.
Smith is partly turning Russell upside-down, but without denying 
relations. He claims that the syntax of Russell’s predicate logic does not 
display the ontological structure of the world, but that the Aristotelian “S 
is P” comes closer to doing so. However, he does not ontologize “S is P” 
without further ado. He claims that Aristotle’s famous ontological square—
consisting of: substantial (natural kinds) universals and particulars, and 
accidental (qualities/properties) universals and particulars—should be 
complemented by the pair process universals and particulars (processes 
in his sense include actions, events, and occurrences) and turned into an 
ontological sextet (Smith 2005, sect. 19).
Both subject–predicate logic and first-order predicate logic can be 
given a default ontologization. If one thinks that default ontologizations 
of first-order predicate logic are seriously misleading, one may use Smith’s 
term and call them fantologies. And if one thinks that default ontologi-
zations of subject–predicate logic are so, then one may (to coin a term) 
call them SisP-ontologies or sispontologies. Russell can then be said to 
accuse Spinoza, Hegel, and Bradley of being sispontologists, just as Smith 
accuses Armstrong of being a fantologist (Smith 2005, sect. 4).
Subject–predicate logic contains a copula, be it “is”, as in “S is P”, 
or “are”, as in “Some S are P” and “All S are P”; but first-order predi-
cate logic contains no copula at all. Look at “Fa”, “∃xFx”, and “∀xFx”. 
This makes Smith talk about “the vanishing [of the] copula” in fantology 
(Smith 2005, sect. 13). Traditionally, the copula of true subject–predicate 
sentences has been taken to represent an inherence relation in the world. If 
“S is P” is true, then what is represented by “P” (normally a property) is 
taken to inhere in what is represented by “S” (normally a kind, natural or 
artificial). No such explicit relation symbol can be found when formulas 
in first-order predicate logic are to be ontologized. The early Armstrong 
answers the question of what the relationship (in Fa) between the referent 
of “F”, which Armstrong takes to be a universal, and a referent of “a”, 
which he takes to be a (“thin”) particular, by saying:
3  Against Fantology Again 
31

It is concluded, therefore, that although particularity and universality are 
inseparable aspects of all existence, they are neither reducible to each other 
nor are they related. Though distinct, their union is closer than relation. 
(Armstrong 1978, II, 3)
Since first-order logic contains no symbol for a relation that connects 
universality and particularity, there is nothing that can be ontologized 
into such a relation. One might use Armstrong’s last sentence to char-
acterize, conversely, the very symbol “Fa” itself, and say that though “F” 
and “a” are distinct, the union between them is in predicate logic closer 
than that of a relation.
But there is more to be noted in relation to the copula. It is not only a 
matter of something that represents an inherence relation; it is also a mat-
ter of what kinds of entities the relation can relate. In “S is P”, be S and P 
either universals or instances of universals, a property can be predicated 
both about another property (e.g., “scarlet is red”) and about a kind of 
substance (e.g., “tomatoes are red”). But in “Fa” and “∃xFx” it is taken for 
granted that “F” is a general term, “a” the name of a particular, and “x” a 
variable for particulars. That is, the predications in question are never of 
a kind-of-particular, but always of particulars-as-particulars.
Of course, one can in first-order predicate logic introduce a distinc-
tion between two sorts of monadic predicates, kind predicates (“S”) and 
property predicates (“P”). The counterpart of the subject–predicate logic’s 
sentence “S is P” would then be “Sa & Pa”, which contains both a kind 
ascription and a property ascription. But this move does not introduce 
anything like an inherence relation into predicate logic. A conjunction 
of two predications of the same particular-as-particular does not, in con-
tradistinction to the subject–predicate logic, contain the possibility of 
speaking about an inherence relation between a property and a kind-of-­
entity. It does not make it possible to predicate P of S. In order to do that, 
a second-order predicate logic would be needed. One in which “P(S)” is 
regarded as a well-formed formula.
Armstrong does not make any attempt to amend predicate logic by a 
distinction between kind-predicates and property-predicates. And since 
he believes in universals, he therefore is of the opinion that there are no 
“irreducibly substantival [substantial] universals” (Armstrong 1978, II, 
32 
I. Johansson

62), only monadic property universals. Russell also wanted to get rid of 
the whole notion of substance and its concomitant kind-of-substance: 
“‘Substance’ when taken seriously, is a concept impossible to free from 
difficulties” (Russell 1974, 211). Quine substitutes classes for both prop-
erty universals and kind universals.
Within the philosophy of science, the anti-substantial view defended 
by Russell and Armstrong has a clear repercussion. It means that it is not 
only everyday languages that should not be allowed to be ontologized, the 
same also goes for all known scientific languages. As Smith points out, 
many typical sentences of science conform to the “S is P” form (Smith 
2005, sect. 8). Not even physics contains only mathematical formulas.
I would like to stress that today’s fundamental particle physics does 
not make claims only about property bearing particles-as-particulars, but 
also about kinds of particles. And these are placed within a minor taxo-
nomical framework. The so-called standard model divides particles into 
quarks, leptons, gauge bosons, and the Higgs boson; and the first three 
taxa are divided further into more fine-grained ones. For instance, “the 
genus” gauge boson subsumes “the species” gluon, photon, Z boson, and 
W boson; and W bosons have non-zero values of all the three fundamen-
tal properties mass, electric charge, and spin. It is even from a physical-
ist stance quite a radical move to claim, that these purported natural 
kinds should not be allowed to be ontologized, and not be allowed to be 
regarded as having properties inhering in them.
According to Smith, fantology also brings with it “a peculiar insensi-
tivity to time” (Smith 2005, sect. 15). I agree. As I said earlier, one rea-
son why Russell wanted to replace subject–predicate logic with predicate 
logic was that predicate logic already displays on the surface the possibil-
ity of irreducible relations. But he had a second ontological reason to 
favor first-order predicate logic, too. In some papers 1905–07 (e.g., “On 
Denoting” [Russell 1905]), he criticized Alexius Meinong’s view that 
there are not only existing entities but also subsisting ones; that is, that 
there are different ways of existence. Consequently, in its syntax, ­first-­order 
predicate logic already rules out the possibility of talking of tense as 
modes of being as, for instance, Roman Ingarden does. Everything that 
belongs to a domain of discourse to which predicate logic is applied, has 
to exist in the same way.
3  Against Fantology Again 
33

In predicate logic, “existence” is a quantifier. This is in line with 
G.E. Moore’s view that “existence” is not a predicate; and so, when ontol-
ogized, with Kant’s view that existence is not a property. But for Russell 
there is more to say than this. The view that “existence”/existence is nei-
ther a predicate nor a property, does not preclude the view that there are 
different ways or modes of existence. It merely means that no such way is 
a property representable by a predicate.
For Russell, it is important, from the ontological point of view, that 
predicate logic contains exactly one existential quantifier. From a purely 
logical point of view, however, the existential quantifier “∃x” may well be 
allowed to take subscripts that represent different ways of existence; for 
example, “1∃x” (in mode 1 there is at least one x), “2∃x” (in mode 2 there 
is at least one x), and so on. However, everything that is claimed to exist 
by means of sentences expressed in traditional first-order predicate logic 
is claimed to exist in the same way.
Subject–predicate logic, in contrast, allows that “S is P” may be 
replaced by “S was P” or by “S will be P”. Since predicate logic contains 
no copula, it cannot do exactly this. Of course, its symbolism allows time 
indexing of both the “F” and the “a” of “Fa”, but that is quite another 
thing. It does not introduce ways of existence; it merely specifies where in 
uniform time the referents of “F” and the “a” are to be situated.
Let it be noted that there are a number of language-independent rea-
sons for adopting a four-dimensionalist (or eternalist) view of time, in 
which all times exist in parity. But it follows from what I have said, that 
any naturalist default ontologization of first-order predicate logic is bound 
to embrace four-dimensionalism. Presentists cannot be fantologists.
2	
Quine’s Canonical Notation
First-order predicate logic does not in itself entail a distinction between 
synthetic and analytic sentences or a denial that there is such a distinc-
tion. Therefore, both Russell and Quine can be fantologists; both of them 
subscribe to a distinction between language and reality. Two quotations 
from Quine’s central work Word and Object will be my point of depar-
ture in this section. When reading them, it should be kept in mind that 
34 
I. Johansson

Quine regards (i) the existential quantifier as being definable by the uni-
versal quantifier together with the negation symbol, and (ii) names as 
being replaceable by definite descriptions. Therefore, neither the existen-
tial quantifier nor names are mentioned as immediately belonging to his 
canonical notation:
Taking the canonical notation [first-order predicate logic with identity] 
thus austerely, … we have just these basic constructions: predication, uni-
versal quantification …, and the truth functions. … The ultimate compo-
nents are the variables and general terms, and these combine in predication 
to form the atomic open sentences. What thus confronts us as a scheme for 
systems of the world is that structure so well understood by present-day 
logicians, the logic of quantification or calculus of predicates.
Not that the idioms thus renounced are supposed to be unneeded in the 
marketplace or in the laboratory. … The doctrine is only that such a canon-
ical idiom can be abstracted and then adhered to in the statement of one’s 
scientific theory. The doctrine is that all traits of reality worthy of the name 
can be set down in an idiom of this austere form if in any idiom.
It is in spirit a philosophical doctrine of categories, except that it is pecu-
liarly relative in its import. Of itself it sets no limits to the vocabulary of 
unanalyzed general terms admissible to science. (Quine 1960, 228)
And here comes what has been made famous under the motto “to be is to 
be the value of a bound variable”:
In our canonical notation of quantification, then, we find the restoration 
of law and order. Insofar as we adhere to this notation, the objects we are 
to be understood to admit are precisely the objects which we reckon to the 
universe of values over which the bound variables of quantification are to 
be considered to range. … To paraphrase a sentence into the canonical 
notation of quantification is, first and foremost, to make its ontic content 
explicit, quantification being a device for talking in general of objects. 
(Quine 1960, 242)
A logical language may allow for more than one default ontologization, 
and first-order predicate logic does. The predicate symbols always repre-
sent something general or abstract, but opinions may differ about what 
should be regarded as general. For Russell and Armstrong, the predicate 
3  Against Fantology Again 
35

symbols represent property universals, whereas for Quine they repre-
sent classes or sets (he uses the terms interchangeably). This difference, 
however, is mitigated by the fact that the late Quine regards classes as 
universals (somewhere in the 1950s, he stops being a nominalist). In a 
response to Armstrong he writes: “What Armstrong has not perceived 
is that I, like him, espouse rather a realism of universals” (Quine 1981, 
182). Armstrong and Quine have also in common the views that (i) they 
leave it for future empirical science to decide what universals there are, 
(ii) they regard four-dimensionalism as the correct philosophy of time, 
and (iii) they deny that there are any mental entities.
The late Quine is a reductionist in two ways, and a non-reductionist in 
one way. He regards all physical objects to be reducible to the objects pos-
tulated by basic physics, and he regards all universals and abstract objects 
to be reducible to classes. He claims, however, that it is impossible to 
reduce classes to physical objects. He defends a physicalism-with-classes 
ontology. I quote:
Let us not leave the latter topic quite yet: ontology, or the values available 
to variables. As seen, we can go far with physical objects [he allows even 
spatiotemporal points to be called physical objects]. They are not, however, 
known to suffice. Certainly, as just now argued, we do not need to add 
mental objects. But we do need to add abstract objects, if we are to accom-
modate science as currently constituted. Certain things we want to say in 
science may compel us to admit into the range of values of the variables of 
quantification not only physical objects but also classes and relations of 
them. (Quine 1966, 244)
The early Armstrong, as I said, claims that the union between property 
universals and particulars-as-particulars is closer than that of a relation; 
and that therefore there is no need to discuss any relation between them. 
Quine behaves analogously. At first sight, since the symbol “Fa” can be 
read “a is member of the class of Fs” or “a ∈ F”, it may seem as if he pos-
its a kind of ontological membership-relation to explain the connection 
between physical objects and classes. But things are more complicated:
36 
I. Johansson

The further part of logic is set theory, which requires there to be classes 
among the values of its variables of quantification. The one sign needed in 
set theory, beyond those appropriate to elementary logic, is the connective 
‘∈’ of membership. (Quine 1966, 110)
Quine here divides logic into set theory and elementary logic (the canon-
ical language), which means that (a) he places the epsilon symbol outside 
of his canonical language, and (b) he regards it as being a connective. Both 
these things are important in relation to a pertinent question that I will 
soon raise.
On the surface, it looks as if a second-order logic is needed in order to 
make quantifications over classes possible; that is, abstract classes must 
be representable by a variable in order to be able to be bound by a quan-
tifier. But, if this first impression were true, the first-order logic of the 
canonical language would not allow classes to exist. Therefore, in order to 
have a consistent ontological position, Quine has to explain how classes 
can become represented by variables in first-order predicate logic. I will 
now put forward the foreshadowed question: where and how does Quine 
try to accomplish this feat? As far as I can see, he never makes any explicit 
attempt. Moreover, I will now argue, if he had made one, he could not 
possibly have succeeded.
As is clear from the philosophy of science, reductions of one kind of 
physical objects to other kinds of physical objects (e.g., molecules to sub-
atomic particles) are confronted with problems; and as is clear from the 
philosophy of mathematics, reductions of one kind of abstract objects to 
other kinds of abstract objects (e.g., numbers to classes) are confronted 
with problems. Both these kinds of reduction problems, let it be noted, 
Quine regards as being soluble (whereas I consider them insoluble). 
However, his problem with how to make classes representable by vari-
ables in first-order logic is of quite another kind—and magnitude.
He must be able to define a relationship between the physical objects 
represented by the variables in the canonical language and the abstract 
class objects. The problem is analogous to Plato’s problem of how to 
explain the relationship between the sensible things in the spatiotemporal 
world and the entities in his transcendent atemporal realm of ideas. Plato 
introduced a relation of participation, but Quine can only appeal to the 
3  Against Fantology Again 
37

epsilon symbol and what it might represent. As I will point out next, this 
is not enough.
Quine regards classes as extensionally defined by their members; classes 
that have exactly the same members are identical. Therefore, classes that 
have physical objects as members cannot ultimately be defined without 
the epsilon symbol being used; they cannot be regarded as non-definable 
particulars and then quantified over. Nonetheless, as noticed, he explic-
itly regards “∈” both (a) as being outside of predicate logic, and (b) as 
being a logical connective, not a relation predicate. Position (a) means 
that the membership relation needed in order to define classes cannot 
be stated in the canonical notation. Position (b) means that even if, in 
some way or other, the epsilon symbol could be made a natural part of 
the canonical language, it is not allowed to be ontologized, since it is on 
a par with the logical constants that, for Quine, are non-ontologizable.
In the same way that Russell claims that Leibniz is wrong in thinking 
that his monadology needs no other logic than subject–predicate logic, I 
claim that Quine is wrong in thinking that his physicalism-with-classes 
ontology needs no other logic than first-order predicate logic. Just as 
Leibniz cannot explain how on his own premises he can say “there are 
monads”, Quine cannot explain how on his own premises he can say 
“there are classes”.
I find what has now been said reason enough, when doing ontol-
ogy, for not letting oneself to be bound by Quine’s canonical notation. 
Nonetheless, another reason will be presented in the next section.
Smith is against fantology primarily because it makes it impossible 
to claim that there is an inherence relation between properties (quali-
ties) and kinds (substances), and that there is a has-as-participant relation 
between processes and kinds. Claims that are central to his ontological 
sextet. In outline, I am on Smith’s side in this criticism, even though I may 
differ from him with respect to some details concerning the philosophy 
of time, but I will not delve into this. Instead, I will now say some words 
about fantology in relation to an issue that remains untouched by Smith, 
namely, the existence or non-existence of intentionality.
38 
I. Johansson

3	
Intentionality in the Canonical Notation
Since first-order predicate logic is extensional, fantology takes the whole 
realm of intentional phenomena and the referents of intensional propo-
sitions away from the ontological picture. Some kind of physicalism is 
declared to be the fundamental ontological truth:
One may accept the Brentano thesis [of the irreducibility of intentionality] 
either as showing the indispensability of intentional idioms and the impor-
tance of an autonomous science of intention, or as showing the baseless-
ness of intentional idioms and the emptiness of a science of intention. My 
attitude, unlike Brentano’s, is the second. … Not that I would forswear 
daily use of intentional idioms, or maintain that they are practically dis-
pensable. But they call, I think, for bifurcation in canonical language. … If 
we are limning the true and ultimate structure of reality, the canonical 
scheme for us is the austere scheme that knows no quotation but direct 
quotation and no propositional attitudes but only the physical constitution 
and behavior of organisms. … If we are venturing to formulate the funda-
mental laws of a branch of science, however tentatively, this austere idiom 
is again likely to be the one that suits. But if our use of canonical notation 
is meant only to dissolve verbal perplexities or facilitate logical deductions, 
we are often well advised to tolerate the idioms of propositional attitude. 
(Quine 1960, 221)
In traditional post-medieval epistemology—to be contrasted with mod-
ern so-called meta-epistemology—something non-physical has always 
played a central role. Descartes ended his quest for certain knowledge in 
his presumed indubitable utterance “cogito ergo sum”, which represents 
something in consciousness. Hume, despite his general skepticism, found 
the existence of simple impressions indubitable, and they were mental 
in character. Late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century empiricism 
saw attempts to ground epistemology in entities that are supposed to be 
neither physical nor mental. Most famous are Mach’s sensations or ele-
ments (Mach 1959 [1886]), Russell’s neutral monism (which allows rela-
tions) (Russell 1961 [1921]), and Carnap’s elementary experiences (1969 
[1928]). These observations give rise to the following question: what does 
3  Against Fantology Again 
39

the epistemology of the physicalist Quine look like? He cannot, on pain 
of inconsistency, introduce something non-physical apart from classes.
It should be noted, that in systematic philosophy there cannot pos-
sibly be a gulf between ontology and epistemology. If one claims that 
an ontology is true, one lays claim to have some knowledge; and if one 
makes epistemological claims, one presupposes the existence of at least 
one cognitive faculty. Quine has to say something about epistemology, 
and he does.
One Quine expert says: “Much of Quine’s work in epistemology is thus 
a more or less speculative discussion of how a child might acquire cogni-
tive language” (Hylton 2014, 4.1). And this means how from a third-­
person perspective cognitive language is acquired. In Quine’s physicalist 
“empiricism,” empirical evidence has nothing to do with consciousness 
or any ontologically neutral entities. Empirical evidence is made equiva-
lent to physical impacts on our physical sensory system. Below comes 
another quotation (Quine makes no distinction between “intensional” 
and “intentional” idioms):
All three of these idioms—‘perceives that’, ‘thinks that’, ‘It occurred to him 
that’—are idioms of so-called propositional attitude. … As they stand, the 
idioms of propositional attitude resist predicate logic. … Their underlying 
trait, which pervades mentalistic talk pretty generally, is that they are inten-
sional, whereas predicate logic is extensional. … Extensionality is much of 
the glory of predicate logic, and it is much of the glory of any science that 
can be grammatically embedded in predicate logic. I find extensionality 
necessary, indeed, though not sufficient, for my full understanding of a 
theory. (Quine 1995, 90–91)
Quine—rightly to my mind—rejects traditional rationalism and empiri-
cism and their quest for certainty, but he also—wrongly to my mind—
denies the mere existence of non-physical entities beside the abstract 
classes. Is such a denial really epistemologically possible? How does 
Quine manage to take conscious thinking and perceiving completely 
away from the epistemological picture? The explanation has been deliv-
ered by A.W. Moore, and I refer to him for the argumentation. Here is 
his conclusion:
40 
I. Johansson

[T]he single most important feature of Quine’s entire philosophy [is]: that 
its real driving force is his naturalism. Everything else flows from that; every-
thing else must be understood in terms of that; everything else needs to 
accommodate that. (Moore 2012, 308)
Beneath both Quine’s peculiar form of “empiricism” and his non-­
nominalist physicalism, there is an epistemological naturalism that he 
thinks grounds both. It says that the natural sciences’ way of investigat-
ing and making sense of things is the one and only way. No place is given 
to complementary ways. If the quest for absolute certainty is taken away 
from Descartes, Hume, and the early Carnap, their views can be refor-
mulated as follows. Descartes: the seemingly most indubitable fact is that 
there is at least one mental substance. Hume: the seemingly most indu-
bitable fact is that there are simple impressions. Carnap: the seemingly 
most indubitable fact is that there are elementary experiences. According 
to Quine, the seemingly most indubitable fact is that the natural sciences 
have recourse to a method that increases our knowledge of the world.
In my opinion, one can be a fallibilist and dismiss the quest for cer-
tainty without, pace Quine, denying the mere existence of conscious phe-
nomena, whether they are then later best classified as states, as acts, as 
events, or as being of all three kinds. Within my fallibilist framework I 
trust the natural sciences, but I also look upon Descartes’s cogito ergo sum 
as containing quite a kernel of truth. It can be laid bare as follows. The 
term “cogito” subsumes both the expressions “I perceive” and “I think”. 
One can just as well say to oneself (a) “I perceive, therefore I am” as (b) “I 
think, therefore I am”. However, in order to make a truly good epistemo-
logical point one cannot, like Descartes, speak as if a conscious moment 
of perceiving/thinking shows that there is a mental property bearer, which, 
moreover, is an enduring entity. Both these features can be doubted, but 
the belief in conscious occurrences nonetheless be retained.
The two Cartesian self-reflective utterances above should be replaced 
by: (a′) “now I am perceiving, therefore there now exists a conscious occur-
rence”, and (b′) “now I am thinking, therefore there now exists a conscious 
occurrence”. Using the term “propositional attitude”, I claim that I know 
(c′): “now I am perceiving-something/thinking-about-something, there-
fore there now exists a conscious occurrence of a propositional attitude”. 
3  Against Fantology Again 
41

In fact, I am more certain that I have conscious moments of propositional 
attitudes, than I am that there is a mind-independent world studied by 
physics. But I am pretty certain of both.
My view does not entail the existence of any momentary free-­floating 
Cartesian substances. The occurrences spoken of may well be—and I 
think they are—phenomena that are for their existence dependent on 
a brain-and-body without being identical with such a substratum. Just 
as physicists can discuss what subatomic particles there are, believers in 
conscious occurrences can discuss both what the parts and the structure 
of such phenomena are like, and what kind of material conditions of 
existence they have. The fact that there are conscious occurrences of per-
ception and thinking does not imply that their content and structure are 
epistemologically transparent; my own conjecture about the structure of 
consciousness is presented in Johansson (2014).
The first Quine quotation in this section contains the statement “If 
we are limning the true and ultimate structure of reality, the canoni-
cal scheme for us is the austere scheme that knows … only the physical 
constitution and behavior of organisms.” The expression “the true and 
ultimate structure of reality” is of crucial importance. Implicitly, Quine 
here brings in the old distinction between appearances and reality, and 
says that his canonical language is only meant for the ontology of the 
latter. But this he cannot say without allowing two different ways of exis-
tence, one for appearances and one for reality. Furthermore, if this were 
allowed, he could no longer claim that all ontological claims have to be 
translatable into the canonical language. Surely, if appearances there are, 
they must exist in some way. Thus, quite independently of the inconsis-
tency noted in the last section, there is in Quine’s philosophy another 
inconsistency, too.
Quine’s fantological ontology is doubly incoherent.
Acknowledgements  For comments on my way to the final version, I would like 
to thank Jan Almäng, Javier Cumpa, Rögnvaldur Ingthorsson, Kevin Mulligan, 
Christer Svennerlind, Erwin Tegtmeier, Frederic Tremblay, and Leo Zaibert.
42 
I. Johansson

References
Armstrong, David. 1978. Universals & Scientific Realism I–II. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Carnap, Rudolf. 1969 (1928). The Logical Structure of the World. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
Hylton, Peter. 2014. “Willard van Orman Quine.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia 
of Philosophy (Winter 2014 Edition), edited by Edward N. Zalta, URL = 
<http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/quine/>
Johansson, Ingvar. 2013. “Scattered Exemplification and Many-Place Copulas.” 
Axiomathes 23:235–46.
Johansson, Ingvar. 2014. “Triple Disjunctivism, Naive Realism, and Anti-­
representationalism.” Metaphysica 15:239–65.
Mach, Ernst. 1959 (1886). The Analysis of Sensations. New York: Dover.
Moore, A.  W. 2012. The Evolution of Modern Metaphysics: Making Sense of 
Things. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Quine, W. V. 1960. Word and Object. Cambridge Mass.: The MIT Press.
Quine, W. V. 1966. The Ways of Paradox and Other Essays. Cambridge Mass.: 
Harvard University Press.
Quine, W. V. 1981. Theories and Things. Cambridge Mass.: Harvard University 
Press.
Quine, W.  V. 1995. From Stimulus to Science. Cambridge Mass.: Harvard 
University Press.
Russell, Bertrand. 1905. “On Denoting.” Mind 14:479–93.
Russell, Bertrand. 1910. “Some Explanations in Reply to Mr. Bradley.” Mind, 
New Series XIX: 373–8.
Russell, Bertrand. 1961 (1921). The Analysis of Mind. London: George Allen & 
Unwin.
Russell, Bertrand. 1974 (1946). History of Western Philosophy. London: George 
Allen & Unwin.
Russell, Bertrand. 1986 (1918). “The Philosophy of Logical Atomism.” In The 
Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell vol. 8, edited by J. G. Slater, 157–244. 
London: George Allen & Unwin.
Smith, Barry. 2005. “Against Fantology.” In Experience and Analysis, edited by 
M.  E. Reicher and J.  C. Marek, 153–170. Wien: ÖBV & HPT 
Verlagsgesellschaft. (Also at <http://ontology.buffalo.edu/bfo/Against_
Fantology.pdf >)
3  Against Fantology Again 
43

45
© The Author(s) 2016
L. Zaibert (ed.), The Theory and Practice of Ontology, 
DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-55278-5_4
4
1	
A Geographic Preamble
In his celebrated Romanes Lecture of 1907, George Curzon of Kedleston—
former British Viceroy of India under Queen Victoria and King Edward 
VII and future Secretary for Foreign Affairs under King George V—
emphasized the overwhelming influence of political frontiers in the his-
tory of the modern world.
The majority of the most important wars of the [last] century have been 
Frontier wars. Wars of religion, of alliances, of rebellion, of aggrandisement, of 
dynastic intrigue or ambition—wars in which the personal element was often 
the predominant factor—tend to be replaced by Frontier wars, i.e., wars aris-
ing out of the expansion of states and kingdoms, carried to a point, as the 
habitable globe shrinks, at which the interests or ambitions of one state come 
into sharp and irreconcilable collision with those of another. (Curzon 1907, 5)
On Drawing Lines Across the Board
Achille Varzi
A. Varzi (*) 
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
e-mail: av72@columbia.edu

He knew what he was talking about. At the time of his lecture, the deter-
mination of the geopolitical frontiers of the British Empire was a major 
source of diplomatic preoccupation, if not of international danger, and 
Curzon himself had just returned from a continent where he had been 
responsible for the security of a land frontier 5,700 miles in length (“the 
most diversified, the most important, and the most delicately poised in 
the world”, 4). It was not without authority, therefore, that he would 
see his lecture as an opportunity to urge British foreign ministers and 
ambassadors to concentrate their efforts on frontier policy, in the convic-
tion that many sources of political discord could be removed through the 
adjustment of rival “interests and ambitions” at points where the relevant 
territorial borders adjoin.
Frontiers are indeed the razor’s edge on which hang suspended the modem 
issues of war or peace, of life or death to nations. […] Just as the protection 
of the home is the most vital care of the private citizen, so the integrity of 
her borders is the condition of existence of the State. (7)
As Curzon himself pointed out, at the time of his lecture no compre-
hensive work had ever been devoted to the subject of frontiers as a whole. 
The formulae of frontier policy were hidden “in the arcana of diplomatic 
chancelleries”; its incidents and drama were in the hands of a few silent 
men “in the clubs of London, or Paris, or Berlin” (5). His 58-page text 
may therefore be considered the first sustained attempt to fill in that 
important gap, not only from the perspective of political history and “the 
science of government”, as he would call it, but also in the theoretical 
foundations of geopolitics as we know it today. In fact, Curzon’s text is 
admirable for the rich supply of historical and political examples with 
which he illustrates his main thesis about the overwhelming importance 
of frontiers. However, what makes it a truly groundbreaking contribution 
is precisely the theoretical framework in terms of which Curzon articu-
lates his thesis. And what makes the framework powerful, today as in 
1907, is that it rests entirely on a single, fundamental conceptual distinc-
tion. It is the distinction between those frontiers, or boundaries, that are 
afforded by “the natural features of the earth’s surface”, such as moun-
tain ranges, ravines, coastlines, river banks, desert barriers, etc., and those 
46 
A. Varzi

boundaries which, not being dependent upon any such landmarks for 
their selection, have instead been “artificially created by man” and find 
their origin “in the complex operations of race, language, trade, religion, 
and war” (13).
To us, this may sound like an obvious distinction to draw.1 Any atlas 
will contain maps of two sorts, physical and political, and any history 
book will reveal that the history of boundaries is to a great extent a chron-
icle of the progressive need to supplement or to replace natural boundar-
ies of the first kind by artificial boundaries of the latter kind as the human 
population increased, commerce and industry grew, and naval and mili-
tary forces (along with imperialism) developed. Yet what seems obvious 
to us was not as plain and clearly understood at the time of Curzon’s lec-
ture. More importantly, Curzon did not simply codify the distinction; he 
also showed that the natural/artificial opposition is of great significance 
from a broader theoretical perspective. For precisely insofar as the “condi-
tion of existence” of a political unit lies in the “integrity of its borders”, it 
makes a big difference whether the borders themselves have been robustly 
fixed by nature or simply drawn conventionally by people through politi-
cal agreement, unilateral stipulation, or warfare. Again, this may sound 
like a truism, and Curzon himself seemed to think it was:
That a country with easily recognized natural boundaries is more capable 
of defence and is more assured of a national existence than a country which 
does not possess those advantages; that a country with a sea Frontier, such 
as the British Isles, particularly if she also possesses sea-power, is in a stron-
ger position than a country which only has land Frontiers and requires a 
powerful army to defend them; that a mountain-girt country is the most 
secure of internal States—these are the common-places of political geogra-
phy. (10)
The fact remains, however, that the point had never before been made 
and articulated so explicitly, and for this reason alone, if not for Curzon’s 
actual use of the distinction in the course of his long political career,2 his 
Romanes Lecture should be regarded as a milestone in the foundations of 
modern geopolitics.
4  On Drawing Lines Across the Board 
47

Indeed, Curzon’s point bites even deeper than that. It bites deeper and 
wider, for boundaries are not a prerogative of geography. Boundaries are 
at work in articulating every aspect of the reality with which we have to 
deal. They stand out in every map we draw of the world—the world of 
geography as well as the world of human experience at large, beginning 
with the contents of perception. There is, at bottom, a map in every child’s 
line drawing. And this ubiquity of boundaries goes in concert with the 
pervasiveness of the natural/artificial distinction, the apparent contrast 
between objective and subjective demarcations, the opposition—in Barry 
Smith’s more recent terminology3—between bona fide joints of reality 
and fiat articulations that lie skew to any factual differentiations on the 
side of the world and simply reflect, in whole or in part, human prac-
tices, decisions, and cognitive operations. In short, Curzon’s distinction 
betokens the general opposition between what is found or discovered and 
what is made or created, and this opposition has ramifications that go far 
beyond the “common-places of political geography”; they take us straight 
to the fundamental metaphysical opposition between realism and anti-­
realism. For the question of realism is, in an important sense, the ques-
tion of what are the natural boundaries, those that “carve at the joints”. 
And in this sense, anti-realism may be seen as the radical stance enticed 
by the limit case: What if there aren’t any? What if, pace Lord Curzon, all 
boundaries are, on closer examination, of the fiat, artificial sort?
2	
From Geography to Metaphysics
Let me elaborate on the thesis that boundaries, and the natural/artifi-
cial distinction that they elicit, are not a prerogative of the large-scale 
geographic world that we find depicted in ordinary maps and atlases. 
In this regard, Barry Smith’s work over the years has been enormously 
influential, and thoroughly comprehensive, but the point it is still worth 
stressing.4
To some extent the thesis is self-evident. Consider, for instance, the 
smaller-scale world featured in cadastral registries, a domain amply stud-
ied by Smith himself in his joint work with Leo Zaibert. Here it is imme-
diate that the parceling of land into real estate is a twofold boundary 
48 
A. Varzi

business of the sort described by Curzon. In some cases the parceling 
may reflect physical discontinuities to be found in the land itself, such as 
ditches, cliffs, creeks, etc. More often, however, it is just a matter of fenc-
ing off a plot of land by fiat. The ownership of the plot does not depend 
on its physical properties and associated natural rights; it is entirely an 
institutional affair, a matter of social and legal agreements.
The act of fencing alone is not sufficient for such object-creation. [It] 
requires also the existence of what John Searle calls collective intentionality, 
that is, it requires that other persons (simplemindedly or not) believe that 
the land is indeed the property of he who fenced it off. (Smith and Zaibert 
2001, 162)5
Or consider the partitioning of the ecological environment effected 
by what biologists call niche construction (Odling-Smee 1988).6 Here, 
again, we have a clear illustration of the pervasiveness of boundaries in 
the organization and representation of the space around us, and again 
Curzon’s distinction applies immediately (though obviously without 
recourse to explicit conventions or legal agreements). There are niches 
that are fully enclosed within a physical retainer, such as an egg, a closed 
oyster shell, or a larval chamber; niches that, like a kangaroo pouch or 
a bear’s cave, are bound partly by a physical boundary and partly by an 
immaterial boundary marking (more or less vaguely) the opening through 
which the organism is free to leave; niches that are bounded by a physical 
retainer to a very low extent, as with the niche of the oxpecker removing 
ticks from the back of an African rhinoceros (bounded by a part of the 
rhinoceros’s hide); and, finally, niches that lack a physical retainer alto-
gether and are bordered entirely by boundaries of the fiat sort, as with 
a fish orbiting underwater or a falcon in the sky circling above the area 
where its prey is to be found. It is indeed remarkable how closely such a 
variety of niche structures mirrors the geopolitical variety described by 
Curzon. His “common-places of political geography” are also confirmed, 
for obviously the prima facie strength and protective function of any par-
ticular niche—what Gibson (1979) calls its “affordance-character”—is to 
a large degree determined by the sort of boundaries that delimit it. And 
just as the history of geopolitical boundaries is, to a great extent, a history 
4  On Drawing Lines Across the Board 
49

of the progressive need to supplement natural boundaries with artificial 
ones, so the history of evolution is, in many ways, a history of the growth 
in complexity of organism–environment relations. As Richard Lewontin 
famously put it:
Unless there is some preferred or natural way to subdivide the world into 
niches the concept loses all predictive and explanatory value. […] There is 
a constant interplay of the organism and the environment, so that although 
natural selection may be adapting the organism to a particular set of envi-
ronmental circumstances, the evolution of the organism itself changes 
those circumstances. (1978, 215)
Now, it is not an exaggeration to say that these sorts of consideration 
apply across the board, including the mapping of reality that emerges 
from the cognitive acts of single individuals. I mentioned, for instance, 
the contents of perception. We know that these are structured for the 
most part in terms of figure–ground organization (Rubin 1921), which is 
to say the organization of the visual field into objects that stand out from 
their surroundings. This is entirely a matter of drawing boundaries. And 
here, too, we find the same mix of bona fide and fiat components that is 
so central in geographic representations7 (which may explain why Kant, 
of all people, was so keen on teaching geography throughout his career8). 
On the one hand, we tend to see and track the middle-size objects in our 
immediate environment on the basis of the natural boundaries they seem 
to possess. The use of edge-detection techniques for object recognition 
in computer vision is motivated precisely by this fact, for in normal cir-
cumstances such boundaries correspond to salient discontinuities in the 
depth and brightness of the perceived scene.9 The very fact that humans, 
from the time they are infants, tend to reify and quantify over such 
non-entities as holes and shadows just as easily as they do with regard 
to material objects, as developmental psychology and the psychology of 
perception have amply shown,10 is another proof of the importance of 
“natural” discontinuities in the segmentation of the visual scene: the pos-
session of a boundary is a sign of objecthood. On the other hand, it is 
also true that sometimes we parse the visual scene in terms of boundaries 
that involve the creative contribution of our perceptual ­apparatus, which, 
50 
A. Varzi

as we know from Schumann’s work on illusory contours, tends to articu-
late reality in terms of continuous borders even when such borders “are 
objectively not present” (1900, 14). Kanizsa’s triangle (1955) is perhaps 
the example that best epitomizes this phenomenon. But the same could 
be said of many other ways in which fiat boundaries emerge from the 
figure–ground organization of the visual field through the basic factors 
studied by Gestalt theorists, such as proximity, continuity, closure, color 
and texture similarity, good form, etc. (Wertheimer 1923). There is no 
bona fide boundary in a pointillist painting, except perhaps around each 
individual color spot; yet we see each “figure” as though it possessed a 
regular contour.
And perception is just the beginning. As Smith has argued since 
(1994a), similar considerations apply at any level of representation or 
organization of the spatial world around us. We think of a boundary 
every time we think of an object as of something separated from or dis-
tinct within its surroundings. There is a boundary (a surface) enclosing 
this apple. There is a boundary marking off my body from the environ-
ment. There is a boundary around every water droplet. In cases such as 
these, it is intuitive to speak of natural demarcations, as with the bound-
aries of an island: they are, Smith says, “boundaries in the things them-
selves” (1995a, 476),11 which exist and would exist even in the absence 
of all delineating or conceptualizing activity on our part. Yet in many 
other cases the demarcations are clearly artificial or human-induced. The 
boundary delimiting my part of the office from my colleague’s, Tibble’s 
tail from the rest of her body, the header from the text area in the page 
layout—these are boundaries that we draw by fiat in order to partition 
a larger whole into proper parts, exactly as with the geographic border 
that separates Lesotho from South Africa or Northern Ireland from the 
Irish Republic. Conversely, just as certain agglomerations may, in the 
geographic world, have a principle of unity, as with Benelux or Polynesia, 
so fiat boundaries are at work whenever we circumclude a number of 
smaller objects into larger wholes:12 we represent the world as consisting 
of trees, bees, and stars but also of forests, swarms, and constellations 
(and schools of fish, flock of birds, herds of cattle, decks of cards, ency-
clopedias, bikinis, tokens of the letter ‘i’, etc.).13
4  On Drawing Lines Across the Board 
51

Temporal entities, too, such as events and processes, have boundaries, 
viz. beginnings and endings14; and Curzon’s distinction appears to apply 
to this domain equally well. A person’s birth and death, the instant when 
a ball begins to roll, the point in the splitting of an amoeba when one 
animal suddenly becomes two: these would be temporal boundaries of 
the bona fide sort. A person’s turning 21 years old, by contrast, or the 
subdivision of baseball games into innings and of innings into frames, are 
clear examples of fiat discriminations that are driven entirely by human 
conventions and purposes. Similarly for the boundaries through which a 
complex of actions and events is singled out and described as a wedding, 
a conference, a revolution, a war, etc., which is but the temporal analogue 
of the sort of boundary whereby an agglomeration of smaller spatial enti-
ties is circumcluded by fiat into a larger whole. This is a phenomenon 
that is actually quite common also in relation to the simpler and more 
private events that make up our normal day-to-day lives. To use one of 
Smith’s favorite examples,15 whenever we comprehend the apparent con-
tact between two bodies as a kiss or a handshake we rely on our fiat lassos 
to carve out from a congeries of physical processes (relating to surface 
tension, fluid exchange, etc.) and associated psychological phenomena 
(of tactual and emotional feeling, etc.) a conventional and neatly demar-
cated unit.
Finally, even abstract entities (if such there be) may be said to have 
boundaries. This is obvious when it comes to the abstract figures studied 
by geometry. But the same applies, for instance, to such abstracta as sets 
and classes, or concepts, witness Euler’s popular method for representing 
the former by means of simple closed curves “within which all the [ele-
ments] are confined” (1768, 98) or Frege’s demand that in logic every 
concept “must have a sharp frontier” (1903, 69).16 And here, too, the nat-
ural/artificial opposition appears to play an important role. Those sets or 
concepts that are expressed by projectable predicates, substance sortals, or 
so-called natural-kind terms, such as ‘emerald’, ‘horse’, or ‘gold’, would 
have genuine bona fide boundaries; those that are expressed by disjunc-
tive predicates such as ‘emerose’ and ‘grue’, or by phase sortals such as 
‘colt’ and ‘teenager’, would by contrast come with artificial, fiat boundar-
ies that do not support law-like generalizations (Goodman 1954). Ditto 
for the corresponding universals, if such there be. For another example, 
52 
A. Varzi

literary and musical compositions (construed as abstract types) typically 
come as bounded entities, and just as we partition them into chapters and 
movements, or extract quotations, so we collect them by fiat into larger 
wholes: Kant’s Opus Postumum, the Harry Potter saga, Wagner’s Ring, etc.
So much, then, for the claim that boundaries are not a prerogative 
of geography. They definitely aren’t. Call them frontiers, borders, edges, 
contours, margins, surfaces, beginnings and endings, limits, or what have 
you—it is a fact that boundaries stand out in every map of the world, at 
any level of representation, and so does the natural/artificial distinction 
that they elicit across the board. And if things are so, then it is a short 
step now to see in what sense Curzon’s distinction bites much deeper and 
wider than he himself might have thought, to the point of raising funda-
mental metaphysical issues. For,
Lo! Once fiat outer boundaries have been recognized, then it becomes clear 
that the genuine–fiat opposition can be drawn in relation to objects also. 
(Smith 1994a, 17)
If a certain entity is fully enclosed by a natural, self-connected boundary 
of the appropriate sort, then it is reasonable to suppose that its existence 
and persistence conditions do not depend on us; it is a bona fide entity in 
its own right. For Smith this is actually the central mark of genuine sub-
stances (1992, §6). By contrast, if its boundaries are, in whole or in part, 
artificial, then the entity itself is to some degree a fiat entity, a construct, 
a product of our world-making. Clearly this is a big difference. And the 
question of which entities are of which sort becomes the fundamental 
metaphysical question of which entities are there to be discovered and 
which, by contrast, are created by us.
3	
Realism v. Anti-realism
As I mentioned, this way of framing the question takes us straight to the 
traditional opposition between realism and anti-realism. Smith puts it 
thus:
4  On Drawing Lines Across the Board 
53

We might distinguish, in the range of possible ontologies, between:
–	 Extreme idealism: the doctrine that all objects are created, or in other 
words that all objects exist exclusively as the products or figments of 
human cognition.
–	 Moderate (or “creationist” or “Ingardenian”) realism: the doctrine 
that some objects are created, some discovered.
–	 Extreme (or “platonist” or “Meinongian”) realism: the doctrine that 
all objects are discovered, or more particular that all objects are 
found and not made.
I shall dismiss immediately the extreme idealist alternative (or is there really 
some extreme idealist who believes sincerely that the ground on which he 
stands, or the meteor speeding towards the building in which he sits, is a 
mere product of human cognition?). The important debate, I would argue, 
is that between extreme and moderate realism. (1995b, 192)17
There is indeed a good reason why the range of possibilities should in 
principle include all three alternatives listed by Smith. The opposition 
between bona fide and fiat boundaries, hence between discovered and 
created entities, is first and foremost a conceptual distinction; and while 
instances of both types suggest themselves easily, as in the many examples 
given above, there is of course room for disagreement and nothing rules 
out that, upon reflection, one of the two categories will be found empty. 
As the quotation makes clear, Smith immediately rejects one such pos-
sibility, to the effect that there are no bona fide entities whatsoever, as 
utterly untenable. Eventually he also rejects the opposite extreme—no 
fiat entities—so in the end he sides with the moderate option, or some 
particular version of it, recognizing entities of both sorts. This is in line 
with traditional wisdom. It corresponds to the agenda set out by Plato 
in the Phaedrus, where Socrates famously recommends that we carve the 
world along its “natural joints”, trying “not to splinter any part, as a bad 
butcher might do” (265d).18 And Smith would emphasize that this is also 
the right way to think about science. As he writes elsewhere:
The very idea of science as a meaningful enterprise—an idea whose validity 
is made manifest in successful applications—presupposes […] that some, 
but not all, conceptual distinctions track real divisions in the world. 
(1999a, 278)
54 
A. Varzi

Now, moderate realism is such a broad view, covering all sorts of inter-
mediate positions, that it is hard to deny its overall force vis-à-vis its two 
extreme competitors. It still leaves it open which things belong to which 
category, the bona fide or the fiat, but so be it: that is precisely the fun-
damental metaphysical question raised by the distinction, and moderate 
realists will make it their business to address it with the seriousness it 
warrants. Nonetheless the two doctrines labeled as “extreme” deserve a 
hearing, too. Are they really utterly and irredeemably untenable?
Smith is right, I think, in drawing this conclusion with regard to 
extreme realism. There are several ways of articulating that view. One 
could, for instance, insist that (i) deep down, fiat entities are mere talk of 
no genuine ontological significance, or (ii) fiat entities are mere potential 
entities that do not, as such, enjoy actual existence, or (iii) fiat entities 
are not strictly speaking created but merely selected from the pre-existing 
totality of all relevant geometrically determined possibilities. None of 
these accounts, however, does full justice to the way in which fiat entities 
are supposed to emerge from the drawing of fiat boundaries in the sense 
here understood. Option (iii) is in fact the one targeted by Smith, and I 
agree that it fails insofar as the drawing of fiat boundaries may, in some 
cases, result in perfectly coinciding entities, as with Hamburg-Stadt and 
Hamburg-Land (whose non-identity is seen in the fact that the two might 
in principle diverge, as with the city and state of Bremen).19 Option (ii) 
is perhaps best seen as rooted in Aristotle’s conception that “no part even 
exists otherwise than potentially” (Physics VII, 5, 250a24–25).20 Strictly 
speaking, this would only apply to those fiat entities that are carved out 
on the surfaces or within the interiors of larger wholes, but it seems plau-
sible to extend the view also to those entities that are obtained by fiat 
agglomeration of smaller parts.21 As a general metaphysical theory of 
parts and wholes, the view is certainly not idle and not one that can be 
quickly dismissed.22 Yet, again, it hardly captures the full strength of our 
fiat practices. As Curzon’s geopolitical examples show all too well, the 
drawing of artificial boundaries may result in entities whose conditions 
of existence (and persistence) may be weaker in comparison to entities 
protected by robust, natural boundaries; yet both sorts of entity have 
full claim to actuality when it comes to our social and political lives, to 
the point that in each case people are willing to give their lives—and 
4  On Drawing Lines Across the Board 
55

­administrators to spend huge sums of money—to defend them. Perhaps 
not all (undetached) proper parts exist, and perhaps not all (scattered) 
agglomerations exist, as some philosophers have argued.23 But to draw a 
boundary is not merely to pinpoint a part or a whole; it is to engage in 
a fully-fledged performative act whose creative force delivers something 
well outside the pure realm of possibilia. This is also why option (i) doesn’t 
seem credible. I can see its strong appeal from a nominalist perspective. 
But there is a big difference between mere talk and illocutionary speech 
(in the sense of Austin 1962), and the drawing of fiat boundaries belongs 
squarely to the latter. In carving out a fiat entity we do not simply re-
describe a portion of reality with different words, or just enrich our lan-
guage with new names for things we already had. We literally bring those 
entities into being, with all that comes with them. And here, again, the 
geopolitical examples discussed by Curzon are instructive. As Smith him-
self concludes,
If it can be accepted that clear examples of fiat objects are provided by the 
Jeffersonian entities with which we began, then it will follow that not the 
least important reason for admitting fiat objects into our general ontology 
will turn on the fact that most of us live in one. (1995a, 478)24
What, then, about the opposite extreme doctrine, the doctrine that all 
boundaries are of the fiat sort, hence all entities are created? Is it also as 
untenable as Smith suggests? To me, it is here that the “important debate” 
takes place, not between the second and third doctrines listed by Smith 
but between the first two. For while we can hardly be wrong in classifying 
a boundary as being of the fiat sort, since such boundaries are drawn by 
us, in some cases we may be under the impression that a boundary is of 
the bona fide sort when, on closer inspection, it turns out to be a product 
of our own making. And if this is true in some cases, then it is not obvi-
ous why it couldn’t be true in all cases.
That it is indeed true in some cases is, I think, not only possible, but 
evident. We are animals of a certain size and all our everyday perceptions 
and actions take place at the mesoscopic level, which is to say the level at 
which we and the world are, in Gibson’s terms, “comparable” (1966, 22). 
56 
A. Varzi

But precisely for that reason, precisely because it is our level, the bound-
aries that strike us as “natural” are likely to reflect for the most part our 
cognitive limitations. Thus, earlier I mentioned the surface of an apple as 
an instance of a bona fide boundary that exists and would exist even in 
the absence of all delineating or conceptualizing activity on our part. The 
example suggests itself. Physically speaking, however, we all know that 
an apple is not the solid, continuous substance that it seems to be. It is a 
smudgy crowd of tiny particles frantically dancing in empty space, and 
speaking of its surface is really like speaking of the surface of a swarm of 
bees, the outline of a constellation, a figure’s contour in a pointillist paint-
ing. There are no such boundaries in the bona fide world. All involve a 
fiat demarcation whereby a plurality of smaller things are circumcluded 
and assembled by our cognitive system, bridging the gaps and connecting 
the dots. And what goes for apples goes for human bodies, water droplets, 
rocks, trees, chairs, and so on—for all sorts of material bodies that to us 
seem to enjoy a natural boundary of their own. Smith takes it as obvious 
that meteors are bona fide objects, for no idealist can be so foolish as to 
pass over the objective, devastating effects a meteor may cause. Yet surely 
fiat objects can be devastating too, as the one we are living in has been in 
many a military conflict. Causally speaking, fiat and bona fide entities are 
on a par. So, physically speaking, meteors may still be like apples, just as 
moons, planets, and even stars may, in this sense, resemble constellations. 
In the memorable words of Goodman:
As we make constellations by picking out and putting together certain stars 
rather than others, so we make stars by drawing certain boundaries rather 
than others. (1983, 104)
Of course, this is not by itself enough to conclude that all material 
bodies are fiat objects. After all, if an apple consists of tiny particles (as a 
swarm consists of bees), then at least those particles (bees) ought to exist 
and be what they are independently of our cognitive paraphernalia. Even 
a hard-core physicalist might therefore concur that at some level, possibly 
a level way beneath our everyday ken, bona fide objects exist. This is cer-
tainly a possibility, and one that would suffice to dismiss the doctrine of 
“extreme idealism”—not the meteors, but the tiny particles. On the other 
4  On Drawing Lines Across the Board 
57

hand, even this line of reasoning may be found wanting, for obviously 
it depends on a naive corpuscularist conception of matter that is just as 
controversial today as it was in Democritus’ time. Surely things are more 
complex than that. And if it turned out that, on closer look, our apple 
is gunky, which is to say composite all the way down, and if this were 
true of all material bodies alike, then one might indeed conclude that all 
material bodies are, on closer look, fiat all the way down.
This is just one example, and it only concerns boundaries in the 
domain of material bodies. As I have argued elsewhere (2011), however, 
similar concerns may be extended to the other domains in which the 
natural/artificial opposition arises. For instance, above I mentioned a 
person’s birth and death as obvious candidates for bona fide boundar-
ies in the realm of temporal entities. These are examples Smith himself 
finds emblematic (1994a, 2). But are they really? What we truly have are 
streams of physical, biological, and psychological processes that do not 
by themselves determine when a person begins to exist, or ceases to exist. 
That is why philosophers have felt the need to supplement their own the-
ories, which in fact turn out to be quite diverse (theological ensoulment 
and desoulment doctrines, developmental/metamorphic views, biologi-
cal life-cycle accounts, “personhood” definitions, etc.) We can base our 
theories on as many factors we like, including formal–ontological con-
ditions and advanced scientific findings,25 but theories they are, to the 
point that even the US Supreme Court had to acknowledge the impossi-
bility of settling the issue.26 And if things are so, then the relevant bound-
aries lose their “natural” character and even a person’s life may become, 
to some extent, a fiat business. Similarly for the other cases mentioned 
above, including the all-important category of “natural kinds”. Surely 
there is a difference between, say, a wholly arbitrary zoological classifica-
tion, such as Borges’s Chinese Encyclopedia,27 and the sorts of taxonomy 
that we actually find in the biological sciences. Yet we all know that the 
latter, too, are the product of theoretical criteria that are constantly in 
flux, reflecting cultural circumstances and practical concerns of various 
sort. It is telling, for instance, that less than two centuries ago some zool-
ogists would still attribute taxonomic value to the distinction between 
“domestic” and “savage” animals28; and even today we may wonder, to 
use Catherine Elgin’s example (1995, 297), whether a taxonomy that 
58 
A. Varzi

draws the line between horses and zebras where we do is truly tracking 
bona fide worldly differences. No doubt the thought that biological taxa 
are, on the whole, mere fiat constructs may sound extreme, if not “totally 
inconsistent” with “the objective reality of evolution” (Stamos 2003, 131, 
n. 35) But then, again, it is worth recalling that Darwin himself seems to 
have felt otherwise:
It will be seen that I look at the term species, as one arbitrarily given for the 
sake of convenience to a set of individuals closely resembling each other, 
and that it does not essentially differ from the term variety. (1859, 52)
Indeed, even Curzon’s original distinction in the geopolitical sphere is, 
on closer look, vulnerable to this sort of concerns. For just what, one may 
ask, are the “features of the earth’s surface” that define natural boundaries? 
There are at least two worries to be registered. One is that even here there 
is an obvious granularity problem. It is understandable that the British 
Lord would speak of the glorious sea frontier of Britain. But what is that 
frontier, exactly? Where exactly is it? There is a big difference between the 
coastline that we see from an airplane, or that is reproduced on a map of 
Britain, and the messy seashore that we actually find when we go there, 
ground-level: except perhaps by the cliffs of Dover, the neat demarca-
tion between land and water turns out to be an abstraction, an idealiza-
tion, and cartographers need to fix on some artificial criteria to decide 
where and how to draw the line.29 The German geographer Friederick 
Ratzel, whose work on boundaries must have been familiar to Curzon, 
knew this well: “Der Grenzraum ist das Wirkliche, die Grenzlinie die 
Abstraktion davon” (1897, 448). Ditto for the rock-hard boundaries 
afforded by mountain ranges, such as the much extolled Alpine barrier 
demarcating Italy from the rest of Europe. Giuseppe Mazzini would not 
hesitate to describe it as “the most sublime, undeniable boundary the 
Almighty could have given us” (1859, 167); yet as recently as 2008 Italy 
and Switzerland were still working on a conventional agreement to define 
that boundary and determine its exact location in view of the continual 
weathering transformations of the crest and watershed lines (rock ero-
sion, glacier melting, etc.).30 This is not to deny that the mighty Alps offer 
stronger protection than a frail Jeffersonian border. But it is indicative 
4  On Drawing Lines Across the Board 
59

of their ontological fragility qua bona fide geographic boundaries which 
exist in complete independence of human collective intentionality.
The second worry is even more important. For as Curzon himself took 
pains to acknowledge, what counts (and works) as a natural frontier is 
oftentimes determined by our own attitudes. Surely the sea has repeat-
edly protected England against the fury of the Continent, as the Alps 
have shielded the Italians from more than one great and well appointed 
army; but quite as many instances can be found in which the peoples 
on two sides of a stretch of water or of a mountain range have been 
on friendly terms. Surely, we may add, the fact that Ireland is an island 
explains IRA’s fierce opposition to its partition into separate national 
jurisdictions (“Ireland cannot shift her frontiers. The Almighty traced 
them beyond the cunning of man to modify”31); but then, again, the 
artificial border between Portugal and Spain is the oldest and most resil-
ient one in Europe. What truly matters, it seems, is not just whether the 
relevant boundaries are natural or artificial. It is whether they are regarded 
as being of one type or the other, and whether their status is equally 
recognized by the peoples on both sides. And when it isn’t, there is war, 
as the conflicts in the Middle East illustrate all too well. Curzon tried to 
account for this phenomenon—and for its huge impact on the history 
of humanity—by drawing attention to the difference between real and 
alleged natural boundaries. This occurs towards the end of his lecture:
There is also a class of so-called Natural Frontiers which I have been obliged 
to omit, as possessing no valid claim to the title, namely those which are 
claimed by nations as natural on grounds of ambition, or expediency, or 
more often sentiment. The attempt to realize Frontiers of this type has been 
responsible for many of the wars, and some of the most tragical vicissitudes 
in history. (1907, 54)
It remains to be shown, however, that not all frontiers are of this sort. 
Indeed it is symptomatic that exactly at the time when the Britons 
were absorbing the natural/artificial dichotomy from Curzon’s Romanes 
Lecture, in France the readers of Élisée Reclus’s L’homme et la terre were 
invited to ponder precisely this point, questioning the whole notion of a 
natural frontier along with the sense of “geographic predestination” that 
60 
A. Varzi

it evokes (Reclus 1907, 307f). And while it is a fact that Curzon’s dichot-
omy, “scientifically the most exact”, would soon become standard lore 
among geographers, it is also true that many historians would rather fol-
low up on Reclus’s misgivings and direct their concerns towards its ten-
ability. Lucien Febvre’s criticisms of the Ancien Régime rhetoric, retained 
in Danton’s proclamation that the borders of France had been “marquées 
par la Nature”,32 says it all:
For, at bottom, the whole problem is, or appears to us to be, a question of 
boundaries. Within us, so deeply implanted that we no longer notice its 
hold on us, there is a certain idea of the “natural limits” of the great States 
which causes us to think of their boundaries as things in themselves, having 
an actual value, a kind of mechanical virtue, and a compulsory and at the 
same time creative power. […] A whole philosophy of history [is] com-
prised in that word “natural”. (1922, 360–361)
4	
A Fiat World?
To sum up, then, there are many a reason and plenty of evidence to think 
that in several cases we may be under the impression of dealing with 
natural boundaries when, on closer inspection, those boundaries are a 
cognitive or social artifact. Certainly this is not enough to vindicate the 
extreme idealist view rejected by Smith. Yet the challenge is reasonably 
serious: if we are wrong in some cases—indeed many cases—might we 
not be wrong in all cases? Is it really so implausible to think that all enti-
ties are, at bottom, fiat entities?
I do not intend to engage directly with this question here. The point 
is primarily meta-philosophical and concerns the force of the question 
itself: it is not a question that can be quickly dismissed at the outset. 
As I said, I actually think that the “important debate” takes place right 
here—not between moderate and extreme realism (which must indeed be 
rejected), but between moderate realism and extreme idealism. So let me 
conclude with some remarks on why I think the debate is an open one.33
The first remark concerns the very epithet “idealism” with which Smith 
labels the extreme doctrine in question. I can see why the ­(moderate) 
4  On Drawing Lines Across the Board 
61

realist may want to use this language. Strictly speaking, however, the doc-
trine that all entities are the product of human fiat delineations does not 
amount to a form of idealism, at least not the sort of subjective ideal-
ism according to which the world itself would be an offspring of our 
produktive Einbildungskraft. Perhaps there is a sense in which our world 
is limited by our language, as Wittgenstein proclaimed (1921, §5.6), but 
strictly speaking the world as a whole has no boundaries, so its status is 
not at issue. The debate concerns exclusively the status of its citizens, and 
whether they come in two sorts. Indeed, not only is the doctrine in ques-
tion compatible with the existence of an autonomous, mind-­independent 
world; it presupposes it. For all fiat boundaries are, in geography as else-
where, boundaries that we draw on some pre-existing underlying reality. 
When, for instance, Jefferson called into being the states of the Northwest 
Ordinance, he did so by tracing lines on a map, and the effectiveness of 
his creating act was crucially dependent on the map being a map of the 
world. His pencil lines were meant to delineate portions of an actually 
existing territory. Likewise, and more generally, when we create an object, 
an event, or anything else by fiat, we do not engage in creative magic; we 
do so by drawing lines on some relevant factual material. Smith himself 
makes the point as follows:
The interiors of fiat objects are […] autonomous portions of autonomous 
reality. Only the respective external boundaries are created by us; it is these 
which are the products of our mental and linguistic activity, and of associ-
ated conventional laws, norms and habits. (1995a, 479)34
Of course, Smith also thinks that this sort of creative activity presup-
poses more than the mere existence of autonomous reality. As he writes 
elsewhere:
How would fiat demarcation be possible if there were no genuine land-
marks which we (or the first fiat demarcators) were able to discover, and in 
relation to which fiat demarcation becomes possible and objectively com-
municable? (1996, 300)
62 
A. Varzi

In other words, fiat entities are not, for Smith, carved out arbitrarily by 
us from an otherwise indistinct totality; they are, rather, “functions of 
affordances”, and this reason alone should convince us that it is “a con-
fusion” to suppose that all objects might be of the fiat type.35 But this is 
already to engage in the debate. It is to argue against the extreme view. 
And to resist the argument one need not be an idealist; one only needs 
to resist the assumption that the relevant affordances—the landmarks—
cannot themselves be fiat constructs. This may well be an extreme task, 
a desperate way to save the picture of reality as an “amorphous lump”, as 
Dummett calls it (1973, 563ff). It may well be an extreme form of con-
structivism, or conventionalism, or conceptual anti-realism. But it isn’t 
idealism (and even less irrealism, as Goodman 1978, x, would have it36).
The second remark I want to make is that this extreme doctrine—
let us now call it “constructivism”—does not entail the epistemological 
nihilism that it might suggest. That all boundaries might be of the fiat 
type does not mean that “anything goes”, as if the difference between 
knowledge and belief were entirely up for grabs and truth itself became 
an empty notion. One can see why the realist might press charges. For 
the realist there is something called fundamental science, and its job is 
perfectly well defined: it is to move us in the direction of the bona fide 
“joints of reality” (Smith 2001a, 142). All other inquiry supervenes on 
this, for “all fiat objects are supervenient on bona fide objects on lower 
levels” (143). However, there is no room for fundamental science in the 
world envisaged by the constructivist. If everything were the product of 
our fiat organization, if the joints along which we “carve” the world were 
a feature solely of the artificial categories that we employ in drawing up 
our maps, then all science would pertain only to those maps, “to how 
we talk and think about things” (Smith 1997b, 122). The world itself 
would seem to make no objective contributions, except perhaps for some 
basic mereological truths. And if things are so, then anything goes: no 
facts, just interpretations. This is obviously a legitimate concern. Yet the 
conclusion does not follow. And it does not follow precisely because the 
drawing of fiat boundaries is not an empty activity, a mere play of the 
imagination. As Frege says in a passage often quoted by Smith37:
4  On Drawing Lines Across the Board 
63

The objectivity of the North Sea is not affected by the fact that it is a matter 
of our arbitrary choice which part of all the water on the earth’s surface we 
mark off and elect to call the ‘North Sea’. (1884, §26)
Correspondingly, the truth or falsity of what we say about the North Sea 
is not affected by its status as a fiat entity:
If we say “The North Sea is 10,000 square miles in extent” […] we assert 
something quite objective, which is independent of our ideas and every-
thing of the sort. If we should happen to wish, on another occasion, to 
draw the boundaries of the North Sea differently or to understand some-
thing different by “10,000”, that would not make false the content that 
was previously true. (Ibid.)
None of this depends on the existence of bona fide lower levels, and 
on their traits sufficing to fix the values of traits at the higher fiat level. 
Nothing depends on there being some bona fide boundaries somewhere. 
More simply, as long as constructivism is distinguished from idealism, 
truth and falsity work in the presence of fiat delineations exactly as they 
are supposed to work in the presence of bona fide boundaries. Every 
predicate term has an extension and every singular term has a referent, 
arbitrarily demarcated as these may be. And a subject–predicate sentence 
is true if and only if the referent of the subject term falls within the exten-
sion of the predicate term. Period.
To put it differently, truth and falsity work the same way in the realm 
of what Searle (1995) calls “brute facts”, which would be fixed entirely 
by the world, and in the realm of “institutional facts”, which require col-
lective intentionality. The realist acknowledges facts of both sorts, and 
she may want to keep track of the difference by distinguishing between 
laws of Nature and laws of Right, bona fide laws and fiat laws. But a law 
is a law no matter where it comes from. If the traffic code sets a certain 
speed limit, and we drive faster, than it is a fact that we break the law 
and we deserve a fine. We can’t dispute that. It is a fiat law, and as such 
it is both arbitrary and ephemeral; but a law it is, for the realist and the 
constructionist alike. The extreme constructionist just says that all laws 
are of this kind.
64 
A. Varzi

Finally, there is something positive, too, to be said on behalf of the 
extreme conception of reality that this doctrine proffers. For once the 
specter of epistemological nihilism is dispelled, the idea that it is a mat-
ter of our arbitrary choice to draw certain boundaries rather than others 
shifts sign. Indeed “arbitrary” does not mean “anything goes”; it means 
that it is entirely up to us—in arbitrio nostro—to draw the relevant lines, 
to affect the articulations that we think are best suited to our needs. Now, 
this is by no means an easy business. As Curzon knew well, Jefferson’s 
arbitrary “pencil and ruler” method does not always pay:
It is said in America that many men reside in one State and do their busi-
ness in another, and there is no reason why so artificial a device should not 
have even more inconvenient consequences. (1907, 35)
In fact he should have known better. The partition of Africa during the 
years of New Imperialism, with the European powers literally slicing up 
the continent like “a magnificent cake” (in the words of Leopold II38), is 
one of the darkest periods in our history. Likewise, and more generally, 
classifying people on the basis of their skin color, sexual orientation, or 
IQ scores has produced way more damage than any Borges Encyclopedia. 
Yet precisely here, in their arbitrary character, lies all the potential of fiat 
boundaries. If we realize that they work poorly, we can change them. 
If they fail to measure up to our needs, we can try and replace them 
with better ones, or get rid of them altogether. It is much more difficult 
to revise our maps if we think (or pretend) that some boundaries have 
been drawn by Nature. Here Curzon’s passing remark about “so-called 
natural frontiers”, claimed exclusively on grounds of expediency or senti-
ment, is sadly instructive. For just as the attempt to realize frontiers of 
this type in the geopolitical world has been responsible for some of the 
most tragic vicissitudes in history, so has any attempt to claim as “natu-
ral”, as “beyond the cunning of man”, boundaries that possess no valid 
claim to the title. Our history is replete with horrible things that we 
have done and justified on such grounds. Slavery, the Inquisition, ethnic 
cleansing, genocides, holy wars, safaris: we have perpetrated discrimina-
tions and massacres based on canons of our own choice as though these 
reflected genuine ontological divisions. We stigmatized and persecuted as 
4  On Drawing Lines Across the Board 
65

“brute” or “heretic” whoever held views that did not fit into our map of 
knowledge. Even today one often hears certain forms of conduct, such 
as the use of contraception, or interracial and homosexual relationships, 
condemned as being “against nature”, and the locution “crime against 
nature” is still used as a legal term in the statutes of many US states.39 
All of this is disgraceful and there is no need to explain why. But philo-
sophically it is disgraceful precisely because it rests on a fraud: the fraud 
of pretending that the world is on our side. This is something political 
geographers eventually came to realize:
One of the most powerful arguments to make a frontier seem just is to 
stamp it as a natural frontier. (Broek 1941, p. 8)40
We may of course do more than just stamp and pretend. We may buttress 
our artificial lines with walls, palisades, barbed-wire fences, etc., literally 
as well as metaphorically. Yet this is just adding to the fraud; such markers 
can be very robust, even inviolable, but not so inviolable as to turn the 
artificial into the natural, as shown by the fact that Israel’s separation bar-
rier in the West Bank has not been recognized by the International Court 
of Justice.41 Now, this is not to say that the (moderate) realist is bound 
to perpetuate the disgrace. Nonetheless it is hard not to feel the strain, 
especially insofar as the idea of naturalness is, as Febvre put it in the pas-
sage quoted earlier, “so deeply implanted” that we may not notice its hold 
on us. By contrast, in the world of the extreme constructivist the fraud is 
simply not an option. We are free to draw and fight for the boundaries we 
find most reasonable, but we know their status and we cannot dismiss the 
alternatives as unnatural. We are doomed to make mistakes, but we can 
always try to make amends and revise our maps. Indeed, for the extreme 
constructivist we must do so, it is our responsibility.
Let me stress that none of these remarks is meant to vouch for the doc-
trine of extreme constructivism as such. As I mentioned, the point here 
is primarily meta-philosophical and concerns the prima facie tenability 
of the doctrine. Once properly stripped of all false idealistic and nihil-
istic connotations, there is, I think, a lot to be learned from the debate 
that opposes it to the moderate realist option, and it goes to Curzon’s 
and Smith’s credit to have shown that so much depends on framing the 
66 
A. Varzi

debate itself in terms of boundaries. Not only are these the razor’s edge 
on which hang suspended the modern political issues of war and peace, 
of life and death to nations; they are the razor’s edge on which hangs sus-
pended no less than the metaphysical dispute between realism and anti-­
realism, between the found and the created, between nature and nurture. 
In the end Smith may be right: this way of resetting the debate may 
uncover the serious risks of fraud that hide beneath the realist stance, but 
it also reveals the ultimate challenge that the anti-realist constructivist 
must face:
How would the thesis that all objects are fiat objects be applied to the con-
ceptualizers themselves, the demarcating subjects who construct the rele-
vant systems of fiat boundaries? (1996, p. 299f)42
Here, however, I prefer to end on a different note, and with a different 
quotation. For while Smith emphatically refuses to consign everything to 
the realm of fiat delineations, he has, more than anyone else, explored its 
width and descended its depths. He has seen it all. And there is, really, no 
better picture of that vast and prodigious realm than the one we find in 
his own travel journals.
Delineation is, be it noted, an immensely powerful faculty of cognition; 
the scope of delineatory intentionality, the effortlessness with which we can 
comprehend highly complex wholes—which may be scattered throughout 
the length and breadth of the universe, in both space and time—with a 
simple delineatory act (‘the legacy of the Renaissance’, ‘the Austro-­
Hungarian Empire and its successor states’, ‘English poetry’) is wondrous 
to behold, and bears comparison with the magic of single-rayed intention-
ality, whereby, on the basis of a list of entries which might be drawn up 
entirely at random, we can be directed, in succession, to mountains in 
Siberia, teapots in Halifax, and black holes in the galaxy of Mog. (1997b, 
p. 122)
4  On Drawing Lines Across the Board 
67

Notes
	 1.	The natural/artificial opposition was fully endorsed by the next two 
major writers on the topic of geographic frontiers, Holdich (1916) 
and Fawcett (1918), and soon became standard lore (see Prescott 
1965). Curzon himself introduced it as “generally recognized, and 
scientifically the most exact” (13), and it is indeed present in eminent 
treatises of his time, most notably Friedrich Ratzel’s Politische 
Geographie (1897), §361, “Natürliche und künstliche Grenzen”, and 
Lassa Oppenheim’s International Law (1905), §198, “Natural and 
Artificial Boundaries”.
	 2.	Among other things, at the end of World War I Curzon was respon-
sible for drawing the eastern frontier of the lands in which the Allies 
would recognize the right of the newly independent Poland to form 
an administration. Known as the Curzon Line, the project did not 
materialize and the Polish–Russian conflict continued until 1921, 
when the Treaty of Riga settled on a border some 160 miles east of 
Curzon’s proposal. During World War II, however, Stalin insisted on 
reviving the original project and in 1945 the Curzon Line, only 
slightly altered, became the permanent border. For a detailed histori-
cal reconstruction, see Eberhardt (2012).
	 3.	From Smith (1994a). Smith does not mention Curzon; instead, he 
notes that the bona fide/fiat opposition is analogous to the one drawn 
by Frege (1884), §26, between the ‘actual’ [wirklich] and the ‘objec-
tive’ [objectiv].
	 4.	Here I rely also on some joint work, particularly Smith and Varzi 
(2000).
	 5.	See also Smith and Zaibert (2003), 36. The point about collective 
intentionality refers to Searle’s theory of social objects in (1995). On 
the metaphysical issues underlying the practice of cadastral mapping, 
see also Zaibert (1999) and Bittner, von Wolff, and Frank (2000).
	 6.	Standardly, ecological niches are defined as abstract “hypervolumes” 
in a many-dimensional space determined by environmental vari-
ables—such as temperature, soil fertility, foliage density, proximity of 
predators, and so on—pertaining to the survival of organisms of a 
68 
A. Varzi

given species (Hutchinson 1957). When it comes to individual 
organisms, however, such niche types can exist only through a cor-
responding token, viz. the actual physical space that the organisms 
occupy, and it is tokens of this sort that I have in mind here. See 
Smith and Varzi (1999) and (2002).
	 7.	Smith himself mentions “the complex and subtle fiat organization” of 
the visual field in his (1995a). See also (1999c).
	 8.	Kant taught geography at Königsberg from 1756 to 1796 for a total 
of forty-nine times, more frequently than any of his other subjects 
except for logic and metaphysics. In his own words upon retiring, 
such teaching was “aimed at knowledge of the world” (1798, xiv), 
though he thought that a published version of his lectures was 
“scarcely possible” (his notes were “hardly legible”). A four-volume 
edition, unauthorized, was nonetheless published very soon as Kant 
(1801–1805); a separate two-volume edition, authorized, appeared 
as Kant (1802).
	 9.	For a survey see, e.g., Davies (2005).
	10.	 See, e.g., Giralt and Bloom (2000) and Nelson and Palmer (2001).
	11.	 The phrase returns in (1997b), 120, (1999c), 320, (2001a), 142, and 
(2001b), 76.
	12.	 This parallel is fully articulated in Smith (1999a).
	13.	 Cf. the literature on scattered objects, beginning with Cartwright 
(1975).
	14.	 They also have spatial boundaries, even though these are typically 
affected by a much higher degree of indeterminacy. See Varzi (2002) 
and Borghini and Varzi (2006).
	15.	 From Smith (1999b), 289, revisited in Smith and Varzi (2000), 404, 
and Smith (2001a), 135.
	16.	 Today it is also common to speak literally of conceptual spaces, and 
of the geometry and topology of thought that they represent. See 
Gärdenfors (2000).
	17.	 See also (1995a), 477. For the rationale behind the reference to 
Ingarden and to Meiniong in the nomenclature of the last two 
options, see Smith (1980).
	18.	 Plato’s metaphor (which returns in the Statesman, 287c) was, of 
course, just metaphor. But see Franklin-Hall (2009) for a detailed 
4  On Drawing Lines Across the Board 
69

account and for explicit connections with the bona fide/fiat 
dichotomy.
	19.	 The example is from Smith (1995a), 480, also in (1999c), 323.
	20.	 See also Metaphysics, VII, 16, 1040b10–16: “all the parts must exist 
only potentially, when they are one and continuous by nature”.
	21.	 Smith (1994b), §3.5, treats both cases as equally covered by Aristotle’s 
“mereological potentialism”.
	22.	 Ultimately, however, I do find it metaphysically incongruous. See 
Varzi (2013).
	23.	 See, respectively, van Inwagen (1981) on the “doctrine of arbitrary 
undetached parts” and the debate on the “special composition ques-
tion” prompted by van Inwagen (1987). For the record, I subscribe 
to classical extensional mereology, so I take all parts and wholes to be 
on equal ontological footing, with no restriction on either side. See 
Varzi (2014a).
	24.	 The phrase “Jeffersonian entities” refers to the states of the Union 
established by the Northwest Ordinance, whose boundaries followed 
in large degree the straight pencil lines in Thomas Jefferson’s “Add-a-­
State” Plan of 1784. This is Smith’s main example in (1995a) as well 
as in several other writings, including (1997a), 398, (1999b), 290, 
and (2001a), 121.
	25.	 For example, Smith and Brogaard (2003) argue that, in the course of 
normal fetal development, the conditions for being a person are first 
satisfied at the end of the gastrulation process, which occurs precisely 
at sixteen days after fertilization.
	26.	 Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113 (1973). More precisely, the judiciary 
acknowledged the impossibility of determining the beginning of life 
“at this point in the development of man’s knowledge”, given that 
“those trained in the respective fields of medicine, philosophy and 
theology are unable to arrive at any consensus” (159).
	27.	 Where animals are divided into: (a) belonging to the Emperor, (b) 
embalmed, (c) domestic, (d) suckling pigs, (e) sirens, (f) fabulous, 
(g) stray dogs, (h) included in this classification, (i) trembling as if 
mad, (j) innumerable, (k) drawn with a very fine camelhair brush, (l) 
et cetera, (m) that have just broken the vase, (n) that from a distance 
70 
A. Varzi

look like flies. See Borges (1942). It is noteworthy that precisely this 
passage is the starting point of Foucault (1966).
	28.	 See, e.g., Swainson (1835), where certain quadrupeds are classified 
according to their “innate propensity to live by free choice near the 
haunts of man, or to submit themselves cheerfully and willingly to 
his domestication” (137).
	29.	 Ordnance Survey, the national mapping agency for Great Britain, 
records the coastline of the main island as 11,072.76 miles, calcu-
lated as the length of the mean high-water mark line on a digital 
map; the British Cartographic Society is adamant that the length of 
the coastline “depends on the scale at which you measure it”. See 
Darkes (2008). It may also be recalled that Mandelbrot (1967) took 
the question ‘How Long Is the Coast of Britain?’ as a starting point 
for the development of fractal geometry.
	30.	 “Ratifica ed esecuzione dello Scambio di Note tra la Repubblica itali-
ana e la Confederazione svizzera relativo ai confini ‘mobili’ sulla linea 
di cresta o displuviale, effettuato a Roma il 23 e il 26 maggio 2008”, 
Gazzetta Ufficiale della Repubblica Italiana, Serie Generale, n. 143 
(June 23, 2009), S.O. n. 97, 18–22.
	31.	 From a pamphlet by Arthur Griffith, founder of the Sinn Féin party 
(cited in Bowman 1982, 11).
	32.	 In his Convention speech of January 31, 1793, advocating the 
annexation of Belgium to France (cited also in Smith, 1997a, 399).
	33.	 Here I expand on some remarks I first made in my (2011), §4, and 
(2014b), §§3–4.
	34.	 Reiterated in Smith (2001a), 143. Cf. also (2004), 230, where the 
point is made in the context of a more general theory of fiat parti-
tions: “A partition […] is an artifact of our perceiving, judging, clas-
sifying or theorizing activity […] The reality partitioned, in contrast, 
is what and where it is, and it has all its parts and moments, indepen-
dently of any acts of human fiat.”
	35.	 See again Smith (1995a), 479, and (2001a), 142f, from where both 
phrases in quotation marks are taken. The relevant notion of affor-
dance is Gibson’s (1979), on whose relevance see also Smith (2001b) 
and (2009).
4  On Drawing Lines Across the Board 
71

	36.	 I mention this because the earlier quotation on star-making might 
suggest identifying the view in question with Goodman’s. In fact his 
view is significantly more radical. For Goodman, a “world-version” 
(or “world-representation”, we could even say “world-map”) need 
not be a version of the world any more than a “Pickwick-picture” 
need be a picture of Pickwick (1968, §1.5). Thus, while all we learn 
about the world is contained in right world-versions, “the underlying 
world, bereft of these, […] is perhaps on the whole a world well lost” 
(1978, 4).
	37.	 The passage already occurs in (1994a), 17. See also (1997b), 121, 
(1999b), 290, (2001a), 134, as well as Smith and Varzi (2000), 403.
	38.	 In an 1876 letter to his Belgian ambassador in London (cited in 
Pakenham 1991, 22).
	39.	 Idaho (I.C. §18-6605), Louisiana (R.S. 14:89), Massachusetts 
(MGL 272, §34), Michigan (MCL §750.158), Mississippi (M.C. 
§97-29-59), North Carolina (G.S. §14-177), Oklahoma (Ok. Stat. 
§21-886), Rhode Island (§11-10-1), Virginia (Va. Code 
§18.2-361).
	40.	 I said that Curzon’s distinction has become standard lore for geogra-
phers, if not for historians. Yet critiques may be found and are 
numerous also among the former, beginning at least with Ancel 
(1938). For surveys and discussion, see Fall (2010) and Rankin and 
Schofield (2004), which ends by quoting Ambrose Bierce’s The 
Devil’s Dictionary: “Boundary, n. In political geography, an imagi-
nary line between two nations, separating the imaginary rights of 
one from the imaginary rights of the other” (originally in Bierce 
1881, 323).
	41.	 ‘Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied 
Palestinian Territory, Advisory Opinion’, July 9, 2004, endorsed by 
the U.N. General Assembly on July 20, Resolution ES-10/15. For 
another example, on April 1, 2008, the US Secretary of Homeland 
Security used congressionally-granted power to “waive in their 
entirety” the Coastal Zone Management Act, the National 
Environmental Policy Act, the Endangered Species Act, the Migratory 
Bird Treaty Act, the Safe Drinking Water Act, the Solid Waste 
Disposal Act, and thirty other state and federal laws to ensure the 
72 
A. Varzi

expeditious construction of barriers along the US/Mexico border 
through the Tijuana River estuary (‘Determination Pursuant to 
Section 102 of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant 
Responsibility Act of 1996’, Fed. Reg. 73 FR 18294, Bill. Code 
4410-10-P, effective April 3, 2008); a few months later, the San 
Diegans were playing volleyball with the Tijuanans using the barrier 
at the beach border as a net.
	42.	 Smith doesn’t like Kant, but it is worth noting that the challenge 
raised here is in line with Kant’s reaction to Hume’s idealism in the 
second edition of the Critique: “It must be possible for the ‘I think’ 
to accompany all my representations; for otherwise something would 
be represented in me which could not be thought at all, and that is 
equivalent to saying that the representation would be impossible, or 
at least would be nothing to me.” (Kant 1787, §16, B131–132).
References
Ancel, J. (1938) Géographie des Frontières, Paris, Gallimard.
Austin, J.  L. (1962) How to Do Things with Words (ed. J.  O. Urmson and 
M. Sbisà), Oxford, Clarendon.
Bierce, A. (1881) ‘The Devil’s Dictionary—B’, The Wasp, May 21, p. 323 (then 
edited and included in Bierce’s The Cynic’s Word Book, New York, Doubleday, 
1906).
Bittner, S., von Wolff, A., and Frank, A. U. (2000) ‘The Structure of Reality in 
a Cadaster’, in B. Brogaard (ed.), Rationality and Irrationality (Papers of the 
23rd International Wittgenstein Symposium), Kirchberg am Wechsel, 
Austrian Ludwig Wittgenstein Society, pp. 88–96.
Borges, J. L. (1942) ‘El idioma analítico de John Wilkins’, La Nación, February 
8, pt. 2, p. 1 (then in Borges’s Otras inquisiciones, ed. F. Rodríguez Amaya, 
Buenos Aires, Sur, 1952).
Borghini, A., and Varzi, A.  C. (2006) ‘Event Location and Vagueness’, 
Philosophical Studies, 128: 313–336.
Bowman, J. (1982) De Valera and the Ulster Question, 1917-73, Oxford, 
Clarendon.
4  On Drawing Lines Across the Board 
73

Broek, J. O. M. (1941) ‘The Problem of Natural Frontiers’, in J. O. M. Broek et 
al., Frontiers of the Future. An Examination of One of the Root Causes of War: 
The Unsettled Frontiers, Berkeley, University of California, pp. 3–20.
Cartwright, R. (1975) ‘Scattered Objects’, in K.  Lehrer (ed.), Analysis and 
Metaphysics. Essays in Honor of R.  M. Chisholm, Dordrecht, Reidel, 
pp. 153–171.
Curzon, G. (1907) Frontiers. The Romanes Lecture, Oxford, Clarendon.
Darkes, G. (2008) ‘How long is the UK coastline?’ British Cartographic Society, 
website article www.cartography.org.uk/default.asp?contentID=749
Darwin, C. (1859) On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the 
Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life, London, Murray.
Davies, E. R. (2005) Machine Vision. Theory, Algorithms, Practicalities (Third 
Edition), Amsterdam, Elsevier.
Dummett, M. (1973) Frege. Philosophy of Language, London, Duckworth.
Eberhardt, P. (2012) ‘The Curzon Line as the Eastern Boundary of Poland: The 
Origins and the Political Background’, Geographia Polonica, 85: 5–21.
Elgin, C. Z. (1995) ‘Unnatural Science’, Journal of Philosophy, 92: 289–302.
Euler, L. (1768) Lettres à une princesse d’Allemagne, Vol. 2, Saint Petersburg, 
Academie Impériale des Sciences.
Fall, J.  J. (2010) ‘Artificial States? On the Enduring Geographical Myth of 
Natural Borders’, Political Geography, 29: 140–147.
Fawcett, C.  B. (1918) Frontiers. A Study in Political Geography, Oxford, 
Clarendon.
Febvre, L. (1922) La Terre et l’évolution humaine. Introduction géographique à 
l’histoire, Paris, Albin Michel.
Foucault, M. (1966) Les mots et les choses. Une archéologie des sciences humaines, 
Paris, Gallimard.
Franklin-Hall, L. (2009) ‘Il macellaio di Platone’, Rivista di estetica, 41: 11–37.
Frege, G. (1884) Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik. Eine logisch-mathematische 
Untersuchung über den Begriff der Zahl. Breslau: Koebner.
—. (1903) Grundgesetze der Arithmetik, begriffsschriftlich abgeleitet Band II, Jena, 
Pohle.
Gärdenfors, P. (2000) Conceptual Spaces. The Geometry of Thought, Cambridge 
(MA), MIT Press.
Gibson, J. J. (1966) The Senses Considered as Perceptual Systems, Boston, Mifflin.
—. (1979) The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception, Boston, Mifflin.
Giralt, N., and Bloom, P. (2000) ‘How Special Are Objects? Children’s Reasoning 
about Objects, Parts, and Holes’, Psychological Science, 11: 503–507.
74 
A. Varzi

Goodman, N. (1954) Fact, Fiction, and Forecast, London, Athlone.
—. (1968) Languages of Art. An Approach to a Theory of Symbols, Indianapolis 
(IN), Bobbs-Merrill.
—. (1978) Ways of Worldmaking, Indianapolis, Hackett.
—. (1983) ‘Notes on the Well-Made World’, Erkenntnis, 19: 99–108.
Holdich, T.  H. (1916) Political Frontiers and Boundary Making, London, 
Macmillan.
Hutchinson, G. E. (1957) ‘Concluding Remarks’, Cold Spring Harbor Symposia 
on Quantitative Biology, 22: 415–427.
Kanizsa, G. (1955) ‘Margini quasi-percettivi in campi con stimolazione omoge-
nea’, Rivista di Psicologia, 49: 7–30.
Kant, I. (1787) Critik der reinen Vernunft. Zweyte hin und wieder verbesserte 
Auflage, Riga, Hartknoch.
—. (1798) Anthropologie in pragmatischer Hinsicht, Königsberg, Nicolovius.
—. (1801–1805) Physische Geographie (ed. G. Vollmer), 4 vols., Mainz, Vollmer.
—. (1802) Physische Geographie (ed. F. T. Rink), 2 vols., Königsberg, Göbbels 
und Unzer.
Lewontin, R. C. (1978) ‘Adaptation’, Scientific American, 239(3): 212–230.
Mandelbrot, B. B. (1967) ‘How Long Is the Coast of Britain? Statistical Self-­
Similarity and Fractional Dimension’, Science, 156: 636–638.
Mazzini, G. (1859) ‘Dei doveri dell’uomo, V. Doveri verso la Patria’, Pensiero ed 
azione, 11: 167–169 (then in Mazzini’s Doveri dell’uomo, Lugano [as London], 
self-published, 1860).
Nelson, R., and Palmer, S. E. (2001) ‘Of Holes and Wholes: The Perception of 
Surrounded Regions’, Perception, 30: 1213–1226.
Odling-Smee, F. J. (1988) ‘Niche-Constructing Phenotypes’, in H. C. Plotkin 
(ed.), The Role of Behavior in Evolution, Cambridge (MA), MIT Press, 
pp. 73–132.
Oppenheim, L.  F. L. (1905) International Law: A Treatise. Volume I: Peace, 
New York, Longmans, Green, and Co.
Pakenham, T. (1991) The Scramble for Africa. White Man’s Conquest of the Dark 
Continent from 1876-1912, New York, Random House.
Prescott, J. R. V. (1965) The Geography of Frontiers and Boundaries, London, 
Hutchinson.
Rankin, K. J., and Schofield, R. N. (2004) ‘The Troubled Historiography of 
Classical Boundary Terminology’, Working Papers in British-Irish Studies 
No. 41, Dublin, University College.
Ratzel, F. (1897) Politische Geographie, Berlin, Oldenbourg.
Reclus, É. (1907) L’homme et la terre, vol. 5, Paris, Libraire Universelle
4  On Drawing Lines Across the Board 
75

Rubin, E. (1921) Visuell wahrgenommene Figuren. Studien in psychologischer 
Analyse, Copenhagen, Gyldendalske boghandel.
Schumann, F. (1900) ‘Beiträge zur Analyse der Gesichtswahrnehmungen. Erste 
Abhandlung. Einige Beobachtungen über die Zusammenfassung von 
Gesichtseindrücken zu Einheiten’, Zeitschrift für Psychologie und Physiologie 
der Sinnesorgane, 23: 1–32.
Searle, J. R. (1995) The Construction of Social Reality, New York, Free Press.
Smith, B. (1980) ‘Ingarden vs. Meinong on the Logic of Fiction’, Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research, 16: 93–105.
—. (1992) ‘Characteristica Universalis’, in K. Mulligan (ed.), Language, Truth 
and Ontology, Dordrecht, Kluwer, pp. 50–81.
—. (1994a) ‘Fiat Objects’, in N. Guarino, S. Pribbenow, and L. Vieu (eds.), 
Parts and Wholes. Conceptual Part-Whole Relations and Formal Mereology 
(Proceedings of the ECAI94 Workshop), Amsterdam, European Coordinating 
Committee for Artificial Intelligence, pp. 15–23.
—. (1994b) Austrian Philosophy. The Legacy of Franz Brentano, La Salle (IL), 
Open Court.
—. (1995a) ‘On Drawing Lines on a Map’, in A. U. Frank and W. Kuhn (eds.), 
Spatial Information Theory. A Theoretical Basis for GIS (Proceedings of COSIT 
‘95), Berlin, Springer, pp. 475–484.
—. (1995b) ‘More Things in Heaven and Earth’, Grazer philosophische Studien, 
50: 187–201.
—. (1996) ‘Mereotopology: A Theory of Parts and Boundaries’, Data and 
Knowledge Engineering, 20: 287–303.
—. (1997a) ‘The Cognitive Geometry of War’, in P. Koller and K. Puhl (eds.), 
Current Issues in Political Philosophy: Justice in Society and World Order 
(Proceedings of the 19th International Wittgenstein Symposium), Vienna, 
Hölder-Pichler-Tempsky, pp. 394–403.
—. (1997b) ‘On Substances, Accidents and Universals. In Defence of a 
Constituent Ontology’, Philosophical Papers, 27: 105–127.
—. (1999a) ‘Agglomerations’, in Christian Freksa and David M. Mark (eds.), 
Spatial Information Theory. Cognitive and Computational Foundations of 
Geographic Information Science (Proceedings of COSIT ‘99), Berlin, Springer, 
pp. 267–282.
—. (1999b) ‘Truthmaker Realism’, Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 77: 
274–291.
—. (1999c) ‘Truth and the Visual Field’, in J. Petitot, F. Varela, B. Pachoud, and 
J.-M.  Roy (eds.), Naturalizing Phenomenology. Issues in Contemporary 
76 
A. Varzi

Phenomenology and Cognitive Science, Stanford (CA), Stanford University 
Press, pp. 317–329.
—. (2001a) ‘Fiat Objects’, Topoi, 20: 131–148.
—. (2001b) ‘Objects and Their Environments: From Aristotle to Ecological 
Ontology’, in A. U. Frank, J. Raper, and J.-P. Cheylan (eds.), The Life and 
Motion of Socio-Economic Units, London, Taylor & Francis, pp. 79–97.
—. (2004) ‘Carving Up Reality’, in M. Gorman and J. Sanford (eds.), Categories. 
Historical and Systematic Essays, Washington, Catholic University of America 
Press, pp. 225–237.
—. (2009) ‘Toward a Realistic Science of Environments’, Ecological Psychology, 
21: 121–130.
Smith, B., and Brogaard, B. (2003), ‘Sixteen Days’, Journal of Medicine and 
Philosophy, 28: 45–78.
Smith, B., and Varzi, A. C. (1999) ‘The Niche’, Noûs, 33: 214–238.
—. (2000) ‘Fiat and Bona Fide Boundaries’, Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research, 60: 401–420.
—. (2002) ‘Surrounding Space. On the Ontology of Organism-Environment 
Relations’, Theory in Biosciences, 120: 139–162.
Smith, B., and Zaibert, L. (2001) ‘The Metaphysics of Real Estate’, Topoi, 20: 
161–172.
—. (2003) ‘Real Estate: Foundations of the Ontology of Property’, in 
H. Stuckenschmidt, E. Stubkjaer, and C. Schlieder (eds.), The Ontology and 
Modelling of Real Estate Transactions, Aldershot, Ashgate, pp. 35–54.
Stamos, D. N. (2003) The Species Problem. Biological Species, Ontology, and the 
Metaphysics of Biology, Lanham (MD), Lexington Books.
Swainson, W. (1835) On the Natural History and Classification of Quadrupeds, 
London, Longman et al.
van Inwagen, P. (1981) ‘The Doctrine of Arbitrary Undetatched Parts’, Pacific 
Philosophical Quarterly, 62: 123–137.
—. (1987) ‘When Are Objects Parts?’, Philosophical Perspectives, 1: 21–47.
Varzi, A.  C. (2002) ‘Events, Truth, and Indeterminacy’, The Dialogue, 2: 
241–264.
—. (2011) ‘Boundaries, Conventions, and Realism’, in J.  K. Campbell, 
M. O’Rourke, and M. H. Slater (eds.), Carving Nature at Its Joints. Natural 
Kinds in Metaphysics and Science, Cambridge (MA), MIT Press, pp. 129–153.
—. (2013) ‘Undetached Parts and Disconnected Wholes’, in C. Svennerlind, 
J. Almäng, and R. Ingthorsson (eds.), Johanssonian Investigations. Essays in 
4  On Drawing Lines Across the Board 
77

Honour of Ingvar Johansson on His Seventieth Birthday, Frankfurt, Ontos, 
pp. 696–708.
—. (2014a) ‘Counting and Countenancing’, in A.  J. Cotnoir and D.  L. 
M. Baxter (eds.), Composition as Identity, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 
pp. 47–69.
—. (2014b) ‘Realism in the Desert’, in F. Bacchini, S. Caputo, and M. Dell’Utri 
(eds.), Metaphysics and Ontology without Myths, Newcastle (UK), Cambridge 
Scholars, pp. 16–31.
Wertheimer, M. (1923) ‘Untersuchungen zur Lehre von der Gestalt. II’, 
Psychologische Forschung, 4: 301–350.
Wittgenstein, L. (1921) ‘Logisch-philosophische Abhandlung’, Annalen der 
Naturphilosophie, 14: 185–262 (then as Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, with 
an Eng. transl. by C. K. Ogden, London, Kegan Paul & Co., 1922).
Zaibert, L. (1999) ‘Real Estate as an Institutional Fact: A Philosophy of Everyday 
Objects’, American Journal of Sociology and Economics, 58: 273–284.
78 
A. Varzi

79
© The Author(s) 2016
L. Zaibert (ed.), The Theory and Practice of Ontology, 
DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-55278-5_5
1	
Ontology and Social Reality
Reality is composed of many layers, including what John Searle calls 
“brute facts” and, superimposed on these, what he calls “social reality”. 
Ontology is the study of reality in its various layers, and involves attempts 
to describe that reality in ways that are useful and logically consistent. 
Philosophers and others who attempt to “build” ontologies, must exam-
ine the manners in which we can best describe objects, and devise struc-
tured vocabularies that can be used consistently, often across disciplines, 
and now with an eye toward automation such that when people use terms 
to describe reality, a greater consistency, and thus better understanding, 
ensues. Any object of intentionality is capable of ontological analysis and 
greater clarity. Abstract objects composed by collective intentionality, 
such as the institutions and other objects that comprise “social reality”, are 
5
D. Koepsell (*) 
Comision Nacional de Bioetica & Universidad Autonoma Metropolitana, 
Xochimilco, Mexico
e-mail: drkoepsell@gmail.com
Social Reality, Law, and Justice
David Koepsell

especially rich domains for ontological analysis, and the rewards for devis-
ing structured vocabularies that suit such objects are potentially great. 
Because social objects are typically abstract, and often created through 
vague and historical processes, their contours may be ill-defined, poorly 
understood, or even inconsistent or illogical.
Consider a “war”. A war is a complex social object, composed of events 
and objects, which we could also call occurrents (things that happen over 
time) and continuants (objects that endure), some of which are documents, 
some of which are expressions, declarations, mobilizations of people and 
weapons, all taking place in historical and other contexts that help us to 
make sense of any particular war, such as legal agreements and treaties. 
While some wars start by the actions of individuals without any particu-
lar status or formal governmental role, only certain types of individuals are 
empowered to start or end wars. The description of all of the various parts of 
a “war” involves ontology in application to complex social objects. Doing so 
in a useful manner can be helpful for any number of reasons and individuals. 
Wars are significant human events, and avoiding them or conducting them 
successfully consumes significant resources and occupies the concern of 
many. Understanding and properly or at least usefully describing the natures 
of various parts of a war is a philosophical problem, rooted in the relations of 
objects to each other, and in the logical description of parts of reality.
Ontologists who attempt to understand reality and describe it serve 
numerous constituents and help to order our world. They must work 
from a point of view in which various axioms about the world are taken 
as true, primarily from a realist standpoint in which the existence of an 
objective, external world is taken as given, and which can be described by 
various agents in consistent and understandable ways.
The sciences adopt a similar standpoint. Scientific theories attempt 
to describe the working and objects of nature, assuming that underlying 
their descriptions are real objects with objective properties about which 
consistent observations may be made by any properly equipped agent. 
As theories are refined they come to better reflect the truths of nature, 
expressing better its objects and processes. Social reality is likewise natural, 
although the fact of its composition is complicated by countless individ-
ual minds whose workings are often difficult to observe. Regardless, the 
80 
D. Koepsell

ways that minds constitute objects, the facts of their operating in ­certain  
ways through phenomena that can be described consistently, allows us 
to delve into the nature of social objects and to describe their forms and 
relations to each other. While any particular war would be incredibly 
complex to describe ontologically, we can nonetheless develop general 
theories about the nature of its constituent objects. A treaty, for instance, 
or a raid, a combatant, an occupation, or siege, still has necessary and suf-
ficient features, in a certain necessary context, that can each be described 
and understood ontologically.
Institutional reality, by which we mean the existence of various types of 
social objects that form contexts for the existence of other social objects, is 
an important sub-set of our exploration of social reality. For instance, an 
institution such as an army, a government, or an economy, forms the back-
ground for the existence of certain other objects that compose those insti-
tutions, and by which objects may be grounded or otherwise deemed to 
validly exist only in accordance with the rules of those institutions. Within 
the context of the institution of an economy, a currency plays an impor-
tant role, as do banks and other elements of that institution. Institutional 
reality may be composed by fiat, by mutual agreement, by constitutional 
documents and document-acts, or through evolutionary means.
Law is a significant part of institutional reality, having often developed 
over time, sometimes in vague ways, both through case law and through 
legislation, and encompassing many aspects of human conduct. The law 
is also sometimes a useful starting point for discovering the nature of 
social objects of all sorts, given that one manner in which the law is 
used is to describe categories of objects having various necessary and suf-
ficient features and relations with other objects. For instance, if we wish 
to understand the social object “marriage” we might first start with legal 
definitions, which, along with religious institutions, have for centuries 
been the sources for validating such relationships even while a marriage 
is undoubtedly a social object with components and features not strictly 
defined nor described by the law or religious institutions. Each plays an 
important role in the context of the social institutions that have typically 
made marriage important and recognized as a particular form of social 
object. The law is also where most conflicts about the nature of social 
objects play out, publicly and, in general, with some logical rigor.
5  Social Reality, Law, and Justice 
81

The law is a structured view on the objects of social reality that can 
provide what we often consider to be moral categories to social objects 
and brute objects. For instance, a killing may be a “murder” in a certain 
legal context, but “self-defense” in another, or a legally justified killing of 
a combatant in yet another. The law may thus create a context for judging 
a brute fact to be “right” or “wrong”. Of course, because the legal status 
of an act or object may have consequences, sometimes severe, the law is 
worth studying as a source and reference for an object’s social existence 
for merely practical purposes, as well as for the sake of science.
2	
Legal Ontology
Barry Smith’s work in the field of ontology, and especially in social ontol-
ogy, has inspired and drawn from the work of various legal philosophers 
who have delved into what we might call “legal ontology”. The nature of 
legal objects, and their relations to other elements of social reality, have 
touched upon things like property, real estate, murder, intellectual prop-
erty, and other legally relevant objects. Sometimes, these investigations 
have been undertaken in order to understand and influence policy or 
law-making, and sometimes they have been purely investigative. In any 
case, the examination of legal objects from an ontological point of view 
poses numerous opportunities for philosophers and others who wish to 
better understand social reality, find and fix inconsistencies in the law, 
and bring to bear emerging technologies on legal tools and systems.
Legal ontology may, for instance, delve into the nature of the existence 
of a particular legal object and compare it with other similar ones, or 
examine how and why a killing, for instance, becomes a murder, in order 
to uncover the moral context in which that legal object exists. Or we may 
examine whether there are contradictory principles at play in or among 
legal systems, where, for instance, an object might exist in contradic-
tory forms simultaneously. Legal ontology might be employed to provide 
order and “interoperability” to diverse legal systems that share traits or 
interact with one another.
I have suggested ways in which legal ontology might be pursued with-
out being merely descriptive, and yet not strictly in a way that would be 
82 
D. Koepsell

normative. Rather, I have focused upon legal objects which are either 
contradictory with other legal objects in a particular institutional con-
text, or which may end up being self-contradictory due to a faulty set of 
rules. For instance, intellectual property is a relatively new area of law, 
and has had issues adapting to the development of new technologies that 
challenge its categories. The subjects of copyright law and of patent have 
long been held to be non-overlapping and mutually exclusive. Both have 
allowed for inventors or authors to gain some sort of monopolistic pro-
tection of their creations for limited periods of time in order to encourage 
innovation, but works of aesthetic use have long been afforded copyright 
protection, while utilitarian creations were given patent protection. The 
legal schemes involved with each form of intellectual property (IP) are 
significantly different, and carry differing burdens and rewards, as well as 
requiring in the case of patents a bureaucracy whose job it is to act as a 
transom, whereas copyrights attach automatically without any need for a 
new or specialized bureaucracy (Koepsell 2003).
The emergence of computerized inventions or creations challenged 
assumptions about the categories of IP law. Software was originally pat-
ented, but then also came to be copyrighted as well. The fact that a new 
object fits logically into two previously mutually exclusive categories 
raised some interesting questions regarding the objects of IP law: were 
the categories and descriptions of the objects of IP law drawn logically? 
was software a new “hybrid object”? could a new category better account 
for software? What was IP anyway? In a number of articles and books, I 
worked through several of these questions, but alongside this inquiry, and 
similar inquiries by a number of newly minted legal ontologists who have 
been inspired by or guided by Barry Smith’s work, has emerged another 
related inquiry: what is the connection between law and its objects, and 
“justice”?
As with software, numerous other important social and political issues 
turn on correctly and consistently defining objects, both brute and social. 
For instance, the ongoing debate about the propriety of abortion and its 
acceptable limits hinges upon defining the nature of human life and per-
sonhood. The justice of abortion, by which it may be judged to be mor-
ally acceptable, appears to be behind judgments and decisions regarding 
its legality. Brogaard and Smith explored the ontological issues involved 
5  Social Reality, Law, and Justice 
83

in their paper “Sixteen Days: The Ontology of Fetal Development”. Their 
analysis addresses the necessary and sufficient features of “human beings” 
and paves the way for legal analyses of rights and duties that might be 
owed to “persons”, the legal bearers of such rights and duties according 
to most legal schemes (Smith and Brogaard 2003). A legal ontology of 
personhood, together with the Brogaard and Smith analysis, would go a 
long way toward informing policy decisions in a logically consistent and 
well-founded manner. A person, as a social object superimposed upon 
human beings (and potentially other beings), is a legal object whose 
features can be gleaned from numerous legal opinions, constitutions, 
laws, etc. Describing an ontology of persons that can be used across and 
among varying legal regimes is a potentially useful project for coordinat-
ing among legal regimes, and it is aided by centuries of progress by jurists 
in the task.
In their paper “The Metaphysics of Real Estate”, Smith and Zaibert 
consider the ontology of the legal and social object superimposed upon 
the brute facts of land (Smith and Zaibert 2001). Real estate is the legal 
demarcation of parcels of physical space into various forms and parts, 
prescribed by long-standing customs and norms, and formalized in vari-
ous legal schemes. Real estate enjoys features of property not available 
except for legal and customary regimes that may treat it as divisible, 
jointly ownable, and transferable upon death, among others. The layer 
of social reality expressed by legal treatment of real estate is a special sort 
of social object dealt with by another special social object in the form of 
institutions. These institutions, comprising bodies, constitutions, laws, 
courts, decisions, and others, are the sum of legal reality. Legal objects 
govern society in ways that customs and other less formal elements of 
social reality cannot, subjecting us sometimes to punishments like incar-
ceration or other formalized penalties, which themselves comprise what 
we often call “justice”.
Zaibert and Smith likewise take on “meta”-issues of normativ-
ity in their 2007 paper “Varieties of Normativity: An Essay on Social 
Ontology” (Zaibert and Smith 2007). One of the ongoing problems of 
connecting the study of objects with the study of what “ought” to be the 
case (ethical or moral norms) is posed by the well-known problem often 
called the “naturalistic fallacy” by which an “is” is assumed not to be able 
84 
D. Koepsell

to imply an “ought”. The move from a description of reality, including 
social objects, toward describing how things should ethically be the case, 
is a tricky one, as recognized by Searle, Hart, Rawls, and others. Zaibert 
and Smith examine succinctly the various approaches made by legal and 
moral scholars, as well as by Searle in his work on speech acts and inten-
tionality, and discover that certain social objects acquire, by virtue of 
intentionality toward objects, normative values as a matter of course. We 
can examine this potential link between a description of social objects 
and normative claims by going back to a major inspiration for Smith’s 
work in social objects: Adolf Reinach.
Reinach’s own work on the nature of claims and promises broke 
ground in discovering a connection between law and right. Reinach, 
who had both legal and philosophical training, examined the necessary 
and sufficient conditions surrounding the origin of claims, promises, and 
obligations in his groundbreaking work The Apriori Foundations of the 
Civil Law, among other works. Reinach explains that valid legal rules 
are logically dependent upon some natural state of affairs, which he calls 
“grounding” (Reinach and Crosby 2012). He argues that the law of con-
tracts, for instance, is logically necessary because it is grounded in the 
simple facts of the genesis of duties out of promises. Prior to law-making, 
the acts and intentions surrounding the human activity of promising 
generate claims and obligations. These claims and obligations disappear 
upon the fulfillment of the promise. Contract law is thus grounded in 
natural phenomena, and this Reinach equates with the sort of logical 
necessity that makes the facts of mathematics true. No just enactment, 
he argues, could invalidate the claims and obligations that naturally arise 
from promising, just as no valid enactment could make 2 + 2 equal 5.
Reinach and others have since extended the notion of grounding to 
other types of law, including property law. They argue that our rights 
to ownership of property arise from the brute facts of possession with 
the same sort of logical necessity by which duties and claims arise from 
promises. This same argument is extended by Austrian philosophers in 
the same vein over the right to autonomy, which is rooted in rights of 
“self-possession”. Zaibert, Brogaard, myself, and others inspired by Barry 
Smith’s work in social ontology, largely inspired by Reinach and Searle, 
have begun to delve in greater detail into possible connections between 
5  Social Reality, Law, and Justice 
85

normative claims, the grounding of objects in brute facts, and the larger 
notion one might call “justice”. Justice is the evasive notion attempted to 
be characterized by Hart, Kelsen, Reinach and others in describing the 
normativity of laws, and any connection there may be between the law 
and the “good”.
3	
Problems of Justice: The Failures 
of Deontology and Positivism
What are our options in linking law to right? Reinach distinguishes 
between legal positivism and natural law theories, rejecting both, essen-
tially. Searle does not expressly adopt a theory, but argues against the nat-
uralistic fallacy, and Zaibert and Smith argue for intention as a ground for 
normativity in social objects. Historically, studies of law were not always 
so divorced from justice, nor was law likely to be held to be orthogonal to 
justice as modern, moral relativism more or less demands. There has been 
a trend, first in legal philosophy, now adopted more or less as the primary 
model of a legal education, toward what is called legal positivism. In the 
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the natural foundations of law 
began to be challenged, especially in Anglo-Saxon legal scholarship. For 
more than a thousand years, legal rules were devised by sovereigns who 
were themselves held to be imbued with moral authority for rule-making 
by deities. Of course, with the spread of the Enlightenment, and the 
fall of various sovereigns at the hands of liberal revolutions, the basis for 
valid, moral rule-making and enforcement began to shift.
With Locke, Hobbes, Rousseau, and other modern liberal political 
theorists came a new vision of the basis for natural law, one that extended 
natural law theory beyond the simplistic, sovereign-based dogma of old, 
to a more consistent set of tenets. Natural law, it was argued, grounded 
the validity of legal rules in duties and obligations dictated by the fabric 
of nature (whether or not one accepted some predicate deity), and even 
sovereigns were subject to the dictates of nature’s laws. This shift in think-
ing reflected a shift in scientific and theological thought, roughly reflect-
ing the move from an involved, acting creator, to a distant, detached, 
clock-maker creator, who sets the world in motion and then steps back. 
86 
D. Koepsell

The foundations of modern liberalism included a notion of natural law. 
The revolutions sparked by Locke et al, were legitimized by the viola-
tion of subjects’ naturally endowed rights to life, liberty, and property, 
and these natural rights formed the basis for modern liberal democracies, 
both in their constitutions and in their laws. In a world in which just law 
derives from nature, there is a solid connection between law and morality. 
But a new trend emerged in the late Enlightenment, when philosophers 
and political theorists began to question the foundations of just law, as 
well as reformulating approaches to ethics and justice themselves.
The British philosopher Jeremy Bentham moved away from natural 
law theory in arguing against deontology (which accepts the existence 
of categorical ethical duties) as an ethical foundation. Bentham, seeking 
the make the study of ethics more scientific, rejected nature as a foun-
dation of duties, and formulated the modern ethical approach we call 
Utilitarianism. He is well known for calling natural law theory “nonsense 
upon stilts”. His objections to natural law were epistemological, as he 
argued we can never rightly suppose we know the intentions of a creator, 
nor can duty-based theories of ethics like those of Immanuel Kant ever 
trace back sufficiently enough to provide a solid justification for accept-
ing any particular duty a priori.
Indeed, a weakness of deontology is the leap from presupposing the 
existence of a certain duty, and reconciling its existence with contradic-
tory duties, or converse duties that appear to arise in exceptional situ-
ations. Utilitarianism does not presuppose the existence of categorical 
duties, but rather argues that the ethical compulsion lies not in intent 
or duty, but rather in consequences. The epistemological argument is 
clear: consequences can be more or less predicted, and measured post hoc. 
Intentions can never be similarly measured. In the scientific vein of the 
time, Bentham sought to make the pursuit of legal and ethical theory mea-
surable, and viewed a solid, measurable basis for judging an action only 
in its consequences, namely: the amount of net happiness produced. For 
Bentham, the good can be judged based solely upon whether it increases 
net happiness, and duties, intentions, or other epistemologically unap-
proachable matters need not be consulted. The implications for legal rule-
making are obvious, and in the absence of a natural foundation for just 
laws, legal theorists began to re-imagine the role and scope of legal theory.
5  Social Reality, Law, and Justice 
87

According to John Austin, the validity of legal rules can only be judged 
according to the proper foundation of their enactment by a sovereign. A 
sovereign is one who is recognized as such by a majority, and just laws 
are merely the sovereign’s valid enactments, backed by sanctions. No fur-
ther inquiry of judgment as to the content of legal rules can be made as 
there is no extraneous basis by which rules can be judged to be right or 
wrong, morally speaking. Rule-making is valid so long as the sovereign is 
the majority-recognized sovereign, and has no higher sovereign, and so 
long as the rules are backed by the promise of sanctions in case of their 
violation (Austin 1995). Even while a continental positivism of a sort was 
being formulated by Hans Kelsen, in which at least some solid basis for 
recognizing a valid sovereign is posited (a “grundnorm”: Kelsen 1967), 
the Anglo-Saxon school of positivism became solidified with the work of 
H.L.A. Hart.
Hart nicely categorizes types of rules, distinguishing among primary 
rules (which direct action) and secondary rules (which address proce-
dures). But in direct opposition to Kelsen, Hart rejects the theory of a 
grundnorm, and does nothing to resolve what seems now to be a signifi-
cant gap in positive legal theory: reconciling rules with a notion of justice. 
As opposed to the neo-Kantian approach of the twentieth century’s most 
prominent legal scholar outside of the positivist tradition, John Rawls, 
legal positivists generally do not see inquiring into the just foundations 
of legal rules, outside of the valid enactments of sovereigns according to 
established procedures, as being a coherent area of inquiry (Hart 1958).
With legal positivism, we need not concern ourselves with meta-
physical questions of right or wrong, but can focus instead on episte-
mologically approachable questions regarding the results of our actions, 
and whether they accord with our preferences. Legal positivism is the 
dominant theoretical paradigm in Anglo-Saxon law schools, and it is 
bolstered by various trends in politics, including concerns with plural-
ism and multi-culturalism. Natural law theory is vulnerable to critique 
where various cultural, religious, ethnic, or philosophical backgrounds 
confront problems from differing viewpoints. Adopting the natural law 
justification for a rule that contradicts some religious, ethnic, cultural, or 
philosophical viewpoint means arguing for the error of someone’s point 
88 
D. Koepsell

of view. But as we live in increasingly pluralistic societies, with ever more 
multi-cultural populations, asserting some particular paradigm to be cor-
rect risks eroding what many conceive to be a foundation of liberalism: 
the freedom of conscience. A basic tenet of our modern liberal democ-
racies is necessarily that people are entitled to their opinions, points of 
view, and to express their beliefs. Thus, states ought not then to criticize 
the foundations of those beliefs, or force citizens to subscribe to a particu-
lar point of view. Because positive legal theory embraces the notion that a 
law is valid so long as it is enacted by a sovereign and backed by sanctions, 
then there is no further basis to question the validity of a validly enacted 
rule. The freedom of conscience of those who either support or defy the 
rule is preserved, because no judgment about the underlying justice of 
that rule may be made. We can only classify people as rule-­followers 
or rule-­breakers, not as just or unjust, and the basis of valid rules need 
not be traced to any natural, immutable principle. Pluralism and multi-­
culturalism are preserved both within nations and among them, as ethics 
and rules are completely divorced. A rule-breaker cannot be judged to 
be immoral, and rules we do not like can be changed without reflection 
upon metaphysical issues of justice or the good. Law-making can be sci-
entifically accomplished by looking at a list of projected consequences, 
and applying those rules that maximize the consequences we prefer.
Legal positivism is vulnerable to attacks based upon history, and our 
cultural, national, and international reactions to perceived injustices 
within sovereign states, as well as among them. These same attacks are 
consistent with criticisms of utilitarian ethical theory. Namely: if we 
are only guided by the consequences as a guide to action, then on what 
moral basis must minorities be protected? In utilitarianism, as in legal 
positivism, there is no theoretical basis to necessitate the protection of a 
minority. In classical utilitarianism, the right thing to do is that which 
increases happiness (maximizes utility) overall. Rule-utilitarianism pro-
tects against this possibility to some degree. Positive legal theorists simi-
larly must recognize the validity of an enactment if it is enacted by a 
valid sovereign (supported by a majority) and backed up with sanctions. 
Countless examples of potential injustices can be named, both historical 
and hypothetical.
5  Social Reality, Law, and Justice 
89

3.1	
Ontology and Justice
As with utilitarianism, or moral relativism, positive legal theory leaves 
open the difficult problem of determining when a particular action, 
or intention, is morally wrong. In fact, in none of these theories is the 
notion of “moral wrongness” even comprehensible. Things may or may 
not be acceptable in specific contexts, or may be valued for their effect 
on general utility (inasmuch as it might be measured or measurable), but 
notions of right or wrong, as the terms are traditionally used in ethical 
theory, are not per se applicable. Although students of ethics are taught 
about utilitarianism, and ethics scholars, or applied ethicists, must resort 
at time to the hedonic calculus in resolving ethical dilemmas, the end 
result of such a calculus will always be some determination about what 
one should do in order to increase general utility (happiness), and not 
clearly an ethical judgment about what is right or good in a moral sense. 
This is because each decision is necessarily contingent, and hypothetical, 
as opposed to decisions made according to deontological theory, which 
are categorical and apply to every such action or intention. Some of the 
weaknesses of utilitarianism in creating systems of justice are noted by 
John Rawls, and other modern Kantian, or neo-Kantian scholars of law 
and ethics. These weaknesses make it difficult to argue that positive legal 
theory, or utilitarianism, can lead a society to a state fairly called just. 
(See, generally, Rawls 1999a, b). The term justice implies some accord 
with notions of morality. In modern constitutional parlance, there are 
two forms or aspects of justice: substantive and procedural. Procedural 
justice means simply that for every person who becomes involved in a 
criminal or civil judicial matter, the procedures employed are employed 
equally, and fairly, and their content is transparent, and purposes clear. 
Substantive justice is more complex, and the notion implies some accord 
with some higher law. If a law fails to fulfill the requirements of substan-
tive justice, it may justly be struck down. Substantive justice is a measure 
by which both constitutions and legislation may be judged, and accord-
ing to which they may fail.
Given the weaknesses of positive legal theory in providing a solid 
context in which justice can be evaluated, or by which just legal systems 
and their rules could be imposed, why does it continue to thrive in legal 
90 
D. Koepsell

­scholarship and political theory? One explanation may be that legal and 
political scholars have abandoned the quaint, Kantian notions of categor-
ical right and wrong, and have embraced a utilitarian world view. It seems 
to be that in so doing, and in simultaneously accepting the Rawlsian 
notion of distributive justice (as indeed some of these same scholars and 
theorists seem to do), they are trapped in a contradiction. Rawlsian dis-
tributive justice depends upon accepting the notion of categorical duties, 
including the duty to treat everyone as an end, and not merely as a means 
to an end. Another categorical duty under Rawls is to treat everyone with 
equal dignity. But Rawls accepts more or less the Kantian explanation for 
the existence of these duties, arguing that we would arrive at these duties 
in forming a society if we place ourselves in the “original position” behind 
his hypothetical “veil of ignorance” from which vantage point we have no 
idea of whom we might be in a society. As Zaibert and Smith point out, 
the Rawlsian perspective is built also on Utilitarian foundations. Kant’s 
categorical imperative is arrived at by a different heuristic, but the con-
tent is the same: we have to be able to successfully universalize an impera-
tive without contradiction in order for a rule to be moral. Neither Rawls 
nor Kant judge the morality of a rule according to consequences, and 
Rawls is thus generally agreed to be a neo-Kantian, as he himself at times 
contends, despite his Utilitarian bases.
The problem remains that: if justice is hypothetical and contingent, 
as it must be under a utilitarian/positivist perspective, then rule-making 
will be similarly contingent, and may even fail to be just. Just as Bentham 
insisted, the link between law-making and morality must be completely 
severed, and decisions about the justice of rule-making or rule-makers 
must be limited to procedural matters. Arguably, no coherent system of 
substantive justice could be based solely upon utility as a measure or stan-
dard by which just laws could be created. The barriers are epistemological 
(the calculus cannot be carried out to sufficient exactness, either over and 
across populations, or through time), as well as ontological: the calculus 
does not tell us what is good or right, but merely what we should do in 
a certain situation to maximize happiness. One glaring gap in accepting 
the logic of the latter statement as somehow a coherent foundation for a 
just system is that it relies upon a categorical rule, one which ­cannot be 
adjudged scientifically, namely: that happiness is a sound basis for moral 
5  Social Reality, Law, and Justice 
91

decision-making. This itself implies a categorical, rather than hypotheti-
cal, grounding, which must be taken as an axiom. Because of this and 
similar logical gaps in utilitarianism, and unacceptable practical conse-
quences of accepting a purely utilitarian basis for ethical decision-­making, 
legal positivism stands on similarly shaky ground. The fact is that neither 
rule-makers nor ordinary people function as though there is no greater 
grounding for just rules than utility. There are clear, historical instances 
both within and among nations where actors (both individuals and states) 
have done things that appear to us to be clearly unjust, but which they 
justified to themselves as warranted based upon their perceived effects 
upon general happiness. Evolutionary psychology may hold the key as to 
why we consider certain intentional states and actions to be wrong per se, 
but the fact of this acceptance is recognized in constitutions and in courts. 
It is the impetus behind the slow march toward greater freedom, and 
more perfect systems of justice. The general recognition that, despite the 
arguments of legal positivists, there are certain categorically wrong actions 
and intentions, is what has enabled constitutional change as well as liberal 
revolutions, and it is what has made these historical moments good.
There appears to be a third way, outlined by Smith, Zaibert and oth-
ers following the path laid down by Reinach and Searle. We can focus 
on the objects of justice, things like rights, and discover the intentional 
states and expressions necessary for their existence. We can examine then 
in light of the ontology of such objects cases that reveal the application 
of their ontologies, help discover any lapses or inconsistencies, and even 
ultimately describe how policies may or may not abide by justice’s objects.
4	
A Role for Soft Normativity and Social 
Ontology
Justice is an abstract object central to jurisprudence—the social practice of 
resolving disputes about law and right. It is a concept referred to repeatedly 
in jurisprudence, and an ideal for rule-making both within and among 
nations. That it is a legitimate object of intentionality requires that we take 
it seriously as an object of study whose central role in a large portion of 
social reality is universally acknowledged, even while there is a divergence 
92 
D. Koepsell

of views about its nature and workings. Many of those who have inspired 
and been inspired by Smith’s work in social ontology have recognized a 
connection between the right and legal objects and institutions, and drawn 
some connections between the two. I am happy to say that my work in 
the ontology of genes and intellectual property predicted a major shift in 
the law regarding the patenting of genes such that two high courts have 
overturned the practice (The United States and Australia), consistent with 
a clearer ontology of artifact and nature, and more consistently with the 
underlying ontology of the objects of intellectual property (Koepsell 2015).
Besides clarifying legal objects, noting internal inconsistencies, clari-
fying the nature of legal objects as they relate to each other and other 
social objects in general, and building bridges among legal ontologies for 
internationalization of legal schemes, there remains outstanding the task 
of understanding the object “Justice” itself, touched upon above in each 
of the various papers mentioned. Barry Smith and I, along with other 
researchers, have attempted to point out the need to develop interoper-
able vocabularies for biomedical ethics, and the ethical concepts underly-
ing the field are intimately connected with issues of Justice (think of the 
Nuremberg Code).
We can be realists about justice, as we are about other social objects, 
pursue its necessary and sufficient conditions by looking at discrete por-
tions of social reality, and in relation to specific objects of the law, and 
perhaps continue the task of understanding its nature even as Smith and 
his influences and students have begun to do so. In so doing, we may 
even begin to make an impact on societies in improving the conditions 
of justice in ways that philosophers have long intended and attempted, 
grounded in rigorous ontological analyses, and inspiring the institutions 
of the law to do likewise.
References
Austin, J. (1995). The Province of Jurisprudence Determined, W. Rumble (ed.). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press (first published, 1832).
Hart, H.L.A. (1958). ‘Positivism and the Separation of Law and Morals,’ 71 
Harvard Law Review 593 repr. In Essays in Jurisprudence and Philosophy. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1983.
5  Social Reality, Law, and Justice 
93

Kelsen, H. (1967). Pure Theory of Law, M. Knight, trans. Berkeley: University 
of California Press.
Koepsell, D. R. (2003). The Ontology of Cyberspace: Philosophy, Law, and the 
Future of Intellectual Property. Open Court Publishing.
Koepsell, D. R. (2015). Who Owns You: Science, Innovation, and the Gene Patent 
Wars. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Rawls, J. (1999a). Lectures on the History of Moral Philosophy, B. Herman (ed.). 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Rawls, J. (1999b). A Theory of Justice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. Revised edition.
Reinach, A., and Crosby, J. (Eds.). (2012). The Apriori Foundations of the Civil 
Law: Along with the Lecture “Concerning Phenomenology” (Vol. 8). Walter de 
Gruyter.
Smith, B., and Brogaard, B. (2003). 16 days. Journal of Medicine and Philosophy, 
28, 45–78.
Smith, B., and Zaibert, L. (2001). The metaphysics of real estate. Topoi, 20(2), 
161–172.
Zaibert, L., and Smith, B. (2007). The varieties of normativity: An essay on 
social ontology. In Intentional acts and institutional facts (pp.  157–173). 
Springer Netherlands.
94 
D. Koepsell

95
© The Author(s) 2016
L. Zaibert (ed.), The Theory and Practice of Ontology, 
DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-55278-5_6
1	
Introduction
On March 3, 1972, Idalgo Macchiarini, an executive of a mid-size firm 
in Milan, was kidnapped by a group of masked persons. He was sub-
jected to an interrogation about the future financial plans of the firm 
he was employed in, and released after a couple of hours. A black and 
white photo was shot to document the kidnapping. The photo shows 
Macchiarini with a tag on which one could read the following words 
(among others): “Brigate Rosse. Colpiscine uno per educarne cento. [Red 
Brigades. Strike One to Educate Hundreds.]” This was the first time that 
the Italian Brigate Rosse had targeted a human person and also the first 
of a long series of actions that endured throughout the 1970s and 1980s 
and culminated in the kidnap and then murder of the Italian ex-prime 
minister, Aldo Moro, in 1978.
Acts of Terror as Collective Violent Acts
Alessandro Salice
6
A. Salice (*) 
University of College Cork, Ireland
e-mail: alessandro.salice@ucc.ie

The term generally used to denote this kind of action, both in everyday 
speech as well as in legal and political terminology, is “terrorism”, and the 
usage of this expression, especially in non-scientific contexts, seems to 
be supported by a certain intuitive understanding, which is perhaps best 
expressed by the Oxford English Dictionary definition: the “unofficial or 
unauthorized use of violence and intimidation in the pursuit of political 
aims”. Despite this basic intuition, however, views rapidly diverge when 
it comes to providing a more precise description of this social phenom-
enon and, especially, when questions are posed such as who actually per-
forms acts of terror, who are the victims of such acts and what form of 
violence, if any, is involved in these acts.
Some, from the very outset, would contest the possibility of providing 
a definition of the concept of terrorism (Weinberg et al. 2004), maybe 
arguing that “terrorism” expresses an essentially contested concept, i.e. 
a concept “the proper use of which inevitably involves endless disputes 
about [its] proper uses on the part of [its] users” (Gallie 1956: 169; cf. 
Primoratz 2013). Along these lines, some would, for instance, think that 
only actions against civilians are acts of terrorism, while others would 
deny that and accept that damaging material things, under certain cir-
cumstances, could count as an act of terrorism. Accordingly, one and the 
same event would be described as an instance of terrorism by some and 
not by others. Yet others would claim that the endless disputes about this 
concept are not triggered by disagreement about its descriptive content; 
rather they originate because it is a “thick” concept in Bernard Williams’s 
sense (Williams 2006). On this view, “terrorism” would express a content 
that includes both descriptive and evaluative features to the effect that, 
when this term is employed, one is not just describing a given event; one 
is also evaluating it. For instance, while actions performed by freedom 
fighters may show descriptive similarities with those of terrorists, they 
cannot be assessed in the same way and, hence, do not count as acts of 
terrorism.
At the same time, it is not clear whether the notion of terrorism just 
points to one kind of social phenomenon or, rather, whether there are 
different kinds of terrorisms: this term, when used to, for example, desig-
nate the Jacobins’ reign of terror during the French Revolution, could be 
argued to have a different meaning than when used to refer to the recent 
96 
A. Salice

shootings at the Parisian Charlie Hebdomadaire or to the actions of the 
Red Brigades. Hence, it seems that any investigation into this notion that 
is not sensitive to the differences in kind that characterize the concept of 
terrorism, will eventually miss the point. And the point would be that the 
definition of terrorism is informed by historical and contingent factors 
and especially by the political and social situation of the time. There is 
no terrorism “as such”, but actions are held as instances of terrorism in 
different senses according to different contexts.
This chapter is certainly not in a position to address all the difficulties 
that appear to be intrinsic to any attempt to describe this notion. Rather, 
it will mainly focus on what is a perhaps rather uncontroversial claim in 
much (although not all, cf. Goodin 2006) of the relevant literature, and 
this is the idea that terrorism is (or presupposes) violence:1 since there 
cannot be terrorism without violence, these two notions are essentially 
linked. But how should one understand this claim, and what are the 
forms of violence at stake here? To answer this question, I draw on a 
notion of a violent act that I have developed in previous work (Salice 
2014) and argue that acts of terror are a kind of violent act: they are col-
lective acts of violence that have social groups as their targets.
This chapter is organized in two parts. In the first section, I discuss 
two theses that I have argued lie at the core of the idea of violent acts. 
Roughly, these theses are that violent acts (i) presuppose what could be 
called “damaging acts” (i.e. acts whose only purpose is to inflict psycho-
logical or physical damage) and (ii) need to secure uptake in order to be 
successful. In the second section, I apply this conceptual framework to 
acts of terror and contend that, to be successful, acts of terror are required 
to fulfill the very same conditions. Historical cases of terrorism may be 
used to illustrate that, indeed, this is the case: not only is the damage 
of terrorist attacks quickly and easily identifiable as the planned con-
sequence of intentional acts, but usually perpetrators also overtly claim 
responsibility for their acts. Assuming that this argument is on the right 
track, I suggest three further features that seem to characterize acts of ter-
ror even more precisely.
The first feature is that their addressees differ from the addressees of 
the underlying damaging acts (call the latter addressees “the victims”). 
Put differently, terrorists exert violence on their addressees by inflicting 
6  Acts of Terror as Collective Violent Acts 
97

­damage on the victims: for example, a terrorist may injure random citi-
zens (the victims), while the actual target (or addressee) is a community or 
a government. This consideration leads to the second feature that appears 
to qualify acts of terror. Despite their difference, a close relation seems to 
tie victims and addressees together: generally, the victims are related to 
the addressee insofar as they are members of a group, which makes it pos-
sible to identify groups as the genuine addressees of violent acts. Finally, I 
shall present defeasible evidence for a third feature: acts of terror are not 
performed by individuals, but by groups, i.e. they are instances of group 
agency. It might be that individuals perform the damaging acts on which 
acts of terror are eventually based, but such individuals, I would contend, 
act in representation of a group, which is the authentic subject of such 
acts. In the conclusion, this last claim is problematized in light of recent 
cases of so-called “lone-wolf terrorism” that seem to invalidate it.
A last remark. The line of reasoning developed in the next sections 
mainly has in mind those cases of political terrorism that occurred in 
Europe in the 1970s and 1980s and that are paradigmatically illustrated 
by the actions of the Red Brigades. The conceptual framework devel-
oped in the following sections is intended to capture some traits of those 
actions, but no claim is put forward about whether or not such a frame-
work applies to all kinds of terrorist acts. The reason for focusing on that 
set of cases is that their structure seems to be less opaque than others: not 
only did the agents formulate their intentions in a comprehensible and 
thought-out manner, but the temporal distance from those events may 
also allow for a better grasp of what happened in that period.
2	
Violent and Damaging Acts
What is it to do violence to someone? What are the conditions of satisfac-
tion of such an act? A rather trivial idea is that part of the intention to do 
violence to someone is about injuring or harming the victim. In a sense, 
one cannot intend to do violence to someone if one does not intend to 
injure or harm him. That is, for an act of violence to be satisfied, the con-
comitant intention to injure or harm the victim must be satisfied, too. 
This goal can be achieved in many different ways, and it is certainly not 
98 
A. Salice

the case that such injury or harm has to be restricted to physical injury; 
by all means, mental injury, causing distress or negative emotions, can 
and does fall under our common understanding of what violence is. But 
one could generalize here and call all the actions that serve the purpose of 
(mentally or physically) harming someone else “damaging acts”.
Said another way, damaging acts are those acts whose only goal is to 
inflict psychological or physical damage on someone else. A damaging 
act is satisfied if the victim is harmed in the way the aggressor intended; 
in a sense, the damage can be seen as the specific result of the act. As an 
example of an act of this kind, imagine David’s hurling a stone from his 
sling. If he manages to hit Goliath in the center of his forehead as he 
planned, his act is satisfied, period.
If only part of the intention to do violence is about injuring the victim, 
as I have suggested above, then further conditions need to be added to 
model violent acts. But, before turning to these conditions, it might be 
important to address qualms that some might already express at this stage 
vis à vis the distinction between damaging and violent acts: to accept this 
distinction, as the objection might go, is to deprive damaging acts of the 
attribute of being violent. But what do we mean when we use that predi-
cate? The following conditions aim at capturing the idea that, whereas 
one can certainly damage things or inanimate things, to perform acts 
of violence requires a certain social and mutual understanding between 
the aggressor and the victim, which is not present, and is perhaps even 
excluded, from the very outset in the case of mere damage. And yet, if 
regimenting the predicate of “being violent” in this sense is perceived as 
too restrictive, one way to meet this objection could be to enlarge the 
scope of the predicate so as to accommodate at least two different senses: 
one sense, call it “violent in the broad sense”, that encompasses damaging 
acts, and another sense, “violent in a narrow sense”, that encompasses 
those acts which presuppose damaging acts and fulfill the conditions 
spelled out below.
Time now to turn to these conditions. Begin by mentioning another 
thought that seems to speak in favor of the conceptual distinction 
between damaging and violent acts. Think of old-fashioned methods of 
education, cases where children were beaten with educative purposes in 
mind. The question of whether such methods were efficient and, if yes, 
6  Acts of Terror as Collective Violent Acts 
99

in which sense they were efficient, is left out of consideration here. What 
seems to be at stake is that it is possible for damaging acts to be steered by 
an intention, the ultimate goal of which is not to damage. Now, suppose 
you see a teacher slapping a child in the face: you could either describe 
his action by saying that this is a bad teacher (for he falsely believes that 
slapping children is a means to educating them), or you could say that, 
in slapping the child, the teacher is fulfilling his duty, namely, he is edu-
cating the child. Put another way, the teacher’s intention in injuring the 
child is not to perform a violent act, but to educate. Similar consider-
ations, it seems, could be put forward in all those cases in which the 
agent harms another subject, but the action is intended to benefit the 
harmed party. (And this leaves open two broad possibilities: either the 
action actually benefits the person, or it does not. In the latter case, the 
agent could be blamed for being incompetent.)
So it seems that, for an act to be an act of violence and not just an act 
of damaging, the agent has to not pursue the interests of the victim. I will 
not further characterize what it means for an act to be against the inter-
ests of someone else. For the sake of this paper, I will rely on the vague 
intuition that the addressee is worse off after the action and that this is 
not just as a matter of fact, but as an intended consequence of the action 
(this makes violence bad, cf. Bufacchi 2004).
But now consider the following case. Suppose that an aggressor has 
targeted a victim and that he intends to harm the victim without intend-
ing to pursue any further goal in the victim’s interest. Eventually, the 
action is performed: while the victim is walking down a pitch-black street 
listening to some music through his earphones, the aggressor beats the 
victim in the head from behind. But what happens is that, because of 
the circumstances, the victim ends up thinking that a roofing tile has 
fallen from a roof and hit him, or even that the harm was done totally 
unintentional—and the agent is aware of the victim’s ignorance of the 
cause of the injury. I guess there are at least two ways of assessing this 
scenario from the perspective of the agent. Either ignorance of the event 
is an intended effect of the action, or it isn’t. And, if it isn’t, it either goes 
against the agent’s intention, or it is considered by the agent to be purely 
irrelevant.
100 
A. Salice

There are two options that one can use to rationalize the first alter-
native (which sees ignorance of the event as an intended effect of the 
action). The first is that the aggressor’s intention merely is to damage 
the victim and get away with that (for instance, he wants to avoid being 
sued). If that is the case, then everything suggests that, from the agent’s 
perspective, there is no difference here between damaging a human being 
and damaging an inanimate thing. This scenario is similar to the case of 
vandalism wherein things can be damaged in secrecy, leaving open the 
interpretation that the damage was the result of a natural chain of events. 
But this, one can argue, is not what is quintessential to acts of violence: 
violence, it seems, is always directed against conscious creatures (qua such 
creatures), not towards things. One addresses persons with one’s actions 
in a completely different way than one simply deals with things (on this 
form of basic recognition, cf. Peacocke 2014).2
The second way to rationalize the agent’s action under the first alterna-
tive (according to which, we recall, ignorance of the event is an intended 
effect of the action) is by appealing to additional intentions had by the 
agent. Accordingly, the agent intends to reach other goals, the achieve-
ment of which is served by the victim’s false belief. In this case, the 
description under which the overall action falls would be identified by 
the ultimate goal of the agent (cf. Anscombe 2000: 46): the aggressor 
might want to rob the victim (by distracting his or her attention), or the 
agent might want the victim to sue the owner of the house from which it 
is believed the tile has fallen, and so on. And this, one may conclude, can 
include damaging another person, but not doing violence to him.
If that is on the right track, then the victim’s ignorance of the cause of 
the harm is not an intended effect of the action. Here, again, two different 
readings present themselves: either it is not an intended effect in the sense 
that the agent just does not care about the victim’s belief regarding the 
injury, or it is unintended in the sense that it goes against the intentions 
of the agent. The first option is closely linked to the one suggested above 
according to which the agent simply has the intention to damage the 
victim together with the concomitant intention to hide the intentional 
nature of the damage. It is linked to it, one can argue, for the following 
reason: if indifference towards the victim’s belief is the stance adopted by 
the agent, then such indifference is compatible with the possibility that 
6  Acts of Terror as Collective Violent Acts 
101

the victim believes her injury to be caused by a natural (non-intentionally 
caused) event. And this, again, can be seen as demonstrating that the 
agent merely has the intention to damage some-thing, instead of doing 
violence to some-one.
We are thereby led to the last option: the victim’s ignorance is unin-
tended in the sense that it goes against the intentions of the agent, and 
this is because the agent has the intention to convey relevant information 
to the victim about what is going on. It seems that this communicative 
intention (which, on the current interpretation of the example, remains 
unsatisfied) is what makes the action of the aggressor an instance of an 
act of violence. That is, and before tackling what specific information it 
is that the agent intends to convey, violent acts seems to be in need of 
securing uptake in order to be successful. Put another way, a successful 
violent act is not only one that manages to produce harm, but also one 
that secures its uptake in the victim. Accordingly, violent acts presup-
pose damaging acts in the sense that violating a person does presuppose 
(without reducing to) injuring him or her and that there is an intentional 
content shared by both damaging and violent acts.
We can now turn to the question of the kind of uptake that the victim 
has to secure. One element has already been emphasized above: this is the 
fact that the victim’s injury has been produced intentionally. Put differ-
ently, the relation that links the injury to the agent’s intention (to cause 
that harm) has to be made transparent to the victim, which amounts to 
saying that the victim has to become aware that the injury is in a relation 
of satisfaction to the aggressor’s intention. But, if this cognitive step has 
been made, i.e. if the victim becomes aware of that, then he also becomes 
aware of the fact that there is an aggressor who is targeting him. The 
victim’s understanding of this fact is again intended by the aggressor, 
and it has to be so if the aggressor intends his or her act to secure uptake 
in the victim in a way that preserves the victim’s understanding of the 
intentionality of the injury. These considerations can be taken to point to 
a psychological attitude on the side of the aggressor, which supports the 
tendency to disclose rather than to hide elements of the agentive scenario. 
And such elements also include, one might claim, the identity or parts of 
the identity of the aggressor.
102 
A. Salice

Imagine Odysseus’s blinding of Polyphemus. The success of Odysseus’s 
act does not only depend on whether Polyphemus has been blinded. It 
also does not solely depend on whether Polyphemus correctly recognizes 
that his harm is being done intentionally. Rather, it also requires that 
Polyphemus is aware of the identity of who has done the harm, and this 
is contingent upon Odysseus’s revealing his identity (true, Odysseus liter-
ally means “no one”, but Odysseus’s utterance already discloses an aspect 
of his identity, although minimal—as Aristotle also points out: “[…] the 
poet has well written: ‘Say that it was Odysseus, sacker of cities,’ imply-
ing that Odysseus would not have considered himself avenged unless the 
Cyclops perceived both by whom and for what he had been blinded” 
Rhet. B 3.16). This last condition, the aggressor’s disclosure of (parts of) 
his identity, can be contended to constitute Odysseus’s act, for this act 
would not have been considered satisfied had Polyphemus not known the 
identity of his aggressor. I take this condition to qualify Odysseus’s act as 
a full-blown act of violence.
If considered under this light, acts of vengeance, menace,3 and some-
times punishment can all count as acts of violence—not only do these 
acts cause harm, they also do so “out in the open” so as to allow the vic-
tim to secure uptake of the action itself. Granted, no conceptual claim 
has been provided to underpin the idea that the aggressor always and by 
necessity intends to disclose his identity when issuing acts of violence. 
However, the psychological tendency highlighted above is conducive to 
this point, especially if it is considered in connection with the idea that 
the disclosure of the aggressor’s identity comes in grades: Odysseus men-
tions his first name, but in other cases the victim simply has to identify 
the person that is the aggressor for the act of violence to be satisfied. 
Between these two extremes, intermediate cases are plausible, too: verbal 
threats can be successful if the aggressor reveals elements of his identity 
that motivate some authority over the addressee (if he is taken to be the 
consignee of a Mafia boss, for example).
6  Acts of Terror as Collective Violent Acts 
103

3	
Acts of Terror as Collective Violent Acts
I have suggested that the distinction between damaging and violent acts 
can be useful to model acts of terror as these latter acts can be portrayed 
as a particular kind of violent act in the sense just sketched. This section 
is organized in two parts: first, attention goes to the features that make 
acts of terror acts of violence. In a second step, I zoom in on what I take 
to be some specific features of such acts.
Two main considerations indicate that acts of terror are acts of vio-
lence. The first is a rather uncontroversial observation upon which the 
second part of the present section elaborates further: if someone engages 
in an act of terror, then their intention is to inflict harm on someone. The 
open questions here regard who is acting and who is the victim and, to 
anticipate the following line of reasoning, the suggestion is that answers 
to both questions require appeal to collective notions.
The second consideration that reveals a close proximity between acts 
of violence and acts of terror is that both seem to be in need of secur-
ing uptake. Historical cases of terrorism clearly illustrate this: not only 
is damage quickly and easily identifiable as the planned effect of inten-
tional acts, but generally the perpetrators overtly claim responsibility for 
their acts. To illustrate this, think of how journalists present the news 
once it has been ascertained that a given injury is not an accident, but 
the consequence of an intentional action. Here is one among many 
examples—after a bomb exploded in front of the French Embassy in 
Tripoli on April 23, 2013, the Telegraph reported: “A car bomb has hit 
the French Embassy in the Libyan capital Tripoli, seriously injuring a 
security guard in the first major attack on a diplomatic mission in the 
city. […] No-one claimed responsibility, but suspicion will fall on […]”.4 
News of this kind is generally broadcast right after the terrorist event and 
before credit for the attack has been claimed. Already the mere fact that 
such news conveys the expectation that at some point responsibility for 
the event will be claimed indicates that the acts performed are not purely 
about causing damage or harm. There is something more to this kind of 
act—and, indeed, it is not only the case that, eventually, responsibility is 
claimed, but it can also happen that different terrorist organizations try to 
104 
A. Salice

­capitalize on the event by claiming credit for it. So, it seems that, for an 
act of terror to be properly and completely performed, the agents have to 
put their (readable) signature on it, as it were.
Why does the claim for responsibility appear to be so important? A 
consideration analogous to those developed in the first section might 
shed some light on this point: imagine a scenario in which a group inten-
tionally attempts to injure someone, but without the concomitant inten-
tion to reveal its identity or without the intention to let the aggressed 
know that the harm incurred is the effect of a planned action. That is, 
imagine a group that, while harming someone, is perfectly fine with the 
possibility that all parties involved will believe the action’s effect to be 
an accident. It seems plausible to contend that in this scenario the group 
is merely concerned with the damage as such and that it has no further 
interest extending over and above purely harming someone.
However, the fact that the intentionality of acts of terror stretches far 
beyond the mere injury is exactly what one could contend character-
izes terrorism as what it is: injuring individuals in order to send a mes-
sage, however vague or specific, to an entire community. In this respect, 
the phrase that the Red Brigades were careful to capture in the photo 
of Macchiarini (and in many other photos as well) is fairly illuminat-
ing: “Strike One to Educate Hundreds.” Against this background, the 
conditions for such acts to be satisfied do not reduce to the seclusion of 
Macchiarini or to the physical elimination of Moro. Nor did the terrorists 
of September 11 crash the airplanes into the Twin Towers just to destroy 
the buildings and kill people. More is done by inflicting that harm.
Let us recap. If the line of thinking is so far on the right track, then 
one may conclude that acts of terror are violent acts. Indeed, they seem to 
presuppose damaging acts and to strive to secure uptake. That is, the vic-
tim has to apprehend that the damage has been intentionally generated 
by an act of terror and, by apprehending that, the victim also apprehends 
that he has been targeted by an aggressor. And, as seen, this also coheres 
with the aggressor’s claiming responsibility for the act and, hence, reveal-
ing (at least part of his) identity. All this can hence be taken to illustrate 
that one way to model acts of terror is by using the conceptual framework 
sketched above for acts of violence. However, there are also important 
differences between these two acts. In particular, I would argue that acts 
6  Acts of Terror as Collective Violent Acts 
105

of terror display three further aspects that make them elements of a spe-
cific sub-class within the class of acts of violence.
The first significant aspect has to do with the target of such acts. When 
introducing the distinction between damaging acts and violent acts, the 
silent assumption was made that the targets of both acts were one and 
the same. The question of whether it has to be so can be left untouched 
for acts of violence, but it becomes salient when it comes to acts of terror, 
for it seems that the addressee of an act of terror has to differ from the 
addressee of the underlying damaging acts (call the latter “the victim”). 
Put another way, terrorists exert violence on their addressee by inflicting 
damage on the victim(s) (cf. Primoratz 2013). To substantiate this point, 
one could again appeal to the idea that the intentional horizon of acts of 
terror is not restricted to the causation of certain damage: by producing 
that damage, terrorists intend to send a message, the aimed recipient of 
which is the proper target of the act. If correct, this conduces to a further 
idea: since the victims are the target of damaging acts and since damaging 
acts per se do not require that uptake be secured, it is irrelevant for the 
perpetrators whether the victims become aware of the damaging act and 
its actor. They could be persuaded that they have been involved in a natu-
ral event or in a tragic accident. By contrast, it is required for the success 
of the act of terror that this latter act secures uptake in its addressees. But 
then, is there anything sensible that can be said about the addressees of 
acts of terror? Who has to secure uptake of the act for this act to be suc-
cessful? Certainly, acts of terror have had different targets throughout his-
tory, but they all appear to have something in common, namely the fact 
that such targets are not individuals, but social groups like governments, 
nations, social classes, religious communities, and so on.
This idea can be underscored by another observation: the victim(s) 
differ(s) from the addressee, but both—addressee and victim—are signif-
icantly connected to each other through group membership or through 
relations cognate to group membership. It exceeds the purposes of this 
chapter to define what group membership is; suffice it to say that the 
notion of membership employed here refers to the idea that, for an indi-
vidual to be member of a group, he or she has to act on behalf of the group 
(or “have the group in mind”, as some social psychologists would say; cf. 
Hogg and Abrams 1998). So, for instance, Aldo Moro was a member of 
106 
A. Salice

the Italian government and had been the highest representative of the 
Italian Republic. In this case, the relation between victim and addressee 
is that of (robust, if you wish) group membership, i.e. the victim is the 
member of a group and consciously acts as a group’s member. However, 
the robustness of such a relationship might be weakened as the victim 
may merely share the economic interests or the religious or political views 
of the addressee (without explicitly conceiving of himself as a member of 
that group). Or even the victims might merely represent a given group in 
the sense in which, for example, the marathoners that were killed in the 
2013 attack in Boston were just representatives of American, middle-­
class society. But what if the victims are not related in any relevant way 
to the target? This opens the possibility of assessing the competence of 
the terrorists for, in such a case, they arguably prove to be incompetent 
(given the provided notion of acts of terror). But, if correct, this observa-
tion just means: for the act to be an act of terror, the perpetrators have 
to believe that such a relation obtains (independently of whether or not 
it actually does).
This leads to the second feature that, I maintain, qualifies acts of terror: 
their addressees are social groups. They are groups to which the victim 
is related either by membership or by means of another relevant rela-
tionship. One could hence conclude that it is the group that is asked 
to understand the act (for this to be successful). The elicitation of nega-
tive emotions, and, especially, of fear and terror, in the targeted group 
could be seen as a direct consequence of such understanding (rather than 
as its primary effect)—this is the understanding of being the target of 
actions performed by a hostile group that are able to produce sensible 
damage. As there are different kinds of groups with cognitive architec-
tures that largely diverge from each other (corporations or governments, 
for instance, differ from large-scale communities, cf. Huebner 2014), the 
question of what it means for groups to understand the act would be 
answered differently with respect to the kind of targeted group. Brute and 
massive exercise of force might be needed for the message to reach loosely 
articulated groups, whereas the seclusion of an individual for some hours 
could very well serve the same purpose in the case of complexly organized 
groups, which are able to retrieve more fine-grained information from 
the environment.
6  Acts of Terror as Collective Violent Acts 
107

Finally, who are the perpetrators? Just as in the case of the acts’ address-
ees, it seems that collective notions also have to be introduced into the 
picture in the case of the perpetrators. Defeasible evidence for the claim 
that acts of terror are collective actions and, hence, that their subjects are 
collective subjects or groups is provided below. But it might be impor-
tant to begin with a clarification of the claim itself. It is an established 
idea within the literature on collective intentionality that agency can be 
shared (cf. Schweikard and Schmid 2012). Disagreement begins, how-
ever, when it comes to the question of whether the idea of shared agency 
has to be understood in distributive or in collective terms. In the first 
case, shared agency has to be cashed out as an action that is brought 
about by a distributed we, i.e. by several individuals who join their forces, 
coordinate and collaborate towards a common purpose. In the second 
case, the proper agent is a collective we or even an entity that supervenes 
on the individual members (on this distinction, cf. List and Pettit 2011, 
194). Despite the importance of this debate, the current purposes do not 
require taking an articulated stance towards it: theories of both kinds 
could be plugged in in the account offered of acts of terror.
One point deserves attention, though. The claim about the collective 
nature of acts of terror can be controverted by historical events where 
independent sub-groups or even single individuals have performed the 
damaging acts on which acts of terror are eventually based. However, 
such cases could be accommodated if the claim is aptly relaxed: actions, 
one may contend, can also be performed by proxy by individuals (or 
by independent subgroups) who act in representation of a group that is 
eventually the authentic subject of acts of terror. This implies a further 
consideration: for it has been noted that the proxy agent must receive 
authorization to act on behalf of the person or group for which he or 
she acts (Ludwig 2014). And this suggests that it is not sufficient for the 
agent to simply believe that he or she acts by proxy: he or she must know 
that. And knowledge is factive, which has obvious consequences for this 
issue. Under the assumption that acts of terror are either collective or 
are performed in representation of a group, if a group has not bestowed 
the agent with the authority to act by proxy, then an action does not 
qualify as an act of terror (and this is regardless of the agent’s beliefs on 
the matter).5
108 
A. Salice

Before drawing this conclusion, however, the reason is urged for the 
claim that groups are subjects of acts of terror. Admittedly, the reason I 
present here is defeasible. It is defeasible because it imposes constraints on 
the motivational structure that leads agents to perform acts of terrorism 
and because such constraints could be claimed to represent merely suffi-
cient, but not necessary, features of those acts. What are these constraints?
The suggestion is that there is a strong connection between acts of 
terror and ideologies. By “ideologies” I roughly mean shared systems of 
philosophical, political, or religious ideas, which, together with more 
primitive dispositions and habits, enact social practices (cf. Haslanger 
2012). Keeping this notion in mind, an act of terror seems to be moti-
vated by an ideology in the sense in which it can be said that terrorists 
“serve a cause”, that is, the cause which one serves or the ideology behind 
an act of terror is a shared system of ideas (and note—this would be an 
ideology that considers terror as a viable means of promoting the cause). 
But if this is a system of collective ideas that enables certain social prac-
tices, then the genuine subjects of those ideas are groups, not individuals: 
an individual could initiate or contribute to the development of a system 
of ideas that eventually flourishes into an ideology, but the notion of 
ideology per se is intrinsically collective (on this, cf. Gramsci 2000: 199).
Now, if to perform acts of terror is to serve a cause or an ideology, and 
if ideologies are systems of beliefs had by groups, then it appears plausible 
to conclude that groups are the genuine subjects of acts of terror (because 
only groups are the kinds of subjects that can be motivated by that spe-
cific kind of motivation). Relatedly, if individuals perform acts of terror, 
then they do so qua group members—namely as members of that group 
which has such and such an ideology.
4	
Conclusion
Introducing such ideological reasons for action into the picture adds a 
further level of complexity to the analysis. On the one hand, this suggests 
that an individual who fulfills all the above-mentioned conditions, but 
acts based on private and non-ideological reasons, is not performing an 
act of terror. But, on the other hand, it might be used to challenge the 
6  Acts of Terror as Collective Violent Acts 
109

claim that acts of terror are collective (or are performed in representation 
of a group): when Anders Behring Breivik killed 77 persons in 2011 in 
a twofold attack on Oslo and the island of Utøya, he contended that his 
brutal action was motivated by political considerations—considerations 
that have been developed in a thousand-pages long political manifesto 
(cf. Gardell 2014). Breivik’s mental health was the object of much con-
troversy (cf. Nilsson et al. 2015) and, after having been diagnosed with 
narcissistic personality disorder with antisocial traits (the first diagnosis 
was paranoid schizophrenia), he was eventually convicted of mass murder 
and terrorism.
It certainly lies beyond the scope and purposes of this paper to assess 
Breivik’s acts—especially given the whole spectrum of interpretations 
to which these actions can be subjected. However, it is only under the 
(admittedly simplistic) assumption that Breivik’s criminal hand was 
moved solely by the motives he stated in his manifesto that this case gains 
relevance for the claims of this article. Assuming this were so, then it is the 
relation between ideology, intentional action, and the notions of group 
and group membership that this case brings to the fore. In this respect, it 
appears significant that it was only Breivik who claimed responsibility for 
those actions and that his efforts to associate himself with other political 
subjects largely failed (Fekete 2012).
Granted, those crimes were performed against the background of an 
aberrant ideology (and one could argue that sharing this ideology makes 
Breivik a member of the group propagating it). But the isolation in which 
those crimes were brought about could be taken as a sign that the inten-
tions (and the corresponding plans and strategies) that led to Breivik’s 
actions were purely individual in form—in other words, if all political 
subjects dissociated themselves from the crimes (and if they were not 
lying in doing so), then this testifies to the fact that, after all, it was 
not part of their ideology to serve the perverse cause by means of mass 
murder. This would invalidate (or at least moderate) the judgment about 
Breivik’s acting on an ideological basis—his motivation was not ideologi-
cal, because it was not shared by a group.
Certainly, the agent could have genuinely thought that there was a 
collective endeavor to which the crime was supposed to contribute, but 
it has been convincingly argued that, when it comes to collective atti-
110 
A. Salice

tudes, one can always fall prey to the radical mistake of considering one’s 
individual attitudes to be collective (cf. Searle 1990). How to settle these 
questions in the case of the Breivik’s massacre is largely an empirical mat-
ter, but the fact that these are sensible questions to be asked shows the 
peculiarity of this event and maybe even also the complexity of the mes-
sage that terrorism is able to send.
Notes
	1.	 The idea of this article goes back to an email that Barry Smith sent me 
right after I published a paper on the notion of violence back in 2014. 
In this email, Barry suggested some ways of applying the analysis of 
that paper to acts of terror, and I am now very glad to be able to con-
tribute to a volume in his honour with a paper that he actually inspired 
(and this, despite every possible disagreement!). A previous version of 
this paper was presented at the third workshop of the European 
Network on Social Ontology (Helsinki 2013). My gratitude goes to 
that audience, but also to Vittorio Bufacchi, Felipe Léon, and Matthew 
Rachar who have read and commented upon previous drafts.
	2.	 This is not to say that one cannot inflict harm on a person by adopting 
a totally dehumanizing stance (cf. Gallagher and Varga 2014): geno-
cides have shown to which tragic consequences such an attitude can 
lead human beings.
	3.	 If threats are acts of violence, one might wonder what damage they 
presuppose, given that they seem to involve the intimation of future 
damage. But one should not overlook the fact that words can be used 
to do many different things, including the infliction of harm. In other 
words, the mental distress of being under threat is a cogent and 
intended effect of the threat itself (on this, see Salice 2014).
	4.	 Retrieved from http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/afri-
caandindianocean/libya/10011812/French-embassy-in-Tripoli-hit-­
by-car-bomb.html (accessed September 10, 2015).
	5.	This, one can claim, holds a fortiori if the group does not even exist. At 
the end of the 1990s, the Austrian bomber, Franz Fuchs, sent letter 
bombs to many figures of Austrian political, cultural and intellectual 
6  Acts of Terror as Collective Violent Acts 
111

society claiming to have done so in the name of an alleged “Bajuwarische 
Befreiungsarmee [Bajuvarian Liberation Army]”. But, since no such 
army has ever existed, no relation of representation could have been in 
place here—regardless of whether Fuchs was lying or was delusional.
References
Anscombe, G.E.M., 2000, Intention, Harvard University Press.
Bufacchi, V., 2004, Why is violence bad? American Philosophical Quarterly, 
41–2, 169–180.
Fekete, Liz, 2012, The Muslim conspiracy theory and the Oslo massacre, Race 
& Class, 53–3, 30–47.
Gallagher S., Varga S., 2014, Social Constraints on the Direct Perception of 
Emotions and Intentions, Topoi 33, 185–199.
Gallie, W.  B., 1956, Essentially Contested Concepts, Proceedings of the 
Aristotelian Society 56, 167–198.
Gardell, Mattias, 2014, Crusader Dreams: Oslo 22/7, Islamophobia, and the 
Quest for a Monocultural Europe, Terrorism and Political Violence, 26, 
129–155.
Goodin, Robert E., 2006, What’s Wrong with Terrorism? Oxford: Polity.
Gramsci, A., 2000, The Gramsci Reader. Selected Writings 1916–1935. Ed. by 
D. Forgacs, with an introduction by E. J. Hobsbawm, New York: New York 
University Press.
Haslanger, S., 2012, Resisting Reality. Social Construction and Social Critique. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hogg, M.A., and Abrams, D., 1998, Social Identifications. A Social Psychology of 
Intergroup Relations and Group Processes, London: Routledge.
Huebner, B., 2014. Macrocognition. A Theory of Distributed Minds and Collective 
Cognition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
List, Ch. and Pettit, Ph., 2011, Group Agency: The Possibility, Design and Status 
of Corporate Agents. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ludwig, K., 2014, Proxy Agency in Collective Action, Noûs 48:1, 75–105.
Nilsson, L.S., Parnas, A.U., and Parnas J., 2015, Diagnosing insanity 170 years 
apart: Pierre Rivière and Anders Breivik. Journal of Psychopathology 21, 
109–118.
Peacocke, Christopher, 2014, Interpersonal self-consciousness, Philosophical 
Studies 170–1, 1–24.
112 
A. Salice

Primoratz, I., 2013, Terrorism: A Philosophical Investigation, Oxford: Polity 
Press.
Salice, A., 2014, Violence as a social fact, Phenomenology and the Cognitive 
Sciences 13–1, 161–177.
Schweikard, D., and Schmid H.B., 2012, Collective Intentionality. In Stanford 
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ed. by Edward N. Zalta, Stanford.
Searle, J., 1990, Collective Intentions and Actions. In Intentions in 
Communication, ed. by P.R. Cohen, J. Morgan, and M.E. Pollack, Cambridge: 
MIT Press, 401–415.
Weinberg, L., Pedahzur A., Hirsch-Hoefler S., 2004, The Challenges of 
Conceptualizing Terrorism, Terrorism and Political Violence 16–4, 777–794.
Williams, B., 2006, Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy, London: Routledge.
6  Acts of Terror as Collective Violent Acts 
113

115
© The Author(s) 2016
L. Zaibert (ed.), The Theory and Practice of Ontology, 
DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-55278-5_7
1	
Coming Out
Apparently, in his later years, Heidegger confessed to his assistant: “I still 
haven’t let the cats out of the bag” (“die Katze noch gar nicht aus dem Sack 
gelassen”). The saying is linked to another common manner of speaking 
in Germany: “ich kaufe doch nicht die Katze im Sack”, that is, “Surely I 
won’t buy the cat in the bag” (i.e. without seeing it), which refers to the 
times when people would pass off cats as rabbits at the market. In short, 
“I will not buy a pig in a poke.” Heidegger’s statement can be understood 
as follows: the situation is still unclear, there is still something in store. 
And maybe: “I have not spilled the beans yet.”
In the light of the Black Notebooks, published—with a coming-out that 
is the most revealing fact in this whole affair—by Heidegger’s explicit 
wish, everything has become clearer: Heidegger had not spilled the beans, 
and the philosophical world had bought his philosophy sight unseen. One 
7
M. Ferraris (*) 
University of Turin, Turin, Italy
e-mail: maurizio.ferraris@unito.it
Letter of Pharisaism
Maurizio Ferraris

would be tempted to be ironic, like Bernhard in Wittgenstein’s Nephew, 
where Wittgenstein’s Austrian relatives claim that Ludwig’s thinking is all 
a bluff although he managed to convince the British that he was a great 
philosopher, but it is not so simple.
Heidegger’s secret is not Nazism: for decades we have known that 
Heidegger’s adhesion to the movement was anything but an accident or 
a “hogwash” (eine Dummheit), as he claimed after the war without much 
conviction (basically, he almost defined it as “a prank”). On the contrary, 
it lasted at least until Stalingrad, and in fact even after, as evidenced by 
the decision to publish these books. This, in my opinion, is the real big 
news. At the beginning of the debate following the publication of the 
notebooks, people wrote that they had been “discovered” as a regrettable 
revelation. However, this is a mistake and more accurately a rationaliza-
tion, arising from the fact that it appears inconceivable that Heidegger 
actually prepared the publication of these writings, which mix Nazism, 
anti-Semitism, and a paranoid cult of secrecy.
2	
Hermeticism
Hence, in my opinion, the fundamental question: how is it possible that 
a man who had already been prosecuted, and forced to give up teaching 
for a few years because of his affiliation with Nazism, gave the disposition 
to release these notebooks of darkness after the publication of his com-
plete works? This is even weirder when you think that these notebooks 
hold, so to speak, the cipher to decode (as we shall see) many of his her-
metic statements. It looks like a gesture of parrhesia that does not seem 
to be like Heidegger (“he lies as much as he can”, Hannah Arendt said 
of him). A gesture of self-denunciation, a voluntary self-abasement that 
definitely jeopardizes the attempts to rehabilitate him and to see Nazism 
as extrinsic to his philosophy. So why? In my opinion for two reasons, 
one political-historical and the other philosophical.
Politically, Heidegger was convinced that Bonn Germany would not 
have a longer life than Weimar Germany, and that when the notebooks 
came out the wind of history would have already returned to blow in the 
right direction (for him). After all, that’s what Hitler said in his ­political 
116 
M. Ferraris

testament: when the great Jewish conspiracy that had decreed the catas-
trophe of his project had been finally eradicated, the world would under-
stand his greatness.
The historical-political reason is the premise of the philosophical rea-
son. Heidegger has always been hermetic, and deliberately so, to the 
delight of his interpreters but also for a more substantial reason. After 
the war he wrote: “It was not in 1927, the publication date of Being and 
Time, that I began to observe silence in thought, but in Being and Time, 
and even before, and always.” And in the Black Notebooks he explains 
that his message was “never, and for good reason, communicated in an 
immediate way”, and that “we stand in the invisible front of secret spiri-
tual Germany”. This was Hitler’s principle as we find it in Mein Kampf 
(read and annotated by Heidegger): “German, learn to keep quiet.” This 
secrecy in the intentions of Heidegger responded to another secret: the 
“secret spiritual warfare” conducted by Judaism, which one must respond 
to with another mystical and philosophical war.
Now everything is clearer: Heidegger’s insistence on polemos as the 
essence of the world; his mystical definition of truth as alètheia, i.e. 
unconcealment (which is to say: we live in a world of shadows and deceits, 
where only the seer can grasp the truth); the idea that the history of meta-
physics was a destiny of decay to which Germany was called to react—all 
of this belonged to his strategy. Completely blinded by the syndrome of 
the Jewish conspiracy, Heidegger made up his own conspiracy: he wrote 
mysterious texts, published them mostly after his death (Heidegger did 
not publish much while he was alive, as in youth he preferred to be con-
sidered the secret king of German philosophy) and, finally, once the great 
hermetic corpus had seen the light in a post-catastrophe Germany, he 
would release the hermeneutic key, the Rosetta stone that would allow 
us to decipher the true meaning of his difficult (and, I think, futile) 
meditation on the Last God, The Event, Abandonment, Gestell, Geviert, 
Lichtung and Being that is not the being’s being.
I admit that this interpretation seems to be inspired by the theses of 
“magical Nazism”. However, on the one hand it is historically proven 
that Nazism had a mystical element very much in line with Heidegger’s 
spirit— he was fascinated by secret Germany, Angelus Silesius’s spiritual 
and sensual mannerism, and Meister Eckhart’s obscure sermons. On the 
7  Letter of Pharisaism 
117

other hand, without postulating this mystical component, some of his 
statements would be incomprehensible: for instance, in What is Called 
Thinking? he says that “we haven’t started thinking yet”, as if all of history 
up until that moment had been nothing but a cover, a misunderstanding, 
a plot. And why is it so important that the lack of Heimat can become a 
global destiny, as we read in the Letter on Humanism? Because it would 
mean that “Semite nomads” have won.
“Brief über den Humanismus” is a 1946 letter to Jean Beaufret that 
has led to Heidegger’s post-war recovery in France and by the Left. If you 
think about it, there is a sort of farcical element to this tragedy: Beaufret 
rehabilitates Heidegger and translates his texts, which inspire a great 
Jewish philosopher like Derrida and a great Jewish poet like Celan. Also, 
Frédéric de Towarnicki, allied fighter, goes to Freiburg in 1945 with Alain 
Resnais bringing Heidegger a sign of cultural solidarity at the moment of 
greatest political disgrace, and Heidegger still continues to allude to the 
Jewish conspiracy.
It reads like a book by Gide. But now everything is, if not clear, at 
least understandable, starting from the seemingly absurd decision to 
arrange for the publication of these notebooks. They would come out at 
a time when, perhaps, the “calculating thought” that Heidegger attrib-
uted essentially to Judaism would be replaced by a “meditating thought”. 
Until that day, secrecy was absolutely necessary. In the light of all this, it 
is rather strange to think of Pietro Chiodi, a Giustizia e Libertà partisan, 
translating Being and Time and dealing with a prose that, as we have 
seen, Heidegger defines as deliberately contrived to “observe silence in 
thought”. Really strange indeed—a left-wing ironical touch that is even 
more paradoxical if we think that, as we read in the notebooks, Husserl 
did not understand Being and Time because he was Jewish, i.e. homeland-­
less, Heimat-less and even Hütte-less.
3	
Anti-Semitism
It has been said that Heidegger’s was a metaphysical anti-Semitism. This 
expression has something odd about it. First of all, even if anti-Semitism is 
metaphysical it is still sheer anti-Semitism (each had their own: Goering’s 
118 
M. Ferraris

was an aeronautical anti-Semitism, Goebbels’s a media anti-Semitism 
and Heidegger’s a metaphysical anti-Semitism). As such this statement is 
the caricature of another, much more serious statement made by Derrida 
in Of Spirit (1987). Here Derrida notes that Nazism does not represent 
the irruption of a foreign body into the world of spirit—on the contrary, 
it is rooted in the highest peaks of European culture.
Nazism was not born in the desert. We all know this, but it has to be 
constantly recalled. And even if, far from any desert, it had grown like 
a mushroom in the silence of a European forest, it would have done so 
in the shadow of big trees, in the shelter of their silence or their indif-
ference but in the same soil. I will not list these trees which in Europe 
people an immense black forest, I will not count the species. For essen-
tial reasons, the presentation of them defies tabular layout. In their 
bushy taxonomy, they would bear the names of religions, philosophies, 
political regimes, economic structures, religious or academic institu-
tions. In short, what is just as confusedly called culture, or the world of 
spirit (Derrida 1989).
So far, so good. But if in fact we move from theory to its carica-
ture, that of “metaphysical anti-Semitism”, things change. Insisting 
that anti-­Semitism has a cultural root means introducing a kind of 
determinism: if you’re an intellectual, with some training, and maybe if 
you’re German, you can’t help being anti-Semitic and pro-Nazi. I would 
add that insisting on metaphysical anti-Semitism involves dwelling on 
Heidegger’s lengthy and uninteresting production after Being and Time 
and the immediately surrounding texts, such as The Basic Problems of 
Phenomenology or Kant and the Problem of Metaphysics, which add noth-
ing to the 1927 book.
4	
Politics
On Heidegger’s anti-Semitism—metaphysical or not—I think I have said 
it all. However, I would like to open a chapter that I think people haven’t 
thought about enough. No one has ever thought of making Thomas 
Mann a hero of the Left, while the Nazi rector of Freiburg was considered 
7  Letter of Pharisaism 
119

one, at least in France and Italy. How is it possible? Before the publication 
of the Black Notebooks, Gianni Vattimo (La Stampa, June 2, 2012) argued 
that Heidegger was a Nazi but not a racist. One cannot help wondering: 
provided that there can be such a thing as a non-racist Nazi, is it not bad 
enough to be and keep on being a Nazi? Vattimo himself recognizes this 
when he approvingly notes that Heidegger did not want to be a “demo-
cratic” (in quotation marks) and “disciplined Atlantic” philosopher? One 
would say that it is bad, very bad.
Yet precisely those quotation marks around “democratic” and “disci-
plined Atlantic” suggest not only why Heidegger’s Nazism was underes-
timated but why he was also read as an author of the Left. How is it that 
Heidegger has achieved—as a kind of reverted Lili Marleen, and without 
lifting a finger—the singular task of taking to the postmodern Left slo-
gans, terms, and concepts that belonged to the Nazi worldview? How is 
it that the ultimate success of what a contemporary (Levinas) called “the 
philosophy of Hitlerism” took place in the Left and not in the Right, after 
the war? The mystery is revealed quite easily.
On the one hand, in post-war Germany, to talk about Nazi authors 
such as Heidegger, Jünger, Schmitt (and their common reference, 
Nietzsche) seemed undesirable, when German culture was understand-
ably trying to turn the page. Things were different in France and Italy, 
and this explains the Colli and Montinari edition of Nietzsche’s works, as 
well as the revival of Heidegger, first in France (often in anti-Sartre way, 
starting from the Letter on Humanism), then in Italy. This clearance (the 
term is appropriate, as it involves a change of borders and then a return 
to Germany via France and the United States) aroused the ironic remarks 
of a man of spirit like Jünger, who observed that he found all his works 
in the library of Mitterrand, but after all they could all be already found 
in Hitler’s library.
However, in my opinion, there is a second, more decisive reason. After 
the war, it was as if the Left had taken upon itself the monopoly of politics. 
Politics and the Left were coextensive, therefore every political thinker, 
including Hitler’s jurist, Schmitt, became a reference for the Left. The 
main merit of Faye’s analysis in Heidegger: The Introduction of Nazism into 
Philosophy (which differs from previous studies on Heidegger’s Nazism) 
lies in illustrating with clarity and depth the intimate political structure 
120 
M. Ferraris

of Heidegger’s thought, which made him particularly recyclable, in a 
hyper-political time like the 1960s. History and decision are the only 
reality (which was in tune with Hitler’s deadly anti-realism, but also with 
the most well-meaning anti-realists proclaiming the necessity of imagina-
tion in power), we should fight objectivity in the name of solidarity and 
cold intellectualism in the name of the community of people: “That ques-
tion, through which our people rides out its historical destiny, enduring 
it through danger, holding it high in the greatness of its mission—that 
question is its philosophizing, its philosophy” (quoted in Faye 2011: 92).
This philosophical “movementism” appears very clearly in a 1934 sem-
inar omitted from the Collected Works (which, therefore, rightly observes 
Faye, are not really complete) as well as in a seminar on Hegel of the same 
period: here Heidegger’s fundamental intent is to politicize his thought 
so that, in order to illustrate the thesis of the identity of rational and real, 
he states that the Treaty of Versailles is not real. The insistence on historic-
ity, understood as the becoming that can justify anything, is the keystone 
of Heidegger’s constructivism—which amounts, in essence, to a triumph 
of the will to power. When postmodernists argued that any thesis and any 
truth must be indexed in the time they did it with emancipatory inten-
tions, but were really repeating Heidegger’s argument in defense of the 
Führerprinzip. Eager to move to Monaco to be closer to Hitler (as stated 
in his correspondence with Blochman), and perhaps acting on one occa-
sion as the Führer’s ghost writer, Heidegger transposed the present into 
eternity, politics into metaphysics, and vice versa.
5	
Metaphysics
In yet another ironical circumstance related to Heidegger’s reception, the 
deconstruction of the history of being which the philosopher engages in 
after Being and Time becomes a way for him and his followers to keep talk-
ing without the interruption of metaphysics. The reversal of Platonism is 
a way to talk about Plato and to revive the idea of the philosopher-king 
and the enlightened; the being that is not the being’s being and which 
does not identify with the supreme entity becomes a way to talk about 
the Ultimate God; talking about polemos means giving an ancient Greek 
7  Letter of Pharisaism 
121

touch to Jünger’s total mobilization. The complexity and perversity of the 
strategy is twofold. On the one hand, overcoming metaphysics is rather 
a way to make it ubiquitous, as when Heidegger argues that Aristotle is 
involved in the functioning of the diesel engine. On the other hand, the 
eternalizing wind blowing on the philosophical Olympus hides contin-
gent political references that are anything but metaphysical.
So, on stage we have Heraclitus and Plato, Aristotle and Descartes, Kant 
and Hegel, and behind the scenes or in the dressing room Dostoevsky, 
Jünger, Spengler and who knows who else: the story of being outlined by 
Heidegger in the 1930s and 1940s seminars on Nietzsche recovers the 
latter’s fatalistic and titanic ontology, except for the reference to science. 
Indeed, what is being proposed is anything but scientific: Nietzsche is a 
lone eagle in secret dialogue with other great thinkers, a sacrificial victim 
like Hölderlin, awaiting redemption by the new historical contingency. 
As for the rest, there is a fusion of Nietzsche and Jünger in an accentua-
tion of dynamism: it comes to overcoming metaphysics, which is charac-
terized as forgetfulness of being, confused under beings and with beings, 
to prevail against nihilism and really think being.
Heidegger proposes the question of being in terms both political and 
theological. On the one hand, there is the theme of heroic nihilism and 
the resolute acceptance of the end of the gods. Caught between East and 
West, between the United States and Russia (as Heidegger wrote in the 
Introduction to Metaphysics, 1935), the metaphysical people par excellence 
is preparing for a heroic nihilism. As recalled by Farias, this compari-
son was later used, mutatis mutandis, by the Iranian premier Mahmud 
Ahmadinejād, a former disciple of Ahmad Fardid (1909–1994), who 
proclaimed himself a “fellow traveler” of Heidegger. On the other, there 
is the expectation of the last God: a new being who returns to lead a secu-
larized world with the decisiveness of a Führer.
It is no coincidence that the seminars on Nietzsche go hand in hand 
with the drafts for his Beiträge, in which he speaks of being as an event, 
mysteriously alluding to a final God destined to save the earth from nihil-
ism, and mentions (a little surprisingly, but confirming the suspicions 
about the historical identity of the last God) Junger’s total mobilization 
(§ 74). In fact, in Heidegger the short circuit between the eternal and 
the present is always on the horizon. For example, the Greek temple of 
122 
M. Ferraris

which Heidegger speaks in another writing of 1935, The Origin Of The 
Artwork, was, in the first public versions of the conference, the Zeppelin 
Field in Nuremberg, constructed in Classical style (it was inspired by the 
altar of Pergamon) to accommodate Hitler’s speech—whom even here 
Heidegger identifies with the divine. This, closing the circle, casts a sinis-
ter light on his 1966 statement that “now only a god can save us”.
The distinctive feature of this dynamic ontology in which, under the 
sign of the event, being and nothingness coincide, is, as it were, its military 
and militating character. The tone is strictly vintage, so much so that it is 
found in another great nihilistic doctrine: Gentile’s The General Theory of 
the Mind as Pure Act, conceived in 1916 in the wake of war enthusiasm. 
The same enthusiasm we find in Heidegger’s classes on nihilism, when he 
celebrates the collapse of France under the blows of the Panzers of General 
Guderian: “These days we are witnessing a mysterious law of history, that 
is, that one day a people no longer lives up to the metaphysics triggered 
by its own history, and this happens just at the moment when this meta-
physics has changed into the ‘unconditioned’.” Later, with an argument 
that recalls Goebbels when reporting the terrorism of Anglo-American 
bombing, he states: “If today, for example, the British destroy the units of 
the French fleet at anchor in the port of Oran, from the point of view of 
their power this is completely ‘right’; in fact it is only what is useful to the 
strengthening of their power. This means, at the same time, that we never 
have to justify this approach; every power, from the metaphysical point of 
view, has its reason. And if it is wrong it is only by impotence.”
6	
Hermeneutics
No wonder that, long before Heidegger spilled the beans, his interpreters 
had to engage in a process of de-Nazification, which happened in many 
ways. First the historical-grammatical way: if you read Heidegger prop-
erly, understanding him and putting him in context, all misunderstand-
ings would be solved. In this line of thought, consider François Fédier 
in Heidegger’s Political Writings. When commenting on the closing lines 
of the allocution dated May 17, 1933 where Heidegger wrote: “to our 
great Führer Adolf Hitler a German Sieg Heil”, the editor’s comment is: 
7  Letter of Pharisaism 
123

“Today the expression “Ski Heil” is still used—with no political connota-
tion whatsoever—by skiers to wish one another a good ski” (p. 329 of the 
Italian translation, Casale Monferrato, Piemme 1998). This transforma-
tion of the Sieg Heil in Ski Heil is disturbing, especially when you consider 
that the Wink, the “gesture” or “nod” by which the Ultimate God, in the 
Contributions to Philosophy, announces the possibility of “another begin-
ning” and the overcoming of nihilism is, in all likelihood, the Nazi salute.
But there also was—and continues to be, strange as it may seem—a 
mystical-allegorical way, which translated Heidegger’s jargon so incom-
prehensibly that it achieved de-Nazification by confusion. Take the case 
of passage reported above, that has been rendered (not thirty years ago, 
but last year) as follows: “That question, through which our people stands 
to its springing being, that is, holds it alert for temptation and makes it 
rise up in the extraneum of the nobility of its mission—that question is 
its philosophizing, its philosophy” (Che cos’è la verità? Italian edition edited 
by Carlo Götz, Milano, Christian Marinotti Edizioni, 2011). With this 
hermeneutics even the orders of a Sonderkommando on the Eastern Front 
can be transformed into symbolist poems or recipes.
And what about the Rectorial Address, usually translated with a plain 
and unequivocal The Self-Assertion of the German University, which was 
re-translated as The Self-Administration of the German University? The 
text contains, among others, a passage where the only (maybe) under-
standable thing is the desire to fight, or, alternatively, to cut the bud-
get? “Battle alone keeps this opposition open and implants in the entire 
body of teachers and students that basic attitude that allows self-limiting 
self-assertion empower resolute self-examination to come to genuine 
self-administration.”
Admiration can be blinding, and this doesn’t only hold for Heidegger. 
For example Baudelaire, in My Heart Laid Bare, writes as follows: “A 
pretty conspiracy to organize for the extermination of the Jewish Race./
The Jews, Librarians and witnesses of Redemption” (Baudelaire 1975). 
To say that these words were underestimated is a euphemism: Benjamin, 
commenting on the passage, calls it a “gauloiserie”, (Passagen-Werk, 
J40, 1), while Claude Pichois, the editor of the works of Baudelaire by 
Gallimard, writes that the passage “is difficult to interpret,” but that “any 
anti-Semitism is to be excluded”.
124 
M. Ferraris

7	
Philosophy
Obviously at this point, and in conclusion, one may ask: what does all of 
this have to do with philosophy? Are we tackling the anti-Semitism of a 
twentieth century German man, or the thought of a great philosopher? 
I know that many believe that Heidegger is not a great philosopher, and 
that anti-Semitism, Nazism, and all in all the philosophical inconsistency 
we find in his 1930s works on the history of being are already present in 
Being and Time. I am not of this opinion. If we recognize that philoso-
phy does not go through good intentions, we must also recognize that it 
doesn’t go through bad intentions either, and that the work, in the end, is 
what counts. As dark, questionable, and ultimately kitsch as the category 
of “great philosopher” may be, the fact remains that a book is more than 
enough to achieve such status, and Heidegger wrote that book. Or, as it 
may displease (which is legitimate) to give the title of “great philosopher” 
to a Nazi, we can say that Being and Time is a great book, while the author 
can very well board the last train to Nuremberg.
As an Italian, I find myself in an advantageous position to understand 
a vir unius libri (i.e., a man of one book): this obsesses Heidegger in 
the Notebooks, where this expression appears literally and the problem of 
the continuation of Being and Time keeps presenting itself. Our greatest 
novelist, Alessandro Manzoni, only wrote one novel, and this does not 
make him any less great—and his taking interest in Longobard history 
and Catholic morals, instead of writing Nazi speeches or anti-Semitic 
notes, definitely makes him a nicer person. Back to Heidegger: let us 
leave anti-Semitism in the Black Notebooks, and keep metaphysics where 
we find it: in Being and Time. Everything else is an anguished wander-
ing through the history of Being which mirrors private affairs, and often 
goes as far as sheer nonsense—as once said Franco Volpi who, being a 
person of interest, at some point intended to write a book called Goodbye 
Heidegger! If that is the case, wanting to blacklist Being and Time reminds 
one of a reverse book burning. However, I do not agree with those who 
say it would be like burning Emile because Rousseau sent his children to 
an orphanage. Rousseau preached one thing and did the other: he said 
that nobody could replace maternal love and then he sent his children to 
an orphanage, maybe on the pretext that he was not the mother anyway. 
7  Letter of Pharisaism 
125

Heidegger’s case is different: he did practice what he preached, playing 
the Nazi rhetorician and writing that the Jews had asked for it.
From this point of view, the Black Notebooks testify to the personal 
and speculative background of “the second Heidegger”, and are impor-
tant because they give an explanation of the “adventurous wandering” 
(Gadamer) around the history of Being. What Heidegger did was run 
in circles around his own obsessions, consolidated in the concept of 
“history of Being”. What did Bouvard and Pécuchet say? “Ce qu’il y a 
d’important, c’est la philosophie de l’histoire” (“What is important is the 
philosophy of history”), and that’s what Heidegger offered after Being and 
Time, through the concepts of thinking beyond metaphysics, Destruktion 
and Abbau (literally, “destruction” and “de-building”). As we know, phi-
losophy of history is a branch of moral philosophy: an account of facts 
that has a moral goal. Its origin can be found in the De Civitate Dei (The 
City of God): Pagans are punished for their lack of faith, and history will 
progressively show the City of Man approaching the City of God. In 
Heidegger, instead, history is a downfall, a progressive oblivion of Being 
in which technology, metaphysics and the Jews have precise responsibili-
ties. They are the culprits.
8	
Pharisaism
The second Heidegger—the Heidegger of the history of Being, of the 
Notebooks, of the Beiträge (Contributions to Philosophy)—deals with 
morality in a wrong way. He compares the extermination of the Jews 
to mechanized agriculture and declares himself in favor of mercilessness 
beyond good and evil, and at the same time he maintains that question-
ing is the piety of thinking—so he calls himself extremely compassionate, 
but only in thought. In short, he preaches a theoretical moralism and 
a practical immoralism. What I would like to focus on is not his anti-­
Semitism or Nazism (which are not theoretically interesting, but morally 
repugnant), but something that has a Jewish name and universal validity: 
Pharisaism. It is an intellectual evil to which my attention has recently 
been brought by Kevin Mulligan’s memorable conference, “Kant et le 
pharisaisme” (“Kant and Pharisaism”). The basis of Pharisaism is the idea 
126 
M. Ferraris

that one’s moral value is determined by the beliefs one professes, rather 
than one’s actions. If in Rousseau what predominates is hypocrisy (even 
more disconcertingly, as it pretends to be absolutely sincere, thus con-
firming Gide’s saying that nothing is more premeditated than sincerity), 
Heidegger elaborates a theory of thinking according to which thoughts 
are the true, most intense and radical actions. This makes the state-
ments in the Black Notebooks even heavier, since their author intended 
to act, not simply to theorize. As mentioned earlier, at the same time he 
maintained that the true piety is that of thinking, which expresses itself 
through questioning; a questioning that exempted him from any kind 
of common piety, and from actually doing something for those nomads 
who were subjected to a mechanized-agricultural treatment.
Heidegger is not the first who took this path, but he does embody 
the mainstream of modern philosophy. In the end, if we consider how 
light-heartedly over the last two centuries philosophers thought that the 
world depends on mankind, it becomes clear that this dependence, never 
proved and purely imaginary, hides a Pharisaic goal. Things only exist for 
subjects, who therefore are responsible for them on multiple levels, from 
the Kantian moralist to the Heideggerian shepherd of Being, from the 
Schmittian decisionist to the existentialist who thinks that the world is 
affected by the crises of their own conscience. This (largely imaginary and 
little practiced) enormous responsibility set the tone of philosophy in the 
last two centuries, when the correlation between humans and Being was 
considered evidence of the philosopher’s political engagement—which, 
coherently with its premises, developed solely in the realm of ideas. 
Pharisaism creates what I would suggest calling “hermeneutical fallacy”, 
the confusion between the axiological relevance of something (language 
is important, history and the subject are important, and it is even more 
important to have a roof over one’s head and to manage to scrape together 
something to eat) and its ontological relevance.
The crucial aspect of Pharisaism is its non-falsifiability. Pharisees do not 
maintain that thoughts build reality; they just say they have an ­influence 
over reality that acts as a strange hidden quality. This quality bears the 
generic name of “interpretation” and can fit multiple occurrences: when 
it comes to claiming the importance of interpretation, Pharisees state that 
there are no facts, only interpretations, thus attributing full ontological 
7  Letter of Pharisaism 
127

relevance to interpretation. But when it comes to defending themselves 
from the objection that interpretations are only valid in the case of a half-
full or half-empty glass, not in the case of a full or empty one, and—more 
seriously—that to state there are no facts, only interpretations means 
to erase the past, responsibility, good and evil… this is when Pharisees 
declare they never negated the external world or the Holocaust. That is, 
they admit they have only been jabbering. In fact, the dependence they 
claim to support is purely nomenclatorial, and consists in asserting that 
the names of the objects known depend on the knowing subjects. Only 
a sacrifice of the intellect would make it possible to consider this depen-
dence real. On the contrary, in exchange for this sacrifice, Pharisees obtain 
the ambiguous gift of omnipotence, though only on their computer desk. 
Among the precursors of Pharisaism one can find great, minor and small 
figures; however, and luckily, even among the Heidegger’s heirs one can 
find differences in value which must not be underestimated.
9	
Heidegger’s Heirs
The most creative interpreters of Heidegger during the second half of the 
twentieth century (Derrida, Vattimo, and Rorty) always interpreted him 
from a left-wing standpoint, and in no way did they share Heidegger’s 
political and ideological views. This distance, which is also cultural and 
linguistic (none of them is German), has surely helped. Maybe Rousseau’s 
children preferred being sent to an orphanage to living with that para-
noiac, and certainly postmodern thinkers were lucky not to have dealt 
with Heidegger personally, but only with his books, and often not with 
the worst ones (Derrida and Rorty were spared the confrontation with 
the Black Notebooks because they died before they were published). It is 
really hard to see how the Black Forest Nazi, a liberal New Yorker like 
Rorty, a Parisian Sephardi teacher like Derrida, and an Italian communist 
Member of Parliament like Vattimo could possibly live side by side.
It is truly a miracle that this cohabitation, impossible in real-
ity, was instead entirely possible on paper, and led to a radicalization 
of Heidegger’s opinions. Heidegger saw metaphysics as oblivion and 
truth as a downfall, whereas his successors turned metaphysics, truth, 
128 
M. Ferraris

and objectivity into evil gods living in a vindictive and terrible Walhalla. 
Again, morality is dealt with in the wrong way. Wrong enough to reach 
the conclusion, as Rorty and Vattimo did, that to promote solidarity it 
is necessary to get rid of objectivity and truth (an epistemological con-
cept) and that the fight against the metaphysical tradition, which takes 
place in libraries, is comparable to the fight between British miners and 
Margaret Thatcher. This is a profound difference between Heidegger and 
his successors, and it obviously benefits the latter. While Heidegger, and 
Hitler, maintain that those who die deserve to die, their heirs (with what 
looks like a Benjaminian ethos) side with the victims. But even great 
interpreters have different opinions. For the sake of brevity I will only 
compare Derrida and Vattimo, who represent two different ways of being 
left-wing Heideggerians.
Derrida always criticized Heidegger, from his early works (for exam-
ple, he accused Heidegger of idealism in Ousìa et grammè) to his mature 
ones (Geschlecht—Heidegger’s Hand is possibly one of the most anti-­
Heideggerian texts ever written), to the late ones; the issue of animality, 
which is a key concept precisely in Derrida’s last works, originates from a 
strong philosophical criticism of Heidegger’s theory that animals cannot 
die, they can only decease. De l’Esprit (Of the Spirit) is also unforgiving 
towards Heidegger, but (together with the text in defense of Paul de Man, 
Like the Sound of the Sea Deep within a Shell: Paul de Man’s War) it is one 
of the least successful, because his judgment of Heidegger’s and de Man’s 
anti-Semitism gets mixed up with cultural politics, since at the same time 
Derrida had to defend himself from attacks against deconstruction. Either 
way, it remains unquestionable that if there is one reader of Heidegger 
who shares none of the most controversial aspects of his philosophy, that 
is Derrida. Moreover, he also does not share Heidegger’s anti-realism. The 
crucial thesis of the later Derrida’s—that “justice is the undeconstructa-
ble”—in my opinion implies that “reality is the unamendable”. It means 
there is a limit to deconstruction, which in particular cannot go as far as 
saying that unfair is fair. Also, it means that in order to be fair towards 
something one must operate in a real space: the fact that the Holocaust 
could never be morally just depends on our set of values, but it equally 
depends on what the Holocaust actually was in the real world, in which 
facts cannot be reduced to interpretations.
7  Letter of Pharisaism 
129

The case of Vattimo is entirely different, because he never criticized 
Heidegger, he just developed his thinking and made it actual. He does 
not even criticize the Black Notebooks: after asserting that Heidegger was 
a Nazi, but not an anti-Semite (which is impossible), he affirmed that 
anti-Semitism is part of Heidegger’s radicalism, which is always left-­
wing anyway. In parallel, Vattimo openly took a stand against Israel, and 
stated that had it not been for his age, he would have gone fight with the 
Palestinians. It seems legitimate to recognize in Vattimo a strong com-
ponent of traditional Catholic anti-Semitism. But his peculiarity is the 
anti-realism that characterized his final works. On the theoretical side, 
anti-realism means to adopt the imaginary constructionism of idealism, 
while on the political side it means to adopt the same radical anti-realism 
which lay at the roots of Hitler’s political activity—it is anti-realism that 
we see in the attack to the Ardennes, in the vain Hungarian resistance 
and, quite representatively, in the fact that in April 1945 Hitler had a 
plan for the post-bellic rebuilding of Linz brought to him. Instead of 
reality, a moralistic view of politics and history prevails. Blessed be the 
last, for they will be deconstructed: at the core of the postmodern vision 
of Pharisaism, in line with a course of action that repeats itself on several 
occasions, we have to deal with a clash between good and evil in which 
the good systematically seems to be represented by the losing party. This 
implicitly means that, should the losing party prevail, it would imme-
diately cease to be good and become evil. As Vattimo says: “from weak 
thought to the thought of the weak”, which would be like saying from 
a philosophy of misery to the misery of philosophy. There’s nothing bad 
about it; on the contrary, there can even be something good here, pro-
vided one does not forget that among the weak were also, for example, 
German people scared by the cold and humiliated by the defeat, ready to 
respond to terror with terror: that is, the Nazis.
10	
“Can You Still Be a Heideggerian?”
As in Hugo’s Châtiments, the real punishment that God inflicts upon 
Napoleon is not the 1812 catastrophe or the 1815 defeat, but rather Louis 
Bonaparte’s coup many years later—an event that Marx also described as 
a farce. Consider these three quotations:
130 
M. Ferraris

Denied or claimed non-reading is a form of intellectual dishonesty. But it 
is not the only one. A related and more serious form of it is plagiarism: the 
thoughtless and relentless theft of ideas, insights, observations. New tech-
nologies are not enough to explain it. It is, again, the absence of any ethics 
in the relationship with the text and with the author. Take a book, or an 
essay, and plunder it with copy-and-paste; so, without much hesitation, 
you pass it off for your stuff. What is the point of quotation marks? 
(Donatella Di Cesare, Heidegger & Sons, Turin, Bollati Boringhieri 2015, 
p. 41.)
The disciple’s consciousness, even more so if she is female, grateful to the 
master, is an unhappy consciousness. For when she starts to speak, or bet-
ter, when she resumes the interminable and silent dialogue with the master, 
his questions, his answers, although the master didn’t want to have the last 
word, she feels herself indefinitely challenged, or rejected or accused by the 
voice of the master that speaks within her and before her, to reproach her 
for making this challenge and to reject it in advance, having elaborated it 
before her, after all. She would then be forced to remain an “infant”, that 
is, not to speak—only, this unhappiness stems from the fact that she hides 
from herself that—in academia as in real life—that the master, like the 
father, is always absent. (Donatella Di Cesare, Heidegger & Sons, Turin, 
Bollati Boringhieri 2015, p. 49.)
The disciple’s consciousness, when he starts, I would not say to dispute, 
but to engage in dialogue with the master or, better, to articulate the inter-
minable and silent dialogue which made him into a disciple—this disciple’s 
consciousness is an unhappy consciousness. Starting to enter into dialogue 
in the world, that is, starting to answer back, he always feels “caught in the 
act,” like the “infant” who, by definition and as his name indicates, cannot 
speak and above all must not answer back. (…) He feels himself indefi-
nitely challenged, or rejected or accused; (…) by the master who speaks 
within him and before him, to reproach him for making this challenge and 
to reject it in advance, having elaborated it before him; (…) This intermi-
nable unhappiness of the disciple perhaps stems from the fact that he does 
not yet know—or is still concealing from himself—that the master, like 
real life, may always be absent. (Jacques Derrida, Writing and Difference, 
London, Routledge 1978, pp. 36–37.)
Pharisaism means placing one’s moral value in the ideas that one professes 
rather than one’s actions. Therefore, the condemnation of plagiarism at 
page 41 is more than enough to justify plagiarism at page 49.
7  Letter of Pharisaism 
131

“Can you still be a Heideggerian?” wondered Charlie Hebdo in 
December 2015. Would a student today specialize in Heidegger? And 
how can one quote—say, in post-colonial studies or women studies—
someone who hailed Hitler not by mistake but by inner rooted convic-
tion? Kierkegaard said he’d had enough of Schelling when the latter was 
still alive and pontificating in Berlin in the 1840s—we have a lot of nerve 
to still worship Heidegger 40 years after his death. And yet, are we still 
doing it? Isn’t it profoundly wrong to see philosophy as a family heritage?
And yet the answer to the question “Can you still be Heideggerian?” 
is: of course you can. Tant qu’il y aura des hommes … Or, more exactly, 
as Bayle put it, no sect can be defeated enough for it not to reappear 
elsewhere. Heidegger’s left-wing luck began in 1945, while he was being 
processed for Nazism—of course Heideggerians will not think much of 
these bagatelles for a massacre! Of course, there are worse things than 
Heideggerism, which had the merit of showing the nature of Pharisaism 
at its best, warning us about our weakness as vain intellectuals.
De Maistre wrote a letter to his daughter, saying: what if, instead of 
giving birth to your brother, your mother had written a novel? Would 
it be better or worse? In fact, it is not enough to give birth to someone: 
you must educate them, make them a gentleman and a good soldier who 
wouldn’t flee the battle. I am familiar with this objection: that’s conser-
vatism’s, and it’s very easy to condemn the phallogocentrism of someone 
who reduces the role women to householders and writes to daughters 
speaking of sons. However, this can be translated in positive terms: in 
the demand that actions be coherent with thoughts and, even more, 
that actions have an exemplary value—that is, that they can imitated as 
actions and not contemplated as theories.
Spielberg’s heroes—Schindler and now Donovan from Bridge of 
Spies—are characterized by this exemplarity. And the real alternative (not 
only moral, but theoretical) to Heidegger’s “metaphysical anti-Semitism” 
is Dimitar Peshev, man without qualities and second-order politician of 
a small nation (vice-president of the Bulgarian parliament) who accepted 
without a flinch the anti-Semitic laws introduced in his country. And yet 
on March 7, 1943, when he learned that deportation was about to actu-
ally take place, he wrote to the prime minister denouncing the fact and 
obtained the signature of 43 other members of parliament, provoking 
132 
M. Ferraris

a scandal that made deportation impossible. Eight hundred thousand 
Bulgarian Jews owe him their lives, and if there had been a Peshev in Italy, 
France, Poland, the Netherlands, things would have been different for the 
Jews of those countries.
What if Peshev had written that thought is the highest form of action? 
What if, instead of a letter to the Prime Minister, he’d written a novel or 
taken note of his thoughts in a Black Notebook?
References
Baudelaire, Ch. 1975. Œuvres complètes, I, Paris, Bibliotèque de la Pléiade, 
p. 706.
Derrida, J. 1989. Of Spirit, University of Chicago Press, pp. 109–110.
7  Letter of Pharisaism 
133

135
© The Author(s) 2016
L. Zaibert (ed.), The Theory and Practice of Ontology, 
DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-55278-5_8
The age-old problem of the justification of punishment has classically 
opposed two remarkably different schools of thought. On the one hand 
we have the school of thought that justifies punishment by (some of) the 
alleged consequences that punishment is supposed to generate—conse-
quentialism. And on the other hand we have the school of thought that 
justifies punishment by the fact that punishment is deserved—retribu-
tivism. While the debate is as old as society itself, in its contemporary 
incarnation, the debate is typically seen, for obvious reasons, as oppos-
ing utilitarianism and Kantianism. In a sense, then, this specific debate 
is part and parcel of the more or less recent history of ideas. That is, 
insofar as modern utilitarianism is properly seen as the British (or the 
Anglo-­American, perhaps; or as the analytic) approach, and Kant is 
evidently properly seen as the German (or continental) approach, the 
debate may seem as one manifestation of this binary general distinction.
8
L. Zaibert (*) 
Union College, Schenectady, NY, USA
e-mail: lzaibert@gmail.com
Just Organic Wholes
Leo Zaibert

Barry Smith has complicated this perhaps over-simplified picture by 
systematically arguing for the usefulness of recognizing the existence of a 
school of thought properly termed Austrian philosophy—a philosophical 
tradition which although by and large written in German, ought to be seen 
as importantly different from German philosophy (Smith 1994). In a way, 
Austrian philosophy, Smith argues, shares more with analytic philosophy 
than with German philosophy, insofar as it exhibits “a sympathy towards 
and in many cases a rootedness in British empiricist philosophy” (Smith 
1994, 3). To a great extent, this affinity with Anglo-American philosophy 
is inseparable from Austrian philosophy’s rejection of Kantian philosophy, 
and of the latter’s towering influence over German philosophy proper.
Here I wish to show how the specific case of punishment, too, dis-
plays a certain oversimplification of the territory. It is neither accurate nor 
helpful to see the debate over the justification of punishment as neatly 
breaking down into the consequentialists and the retributivists, into the 
(Anglo-American) utilitarians and the (German) Kantians. There exist, I 
will argue, profoundly anti-Kantian thinkers who nonetheless embrace 
retributivism. Not surprisingly, some of these thinkers happen to be 
emblematic figures of the tradition of Austrian philosophy with which 
Smith has been concerned, above all Franz Brentano.
While it may be tempting to conceive of Austrian philosophy in purely 
geographic terms, Smith seeks to identify some central non-geographic 
characteristics that allow us to identify Austrian philosophy as such. One 
of these central characteristics is particularly helpful in explaining how one 
could be an anti-Kantian retributivist. Smith tells us that Austrian phi-
losophy displays “a concern with ontological structure, and more especially 
with the issue as to how the parts of things fit together to form structured 
wholes” (Smith 1994, 4). For reasons I shall explain in due course, an 
important sub-set of these wholes is comprised of organic wholes—wholes 
whose value is not necessarily identical to the sum of the value of their parts.
1	
Franz Brentano and G. E. Moore
In the very first sentence of his review of Brentano’s The Origin of Our 
Knowledge of Right and Wrong, Moore claimed that it contained “a far 
better discussion of the most fundamental principles of ethics than any 
136 
L. Zaibert

other with which [he was] acquainted” (Moore 1903a, 115). Although 
he detects a certain arrogance in Brentano’s “confidence in the original-
ity and in the value of his own work”, Moore nonetheless admits that 
such self-confidence is “completely justified” for “it would be difficult 
to exaggerate the importance” of Brentano’s work (Moore 1903a, 115). 
Alas, Moore’s reasons for such an extraordinary assessment—particularly 
against the backdrop of the rich tradition of superb British moralists 
with which Moore was evidently acquainted—remain, even among those 
familiar with Moore’s review of Brentano, under-investigated. The most 
notable exception has been Roderick M. Chisholm, whose Brentano and 
Intrinsic Value is not only the best presentation of Brentano’s ethics in the 
English language, but also the best study of its connection to Moore’s 
views (Chisholm 1986).
As Chisholm reminds us, “Brentano’s theory is a theory of intrinsic 
value. It is concerned with that which is ‘good and bad in itself’ or ‘good 
or bad as an end’ and not with that which is merely good or bad as a 
means” (Chisholm 1986, 3). Moreover, Chisholm also points out that 
Brentano’s theory ought to be sharply distinguished from
the theories of Bentham, Mill, and Sidgwick, who had held that pleasure 
alone is intrinsically good. Some pleasure is not intrinsically good, accord-
ing to Brentano, and some displeasure is not intrinsically bad. Moreover, 
some things other than pleasure are intrinsically good, and some things 
other than displeasure are intrinsically bad. (Chisholm 1986, 4)
Brentano’s theory, then, is not just concerned above all with intrinsic value; 
but it is also evidently “pluralistic”, in the sense that it allows a variety of 
things other than pleasure to be intrinsically valuable (Chisholm 1986). 
These two characteristics are also conspicuously present in Moore’s ethics: 
Moore is above all concerned with intrinsic value, and his views are plu-
ralistic. These shared characteristics explain why some have pointed out 
that “Brentano’s ethical theory was an ideal utilitarianism that had yet to 
acquire the name”—an ideal utilitarianism avant la lettre (Welsh Jordan 
1992, 221). After all, it is Moore himself who is generally regarded as the 
most influential exponent of ideal utilitarianism.1
For my purposes here, there is a crucial distinction between ideal 
utilitarianism and the version of utilitarianism that has overwhelmingly 
8  Just Organic Wholes 
137

­commonly operated within the context of punishment theory: classical 
(i.e., Benthamite) utilitarianism. Classical utilitarianism is both hedo-
nistic and non-pluralistic whereas ideal utilitarianism is emphatically 
neither. Brentano denies that there exists “one sort of thing that would 
be under all circumstances the best thing attainable”. Neither the maxi-
mal augmentation of pleasure nor the maximal diminution of suffering 
would be necessarily the best thing to do: “for Brentano’s ideal conse-
quentialism, there is no concrete, non-formal end the pursuit of which 
would always be a positive value” Welsh Jordan 1992, 222). And exactly 
the same can be said of Moore’s ideal utilitarianism.
While evidently pluralistic and non-hedonistic, ideal utilitarian-
ism is still utilitarianism in the sense that its adherents believe that the 
right thing to do is to maximize the amount of intrinsic goodness in 
the world, however variegated and indeed plural the contours and the 
constitutive elements of such goodness may turn out to be. Ideal utili-
tarianism represents an obvious advantage over classical utilitarianism: 
because of its pluralism, because of its allowing many—potentially infi-
nite—things to be valuable in themselves, ideal utilitarianism assumes 
and is able to engage with—and in much less simple-minded way—a 
much richer moral universe than does classical utilitarianism. The clas-
sical utilitarian is simple-­minded in the sense that, in the final analysis, 
she has only one goal in life: to seek pleasure (or to avoid suffering), and 
only one simple formula for establishing value: the more pleasure (or the 
less suffering) the more value. And since this is the only goal, she hardly 
has space for moral conflicts in her worldview, and in fact, she hardly has 
space for really difficult choices (that is, choices where the difficulty goes 
beyond computation).
I think that even the most cursory reflection on our moral lives, on 
“what experience makes evident to us” (Brentano 1969, 31), lends all the 
support that is needed to the view that a richer axiology does a better job 
of capturing the moral universe as it really is than does an ­impoverished 
one. We value all sorts of things: knowledge, love, friendship, art, sports, 
food, and so on; and we do not think that we could easily—if at all—
express the value of some of these things in terms of anything else with-
out thereby caricaturizing it, as classical utilitarians seem committed to 
doing. Recall Brentano’s famous example:
138 
L. Zaibert

Consider how ridiculous it would be if someone said that the amount of 
pleasure he has in smoking a good cigar is such that, if it were multiplied 
by 127, or say by 1077, it would be precisely equal to the amount of plea-
sure he has in listening to a symphony of Beethoven or in viewing one of 
Raphael’s madonnas. (Brentano 1969, 31)
And it is precisely this sort of fungibility that classical utilitarians 
require—everything has to be expressible in the homogenizing terms of 
the amount of pleasure it generates—that pluralists reject.
As a way to further bolster axiological pluralism, consider also the way 
in which one the most ingenious contemporary defenders of the axiolog-
ical monism enshrined in classical utilitarianism deals with Brentano’s 
powerful objection, and with two other even more famous—and in my 
opinion even more damaging—objections to hedonism. Fred Feldman 
links Brentano’s point to a similar point made by John Rawls in A Theory 
of Justice:
there are different sorts of agreeable feelings themselves incomparable, as 
well as the quantitative dimensions of pleasure, intensity and duration. 
How are we to choose a brief but intense pleasant experience of one kind 
of feeling over a less intense pleasant experience of another? (Feldman 
2004, 45–46; cf. Rawls 1999, 488)
Immediately, however, Feldman claims that “the general drift of the pas-
sages [Brentano’s and Rawls] is fairly clear, but the details of the argument 
remain obscure”. In light of this alleged obscurity, what Feldman offers 
in response is rather humble: in his own words, “really just a suggestion” 
(Feldman 2004, 46).
Feldman’s suggestion is to offer three different detailed interpretations 
of what Brentano and Rawls may be after in these passages. Feldman’s first 
interpretation sees the passages as “just an application of the principle 
that ‘ought’ implies ‘can’” (Feldman 2004, 46). The passages may be read 
as offering the following objection: sometimes we are under an obligation 
to determine the relative pleasantness of two experiences, and we cannot 
do this in cases such as Brentano’s cigar. Feldman’s second interpreta-
tion is that Brentano and Rawls are in fact suggesting that hedonistic 
utilitarians cannot admit that different pleasant experiences can indeed 
8  Just Organic Wholes 
139

be phenomenologically different. Finally, Feldman’s third interpretation 
posits that the passages seek to question the possibility that pleasant epi-
sodes “come in precise amounts” Feldman 2004, 48), so that the passages 
may merely seek to challenge the computational accountancy of classical 
utilitarianism.
Although I think that the passages, in any of Feldman’s interpretations, 
pose serious and obvious problems for hedonism, in the end Feldman 
concludes that they do not pose too serious problems after all. For, in his 
view, the hedonistic utilitarian may, addressing each of these three possible 
objections in order, admit that (1) she may in fact be unable to “calculate 
accurately the number of hedons in any episode of pleasure” (Feldman 
2004, 47), that (2) she needs to endorse a more complicated ontology 
whereby in addition to any experiences we have (which could be phe-
nomenologically very different from each other) we also have “the feeling 
of pleasure itself” which is always phenomenologically identical (Feldman 
2004, 48), and that (3) pleasure and pains cannot be measured anyhow.
These are not inconsequential admissions, and, unlike Feldman, I do 
not think that hedonistic utilitarianism can survive unscathed after its 
proponents make any of these admissions. Rather than digressing on 
why these are problems for hedonistic utilitarians, I want to suggest that 
Feldman misses the essential point of the objection in these passages, 
what he calls their “drift”. The gist of the objection is that hedonistic 
utilitarianism is reductive: more precisely, that it reduces the complexity 
of our moral life to an impoverished monism. In other words, the gist of 
the objection is that there is more to life than pleasure.
Brentano’s project is predicated on the view that one thing being better 
than another sometimes has “nothing to do with [the] comparative inten-
sity” of the bare pleasures each generates, but rather with the ­“peculiar 
type of phenomenon … of preferring”—a phenomenon linked to the 
idea of it being correct to value one thing more than another, indepen-
dently of any consideration regarding pleasure (Brentano 1969, 26). One 
reason why we may be correct in preferring one thing over another is 
that that thing deserves to be so preferred. Neither Brentano nor Rawls 
(though for different reasons) was at all concerned in these passages with 
the problem of quantifying pleasures or suffering as such, but rather with 
exposing the simple-minded monism of classical utilitarianism.
140 
L. Zaibert

Let us then turn to Feldman’s reaction to two other famous objections 
which Feldman seems to think pose more serious problems to hedonistic 
utilitarianism and to the impoverished axiology it presupposes: Moore’s 
“Heap of Filth” thought experiment and W.  D. Ross’s “Two Worlds” 
thought experiment. Feldman groups together these two objections 
in what is effectively the last chapter of his book, entitled “Problems 
about Beauty and Justice”.2 I think that this reveals the importance that 
Feldman, rightly, attaches to these objections. But, again, I do not think 
that Feldman is in the end convincing—I think that these objections do 
reveal insurmountable difficulties for the reductionist axiology of hedo-
nistic utilitarianism. This is Moore’s famous thought experiment:
Let us imagine one world exceedingly beautiful. Imagine it as beautiful as 
you can; put into it whatever on this earth you most admire—mountains, 
rivers, the sea; trees, and sunsets, stars and moon. Imagine all these com-
bined in the most exquisite proportions, so that no one thing jars against 
another, but each contributes to increase the beauty of the whole. And then 
imagine the ugliest world you can possibly conceive. Imagine it simply one 
heap of filth, containing everything that is most disgusting to us, for what-
ever reason, as far as may be, without one redeeming feature. Such a pair of 
worlds we are entitled to compare. […] The only thing we are not entitled 
to imagine is that any human being ever has or ever, by any possibility, can, 
live in either, can ever see and enjoy the beauty of the one or hate the foul-
ness of the other.
And Moore’s no less famous reaction to this comparison was this:
Well, even so, supposing them quite apart from any possible contempla-
tion by human beings; still, is it irrational to hold that it is better that the 
beautiful world should exist, than the one which is ugly? Would it not be 
well, in any case, to do what we could to produce it rather than the other? 
Certainly I cannot help thinking that it would; and I hope that some may 
agree with me in this extreme instance. (Moore 1903b, 135)
This constitutes a problem for classical utilitarianism in the sense that, if 
one agrees with Moore, there exists, then, something more valuable than 
something else and this is completely independent from ­considerations 
8  Just Organic Wholes 
141

regarding pleasure or suffering, since after all neither of Moore’s two 
worlds contains any of either. Feldman, however, disagrees: “when con-
sidered in itself, devoid of population as it is stipulated to be, the beauti-
ful world is intrinsically no better than the ugly one” (Feldman 2004, 
192). I find it difficult to agree with Feldman on this. But it could be 
argued that this is one of those cases in which we have reached a point of 
disagreement about bedrock intuitions and that is that. The hedonistic 
utilitarian’s claim that the beautiful world is better only insofar as this 
world “has the capacity (if only it could be populated!) to produce plea-
sure in those who contemplate it” (Feldman 2004, 192) is evidently not 
absurd. And this is a position that could, moreover, in the final analysis 
be correct. But we can, I think, avoid this sort of stalemate of intuitions 
by considering the next objection to hedonistic utilitarianism, in which 
the stalemate does not obtain.
Ross writes:
If we compare two imaginary states of the universe, alike in the total 
amounts of virtue and vice and of pleasure and pain present in the two, but 
in one of which the virtuous were all happy and the vicious miserable, 
while in the other the virtuous were miserable and the vicious happy, very 
few people would hesitate to say that the first was a much better state of the 
universe than the second. (Ross 1930, 138)
Feldman begins his reply by admitting that “Ross’s objection is a tougher 
nut to crack [than is Moore’s]”. And he immediately adds: “whereas we 
can reasonably say that in itself the beautiful world is no better than the 
ugly one, it may seem somewhat unreasonable to say that the just world 
is no better than the unjust one”. In spite of a certain air of evasiveness 
in Feldman’s “may seem somewhat unreasonable” rider, he does more or 
less straightforwardly admit that he is “prepared to acknowledge that the 
more fitting allocation of pleasures and pains in [the just world] makes it 
better in itself than [the unjust world]”. Moreover, Feldman recognizes 
that scenarios such as Ross’s two worlds, unlike Moore’s, do call “for fur-
ther refinements in [his] formulation of hedonism” (all from Feldman 
2004, 192)—a project to which he turns, however, only on page 192 of 
a 196-page long book, and which thus unfortunately remains woefully 
inchoate.
142 
L. Zaibert

The reason why Feldman thinks that replying to Ross’s objection is 
harder than to Moore’s should by now be clear. Even if perhaps this could 
be seen as stubbornly refusing to engage with the objections at hand, 
it really is not absurd to react to Moore’s example by protesting that 
the very talk of worlds which no one could ever experience is fancifully 
improbable, or otherwise unrealistic. Maybe really the only way in which 
the beautiful and the ugly universes can be said to differ is by somehow 
smuggling sentient beings into the picture—either as (potential) inhabit-
ants of those worlds, or simply as a result of having been asked Moore’s 
questions about these worlds. Ross’s objection, in contrast, does not per-
mit this move: his two worlds are supposed to be populated by ordinary 
sentient beings like ourselves. Moreover, while modifications to Moore’s 
example so as to suggest instances that we could actually experience are 
necessarily impossible—since the example requires the absence of sen-
tient beings—examples such as Ross’s are perfectly familiar in our every-
day life. We commonly experience wrongdoers getting away with it (i.e., 
vicious people enjoying pleasures), as well as deserving people not getting 
recognized (i.e., virtuous people suffering)—and when we witness these 
sorts of cases we are, understandably, affected. Other things being equal, 
we prefer (i.e., we think it is better, more valuable)—and we are correct 
in so preferring—justice to injustice. To deny this strikes me not only as 
utterly implausible, but as downright perverse—as Feldman himself may 
be taken to have conceded. This preference has something to do with the 
idea of organic wholes, as I shall argue next.
2	
Harmonies and Values
Despite his many agreements with Brentano, Moore criticized him for not 
giving enough importance to “the principle of organic unities”—a prin-
ciple for which Moore himself is conspicuously famous (Moore 1903a, 
passim). Chisholm admits that “the principle of summation [Brentano] 
had offered [in The Origin of Our Knowledge of Right and Wrong] is incon-
sistent with the principle of organic unities”, as Moore alleges (Chisholm 
1986, 69–70). But Chisholm also points out more than one way in 
which Brentano’s view therein “presupposes Moore’s principle [of organic 
8  Just Organic Wholes 
143

wholes]” and that in fact many a remark by Brentano “enables us bet-
ter to understand the concept of organic unity” (Chisholm 1986, 70). 
Chisholm also refers to passages contained in Brentano’s unpublished 
manuscripts that clearly reveal that he was operating with something very 
much like the framework of organic wholes in mind. And I think that the 
usefulness of this framework for understanding the morality of punish-
ment continues to be regrettably under-researched. The question in front 
of us now is: What exactly about the framework of organic wholes is it 
that is so helpful for understanding punishment? The answer is somewhat 
circuitous.
The most salient—and most famous—characteristic of organic wholes 
is that their value is additively independent from the value of their parts. 
Imagine a whole formed by, say, three parts, a, b, and c, and assume that 
the values of these parts—in isolation—is, in order, 2, 3, and 5. The 
theory of organic wholes states that it is not necessary that the value of 
a whole containing a, b, and c, be 10—it could be more or less than 10. 
Initially, perhaps, this may appear mysterious: what could possibly be 
the source of this differential value? The mystery can, however, be dis-
pelled—and much more easily than usually assumed.
Consider the examples offered by another important philosopher who, 
like Moore, spoke in superlative terms of Brentano’s seminal work on 
axiology (even though, also like Moore, he thought that Brentano’s treat-
ment of organic wholes was too “preliminary”). As he sought to develop 
Brentano’s views, Edmund Husserl offered as perfectly non-mysterious 
examples of organic wholes “any melodic or color harmony whatsoever” 
(Husserl 1988, 96). I can, for example, gather together in my own way 
the same piano parts that form Mussorgsky’s Pictures at an Exhibition, 
and what I will thereby produce will be unfathomably less valuable 
than Mussorgsky’s original masterpiece. Independently of the parts of 
any whole themselves, the specific ordering of these parts generates—or 
fails to generate—value in different degrees. The value of these order-
ings in examples such as the one contrasting my arrangement of notes 
to Mussorgsky’s arrangement is so great that it actually tilts the scale in 
the opposite direction from the prima-facie skepticism with which we 
began: What, other than this ordering, could possibly be the source of the 
differential value of values containing the same parts? Needless to say, to 
144 
L. Zaibert

deny that there are differential values in these cases is to admit that all 
melodic (or color) harmonies are equally valuable—not really a serious 
proposition.
The skeptic may perhaps insist, suggesting that Husserl’s examples are 
unpersuasive in that musical notes, by themselves, or colors, by them-
selves, are valueless: the color green is as valueless as is the note G. But I 
think that this skeptical effort risks proving the opposite of what it wants: 
if the notes that make up a musical composition (or the colors that make 
up a certain painting, etc.) are indeed taken to be valueless, then it would 
seem that the value of any musical (or color, etc.) composition does after 
all flow entirely form the ordering of notes (or colors, etc.) itself—since ex 
hypothesi there would simply be nothing else from where it could flow. 
So, I find hard to avoid the conclusion that Husserl’s examples do dispel 
any mystery regarding Brentano’s point that “the value of a whole is not a 
function merely of the value of the parts of the whole. ‘Goodness also lies 
in the relations which are exhibited within the whole’”,3 or Moore’s point 
that an organic whole “has an intrinsic value different in amount from 
the sum of the values of its parts” (Moore 1903b, 87).
Given my purposes, Husserl’s examples are helpful mainly in the 
explanatory sense: they help explain what organic wholes are and how 
they can indeed exist. But I wish to turn our attention back to examples 
of organic wholes in contexts that are closer to the axiological evaluation 
of punishment. For a few years I have been pointing out how significant 
I find the fact that a utilitarian (albeit an ideal one), like Moore, could 
endorse retributivism.4 I still find this fact significant (and not sufficiently 
discussed by contemporary punishment theorists), and I want to explore 
here how this is possible and what is its significance. And that explana-
tion is also the answer as to what exactly is so helpful about the frame-
work of organic wholes for the debate concerning the justification of 
punishment.
The beginning of wisdom is to heed the distinction between the axio-
logical and the deontic: Moore’s retributivism is purely axiological. There 
is value in deserved punishment, in the sense that deserved punishment 
can add value by belonging to this or that organic whole. This admission 
is not at odds with his utilitarianism, even though it indeed is anathema 
for classical utilitarianism. Furthermore, by deploying the framework of 
8  Just Organic Wholes 
145

organic wholes, he avoids the evidently inappropriate moral mathematics 
of simple-minded accountancy. An organic whole in which a deserving 
wrongdoer suffers to the extent that she deserves may be more intrinsi-
cally valuable than one in which all remains the same except that this 
deserving wrongdoer does not suffer.
As Moore turned his attention to organic wholes “exclusively com-
posed of two great positive evils—wickedness and pain”, he suggested 
that:
quite apart from consequences or any value which an evil may have as a mere 
means, it may, supposing one evil already exists, be worth while to create 
another, since, by the mere creation of this second, there may be consti-
tuted a whole less bad than if the original evil had been left to exist by itself. 
[…] [W]here an evil already exists, as in this world evils do exist, the exis-
tence of the other part of these wholes will constitute a thing desirable for 
its own sake—that is to say, not merely a means to future goods, but one of 
the ends which must be taken into account in estimating what that best 
possible state of things is, to which every right action must be a means. 
(Moore 1903b, 264. Italics in the original.)
In other words, Moore believes that an organic whole in which wrongdo-
ers enjoy impunity could, other things being equal, be less valuable than 
an organic whole in which these very same wrongdoers suffer (to the 
extent that they deserve)—even if the former organic whole contains less 
suffering than the latter, and even though suffering, considered in isola-
tion, is a very bad thing indeed.
The other seminal (avant la lettre) ideal utilitarian thinker we have 
been discussing, Brentano, was interested in exactly this sort of case—
and reacted in a way very similar to Moore’s. Brentano identified three 
different general types of organic wholes “(1) the bonum variationis; (2) 
the bonum progressionis; and (3) the value of retribution or requital” 
(Chisholm 1986, 70). I will here ignore the first two types, but would 
like to note that Chisholm helpfully reminds us that it was precisely 
regarding the third type of organic whole, involving the case of retrib-
utivism in particular, why Brentano “had revised his original views” 
(Chisholm 1986, 71). Chisholm further calls our attention to Brentano’s 
view whereby
146 
L. Zaibert

if at the Last Judgment a greater amount of bliss were given to a person 
who actually deserved it less, then he would have a greater amount of 
good than he otherwise would have, but the good in the universe con-
sidered as a whole would be less. (Brentano 1969, 149; cf. Chisholm 
1986, 72)
And Chisholm reports that in an unpublished fragment titled “On the 
Good that There is in Order or Arrangement” Brentano defended the 
view that “wickedness accompanied by sorrow is better than wickedness 
accompanied by pleasure”, and that this fact “may justify the sorrow that 
is involved in repentance and the pain that is involved in vindictive pun-
ishment”. Chisholm ascribes to Brentano the following view: “If A is a 
wicked deed and if B is the suffering involved in the sinner’s remorse or 
in his retribution, then the two evils, A and B, may be preferable to A 
without B” (Chisholm 1986, 72).
Neither Moore nor Brentano mentions the term ‘desert’, but it is evi-
dent that their concern with “retribution” and “retributive punishment” 
is a concern with deserved punishment. By linking the notion of desert to 
the discussion of organic wholes it becomes clear that the reason why our 
authors agree that deserved punishment can, other things being equal, 
be better than impunity is that desert gives a certain order—a certain 
meaning—to the whole in which it appears, and this in turn generates 
intrinsic, non-instrumental, value. In Brentano’s Last Judgment example 
the whole he had in mind was, presumably, the world as such. What is at 
stake in Brentano’s example is evidently the question as to what bestows 
meaning to the world.
This order is not meant to be mere temporal sequence, though it could 
be just that. Consider two organic wholes, whose parts are stipulated to 
have the same exact values qua parts. The first organic whole contains a 
person who after raping and burning someone, has a car accident, suf-
fering injuries that amount to a certain amount of pain. In the second 
organic whole, someone witnessed the crimes, and then decided to beat 
up the rapist murderer, causing exactly the same amount of pain as the 
car accident in the previous case. In principle, the value of these two 
organic wholes, even though the chronology of events is assumed to be 
the same, could be different.
8  Just Organic Wholes 
147

Consider a third organic whole: someone is hit by lightning when he 
is 25-years-old, and this event causes the same amount of pain as in the 
two previous examples; later, when he is 30-years-old, unrelatedly, he 
rapes and murders someone (causing the same amount of pain as in the 
previous examples, etc.). The consequentialist will again have difficulty 
explaining why any difference between these three cases—all assumed to 
generate the exact same amount of pain—should be admitted. The order, 
the plot, is in principle (excluding consequentialist considerations, which 
we are in these examples excluding) irrelevant: what matters to the conse-
quentialist is the bottom line—and in all these examples the bottom line 
is assumed to be numerically the same.
None of this should be taken to entail that the intrinsic value that des-
ert generates cannot be defeated by other values. Rather, it is to say that 
that value is not as mysterious as many thinkers have claimed it is.5 The 
value of desert is the result of it being a form of order, an arrangement, 
or an emplotment. The very imposition of this order adds value to the 
organic whole whose parts have been so ordered. Just consider how dif-
ferent the following sequence of numbers—1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 
…—must be for someone who knows of Fibonacci and for someone who 
does not. And even if one imagines two people, neither of whom familiar 
with Fibonacci’s sequence, the difference between the one who recognizes 
a pattern and the one sees this as utterly random is significant: the former 
has recognized much more meaning than the latter.
Granting, arguendo, that the “problem of beauty” captured by Moore’s 
heap of filth thought experiment is less devastating for monistic axiolo-
gies than the “problem of justice” captured by Ross’s two worlds thought 
experiment is not to deny the structural similarities between them. 
We can now also see structural similarities between them and cases of 
deserved punishment. Beauty is the result of imposing a certain order 
(arrangement, structure, etc.) upon a group of entities—and therein lies 
part of its value. Justice, too, is the result of imposing a certain order 
(arrangement, structure, etc.) upon a group of entities. And to give some-
one what she deserves—even when what she deserves is suffering—is to 
impose a certain order (arrangement, structure, etc.). All these orderings, 
arrangements and structuring convey meaning to a given situation and to 
our lives in general.
148 
L. Zaibert

3	
To Each His Own
One need only recall the age-old views whereby justice is a matter of 
harmony in the soul, and of rendering to each his due—views which 
are nothing short of cornerstones of our intellectual tradition going at 
least as far back as Plato, if not cornerstones of our very fabric as human 
beings. To take but one example amongst many, consider how Francis 
Ellingwood Abbot put it, when he described justice as “the one abso-
lute and all-inclusive word in ethics”, and he suggested that justice is 
“grounded in reciprocity of ends and means as organic harmony”, and 
that “its ethical formula is, perhaps, the ancient cuique suum—‘to each 
his own’, ‘give every man his due’” (Abbot 1895, 216). There can be 
no harmony in these contexts without desert: the “due” just mentioned, 
what each person is “due”, does not refer, evidently, to what by this or 
that convention or positive law she is entitled to—it refers to what she 
deserves. The sense in which there is justice in my receiving the money I 
won in a raffle—to which I am no doubt entitled—is too humble to be 
the sense which has exercised every thinker ever to care about this topic. 
The sense of the “cuique suum” maxim has always related to people get-
ting what they deserve. And this applies not only to “retributive justice” 
(understood here not as connected to retributivism as such, but to the 
ways in which we respond to wrongdoing generally) but also to distribu-
tive justice. That is why it is so common to quote Aristotle: “all men 
agree that what is just in distribution must be according to desert in some 
sense” (Olsaretti (2003), 1; see also Cupit 1996).
It is important to underscore that invoking these venerable concep-
tions of justice here is meant to illustrate the thread connecting desert 
to justice, to organicity, and eventually to value. The point is to indi-
cate where the value of giving people what they deserve comes form—
not to endorse any particular deontic policy or any particular view of 
distributive or retributive justice. Throughout history the cuique suum 
maxim has been invoked in order to support all sorts of different political 
agendas—and perversions of the principle are no doubt possible: say, the 
Nazis cynically invoking the maxim (Jedem das Seine) at the gates of the 
Buchenwald concentration camp. None of these aberrations, however, 
affects the purely axiological point being made here.
8  Just Organic Wholes 
149

Consider the typical classical, non-pluralist approach: if, say, a crime 
has already been committed, that crime has brought about some suf-
fering—and suffering is always, undifferentiatedly, bad; to now punish 
the criminal is simply to add more suffering to the world. So, the non-­
pluralist hedonist concludes that, unless there would be some good con-
sequences in inflicting this additional suffering, some likelihood that this 
additional suffering that is concomitant to punishment will actually tend 
to reduce suffering down the road (via prevention, rehabilitation, deter-
rence, etc.), there is nothing valuable in inflicting “deserved” punishment 
in itself. But this is simply to refuse to recognize the value that the very 
arrangement or order that desert imposes on some organic wholes. It is 
to assume that the axiological significance of the connection between 
the different episodes of pain in the world is identical to the axiological 
significance of entirely random collections of said episodes.
In her exaggerated desire to see one single source of value, “one single 
end for all moral deliberation”, to adapt to axiological concerns Rawls’s 
more deliberative-oriented way of putting it, the non-pluralist hedonist 
would claim not to see the value in any ordering qua ordering. She 
would see the moral universe as perfectly, and uninspiringly, commuta-
tive. Consider R, who rapes V, and who thereby causes great suffering to 
V, and who, let us assume, does not himself suffer at all. If R were to be 
made to suffer, the non-pluralistic hedonist would think that this state 
of affairs is worse than the first one, since the only difference she will 
see is that now there is more suffering (unless, of course, if by making 
R suffer we could reasonably—consequentially—expect overall suffer-
ing to diminish, but we continue to exclude these considerations in 
these thought experiments). Who gets to suffer and why, are irrelevant 
considerations for the non-pluralistic hedonist. So, the state of affairs 
in which R rapes V, and then B (a random bystander utterly unrelated 
to R and V) is made to suffer exactly the same amount as R may have 
been made to suffer via punishment would appear equally bad to our 
hedonistic non-pluralist. Moreover, if, after R rapes V, it turns out that 
by making V suffer far and beyond what she already suffered as result 
of having been raped, we could reasonably expect overall suffering to 
diminish, then the non-pluralist hedonist would find value in instru-
mentally making V suffer.
150 
L. Zaibert

Of course, the last scenario is a variation on the famous objection to 
utilitarianism whereby it can recommend “punishing” an innocent per-
son. It is, admittedly, a particularly perverse variation (in that it scapegoats 
the very victim), but one that the classical utilitarian just cannot avoid: 
without access to the idea that there is an axiological significance to des-
ert, she may have trouble even explaining what exactly is perverse about 
this variation. Classical utilitarians have typically defended themselves by 
pointing out that in real life it is extraordinarily unlikely that scapegoat-
ing innocent people (or, in my version, scapegoating the very victims) 
would really reduce suffering in the world. Perhaps this is true. But such 
a defense is evidently an evasion of the theoretical point at hand: even 
if true that, say, in “real life” it would not be optimific to scapegoat, the 
classical utilitarian cannot deny that this is an implication of her theory). 
And my discussion of axiology here is theoretical: the classical utilitarian 
needs to deny that there is value in the distribution of suffering as such, 
and so is (other things being equal) committed to seeing the additional 
suffering of R to be neither less nor more deplorable than the suffering of 
any other random person (including V).
I find these sorts of considerations sufficient to show that the order 
that desert adds to an organic whole matters. But it is still not clear that 
it is specifically the order that desert imposes that is valuable and not 
some other order. Imagine a whole whose parts are three random human 
beings, and imagine that someone arranges these three people according 
to the order in which she will murder them. I do not believe that this 
organic whole is, in the final analysis, made more intrinsically valuable 
by having been given this particular order. Orderings can be themselves 
evaluated, and some are more intrinsically valuable than others.6
But then it could seem as if to introduce organic wholes and the val-
ues of orderings, arrangement, and structures is merely to re-launch the 
traditional debates regarding the justification of punishment, only now 
within a somehow different framework. I think that this would be a mis-
understanding of what the discussion of organic wholes in fact accom-
plishes. First, this discussion adds a concern with intrinsic value that is 
often absent from the traditional discussion amongst punishment theo-
rists: an organic whole with a certain order has more intrinsic value than 
the same whole without any ordering. Second, admitting that a given 
8  Just Organic Wholes 
151

ordering may be better or worse than another ordering(s) is not to deny 
that the mere fact that an ordering is imposed on an organic whole adds 
eo ipso some value. Of course, perhaps the order is in itself so repugnant 
that the overall value of the organic whole actually diminishes—but the 
ordering adds some value. In other words, giving people the suffering 
that they deserve adds eo ipso some value, even if so doing, and given the 
additive independence of the value of the whole and the value of its parts 
or the value of its order, could also make the organic whole less valuable. 
It is important to emphasize, moreover, that the non-pluralistic classical 
utilitarian we have been considering does not have an alternative order-
ing to offer instead of the ordering created by considerations related to 
desert. The whole axiological discussion of orderings and their values has 
to necessarily strike her as pointless. She simply wants as little suffering in 
the world as possible and that is that.
Third, and perhaps most importantly, recognizing the axiological sig-
nificance of order does not only stave off flatfooted commutative axi-
ologies, but it is also to further argue for the recognition of pluralism. 
Mobilizing organic wholes allows us to see how many types of factors 
can affect the overall value of any state of affairs, and how this is as true 
of instances of punishment as of any other states of affairs. Only a super-
ficial reading would see the discussion of the axiology of organic wholes 
as a mere euphemistic move. Turning to organic wholes allows us to see 
how pluralism is both possible and important, how an ideal utilitarian 
can be a retributivist, and how complicated the axiology of punishment 
is. And it does this without introducing the more than a little bewildering 
Hegelian talk of punishment being “the negation of the negation [i.e., the 
negation of crime, which itself is the negation of right]” (see Hegel 1991, 
123 ff).
In fact, discussing these axiological dimensions of organic wholes high-
lights some of the perplexing oddities of the overly deontic approaches 
that dominate the specialized literature on punishment. For example, 
consider a common move in this literature: to suggest that if any of the 
essential components of justified punishment is missing, then the organic 
whole constituted by said punishment loses the entirety of whatever value 
it originally had. So, to inflict suffering on, say, a rapist, may be admitted 
to be of some value if done by someone with the authority to do so, but 
152 
L. Zaibert

(implausibly) suggested to be completely devoid of value (and barbaric, 
etc.) if done by someone without said authority.7 There are excellent, 
typically over-riding reasons to prevent vigilantism, but this is not to say 
that what a vigilante does is completely valueless—particularly if it is very 
similar to what an authority would have done.
The best way of avoiding these deeply counterintuitive implications 
is to recognize the axiological importance of both organic wholes and 
of the orderings of their parts. Furthermore, to turn to the axiological 
flexibility and pluralism of organic wholes is, to echo Bernard Williams’s 
pithy take on G.E. Moore, a way of managing to “reject at once the 
stuffiness of duty and the vulgarity of utilitarianism” (Williams 2006, 
8). Interestingly, the tradition of Austrian Philosophy, exemplified here 
above all by Brentano’s work, may be in a much better position to do 
this not only than its German counterpart, but than other philosophical 
traditions as well.
Notes
	1.	 Even if the term itself was coined by Hastings Rashdall in The Theory 
of Good and Evil: A Treatise on Moral Philosophy, Oxford: Oxford 
University Press (1907). And even if some central aspects of ideal 
­utilitarianism can be seen as developments of Henry Sidgwick’s views 
in The Methods of Ethics, Indianapolis: Hackett 1981).
	2.	 Strictly speaking, this is the penultimate chapter, but the actual last 
chapter, “Themes and Puzzles”, is just a relatively brief summation of 
sundry matters yet to be done.
	3.	 Chisholm 1986, 70, citing an unpublished manuscript Brentano 
wrote “probably in the 1890s”.
	4.	 The last section of my Punishment and Retribution (2006) is devoted 
to this very topic. See pp. 208 ff.
	5.	 It is a well-worn trope of the specialized literature on punishment that 
retributivism is somehow “mysterious”. Any list of authors who believe 
this would be idiosyncratic, but some influential exemplars include: 
Cottingham (1979); Honderich (2005); and Mackie (2000). For a 
defense of the view that organic wholes (in particular those Gestalten 
8  Just Organic Wholes 
153

of Gestalt psychology) can be placed within a fully naturalistic ontol-
ogy see Johansson (2013).
	6.	 This is not to say that orderings are to be seen as additional “parts” of 
organic wholes—for otherwise an infinite regress would obtain.
	7.	 This is one of the typical gambits in distinguishing (retributive) pun-
ishment from revenge: the former is done by an authority and of some 
value, the latter (insofar as not done by an authority) is completely 
valueless.
References
Abbot, Francis Ellingwood (1895). “The Advancement of Ethics”, The Monist, 
5, 192–222.
Brentano, Franz (1969). The Origins of Our Knowledge of Right and Wrong, 
Oskar Kraus and Roderick M. Chisholm, eds. London: Routledge.
Chisholm, Roderick M. (1986). Brentano and Intrinsic Value. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
John Cottingham (1979). “Varieties of Retribution”, The Philosophical Quarterly, 
29, 238–246.
Cupit, Geoffrey (1996). Justice as Fittingness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Feldman, Fred (2004). Pleasure and the Good Life: Concerning the Nature, 
Varieties, and Plausibility of Hedonism. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Hegel, G.W.F. (1991). Elements of the Philosophy of Right, Allen Wood, ed. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Honderich, Ted (2005). Punishment: The Supposed Justifications Revisited. 
London: Pluto Press.
Husserl, Edmund (1988). Gesammelte Werke, Band XXVIII: Vorlesungen über 
Ethik und Wertlehre 1908: 1914. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Johansson, Ingvar (2013). “Constitution as a Relation within Mathematics”, 
The Monist, 96, 87–100.
Mackie, J.L. (2000). “Retributivism: A Test Case for Ethical Objectivity”, in 
Philosophy of Law (6th edition), Joel Feinberg and Jules Coleman, eds. 
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Moore, G.E. (1903a). “Review”, International Journal of Ethics, 14, 115–123.
Moore, G.E. (1903b). Principia Ethica. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Olsaretti, Serena (2003). “Introduction: Debating Desert and Justice”, in Desert 
and Justice, S. Olsaretti, ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1–24.
154 
L. Zaibert

Rashdall, Hastings (1907). The Theory of Good and Evil: A Treatise on Moral 
Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rawls, John (1999). A Theory of Justice (revised edition). Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Ross, W. D. (1930). The Right and the Good. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sidgwick, Henry. (1981). The Methods of Ethics. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Smith, Barry (1994). Austrian Philosophy: The Legacy of Franz Brentano. Chicago: 
Open Court.
Welsh Jordan, Robert (1992). “Review of Edmund Husserl’s Vorlesungen über 
Ethik und Wertlehre 1908–1914 Edited by Ullrich Melle (Husserliana, Vol. 
XXVIII). Dordrecht/Boston/London: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1988”, 
Husserl Studies, 8, 221–232.
Williams, Bernard (2006). Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy. London: 
Routledge.
Zaibert, Leo (2006). Punishment and Retribution. London, Routledge.
8  Just Organic Wholes 
155

157
© The Author(s) 2016
L. Zaibert (ed.), The Theory and Practice of Ontology, 
DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-55278-5_9
1	
Introduction
For sure, an unpleasant odor of feet may be categorized as an unpleas-
ant odor. Though foot fetishists (De Block and Adriaens 2013), podia-
trists and manufacturers of washing machines might disagree (Question 
Everything 2015), most people would contend such odor to be classified 
as an offensive odor. No clinician would have qualms in classifying an 
unpleasant odor of feet as an odor of feet nor as a foot finding. Perhaps 
some, in particular the ontology-savvy ones who are therefore able to 
detect ambiguities in natural language phrases, might doubt a foot odor 
‘Pain’ in SNOMED CT: Is There 
an Anesthetic?
Werner Ceusters and Jonathan P. Bona
9
W. Ceusters (*) 
University at Buffalo, State University of New York, Buffalo, NY, USA
e-mail: wceusters@gmail.com
J.P. Bona 
State University of New York Buffalo, NY, USA

to be a limb finding or a body odor. But who would argue it to be a finding 
of sense of smell, i.e. a neurological finding, or a duplicate, and therefore, 
inactive concept? This question smells of The Systematized Nomenclature 
of Medicine—Clinical Terms (SNOMED CT) (Donnelly 2006) all over, 
does it not? Indeed, the former is what its authors argued to be the case 
until 2003 when they discovered that there are actually two different 
sorts of smelly feet: “duplicate concept” ones and “offensive body odor” 
ones. What this discovery means for patients about whom SNOMED 
CT-based smelly feet assertions were made in their electronic healthcare 
records (EHR) is rather unclear. Some might, upon chart inspection, be 
surprised to find their smelly feet to have changed from a neurological 
finding to an offensive body odor. Others might find their smelly feet to 
have become inactive concepts and perhaps therefore conclude they are 
documented as being successfully treated. But in both cases their feet 
themselves are as stinky as before.
The problem we are dealing with here is the underestimated complex-
ity of representing the evolution of terminologies and ontologies over 
time, in this case, of SNOMED CT. SNOMED CT is developed by the 
International Health Terminology Standards Development Organization 
(IHTSDO) and is the largest healthcare terminology currently available. 
It is supported by a concept-based ontology which can formally be repre-
sented by means of a description logic. It is worthwhile pointing out that 
SNOMED CT’s authors have thus far not satisfactorily acted upon the 
confusions around what the word “concept” might denote (Smith 2004). 
Although “concept” in the SNOMED CT documentation is defined as 
“a clinical idea to which a unique concept identifier has been assigned”, 
the term is also homonym for the concept identifier as well as for “the 
real-world referent(s) of the concept identifier, that is, the class of entities 
in reality that the concept identifier represents” (IHTSDO 2015, 725). 
To avoid any confusion, we will perceive for the purposes of this paper 
a version of SNOMED CT as an information content entity (ICE) of 
which concretizations exist as information artifacts in the form of, for 
example, data structures that can be rendered as tables on a computer 
screen by using appropriate software. We will use the term “SNOMED 
CT concept”—or “concept” for short—exclusively to denote any smaller 
information artifact which is part of such concretization and in which 
158 
W. Ceusters and J.P. Bona

inheres an information quality which is about or intended to be about 
some portion of reality (Smith and Ceusters 2015).
Roughly 400,000 SNOMED CT concepts are classified under several 
hierarchies, of which the top classes roughly correspond either to the 
types of entities clinicians encounter instances of during their work (body 
parts, organisms, diseases, substances, procedures, etc.) or to types instan-
tiated by descriptive components of SNOMED CT as an ICE itself, for 
example those denoted by the terms “inactive concept”, “navigational 
concept”, and “metadata”.
SNOMED CT is regularly updated (Ceusters 2011), not only to 
correct mistakes (Geller et al. 2012; Ochs et al. 2015), but also to rep-
resent better and in more detail how the entities in reality denoted by 
SNOMED CT concepts relate to each other. Updates are also made to 
account for changes in biomedical reality itself as well as in our scientific 
knowledge about biomedical reality (Ceusters 2010).
The work described here is part of a larger endeavor intended to find 
out whether it would be possible to use the growing number of historic 
relationships and other changes documented in SNOMED CT release 
files as an information source to detect mistakes that have not been dis-
covered thus far. Since neither author of this paper suffers from smelly 
feet, but rather of an occasional headache while dealing with biomedical 
and other ontologies, we were interested to see how SNOMED CT con-
cepts related to pain evolved throughout different versions and whether 
certain patterns of errors could be detected.
2	
The Distribution of SNOMED CT Versions
International versions of SNOMED CT are biannually distributed by 
the IHTSDO in January and July as a set of release files designed to be 
loaded into healthcare software applications such as electronic healthcare 
record systems. Certain countries endorsing the use of SNOMED CT 
transform the international version into local adaptations. In the USA, 
it is the National Library of Medicine (NLM) that develops US versions 
as an extension of the international versions usually within 3 months of 
the international releases. The NLM makes both the international and 
9  ‘Pain’ in SNOMED CT: Is There an Anesthetic? 
159

US versions available to authorized users as part of the Unified Medical 
Language System (UMLS) (Fung et al. 2005).
Whereas prior to July 2011 all releases were in a format now known as 
“Release Format 1 (RF1)” current releases are also available in the newer 
RF2-format. Core files included in both formats are (1) the concepts table, 
(2) the descriptions table containing terms associated with concepts, and 
(3) the relationships table which contains information on how the con-
cepts relate to each other. Entries, i.e. rows, in each of these tables are 
called “components”.
RF1 releases include also a component history table in which any 
changes such as additions and inactivations introduced in the concepts 
and descriptions tables—but not the relationships table!—over subse-
quent versions are logged. Since July 2008 RF1 releases come also with 
a references table which contains references from inactive components to 
other equivalent or related components that were current in the release 
version in which that component was inactivated.
In the RF2 format these changes are tracked in a uniform manner in 
the core files themselves, including the relationships table, but not for 
changes that occurred prior to 2002. A more extensive change history 
can only be computed on the basis of the original RF1 releases prior to 
July 2011 in addition to the RF1 (or with no additional advantage for the 
work described here, RF2) releases since July 2011.
RF1 versions consist of several tables, five of which are important for 
the work described here.
The concepts table of any version in RF1 includes for each concept (1) 
a SNOMED CT internally unique concept identifier, (2) whether it is 
in active use in the current version and, if not, the reason for withdrawal, 
and (3) whether the concept is primitive or fully defined in terms of the 
description logic used. Examples of two distinct concepts are “60932006: 
Buttock pain (finding)” and “279043006: Pain in buttock (finding)”.
The descriptions table contains for each concept a varying number of 
description records each of which consists of the following data elements:
	1.	 a unique identifier for the description,
	2.	 a status marker indicating whether it is in active use and, if not, the 
reason for withdrawal from current use,
160 
W. Ceusters and J.P. Bona

	3.	 the unique identifier of the associated concept,
	4.	 a term used to describe the associated concept and,
	5.	 an indication of whether this specific term for the concept to which 
this description applies is:
•	 the Fully Specified Name (FSN), e.g. “Backache (finding)”,
•	 the preferred term, e.g. “Backache”, or
•	 a synonym, e.g. “Back pain” and “Pain in back”.
Each FSN term ends with a “semantic tag” in parentheses “which indi-
cates the semantic category to which the concept belongs” (e.g. clinical 
finding, disorder, etc.) and which “helps to disambiguate the different 
concepts which may be referred to by the same commonly used word or 
phrase’ (IHTSDO 2015, 41). Examples of semantic tags are provided in 
Table 9.1. Although most semantic tags correspond each to some unique 
SNOMED CT concept, their taxonomic structure does not follow the 
taxonomic structure of the concepts.
The relationships table contains relations that obtain between 
SNOMED CT concepts. These relationships are expressed by means of 
existentially restricted triples of the form “source concept–relationship–
target concept”—note that in the citation that follows “concept” is to 
be understood in the SNOMED sense—whereby each triple “implies 
that there is some instance of that relationship from each instance of the 
source concept to any instance of the target concept” (IHTSDO 2015, 
678). For example, a triple of the form “x partOf y” is to be understood 
as: forall x: instance-of (x, X) ➞ exists y: instance-of (y, Y) and partOf(x,y).
Two types of such relationships are included in the release files. The first 
ones are called “stated relationships” and are relationships that are directly 
edited in the formal terminology management system by SNOMED 
CT’s authors. Examples, leaving out the concept unique identifiers, are:
No genitourinary pain (situation): (E1)
Is a (attribute) = Clinical finding absent (situation),
Temporal context (attribute) = Current or specified time (qualifier value),
Associated finding (attribute) = Genitourinary pain (finding),
Finding context (attribute) = Known absent (qualifier value),
Subject relationship context (attribute) = Subject of record (person)
9  ‘Pain’ in SNOMED CT: Is There an Anesthetic? 
161

Table 9.1  Examples of SNOMED CT concepts related to pain
Semantic taga
Leaf exampleb
Non-leaf example
Disorder
Phantom pain following 
amputation of penis
Disorder characterized by 
pain
Finding
Complaining of a 
headache
Pain
Situation
Pain behavior present
No genitourinary pain
Procedure
Pain relief
Pain management
Observable entity
Brief pain coping 
inventory score
Characteristic of pain at 
anatomical site
Product
Aromatic analgesic
Drugs used in neuropathic 
pain
Regime/therapy
Back pain prevention 
education
— c
Navigational 
concept
Analgesics and non-­
steroidal anti-­
inflammatory drug 
allergy
Additional pain and 
sensation observations
Substance
—
Analgesic
Physical object
Pain management 
medication delivery 
system pump
Anesthesia equipment
Qualifier value
Painless
Pain management service
Assessment scale
Pain coping strategies 
questionnaire
—
Environment
Pain clinic
—
Occupation
Pain management 
specialist
—
Attribute
Character of pain
—
Context-dependent 
category
On examination—in pain
—
Event
[X] Pain due to internal 
orthopedic prosthesis
Analgesic and/or antipyretic 
and anti-rheumatic drug 
poisoning
Staging scale
Chest pain rating
—
Notes
aThe semantic tags are ranked in descending order of occurrence of pain-­related 
SNOMED CT concepts.
bThe column “Leaf examples”, in contradistinction to “non-Leaf examples”, 
exhibits SNOMED CT concepts that do not subsume other concepts.
cEmpty slots indicate that for this category no occurrences were found in any of 
the versions studied
162 
W. Ceusters and J.P. Bona

and,
Adnexal tenderness absent (situation): (E2)
Is a (attribute) = Clinical finding absent (situation)
Associated finding (attribute) = Adnexal tenderness (finding),
Temporal context (attribute) = Current or specified time (qualifier value),
Finding context (attribute) = Known absent (qualifier value),
Subject relationship context (attribute) = Subject of record (person)
The second type of relationships—”inferred relationships”—are obtained 
through inference by applying the EL++ description logic classifier which 
is part of SNOMED CT’s ontology authoring system on the stated rela-
tionships (Dentler et al. 2011). An example is (E3) which is obtained by 
inference on the basis of (E1) and (E2):
Adnexal tenderness absent (situation): (E3)
Is a (attribute) = No abdominal pain (situation)
Is a (attribute) = No genitourinary pain (situation)
Is a (attribute) = Tenderness absent (situation)
Associated finding (attribute) = Adnexal tenderness (finding),
Temporal context (attribute) = Current or specified time (qualifier value),
Finding context (attribute) = Known absent (qualifier value),
Subject relationship context (attribute) = Subject of record (person)
Additional so called “historic relationships” are found in the references 
table where each such reference indicates the nature of the relationship 
between the inactive and persistent component.
Examples (E4)–(E14) in Table 9.2 indicate that in versions prior to and 
including the version in which these historic relationships appeared, there 
were five distinct SNOMED CT concepts that represented one or more 
types of entities in reality that clinicians colloquially would refer to by 
means of the words “back pain” or “backache”. Three of these concepts—
the ones with the identifiers 373644009, 399079008, and 419258005—
were named “Back pain (finding)”; a fourth one—16986008—carried 
the FSN “Back pain (disorder)”—and the fifth one—161891005—was 
9  ‘Pain’ in SNOMED CT: Is There an Anesthetic? 
163

Table 9.2  Examples of historic relationships
373644009: Back pain (finding):
(E4)
  SAME AS (attribute) = 399079008: Back pain (finding)
161891005: Backache (finding):
(E5)
  SAME AS (attribute) = 399079008: Back pain (finding)
161891005: Backache (finding):
(E6)
  SAME AS (attribute) = 373644009: Back pain (finding)
419258005: Back pain (finding):
(E7)
  SAME AS (attribute) = 161891005: Backache (finding)
399079008: Back pain (finding):
(E8)
  MAY BE A (attribute) = 419258005: Back pain (finding)
399079008: Back pain (finding):
(E9)
  MAY BE A (attribute) = 161891005: Backache (finding)
16986008: Back pain (disorder):
(E10)
  MAY BE A (attribute) =
    398997008: Vertebrogenic pain syndrome (disorder)
16986008: Back pain (disorder):
(E11)
  MAY BE A (attribute) =
    399194009: Disorder characterized by back pain (disorder)
16986008: Back pain (disorder):
(E12)
  MAY BE A (attribute) = 419258005: Back pain (finding)
16986008: Back pain (disorder):
(E13)
  MAY BE A (attribute) = 399079008: Back pain (finding)
16986008: Back pain (disorder):
(E14)
  MAY BE A (attribute) = 161891005: Backache (finding)
267984001: Backache, unspecified (finding):
(E15)
  WAS A (attribute) = 161891005: Backache (finding)
15941001: Brachialgia (disorder):
(E16)
	 REPLACED BY (attribute) = 102556003: Pain in upper limb (finding)
164 
W. Ceusters and J.P. Bona

named “Backache (finding)”. A series of relational assertions were then 
made for various purposes:
	1.	 to eliminate redundancies—”x SAME AS y” asserts that the SNOMED 
CT concepts x and y denote the same entity in reality, whereby start-
ing with the version in which this relationship appears y would not 
anymore be used as an active SNOMED CT concept;
	2.	 to eliminate erroneous or ill-defined concepts while keeping track of 
how they were classified in previous versions (x WAS A y) and what 
they were replaced by (x REPLACED BY y), if by anything at all, and,
	3.	 to indicate which concepts were found to be ambiguous and, when-
ever they would have been used to annotate patient data, which con-
cepts should be considered as unambiguous alternatives ( x MAYBE A y).
The component history table contains for each changed description or 
concept (1) the unique identifier for the changed component, (2) the 
version of SNOMED CT in which this change was made, each ver-
sion being represented using the format YYYMMDD, e.g. “20040731”, 
(3) an indication of the nature of the change such as “added” or “status 
change”, and (4) the status of the component after the change examples 
being “current”, “retired”, “duplicate”, etc.
The RF1 tables contain more information than described above, 
though not relevant for the work reported on here.
3	
Methodology
For our analysis, we used the concepts, descriptions, component history 
and references tables in the RF1 release of the US adaptation released 
March 31, 2015, which includes the international version released by the 
IHTSDO January 31, 2015. These files allowed us to compute changes 
that occurred at the level of concepts and descriptions. To track changes 
in the relationships, we used the RF1 relationship files of all international 
versions from January 2002 to January 2015, as well as all US adapta-
tions since 2011.
9  ‘Pain’ in SNOMED CT: Is There an Anesthetic? 
165

3.1	
Generation of Intermediate Tables
Several intermediate tables had to be constructed for the intended anal-
yses. As a first step, a Historic Relationships Table (HISREL) was con-
structed which provides a complete history for each relationship that has 
appeared in any SNOMED CT release, one per row. It was created by 
merging the relationships tables of each SNOMED CT version into a 
single table wherein the existing columns were preserved and an addi-
tional column for each release date added. Each row represents a single 
relationship, and is marked in each date column to indicate whether that 
relationship was part of the release on that date.
HISREL was further reduced into the Historic Subsumption Table 
(HST) by retaining only those rows containing one of the following 
relationships: Is a (SNOMED CT’s formal subsumption relation), ISA 
(mapping), MAY BE A, REPLACED BY, SAME AS, and WAS A. We 
will use the term “historically subsumed” as in “x is historically subsumed 
by y” whenever we refer to any of these relations holding between x and y.
The Pain Terms Table (PTT) is a manually curated list of SNOMED 
CT concepts that are about or mention pain in one or other form. An 
initial version was generated from a search for descriptions in SNOMED 
CT’s description table containing any of the following substrings: 
“dynia”, “algesia”, “algaesia”, “dolor”, “algia”, “algic”, “esthesia”, “esthae-
sia”, “hyperpathia”, “hyperpathic”, “hypopathia”, “hypopathic”, “pain”, 
“nocicept”, “noxious”, “hurt”, “ache”, “aching”, “sore”, “soring”, “ten-
der”, and “throb”. This list of terms was then manually filtered through 
several passes to exclude false matches such as “Paint (substance)”. We 
also filtered it to exclude entries that were causing the subsumer table to 
be polluted because of (apparent) cycles caused by collapsing the history 
(e.g. rheumatism).
The PTT Subsumer Table (PTTST) is a list of all the concepts which 
historically subsume at least one of the concepts in the PTT. That is, 
it contains every concept “taxonomically above” any concept in the 
PTT.  This table was further reduced to a Leaf Nodes Table (LEAFS) 
containing all and only leaf nodes from PTTST, i.e. those concepts in 
PTTST that do not relate to any other concepts via one of the selected 
relations for inclusion in HST.
166 
W. Ceusters and J.P. Bona

A DATES table was constructed to capture all release version dates 
used in SNOMED CT, 37 in total, including 11 release dates that pre-
ceded SNOMED CT’s first official release (January 31, 2002) and of 
which traces were found in SNOMED CT’s component history table. 
Indeed, SNOMED CT was created in 2001 by merging what was then 
known as “SNOMED RT” with the UK Clinical Terms project (Wang 
et al. 2001). To keep track of which terms came from where, including 
which were already active or retired before the merger and which were 
duplicates in the first release because of the merger, two dates—20020129 
and 20020130, corresponding respectively to the 10th and 11th date in 
the DATES table—were artificially created without actually correspond-
ing to a physical release.
The Pain Graph Nodes Table (PGN) contains a taxonomy constructed 
from the bottom up, starting with the concepts in LEAFS. PGN includes 
every concept in LEAFS, as well as every concept that historically sub-
sumed any of those concepts. That is, it contains every concept that lies 
along a path from a concept in LEAFS to the SNOMED root concept via 
any of the historic subsumption relations in HST, collapsing the relations 
from all release versions into a single graph. It also accounts for concepts 
that were replaced or considered as alternatives for inactivated versions 
by making use of “Replaced By” and “Alternative” entries as collected 
from SNOMED CT’s references tables. PGN was then used as a filter on 
the concept table of SNOMED CT’s last version used in this endeavor 
thereby copying into a new table (PCONC) only those records about 
concepts which were are also in PGN.
Similarly, PGN was used to filter the Pain Historic Subsumption 
Table (PHST) out of HST and the Pain Descriptions Table (PDT) out 
of the most recent SNOMED CT Descriptions table. For PHST this 
was achieved by retaining all and only records from HST expressing a 
relationship in which one or both of the relata are in the PGN table. 
To capture “Replaced by” and “Alternative” relations between concepts, 
PHST also includes additional entries for each concept in PGN that is 
the subject of a historic reference entry in the references tables.
The Historic Pain Concept Table (HPCONC) is built from the concept 
tables of each processed release. For each concept in PCONC, HPCONC 
contains one row for each release in which that concept was included in 
9  ‘Pain’ in SNOMED CT: Is There an Anesthetic? 
167

the concept table. For instance, a pain concept in PCONC that appears 
only in the US National concept tables for releases 20140301, 20140901, 
and 20150301, would have three rows in the HPCONC table, one per 
release. HPCONC has columns for the concept ID, primitiveness, and 
release date in which the concept appears. Although one could argue that 
there is no need to combine the concept tables of each version as the last 
version should contain the total history, we preferred to take the safe way 
in light of the IHTSDO’s motivations to develop RF2 because of several 
inconsistencies in RF1 releases (IHTSDO 2015, 663–664).
The Pain Component Table (PCT) contains all records from SNOMED 
CT’s most recent Component History table for which the component 
identifier corresponds either to a concept identifier in PGN or PDT, or 
to a relationship identifier in PHST.
The Pain History Table (PHIS), finally, brings together information 
contained in the tables described above into a single structure with historic 
and taxonomic information about pain concepts and related concepts.
Table 9.3 contains the historic information about three concepts with 
the FSN “Pain (finding)”. Two of them (367206007 and 366981002) are 
annotated as being retired in the (fictitious) 11th version as a result of the 
merger. The other one (22253000) existed in SNOMED RT prior to the 
merger as indicated by the “1” in the CUR field which corresponds with 
the earliest date of which a trace was found: January 1, 1994. The table 
shows also the various SNOMED CT concepts that subsume—see the 
“Is a (attribute)” in the INFOTYPE column—this concept, including 
one with the FSN “Pain finding (finding)” during the period covered by 
the first four versions.
3.2	
Data Analysis
Several types of analysis have been—and are still being—carried out. 
The ones we report on here involve the changes in and evolution of the 
semantic tags in the FSNs. To that end we retrieved from PHIS all records 
indicating a change in the FSN, whether or not including a change in the 
semantic tag. For example, the following four records from PHIS show 
that in the 17th version the semantic tag for “Pain in lumbar spine” was 
168 
W. Ceusters and J.P. Bona

Table 9.3  Historic information about three SNOMED CT concepts for “pain” accumulated in the PHIS table
Concept ID La Infotype
Component Label
CINb
CURc
DUPd
RETe
Relation present in versionf
22253000
0
Concept 
status
22253000
1
22253000
0
Is primitive
22253000
1
22253000
0
Synonym
2162242017 Pain observations
12
22253000
0
Preferred 
term
37361011
Pain
12
22253000
0
Synonym
37362016
Pain, NOS
12
22253000
0
Synonym
37363014
Dolor
12
22253000
0
Synonym
481278012
Painful
12
22253000
0
Synonym
481279016
Part hurts
12
22253000
0
FSN
751640015
Pain (finding)
12
22253000
0
Is a (attribute)19019007
Symptom 
(finding)
1111111100000000000000000
000000000000
22253000
0
Is a (attribute)279075009
Pain finding 
(finding)
1111000000000000000000000
000000000000
22253000
0
Is a (attribute)421833007
Finding of pain 
sense (finding)
0000000001110000000000000
000000000000
22253000
0
Is a (attribute)106147001
Sensory nervous 
system finding 
(finding)
1111000000000000000000000
000000000000
22253000
0
Is a (attribute)276435006
Pain / sensation 
finding (finding)
0000111110001111111111111
111111111111
367206007 1
Concept 
status
367206007
10
11
367206007 1
Is primitive
367206007
10
367206007 1
FSN
2744729017 Pain (finding)
25
(continued)
9  ‘Pain’ in SNOMED CT: Is There an Anesthetic? 
169

Table 9.3  (continued)
Concept ID La Infotype
Component Label
CINb
CURc
DUPd
RETe
Relation present in versionf
367206007 1
Synonym
490781010
Pain
25
367206007 1
Preferred 
term
773821016
Pain
25
367206007 1
SAME AS 
(attribute)
22253000
Pain (finding)
0111111111111111111111111
111111111111
367206007 1
Is a (attribute)363662004
Duplicate concept 
(inactive 
concept)
1111111111111111111111111
111111111111
366981002 1
Concept 
status
366981002
10
11
366981002 1
Is primitive
366981002
10
366981002 1
FSN
2734046010 Pain (finding)
25
366981002 1
Synonym
490539018
Pain
25
366981002 1
Preferred 
term
773572019
Pain
25
366981002 1
Is a (attribute)363662004
Duplicate concept 
(inactive 
concept)
1111111111111111111111111
111111111111
366981002 1
SAME AS 
(attribute)
22253000
Pain (finding)
0111111111111111111111111
111111111111
Notes
aL: whether the concept is present (1) or not (0) in the LEAFS table
bCIN: Concept Inactivated
cCUR: CURrent
dDUP: DUPlicated
eRET=RETired. Numericals in CIN, CUR, DUP and RET stand for the version in which the component obtained the status.
fRelation present in version: indicates whether the relationship was present (1) or not (0) in the SNOMED CT versions, starting 
with date 20020131 (12th data in the DATES table), each version represented by one digit, organized chronologically.
170 
W. Ceusters and J.P. Bona

changed from “disorder” to “finding”, as indicated by “17” in both the 
RET(ired) column and CUR(rent) column.
Concept ID
Label
CUR
RET
267982002
Pain in lumbar spine (disorder)
17
267982002
Pain in lumbar spine (finding)
17
43116000
Eczema (disorder)
13
43116000
Eczema [Ambiguous] (disorder)
13
Similarly, for the SNOMED CT concept denoting eczema, an FSN 
name change was introduced in the 13th version by dropping the modi-
fier “[Ambiguous]” without changing, however, the semantic tag.
We then annotated changes for these concepts as “disorder ➞ finding” 
and “disorder ➞ disorder” respectively. An exploratory statistical analysis 
was conducted to assess the extent to which changes of this sort were 
distributed significantly differently over concepts which directly men-
tion “pain” or a lexical variant thereof as collected in the PTT table (all 
of which are also included in the PHIS table), versus those concepts in 
the PHIS table which are not in PTT. As a result of the methodology 
described in the section “Generation of Intermediate Tables” above, these 
concepts are either historical subsumers of the PTT concepts themselves, 
or descendants of PTT concepts with their historical subsumers. As an 
example, Figure ure 9.1 shows the historical subsumption taxonomy of 
the concept “405154001: Level of suffering (observable entity)”. This 
concept is included in PHIS because it is historically subsumed by the 
concept “405161002: Pain level (observable entity)”, i.e. from January 
2004 until July 2005. As a consequence, also all other concepts displayed 
in Figure ure 9.1 are contained in PHIS.
3.3	
Results
The historical subgraph of SNOMED CT extracted for our research 
includes 7,673 concepts (1.83 %) out of a total of 420,221 concepts that 
ever have been introduced up to the US national version of March 2015. 
They have been extracted on the basis of 2,164 concepts (28 % of 7,673) 
which directly mention “pain” in one or other form. They are historically 
9  ‘Pain’ in SNOMED CT: Is There an Anesthetic? 
171

related by means of 26,511 relationships, 4,028 of which (15.2 %) being 
based on “was a”, “maybe a”, etc.
These 7,673 concepts were annotated by a total of 8,829 FSNs which 
include a semantic tag. Semantic tags were not always used in SNOMED 
CT’s predecessors, so there are FSNs of inactivated concepts that do not 
have one, where, obviously, some concepts have more than one FSN.
Table 9.4 provides an overview of the various semantic tags that were 
initially assigned to the concepts in our extracted graph. It makes clear 
that the majority of the tags were not changed: only 809 FSNs, in com-
parison to 4,974 that remained active throughout SNOMED CT’s his-
tory without any change, or that were inactivated without involving any 
change. Within the group of FSNs whose semantic tag was changed, 
nearly half (49.5 %) involved those annotated as “disorder” while another 
31.8 % is accounted for by what originally was qualified as “finding”. 
Three categories disappeared completely: “context-dependent category”, 
“environment/location” and “function”. An important number of 
changes—inactivations and semantic tag changes—can be noted for the 
large groups of “situation” (90.7 % of the 248 “situation” FSNs), “pro-
cedures” (31.6 % of 291 FSNs) as well as for “disorder” (31.4 %) and 
“finding” (30.4 %).
Table 9.5 gives an insight in what specific semantic tags were changed 
into, thereby excluding from the counts in Table 9.4 those changes with 
less than five occurrences in order to keep the table readable. Target tags 
excluded include “environment”, “environment/location”, “event”, “link-
age concept”, “physical object”, “qualifier value”, and “substance”. As a 
result of this elimination, some original tags were to be removed, result-
ing in a more compact table. What Table 9.5 tells us is that changes 
occurred in certain clusters. Notable are the reciprocal switches between 
“procedure” and “regime/therapy”, and “disorder” and “finding”. FSNs 
with semantic tag “context-dependent entity” were later in the first place 
classified under “finding” (67.8 %) and for the remainder mainly under 
“situation”.
Table 9.6, finally, demonstrates that for almost all semantic tag 
changes, the FSNs directly mentioning “pain” in one or other lexical 
form as collected in the PTT table changed in different ways than in the 
FSNs of concepts that are not directly related to pain. Significantly more 
172 
W. Ceusters and J.P. Bona

Figure 9.1  Historical subsumption hierarchy of the SNOMED CT concept “405154001: level of suffering (observable 
entity)”. Relationships are annotated with the period during which they were active
9  ‘Pain’ in SNOMED CT: Is There an Anesthetic? 
173

Table 9.4  Changes in semantic tags over different SNOMED CT versions
Unchanged 
active
Inactivated
Type 
change
Total
% of 
total
% changed
% type 
changes
A
B
C
D = A+B+C
E = D/
SUM(D)
F = (B+C)/D
G =C/(B+C)
Assessment scale
22
3
7
32
0.4
31.3
70.0
Attribute
11
0
2
13
0.2
15.4
100.0
Context-dependent 
category
0
163
273
436
5.5
100.0
62.6
Disorder
2,697
940
292
3,929
49.5
31.4
23.7
Environment
14
0
1
15
0.2
6.7
100.0
Environment/location
0
0
1
1
0.0
100.0
100.0
Event
2
2
1
5
0.1
60.0
33.3
Finding
1,754
678
89
2,521
31.8
30.4
11.6
Function
0
16
8
24
0.3
100.0
33.3
Observable entity
154
29
7
190
2.4
18.9
19.4
Physical object
31
1
3
35
0.4
11.4
75.0
Procedure
199
45
47
291
3.7
31.6
51.1
Product
21
11
2
34
0.4
38.2
15.4
Qualifier value
17
19
15
51
0.6
66.7
44.1
Regime/therapy
2
13
20
35
0.4
94.3
60.6
Situation
23
215
10
248
3.1
90.7
4.4
Social concept
1
0
1
2
0.0
50.0
100.0
Substance
26
16
30
72
0.9
63.9
65.2
Totals
4,974
2,151
809
7,934
100.0
37.3
27.3
174 
W. Ceusters and J.P. Bona

Table 9.5  Evolution of semantic tags over different SNOMED CT versions
Semantic tag
TO:
Disorder
Finding
Navigational 
concept
Observable 
entity
Procedure
Product
Regime/
therapy
Situation
FROM:
Assessment scale
10.0
Attribute
5.0
Context-­
dependent 
category
3.7
67.8
0.4
0.7
0.4
27.1
Disorder
75.7
15.8
8.2
0.3
Finding
32.6
50.6
6.7
1.1
9.0
Function
10.0
Observable entity
14.3
71.4
Procedure
2.1
19.1
76.6
Product
10.0
Qualifier value
6.7
53.3
Regime/therapy
65.0
35.0
Situation
10.0
Substance
3.3
86.7
TOTAL FRACTION
32.1
34.1
5.3
3.0
2.8
3.5
5.3
11.5
Note
TOTAL FRACTION indicates the percentage of FSNs of which the semantic tag changed to the semantic tag in the 
corresponding ‘TO’ column, irrespective of what the original semantic tag was. Changes FROM semantic tag x TO 
semantic tag y are quantified as the percentage of x→y changes over the totality of all x→ changes. For example: of all 
the changes that occurred for SNOMED CT concepts that had the original semantic tag of “context-dependent 
category”, 67.8 % were changed to “finding”. Changes from x→x indicate FSN name changes without change in the 
semantic tag.
9  ‘Pain’ in SNOMED CT: Is There an Anesthetic? 
175

Table 9.6  Semantic tag changes in SNOMED CT concepts in whose FSN a pain term (or lexical variant thereof) is directly 
used, compared to semantic tag changes in the SNOMED CT concepts contained in the PHIS table not directly related to 
pain
Semantic tag change
Observed in PHISa
Expected in PHIS
Chi square
Chi test
FROM
TO
+PTT
−PTT
Total
+PTT
−PTT
+PTT
−PTT
“p”
Context-­dependent category
Disorder
3
7
10
2.26
7.74
0.24
0.07
0.5738
Finding
64
121
185
41.74
143.26
11.86
3.46
0.0001
Situation
45
29
74
16.70
57.30
47.97
13.98
0.0000
Disorder
Disorder
4
217
221
49.87
171.13
42.19
12.29
0.0000
Finding
29
17
46
10.38
35.62
33.40
9.73
0.0000
Navigational 
concept
0
24
24
5.42
18.58
5.42
1.58
0.0082
Finding
Disorder
1
28
29
6.54
22.46
4.70
1.37
0.0138
Finding
18
27
45
10.15
34.85
6.06
1.77
0.0051
Procedure
Regime/
therapy
3
33
36
8.12
27.88
3.23
0.94
0.0411
Regime/therapy
Procedure
1
12
13
2.93
10.07
1.27
0.37
0.1996
Situation
Situation
3
7
10
2.26
7.74
0.24
0.07
0.5738
Substance
Product
0
26
26
5.87
20.13
5.87
1.71
0.0059
Other changesb
12
80
92
20.76
71.24
3.70
1.08
0.0289
Notes
a“Observed in PHIS”: actual counts of changes observed in relation to concepts in the PHIS table, thereby differentiating 
between concepts directly mentioning “pain” in one or other lexical form as collected in the PTT table (+PTT), versus 
those in PHIS not in the PTT table (−PTT).
b“Other changes” include all changes for which the total count in PHIS was <10.
Bold: statistically significant; italics: significant “with caution” because <5 occurrences in observed cells.
176 
W. Ceusters and J.P. Bona

“pain terms” than statistically expected became classified as “findings” 
where they used to be under “context-dependent category” or “disorder”. 
On the other hand, significantly more “pain terms” remained classified 
as “finding” in comparison to “non-pain terms” that were classified as 
“findings” but were then reclassified as “disorder”. Remarkable also is that 
nearly three times more than expected (45 observed versus 16.7 expected) 
“pain terms” that were tagged as “context-dependent category” became 
later tagged as “situation”. The differences are undoubtedly statistically 
significant for those changes printed bold in Table 9.6, while some stat-
isticians prefer to remain cautious when individual counts are lower than 
5, despite a Chi test result < 0.05. We have indicated these cases in italics.
4	
Discussion
Many efforts have been made to measure the amount and type of changes 
occurring between SNOMED versions. Spackman (2005) categorized 
changes and measured the rate of changes in SNOMED over a three-­
year span (2002–2005), finding that the most change activity during that 
span was occurring among relationships, and in particular subsumption 
relationships, and concluding that implementers must “carefully exam-
ine mechanisms for handling this degree of change”. Lee et al. (2011) 
examined changes in SNOMED over three years as recorded in the 
Component History and Concept Model, with a focus on the sub-set 
of concepts in the NLM CORE Problem List. Mortensen et al. (2014) 
identified errors and patterns of errors in the CORE Problem List sub-set 
of a single version of SNOMED by focusing on inferred “Is a” relations. 
Of the studied relations 19.5 % exhibited errors, many of which were 
not caught on the first pass by human domain experts. Tao et al. (2015) 
present an approach and analysis, using it to identify relation reversals 
(a particularly dramatic type of structural change) in the evolution of 
SNOMED, finding 48 such reversals since 2009.
To our best knowledge, no research has thus far been done on 
SNOMED CT’s semantic tags. Semantic tags are claimed to have been 
introduced in SNOMED CT “to help disambiguate different concepts 
which may be referred to by the same commonly used word or phrase”. 
9  ‘Pain’ in SNOMED CT: Is There an Anesthetic? 
177

For example, “Hematoma (morphologic abnormality)” is “the FSN of 
the concept that represents the hematoma that a pathologist sees at the 
tissue level. In contrast, ‘Hematoma (disorder)’ is the FSN of the concept 
that represents the clinical diagnosis that a clinician makes when they 
decide that a person has a hematoma” (IHTSDO 2015, 41). Semantic 
tags are not part of the formal taxonomic structure of SNOMED CT, 
although most of them are closely related to one or other taxonomic 
category. The tag “finding”, for instance, appears prominently—perhaps 
exclusively, we did not investigate this thus far—in the FSN of con-
cepts subsumed by the concept “Clinical finding (finding)”. So, is the 
tag “situation” part of the FSNs of concepts subsumed by the concept 
“Situation with explicit context (situation)”? The concept “Clinical find-
ing (finding)” subsumes, inter alia, the concepts “Disease (disorder)” and 
“Deformity (finding)” which in its turn subsumes, inter alia, the con-
cepts “Deformed pupil (finding)”, “Corneal deformity (disorder)”, and, 
astonishingly, also “Complaining of a deformity (finding)” thereby thus 
implying that complaining of a deformity is a special kind of deformity 
in its own right. Also amazing is that not all concepts with the semantic 
tag “disorder” are subsumed by the concept “Disease (disorder)”.
If, at this point, it becomes hard to understand, then that is because, 
in our opinion, it is not understandable at all. One could indeed wonder 
why there is not a taxonomic category “Disorder (disorder)” which sub-
sumes all “Disease (disorders)” plus those under other hierarchies. The 
absence of such a category is even more astonishing in light of some 
reflections we find in IHTSDO (2015, 275–276):
Clinical findings have been defined as observations, judgments or assess-
ments about patients. The problem with the terms finding and observation 
is that they seem to refer to the judgment of the observer rather than to the 
actual state of the body. Examples of clinical findings include: difficulty 
swallowing, nose bleed, diabetes, headache, and so forth. More precise and 
reproducible definitions of clinical findings, and the precise boundaries 
between findings and events, between findings and observables, between 
findings and situations, and the distinction between finding and disorder, 
remain ongoing challenges at the margins. The distinction between a dis-
order and an observation has proven to be difficult to define in a reproduc-
178 
W. Ceusters and J.P. Bona

ible manner across the tens of thousands of concepts included under 
clinical findings. Nevertheless, there are several reliable characteristics of each 
sub-category (disorders and findings). [emphasis added]
Yet, there are no subcategory disorders at all, there is only the semantic 
tag “disorder”!
It is clear that SNOMED CT suffered—and still does suffer—dramat-
ically from the adherence to concepts such as “Clinical finding (finding)” 
and “Observable entity (observable entity)”. Clinical findings are stated 
“to represent the result of a clinical observation, assessment or judgment, 
and include both normal and abnormal clinical states” (IHTSDO 2015, 
275). Observable entities, so we are told, “can be thought of as represent-
ing a question or procedure which can produce an answer or a result”. 
Observables are considered to be partial observation results, where there 
is a defined part of the observation missing. In many cases, what is miss-
ing is a numeric value, or a numeric value with units. “In other cases, the 
observable is like a question, and what is missing can be regarded as the 
answer” (IHTSDO 2015, 316). This explains why, for example, “Pain 
threshold (observable entity)” carries the semantic tag “observable entity” 
and “Decreased pain threshold (finding)” the tag “finding”. It fails to 
explain why “Threshold (qualifier value)” does not carry the tag “observ-
able entity”.
5	
Conclusion
SNOMED CT has undoubtedly come a very long way since its original 
conception as a mere nomenclature for pathology (Major et al. 1978; 
Sommers 1967). The IHTSDO has been working very hard on develop-
ing editorial and technical principles for updating SNOMED CT and 
on training its terminologists in applying the principles faithfully. The 
significantly larger number of changes introduced in pain-related terms 
compared to non-pain terms as observed in our research are most likely 
the result of bringing order in what once was chaos; chaos not only cre-
ated because of the inherent complexity of pain as a clinical entity—pain 
indicates that some abnormality is present, yet it is not necessarily abnor-
9  ‘Pain’ in SNOMED CT: Is There an Anesthetic? 
179

mal itself—(Smith et  al. 2011) from which other terminologies than 
SNOMED CT are suffering as well (Ceusters 2014), but also because 
of the misplaced focus on observations and findings, thereby confusing 
existing entities on the side of the patient on the one hand, with processes 
of observing these entities and representations/communications about 
what is believed to be observed on the other hand.
In this light it is encouraging to read that slowly, very slowly, some 
principles of the Open Biomedical Ontology Foundry (Smith et al. 2007) 
and ontological categories from the Basic Formal Ontology (Arp et al. 
2015; Smith et al. 2005) are trickling down into SNOMED CT’s con-
cept model (IHTSDO 2015, 322). It would be even better if this model 
were to be based on the Ontology of General Medical Science (OGMS) 
(Scheuermann et al. 2009) which separates first-order entities (e.g. dis-
eases, disorders, bodily features, processes of measuring and observing) 
clearly from second-order entities (diagnoses, representations).
So is there an anesthetic for the pains caused by SNOMED CT’s con-
cept model? We believe there is: the OGMS. Whether IHTSDO will 
believe there is a need for an anesthetic remains doubtful. After all, from 
stated relationship (E1), see the section “The Distribution of SNOMED 
CT Versions”, the SNOMED CT’s description logic infers:
No pain (situation):
Temporal context (attribute) = Current or specified time (qualifier 
value),
Associated finding (attribute) = Genitourinary pain (finding),
Finding context (attribute) = Known absent (qualifier value),
Subject relationship context (attribute) = Subject of record (person)
Thus when “no genitourinary pain” is the case, there is supposed to be 
no pain at all. Since neither author of this paper suffers either from stinky 
feet or genitourinary pain, it is according to SNOMED CT not possible 
that we would suffer from headache. If it were all that simple!
180 
W. Ceusters and J.P. Bona

6	
Epilogue
One can still wonder what smelly feet have to do with pain other than 
being emotionally painful when it is pointed out by one’s environment. 
Figure 9.2 explains how the SNOMED CT concepts “unpleasant odor of 
feet” became part of the intermediate files that were constructed to arrive 
at our final collection for inspection. Before releasing the January 2004 
version of SNOMED CT, it was discovered that the bodily feature of foot 
odor was represented twice: once by means of the SNOMED concept 
102597005 and once by 394643003. During the entire period covered 
by the analysis presented here, at least one of these SNOMED concepts 
was subsumed by “Body odor finding” which itself was subsumed by 
“Finding of sense of smell” from January 2002 until (and including) 
January 2003. It is after that version, that “Finding of smell” became, 
in two versions, subsumed by “Pain/sensation finding”, one of the “x 
or y” type of classes by which many biomedical classification systems, 
terminologies and ontologies are infested. Although this SNOMED con-
cept—unfortunately—still exists, there is no version in which it actually 
subsumes either “unpleasant odor of feet” concept. These were pulled in 
in our analysis sets to be able to draw graphs such as partially drawn in 
Figure 9.2, which provides a view on the evolution of SNOMED CT 
concepts in a historical context.
Acknowledgements  This work was supported in part by Clinical and 
Translational Science Award NIH 1 UL1 TR001412-01 from the National 
Institutes of Health, by grant R21LM009824 from the National Library of 
Medicine (NLM), and by grant 1R01DE021917-01A1 from the National 
Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research (NIDCR). The content of this 
paper is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent 
the official views of the NIDCR, the NLM or the National Institutes of Health.
9  ‘Pain’ in SNOMED CT: Is There an Anesthetic? 
181

Figure 9.2  Partial historical subsumption hierarchy of the SNOMED CT concept “102597005: unpleasant odor of 
feet (finding)”
182 
W. Ceusters and J.P. Bona

References
Arp, Robert, Barry Smith, and Andrew D. Spear. 2015. “Building ontologies 
with basic formal ontology.” In Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press. 
ebrary 
http://site.ebrary.com.gate.lib.buffalo.edu/lib/buffalo/
Doc?id=11085695
Ceusters, W. 2010. “Applying Evolutionary Terminology Auditing to SNOMED 
CT.” AMIA Annu Symp Proc 2010:96–100.
Ceusters, W. 2011. “SNOMED CT revisions and coded data repositories: when 
to upgrade?” AMIA Annu Symp Proc 2011:197–206.
Ceusters, W. 2014. “Pain assessment terminology in the NCBO BioPortal: eval-
uation and recommendations.” In Proceedings of the International Conference 
on Biomedical Ontology 2014, 1–6. Houston, TX.
De Block, A., and P. R. Adriaens. 2013. “Pathologizing sexual deviance: a his-
tory.” J Sex Res 50 (3–4):276–98. doi:10.1080/00224499.2012.738259.
Dentler, Kathrin, Ronald Cornet, Annette ten Teije, and Nicolette de Keizer. 
2011. “Comparison of reasoners for large ontologies in the OWL 2 EL pro-
file.” Semantic Web 2 (2):71–87.
Donnelly, K. 2006. “SNOMED CT: The Advanced Terminology and Coding 
System for eHealth.” In Studies in Health Technology and Informatics—Medical 
and Care Compunetics 3. Vol 121, edited by Bos L, Roa L, Yogesan K, 
O’Connell B, Marsh A and Blobel B, 279–290. Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Fung, K. W., W. T. Hole, S. J. Nelson, S. Srinivasan, T. Powell, and L. Roth. 
2005. “Integrating SNOMED CT into the UMLS: an exploration of differ-
ent views of synonymy and quality of editing.” J Am Med Inform Assoc 12 
(4):486–94. doi:10.1197/jamia.M1767.
Geller, J., C. Ochs, Y. Perl, and J. Xu. 2012. “New abstraction networks and a 
new visualization tool in support of auditing the SNOMED CT content.” 
AMIA Annu Symp Proc 2012:237–46.
IHTSDO. 2015. International Health Terminology Standards Development 
Organization - SNOMED CT® Technical Implementation Guide - January 
2015 International Release (US English).
Lee, Dennis, Ronald Cornet, and Francis Lau. 2011. “Implications of SNOMED 
CT versioning.” International Journal of Medical Informatics 80 (6):442–453. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2011.02.006.
Major, P., B. J. Kostrewski, and J. Anderson. 1978. “Analysis of the semantic 
structures of medical reference languages: part 2. Analysis of the semantic 
power of MeSH, ICD and SNOMED.” Med Inform (Lond) 3 (4):269–81.
9  ‘Pain’ in SNOMED CT: Is There an Anesthetic? 
183

Mortensen, Jonathan M., Mark A.  Musen, and Natalya F.  Noy. 2014. “An 
empirically derived taxonomy of errors in SNOMED CT.” AMIA Annual 
Symposium Proceedings 2014:899–906.
Ochs, C., J. Geller, Y. Perl, Y. Chen, J. Xu, H. Min, J. T. Case, and Z. Wei. 
2015. “Scalable quality assurance for large SNOMED CT hierarchies using 
subject-based subtaxonomies.” J Am Med Inform Assoc 22 (3):507–18. 
doi:10.1136/amiajnl-2014-003151.
Question Everything. 2015. Is it normal to like smelly feet? https://www.you-
tube.com/watch?v=gw-rWFadU7M
Scheuermann, R. H., W. Ceusters, and B. Smith. 2009. “Toward an ontological 
treatment of disease and diagnosis.” Summit on Translat Bioinforma 
2009:116–20.
Smith B, Ceusters W, Goldberg LJ, and Ohrbach R. 2011. “Towards an 
Ontology of Pain.” In Proceedings of the Conference on Logic and Ontology, 
edited by Mitsu Okada, 23–32. Tokyo: Keio University Press.
Smith, B., M. Ashburner, C. Rosse, J. Bard, W. Bug, W. Ceusters, L. J. Goldberg, 
K.  Eilbeck, A.  Ireland, C.  J. Mungall, O.  B. I.  Consortium, N.  Leontis, 
P. Rocca-Serra, A. Ruttenberg, S. A. Sansone, R. H. Scheuermann, N. Shah, 
P. L. Whetzel, and S. Lewis. 2007. “The OBO Foundry: coordinated evolu-
tion of ontologies to support biomedical data integration.” Nat Biotechnol 25 
(11):1251–5. doi: 10.1038/nbt1346.
Smith, B., W. Ceusters, B. Klagges, J. Kohler, A. Kumar, J. Lomax, C. Mungall, 
F.  Neuhaus, A.  L. Rector, and C.  Rosse. 2005. “Relations in biomedical 
ontologies.” Genome Biology 6 (5). doi: Artn R46 Doi 10.1186/
Gb-2005-6-5-R46.
Smith, Barry. 2004. “Beyond concepts: ontology as reality representation.” In 
Proceedings of the third international conference on formal ontology in informa-
tion systems (FOIS 2004), 73–84. Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Smith, Barry, and Werner Ceusters. 2015. Aboutness: Towards Foundations for 
the Information Artifact Ontology. International Conference on Biomedical 
Ontology, Lisbon, Portugal, July 27–30.
Sommers, S.  C. 1967. “Systematized nomenclature of pathology.” Pathol 
Microbiol (Basel) 30 (5):826–7.
Spackman, Kent A. 2005. “Rates of Change in a Large Clinical Terminology: 
Three Years Experience with SNOMED Clinical Terms.” AMIA Annual 
Symposium Proceedings 2005:714–718.
184 
W. Ceusters and J.P. Bona

Tao, Shiqiang, Licong Cui, Wei Zhu, Mengmeng Sun, Olivier Bodenreider, and 
Guo-Qiang Zhang. 2015. “Mining Relation Reversals in the Evolution of 
SNOMED CT Using MapReduce.” AMIA Summits on Translational Science 
Proceedings 2015:46–50.
Wang, A. Y., J. W. Barrett, T. Bentley, D. Markwell, C. Price, K. A. Spackman, 
and M. Q. Stearns. 2001. “Mapping between SNOMED RT and Clinical 
terms version 3: a key component of the SNOMED CT development pro-
cess.” Proc AMIA Symp:741–5.
9  ‘Pain’ in SNOMED CT: Is There an Anesthetic? 
185

187
© The Author(s) 2016
L. Zaibert (ed.), The Theory and Practice of Ontology, 
DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-55278-5_10
Western musicians and musically educated people acquire most of their 
repertoire through reading musical scores. Learning to read music is a 
long and time-consuming process. Some crucial conventions must be 
mastered, and implemented according to sensorimotor patterns that are 
specific to the instruments one plays. This chapter explores some aspects 
of these conventions related to time representation. It presents a syntactic 
characterization of a fragment of Standard Music Notation, and discusses 
some cognitive consequences of principles that govern the syntax. A pre-
liminary hypothesis about obstacles to reading is put forward. A conse-
quence of the hypothesis is that certain musical styles appear to be very 
much in synch with Standard Music Notation, whereas others do not 
find an easy representation within it.
The Structure of Standard Music 
Notation
Roberto Casati
10
R. Casati (*) 
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Paris, France 
CNRS-ENS-EHESS Insitut Jean Nicod UMR 8129, PSL Research University, 
Département d’études cognitives 
e-mail: roberto.casati@ens.fr

The chapter has two parts. In the first part I provide a characteriza-
tion of the temporal fragment of Standard Music Notation (SMN).  
I treat SMN like a formal language and describe its syntax and semantics. 
The main theoretical notion is that of an invisible “raster” whose abstract 
properties make the notation possible. Some principles governing the 
notation are spelled out. In the second part I draw some considerations 
of cognitive import about the peculiarities of the notation.
1	
The Temporal Fragment
Standard Music Notation (SMN) is a notation that primarily represents 
the evolution of pitch in time. In its present forms, pitches are repre-
sented as locations on a five-line staff. Here I present a characterization of 
the time representation dimension only. This is meant to be a fragment 
of the complete set of SMN notation symbols. As such, the fragment 
abstracts not only from the pitch dimension, but also from many nota-
tional peculiarities and, in particular, redundancies. We shall start from 
a simplified version of the fragment, and then add a few principles that 
capture many of the idiosyncrasies of SMN.
The simplified fragment includes a set of primitive symbols, notes and 
ties.
Notes, such as
and a functional expression, the tie
 
Notes are aligned on what we shall call a raster. A time signature (3/4, 
6/8, etc.) is provided, so that notes aligned in the appropriate way on a 
time-signed raster constitute a music score.
The notion of a raster is central for the possibility of using the system 
of Standard Music Notation (as well as many other systems, as we shall 
see) to represent time. A raster is an abstract organization of locations 
on the score. It is characterized in terms of its spatially relevant features. 
A raster R is an ordered set of linearly arranged discrete spatial locations
188 
R. Casati

s1, s2, ..., sn
such that s1 is the leftmost element on the raster, and each sm+1 location is 
to the immediate right of its predecessor sm.
A connected segment of the raster is a set of positions of the raster such 
that if sm is the leftmost element of the set and sn is its rightmost element, 
all si such that m≤i≤n are part of the set.
An initial connected segment is any connected segment which includes 
the first location of the raster, s1.
Given a raster R, a score on R is the result of filling every location in a 
given connected initial segment of R by a note.
Let us pause and see what happens here. First, some observations on 
the “spatial” structure of the raster and the shape of symbols. Right-to-left 
orientation (customary in SMN) is actually immaterial to the organiza-
tion of the raster; the notation could be otherwise oriented. But nothing 
of importance hinges on it being oriented the way current practice has 
it, so let it be. Spacewise, the raster could unfold in a spiral; again, noth-
ing depends on this—so let it be visually arranged on a straight line. 
Notes could have triangular or pentagonal shape, or different colors to 
differentiate them; nothing depends on this, hence let us use symbols 
that are sufficiently similar to those used in current practice. Second, 
we need a characterization of the raster structure because we want it to 
represent time. What can a raster represent? The representation provided 
by the raster is topological only: the simple semantics of the raster is the 
following:
if a location sm is to the left of a location sn, then the symbol placed on sm 
denotes an event that precedes the event denoted by the symbol placed on sn.
Figuratively, a raster is a kind of sequence of locations:
x x x x x x x x x x ...
Given that the only relevant properties are order properties, the raster is 
not to be read as a implying a pace. In particular, the referents of the loca-
tions on the raster are not requested to be equally spaced in time.
10  The Structure of Standard Music Notation 
189

Third, the raster structure is discrete. Locations in a raster are atomic; 
there is no such thing as a half location, or as the leftmost part of a location.
Raster structures are little noted but important structures. They under-
lie other types of notation. Alphabetic writing systems, for instance, are 
in part a representation of the unfolding of phonetic events in time. In 
some, particularly transparent writing systems, if a letter symbol is placed 
to the left (or the right) of another symbol, then the referent of the for-
mer must be pronounced before (or after, respectively) the referent of the 
latter symbol. The raster for writing in most Western alphabets:
x x x x x x x x x x …
can be filled in by replacing empty position by letters:
d x x x x x x x x x …
d o x x x x x x x x …
d o g x x x x x x x …
d o g s _ a n d _ m i c e …1
Here, too, the order is purely topological. A character count (includ-
ing spaces) of a written text does not tell how long it will take to pro-
nounce the text. As it happens, the pronounced length depends on the 
particular assignments of lengths to the referents of the letter as well as 
on many other factors. Some vowels in given contexts take more time to 
pronounce than others. The spacing of locations on the raster does not 
make one pronounce the letters at any pace. Here as in the case of musi-
cal notation, the raster is necessary to represent the unfolding in time; it 
is discrete; and the only relevant spatial structure is topological structure.
2	
Molecular Expressions
An important feature of SMN is that it allows for molecular expressions. 
Using the primitive symbols opportunely placed on a raster, one builds 
molecular expressions by the use of ties connecting symbols at adjacent 
locations.
190 
R. Casati

If note a occupies position sm and note b occupies position sm+1, say that a 
is adjacent to b.
A dyadic molecular expression is constituted by two adjacent notes con-
nected by a tie.
Now, stipulate that ties can take as their argument both atomic and 
molecular expressions. Thus a molecular expression can be constituted by 
a note a at sm linked by a tie to a molecular expression in turn composed 
by note b at sm+1 and note c at sm+2.
However, we do not have any reason to distinguish the molecular 
expression constituted by a note a at sm linked by a tie to a molecular 
expression composed by note b at sm+1 and note c at sm+2, from the molecu-
lar expression constituted by a molecular expression composed by a note 
a at sm linked by a note b at sm+1, and note c at sm+2.
Graphically:
 
Hence, by convention, a n-ary molecular expression is constituted of 
pairwise adjacent n notes connected by n-1 ties.2
 
Call a concatenation any set of notes and/or molecular expressions that 
is such that it occupies a connected area of the raster. A music formula is 
any concatenation of notes and/or molecular expressions. Thus, music 
formulae can overlap (share constituents).
Not all music formulae of the temporal fragment are well-formed from 
the point of view of SMN. SMN gives preeminence to temporal units 
and introduces a number of notational abbreviations. In order to appre-
ciate the rationale for the idiosyncrasies of SMN, let us now turn to the 
semantics of our fragment.
10  The Structure of Standard Music Notation 
191

3	
Semantics of the Temporal Fragment
3.1	
Lexicon
SMN distinguishes between pauses and “sounding notes”. The distinc-
tion is irrelevant for the purposes of the present discussion and will not 
be observed in the discussion of the fragment. We shall talk about the 
referents of notes generically as “events”, be they silences or sounds.
The temporal fragment represents the unfolding of events in time. The 
asymmetry of time is mapped into a reading direction. As we observed, 
the only intuitive temporal significance of spatial features of the raster is 
ordinal: the event denoted by a note at a location sm precedes any event 
denoted by a note at a location sm+n. The raster is only used for writing 
down formulae; it does not represent a beat. In the fragment, informa-
tion about temporal measure is completely deferred to notes.
Notes come in a structured, open-ended lexicon. They represent events 
and assign them a duration. Current convention has it that starting from 
the unit note, which is assigned an arbitrary time value, notes can express 
any of the 1/2n values of the unit note.3
 the unit note,
 
One-half of the unit note, ...
 
one-quarter, one-eighth, ... one1/2nth... of the unit note.
3.2	
Molecular Expressions
A molecular expression composed of notes or of molecular expressions 
a and b and a tie between them denotes a single whole (temporally con-
nected) event whose duration is the sum of the durations of a and b.
192 
R. Casati

 
In the example, the denoted event’s length is 3/4 of a unit.
3.3	
Music Formulae
Music formulae are concatenations of notes and/or music expressions. 
They denote sequences of events of various durations.
The following are two examples of music formulae:
 
3.4	
Music Pieces
We have seen that a score on R is the result of filling every location in a 
connected initial segment of R by a note. Some notes may be connected 
with ties, thereby giving rise to molecular expressions. Scores in SMN 
come with a meter indication. Paced music scores are music scores pre-
ceded by a meter indication.
A music score denotes a music piece, i.e. the set of events that are the 
referent of atomic or molecular expressions, and that unfold in time as 
the score indicates.
Some principles govern the interpretation of scores: fullness and 
non-overlap.
10  The Structure of Standard Music Notation 
193

3.5	
Fullness
The temporal fragment is constrained by fullness. A music formula has no 
temporal gaps. Between the events denoted by any two adjacent expres-
sions in a formula there is no room for a third event.
3.6	
Non-overlap
The temporal fragment is constrained by non-overlap. The temporal end-
point of the event denoted by the leftmost note in a couple of adja-
cent notes is always earlier than the temporal starting point of the event 
denoted by the rightmost note in the couple.
Taken together, fullness and non-overlap endow the temporal frag-
ment with the possibility of using notes and molecular expressions so as 
to systematically follow to a rhythmic pattern. If the notation was not 
full, one would not know the starting point of a given event once the 
previous event is terminated. And if the notation allowed for overlap, one 
may have multiple events running at the same time, with no systematic 
way to determine the relative start and endpoint of any of them.
Fullness also blocks incomplete bars, such as the following:
 
4	
The Temporal Fragment and SMN
In SMN conventions are used for rendering some molecular expressions, 
for instance one half note followed by two dots is definitionally equiva-
lent to a molecular expression composed of a half note, a quarter note 
and an eighth note.
 
194 
R. Casati

In general, each dot written to the right of a note or of another dot cor-
responds to a length that is half of the length of the note or the preceding 
dot (the dot to its left). Dots are explained away by the definition (but 
see below for exceptions to the generalized use of the abbreviation). More 
interestingly, SMN uses explicit indications of bars, i.e. temporal units for 
a rhythm. These are redundant in the temporal fragment, as the temporal 
unit is specified by the time signature. However, explicit bars allegedly 
facilitate reading. Related to bar units are rules of well-formedness for 
SMN. In fact, not every formula of our simplified temporal fragment is 
a formula of SMN. Indeed, SMN adds to the elements of the temporal 
fragment so far described the Bar Limit Principle.
Bar limit principle: Notes (i.e., atomic expressions) cannot straddle bars.
This is an example of a well-formed formula according to the bar limit 
principle:
 
And this is an example of a non-wff:
 
The bar limit principle does not forbid suitable molecular expressions 
to straddle bars. Thus, although the two following formulas are semanti-
cally equivalent, only the first is a wwf in SMN:
 
Some conventions forbid certain ways to concatenate notes in a molec-
ular expression whenever the bar limit is not trespassed.
10  The Structure of Standard Music Notation 
195

For instance,
 
or
 
are not allowed if the events denoted by these molecular expressions are 
totally contained within the temporal unit of a single bar. The very same 
expressions may, however, be allowed if the denoted events straddle bars 
at suitable points.
We observed that in general dots are definitionally explained away by 
the use of ties. However, the definitional equivalence does not allow for 
uniform substitution. Dotted notes cannot cross a bar limit. The follow-
ing, for instance, is not allowed:
 
where the first dot is assumed to be related to the second note in the 
score.
This completes the characterization of the most salient features of the 
temporal fragment of SMN. The characterization shows that distinct rep-
resentational time aspects are assigned to the raster structure (a purely 
topological, discrete and ordered structure), and to the temporal values 
of notes. The raster structure is used to express temporal order. Notes are 
used to temporally measure events. Some principles (Fullness and Non-­
overlap) regulate the interplay between order and length of the repre-
sented events. Finally, meter indications subtly interact with the rules for 
using molecular expressions through the Bar Limit Principle.
By way of comparison, fullness and non-overlap are not general 
requirements of the semantics of natural language. “Napoleon run and 
Nelson run” does not require the two runs (i.e. the semantic values of the 
two event sentences) to be adjacent and disjoint events. It may be asked 
whether the items of SMN obeys a stronger principle, Fodor’s Picture 
196 
R. Casati

Principle, according to which if a is a picture of b, then parts of a are 
pictures of parts of b (Fodor 2008). The principle is meant to distinguish 
linguistic representations from iconic representations (as such it does not 
distinguish between pictures and diagrams, but this is not important for 
our present purposes). Music scores indeed comply with the principle, 
but only modulo the raster structure that individuates legitimate parts of 
a score. The only parts of a score that have meaning are either atomic or 
molecular expressions. “Areas” of a score that straddle the right half of a 
note and the left half of the subsequent note are not meaningful. Indeed, 
they are not syntactically individuated parts. However, once the restric-
tion to formulae is accepted, the parthood structure of formulae mimics 
the parthood structure of the events that are their values.
According to the present characterizations, SMN is akin to a formal-
ized language. It is formal also insofar as it is a human artifact, and it 
obeys stipulative rules.
I highlighted what appear to be important analogies with writing. 
Writing, too, as used to represent the phonetic aspect of spoken language, 
is a kind of formalized language, whose rules are of course proprietary 
and different from those for music notation. Writing, too, complies with 
the Picture Principle, modulo the restrictions to parthood imposed by 
the raster structure.
Music notation and writing are thus iconic discrete formal systems. 
Thus characterized, they also come close to maps, whose logical structure 
is underscored by the exploitation of some topological regularities (Casati 
and Varzi 1999).
5	
Remarks about Readability: The Double 
Computation Hypothesis
This section addresses a cognitive point, related to some consequences of 
the particularities of SMN as captured in the fragment here described. 
The interesting idiosyncrasies of the temporal fragment of SMN depend 
upon the historical development of the notation. They have cognitive 
10  The Structure of Standard Music Notation 
197

import at different levels. The main result of the preceding discussion is 
that SMN cannot “see” beyond the single bar without the help of molec-
ular expressions. The rationale of allowing only molecular expressions to 
straddle bars is that it is thereby clear at which point, in the unfolding of 
the event denoted by the molecular expression, a bar is over and a new 
bar commences. Thus, in the case of the following non-wff,
 
one cannot visually catch the beginning of the new bar.
This facilitation comes with an attached cost, though. In the following 
example two bars are represented:
 
It appears that the molecular expression A is easier to read than its 
visual clone B. The difference can be explained by the hypothesis that 
B requires both a computation on the length of A and a parallel com-
putation on the length of the bars. Call this the Double Computation 
Hypothesis.
Some consequences of the double computation hypothesis is that 
there is a subtle interplay between music style, readability, and SMN, 
insofar as the relevant constraints of the temporal fragment are concerned 
(as per the Bar Limit Principle). A much-syncopated music such as jazz, 
or music in which retardation plays an important and sustained role, are 
challenging to the music reader who uses SMN because of the double 
computation requested by the bar limit principle. Call these “temporal 
reading challenges”.
Here are two examples of temporal reading challenges (chosen from 
relatively simple scores, in order to highlight the challenges).
J.S.  Bach, Das Wohltemperierte Klavier, Bach-Gesellschaft Ausgabe, 
Leipzig: Breitkopf u. Härtel, 1886, Band 14, Fugue 3 in C# major, BWV 
848, bars 5–8:
198 
R. Casati

R. Schumann, Piano Quartet op. 47, Robert Schumanns Werke Serie 
V: Für Pianoforte und andere Instrumente, Leipzig, Breitkopf u. Härtel, 
1881, Andante Cantabile, bars 33–37 (the piano part):
 
Within-bars reading is easy for the experienced reader, but transitions 
at bars are somewhat harder.
These examples are reading challenges because of the bar limit prin-
ciple. It may be surmised that polyphonic retardations are in general 
harder to process than notes that are in synch. Here on the other hand 
the challenge consists in the fact that it is easier to read inside each bar 
than across bars.
A more ambitious hypothesis concerns aesthetics. Arguably, certain 
styles are pushing the expressive power of SMN to their cognitive lim-
its. (Maurizio Giri, personal communication) That is, they make it pos-
sible for a music reader to proceed unchallenged. Authors such as Chopin 
appear to have fully integrated the bar limit principle. The structure of a 
typical Chopin work tends to be orderly in that sense, i.e. aligned with 
bars (even though, as in the following example, it may otherwise not be 
an easy read because of the polyphonic density.)
10  The Structure of Standard Music Notation 
199

Chopin, Ballade n. 4, op. 52, Oeuvres complètes de Frédéric Chopin, 
Berlin, Bote & Bock, 1880. Bars 60–62
6	
Conclusions
The chapter has provided a first syntactic and semantic characterization 
of the temporal fragment of Standard Music Notation. It stressed the role 
played by the theoretical notion of a raster. The raster is an “invisible” 
grid of discrete locations that can host symbols according to some rules 
and principles (fullness and non-overlap). The grid itself has a simple 
topological structure. Importantly, items in the grid are atomic locations; 
sub-atomic locations would not be vehicles for representation. Modulo 
this structure, raster based notations are iconic, insofar as they obey the 
Picture Principle.
Raster-based iconic representations—whereby elements of the raster 
are atomic—include also written language as a means of representing 
the temporal unfolding of spoken language. These forms of iconic rep-
resentation are half-way between (paradigm) diagrams and (paradigm) 
pictures; they are akin to maps and formal languages such as the ones 
used in logic.
Notes
	1.	 We are making abstraction here from the many complex temporal 
properties of phonology. Just imagine someone spelling the words 
slowly so as to articulate the various phonemes.
	2.	 This is related to Schoenfinkel’s theorem, according to which n-ary 
functors can be reduced to n unary functors.
	3.	 A minimal usable lexicon would use a single type of note to indicate a 
unit duration, and the tie to bind together notes. Here as before we 
opt for a system that, although simplified relative to SMN, does not 
depart too much from SMN.  This choice allows us explore some 
aspects of SMN. It is to be noted that the minimal lexicon would be 
rather different from SMN, whose class of symbols is open-ended—
200 
R. Casati

there is no shortest describable unit in SMN, as the represented dura-
tions are ever-decreasing fractions of the unit note.
Acknowledgements  Barry Smith made many things possible; in my early 
career, and then over decades of intellectual challenges and exchanges. This 
paper is a small tribute to the discipline of thinking in logico-ontogical terms 
that he champions and fosters. I would also like to thank Maurizio Giri, Richard 
Carter, John Kulvicki, Catherine Elgin, and Achille Varzi for inspiring com-
ments on this paper.
This work has received support from grants ANR-10-LABX-0087 IEC et 
ANR-10-IDEX-0001-02 PSL*.
References
Casati, R. and Varzi, A.C. 1999. Parts and places. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fodor, J. 2008. The language of thought revisited, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, p. 173.
10  The Structure of Standard Music Notation 
201

203
© The Author(s) 2016
L. Zaibert (ed.), The Theory and Practice of Ontology, 
DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-55278-5_11
11
M. Thalos (*) 
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA
e-mail: m.thalos@gmail.com
Attitude: How We Learn to Inhabit 
the Future
Mariam Thalos
1	
Introduction
It is common knowledge that young persons are different from older 
ones, and not just in the ways they look and behave. They also differ in 
how they think. This is not simply a matter of being more or less expert 
at intellectual tasks; often such differences are negligible. Adulthood is 
a matter of being differently cognitively organized and motivated, espe-
cially in relation to time. It’s surprising how little these differences have 
been studied scientifically. This essay is about the fundamentally cogni-
tive ways that older people differ from their younger selves. It’s about 
being grown up.
Social scientists have recently emerged with the finding that older 
people are different from younger ones in being happier, more positive, 
less self-focused and more focused on their communities. Researchers 

put these differences down to differences in time horizons—awareness 
of how long one has left to live (Carstensen 2006). I don’t think there’s 
one simple variable that explains the fundamental cognitive differences 
between young and old. But I will focus on an aspect of their differences 
that renders some of the other differences more explicable. It concerns 
the difference between old and young in respect of how they inhabit the 
arc of their timeline in the world.
The topic of how people experience time has recently been in the news 
because studies have revealed age-related declines in neural processing speed 
(Eckert et al. 2010). This difference in processing speed has been hypoth-
esized to explain the old adage that time seems to clip by at a much faster 
rate for the old than for the young. The processing-speed hypothesis pits 
itself against the contender hypothesis that time perception is purely a 
function of memory structures. While tangentially related, and the only 
study on time phenomenology within miles, the topic of “time flies for 
the old” is not my topic. I mention it to distinguish my topic from it. 
I’m looking instead at two facets of difference between young and old: 
first, in how time figures in the practical phenomenology of those making 
choices; and second, in how that aspect of practical phenomenology itself 
changes over time. On these topics I have been unable to find substantive 
scientific studies.
My own methodology of analysis is largely phenomenological—largely 
(though not entirely) an examination of experience, and the features of 
human cognition (in this case, an ontology regarding time) that it brings 
to light. But because I’m doing philosophy, I will be sensitive also to 
normative dimensions of the topic—issues of what is commendable, and 
the basis (however undetailed I will have to leave it) for commendation. I 
will also appeal to evolutionary principles as a reality check in connection 
with the normative questions.
One moral of my tale will be a cautionary one: I will be arguing that 
the postures toward time that are prescribed to us in modern, formal 
decision theories (for example, in the Theory of Expected Utility and 
its more recent offshoots), are the postures of youth—indeed, the least 
mature ones—and not the postures of adulthood.
204 
M. Thalos

2	
Why the Subject Is Important
It is believed that a normative theory of decision—a theory of how 
correctly to proceed in making decisions, such as, for instance, the 
much-­celebrated Theory of Expected Utility (EU)—can be entirely non-
committal as to the structure of the entities for whom it is meant as a 
guide, its intended consumers. It is believed that such a theory can be 
entirely non-committal even on the procedure by which to implement 
those guidelines and imperatives directed at its intended consumers. In 
his influential book The Foundations of Causal Decision Theory, the prom-
inent decision theorist James Joyce writes:
No sensible person should ever propose expected utility maximization as a 
decision procedure, nor should he suggest that rational agents must have the 
maximization of utility as their goal… The expected utility hypothesis is a 
theory of “right-making characteristics” rather than a guide to rational 
deliberation. It in no way requires an agent consciously to assign probabili-
ties to states of the world or utilities to outcomes, or to actually calculate 
anything. The decision maker does not need to have a concept of utility at 
all, and she certainly does not have to see herself as an expected utility 
maximizer. The demand is merely that her desires and beliefs, however 
arrived at, should be compatible with the expected utility hypothesis in the 
sense that it should be possible for a third party who knows her preference 
ranking to represent it in the way described … [t]he direct obligation that 
the theory imposes is not that of maximizing expected utility, but that of 
conforming one’s preferences to the axioms. A representation theorem will 
show that a person who meets her obligations in this regard will succeed in 
having beliefs and desires that are consistent with the global requirement of 
expected utility maximization. (Joyce 1999, 80, all emphasis original)
This is a mistake. No theory of the normative can ever be so thoroughly 
non-committal. In explication of this idea, I shall begin our investigation 
by showing that not even EU is thoroughly non-committal, and indeed 
that its commitments take the shape of a reductionism—something that 
I shall argue we need to resist. The central aim of this paper is to intro-
duce an alternative framework for thinking about decision-making, one 
that takes seriously the unavoidable realities of decision-making for a 
11  Attitude: How We Learn to Inhabit the Future 
205

­reasonably long stretch of life. Long-term considerations matter. I will 
insist upon models in which the agent’s relationship to the future is quite 
different from that prescribed by EU. It begins from the observation that, 
at least over the developmental period, human decision-makers can even-
tually learn increasingly to “inhabit” both past and future so as not to 
“discount” either. Moreover, they can learn to plan in ways that defy the 
EU model. And this is a very good thing indeed.
Decision theory pioneer Leonard Savage exhorted decision scientists to 
be more cognizant of the decision-maker’s relationship to time horizons 
when he contrasted “small worlds” and “grand worlds”. Savage main-
tained that EU was a theory for small worlds; I am very much in agree-
ment, and will explain the importance of this point at greater length. The 
point is important to appreciate because a theory for grand worlds is now 
very much overdue.1
3	
Committal (Reductionistic) EU
So why do I say that EU is committal? The very criterion that Joyce 
himself proposes in support of EU’s non-committality, exposes it as 
in fact committal. EU embodies a certain conception—in fact a mis-
apprehension—that there is just one (and so obviously it is a single 
and coherent) ideal of decision-making, one that every human being 
is on a developmental path towards (though some will reach it more 
expeditiously, more efficiently or simply sooner than others, while oth-
ers still never move in the right direction). In other words, the crite-
rion Joyce proposes postulates a single ideal—in normative language, 
a single imperative—which serves a (single) criterion of assessment: an 
expected value computation. Everything that fails to satisfy the ideal has 
to be treated as defective or erroneous—better or worse, if we want to 
get fancy—at hewing to the ideal. (This model of assessment is associ-
ated with a bell curve over a set of single scores with a central tendency, 
hence an obvious choice, if an incorrect one, when it comes to model-
ing performance.) There are thus two categories of achievement in the 
model proposed: the Ideal and the Defective. Defect mitigation is all 
there can be to a corrective.
206 
M. Thalos

This single-function model, which results in assessments involving 
only a simple comparative of single values (the actual and ideal), does not 
make good sense from an evolutionary developmental perspective. How 
does evolution produce an entity with a rudimentary form of something 
that in its development dispenses with that something in favor of some-
thing else, something different? Where can a wholly new (and presum-
ably better) function come from? Origins matter. V.S. Ramachandran 
writes: “[I]n biological systems, there is a deep unity between structure, 
function, and origin” (Ramachandran 2011, xiv).
In the biological world, the way of development is via an incremen-
tal building up of larger functionality via accumulations and/or re-­
purposings of existing functionalities piecemeal, rather than wholesale 
replacement of one functionality by another one that is different. This 
means that there must be multiple functionalities, very probably acquired 
over an appreciable time interval (in ontogeny reflected in phylogeny), 
that “add up” in some way to a larger functionality that might not be 
coherent in the way that the single function proposed in EU is coherent. 
“Incoherence” is not the same thing as fallacious or otherwise flawed: it 
is instead the condition of being such as to have its parts in some pos-
sible tension or competition—a condition that relentlessly prevails in all 
biological organisms.2
One might complain at this point, in defense of Joyce, insisting that 
the single-function model, leading to simple comparisons of Ideal/
Defective, is simply not meant as a model at all. It is meant as an ideal 
at which to aim with whatever sort of procedure one is employing. The 
truth, however, is that EU must in fact be interpreted as embodying a 
modeling assumption—the assumption that the function to aim at (the 
Ideal) is a single function, rather than a suite of scope-restricted function-
alities, loosely conjoined and so potentially at odds in any given decision 
context; where deviations from this function must be construed as errors. 
Why do I say that EU must be so interpreted? Simply because it offers 
this single standard, applicable to absolutely all contexts, rather than a 
manifold or suite of partial assessments, without addressing questions as 
to whether the single function might be inferior to a foliation of more 
scope-restricted functionalities.3 The single-standard model short-circuits 
postulations of any multiple-functionalities model as itself an ideal. But 
11  Attitude: How We Learn to Inhabit the Future 
207

it is quite possible that a plurality of narrow-scope assessments, though 
perhaps not coherent in the way that a single assessment can be, is none-
theless the best that one can do given the range of tasks that must be 
performed in service of making decisions. I believe that this is in fact the 
case.
Consider the simple fact that ordering tasks by importance is quite a 
different task from ordering them in the time queue, hence might well 
be pursued according to different principles. Assessing tasks by priority 
can therefore result in a different ordering from assessing them by prin-
ciples of ordering in the “outbox”, especially if their performance must 
involve travel to different points in space. The fact that the assessments 
might result in different orderings is obviously not a defect in the respec-
tive assessments; just a reality when the number of tasks that one needs 
to perform in service of life are multiple rather than singular, and that 
circumstances or resources might render some of these assessments more 
critical for decision purposes than others. It is therefore no defect in a 
hypothetical model of (say) long-term planning that it proposes a suite of 
functionalities rather than a single one, prioritizing some over others for 
certain purposes and reversing the priorities when circumstances demand 
it. It is simply a fact associated with the complexity of the undertaking. 
And a single-assessment model will tend to paper over this fact rather 
than wrestle honestly with the complexity. A single-assessment model is 
a form of reductionism.
This chapter is an exercise in exploring the space of nonreductive 
options, preliminary to developing a more complex model as an ideal for 
decision-making. It is an exercise that takes notice, first of all, of the fact 
that human development is a matter of accumulating a variety of scope-­
restricted functionalities over time. And that a suite of scope-restricted 
functionalities might have advantages.
What I wish to argue is that we change vis-à-vis our capacities for deci-
sion as we develop—no surprise there. But not by throwing off youthful 
ways, or incrementally (or otherwise) modifying them in the direction of 
“better approximation” of an expected utility ideal. Instead, we change, 
we grow up, by acquiring completely new ways of coping (“grown-up” 
postures) that have to live alongside, and interlocking with, the youthful 
postures. The postures we take are quite diverse, and they serve different 
208 
M. Thalos

ends that ultimately all need serving. So we end up having to manage a 
large repertoire of postures. Being grown up, ultimately, is not so much 
a matter of having acquired a posture sufficiently advanced or improved 
over that of youth. Rather, being grown up is learning to develop man-
agerial characteristics of moving between various postures (some com-
pletely unknown to the young) that we acquire in the arc of experience. 
Managerial characteristics constitute distinctive patterns of inhabiting the 
different postures by turns. These patterns are emblematic of personality 
and character traits that distinguish us from other members of the tribe.
4	
Postures in Focus
Children can perform tasks very well indeed, in certain respects better 
than adults can—their focus can be more singular, less divided. So it is 
obvious that one should not hold that a posture is a task competency. 
Rather than being merely the decision-relevant task itself, what I mean 
by posture includes also the way of being oriented towards the task such 
that you are sensitized to certain things as reasons for your performance 
(for instance, as a reason for performing better or worse, quickly or lei-
surely, on the associated task) and desensitized towards other things. Thus 
it involves also a kind of stance towards the decision-relevant task that 
you’re performing. In fact, I am using the terms “stance” and “posture” 
interchangeably. As a human being, one accumulates more and more such 
stances towards performance of one’s tasks, including one’s decisions.
I have written (Thalos [under review]) about three stances that together 
comprise an approximation of EU—although not an equivalence because 
conflicts between functionalities are not always resolvable. But I will argue 
here that these render an individual only as grown up as a fully paid-up 
teenager. In other words, not fully grown up. To be fully grown up one 
requires also the development of a suite of postures that attune one in 
more sophisticated ways to (1) the future; (2) other agents; and finally 
(3) risk; though nowise do I mean to imply there are only three grown-up 
stances. Here I will discuss what I refer to as the future stance—the first 
of the trio I just named. The details of (2) and (3)—the bulk of the larger 
project—have yet to be worked out, although I will have occasion to talk 
11  Attitude: How We Learn to Inhabit the Future 
209

specifically about (2). We will ultimately also require an account of how 
these attitudes work together, in spite of often coming into conflict.
One more preliminary remark before proceeding to discussion of what 
I am calling the future stance: the fundamental logic of stances is that one 
cannot be operating in more than one at any given time. Correlatively, 
it’s not possible to make errors associated with different stances at the 
same time. Thus it is not possible to commit an error of prioritization of 
tasks whilst conducting an assessment as to their proper time queuing; 
this would be analogous to committing a baseball error while playing 
basketball. The fact that we cannot commit errors associated with differ-
ent assessments simultaneously is due to the reality that we cannot (for 
instance) apply standards appropriate to assessing how well a certain per-
son is prioritizing, if that person is doing something completely different.
5	
The Future Stance Part I: The Reactive Self
When we are young we respond to the world with our hearts; we are reac-
tive. In other words, we look out at the world and allow our behavior to 
become captive to some of its features: we are captivate-able. We are in a 
relationship with the world where it is giver (of good gifts, hopefully; but 
all too often of bad things) and we are receiver. Our agency is in a certain 
respect invisible to us because it is still dormant. We respond to the world 
very much like non-agentic beings—without engaging the features of us 
that are (or more precisely, will be) agentic. We allow the world simply 
to appeal directly to our needs and appetites. We have not yet learned to 
operate in self-management mode. When one is operating in this largely 
non-agentic way, the future is practically invisible, completely out of 
sight. Practicality is focused entirely on the now.
Growing up involves learning to respond to the world differently—not 
always and immediately with our hearts, but (dare I say it) with an atti-
tude of mastery, not necessarily over the world, but over ourselves. This 
does not necessitate that the reactive self must disappear. It does not. It 
can be submerged or obscured in what will come later; but it is never 
completely absent.
There’s a very good reason why that reactive self has to precede a more 
grownup self. Our existence as living things, either as individuals, or as a 
210 
M. Thalos

species is marked by what I like to call the tyranny of the present: in order 
to exist one year from today, I, who begins existing let’s say today, must 
exist every single day from today until one year hence. This is true of liv-
ing things, of species of living things, and possibly even of cultural com-
munities and certain works of art.4 There’s a bare minimum of existence 
that they have to pass, each and every moment, in order to proceed to 
existing in subsequent moments in time. We say of these things that they 
have life histories (narratives). This results in a kind of existential fragil-
ity.5 Thus concern for the present must be elemental—justifiable as most 
primal in view of our existential fragility. No wonder then that it appears 
first in ontogeny.
There is something else that favors the reactive self in childhood. 
Children experience pure unbridled joy in engagements with the 
moment. It makes them good partners to their parents, who are obliged 
to have them in tow while they are in pursuit of more grown-up ambi-
tions. Thus the lives of children can mesh easily with those of their par-
ents—something that a teenager’s life does nowhere near as well. It’s thus 
quite fortunate for many parents that the developments in an offspring’s 
ambitions and scope of concerns is accompanied by a larger capacity for 
pursuing them on their own. Thus, they stop being good companions to 
their parents just when they start being capable of taking on more things 
on their own. This cannot be a coincidence.
If concern for the present were all a person ever had, by way of navi-
gating the world, much of what we do by way of reasoning practically 
would be unintelligible. For example, aspiring would be unintelligible, 
since aspiring involves a hope for changing oneself or a hope for what 
one is not-yet. Relatedly, making decisions that are liable to completely 
change one’s priorities is unintelligible if a person could only serve as 
steward for their present concerns (cf. Paul 2015).
6	
The Future Stance Part II: Reaping What 
We Sow
The first thing we learn is to stop letting everything wash over us as 
patients in life—to stop behaving as consumers of fate only. We learn 
to become, in our own minds, producers of it as well. There are two 
11  Attitude: How We Learn to Inhabit the Future 
211

fundamental ways of being a producer of fate. The first (in time as well 
as in principle) is an attitude of trying to control as much as possible 
of the proceedings—let’s refer to this as the dictator mode. I dare say 
that we all start the process of leaving behind the reactive phase in the 
dictator mode. But very soon thereafter most of us learn that not every-
thing should be related to in dictator mode, because some aspects of 
the world are like us—self-moving. Seeking to control these Others is 
not an appropriate goal. While almost all of us develop all the way in 
regards to treating Others as like unto ourselves by young adulthood, a 
sizeable portion of us make only small advances—they are on the autism 
spectrum. Or, worse, certain of those among us find themselves with 
no intrinsic motivation to respond with a regard for Others—they are 
sociopaths.
Still, whether we think of Others as things to be controlled, or instead 
as partners in whatever projects are undertaken, we are in this growing-
­up phase also learning to think of the future as a new playground in 
which to harvest what we sow, as well as at the same time learning to 
take responsibility for what transpires in the meantime and beyond. We 
learn that the future holds consequences for things we do in the past 
and present. The animals we can train—dogs are an especially good 
case—can appreciate associations between things in the extended now 
(the duration of their short-term memories) but they have no con-
sciousness of cause and effect as such. This larger capacity requires a 
serious appreciation of what no-longer-is and what is not-yet; and this 
requires “having feet” in the past and the future. It requires taking up 
residence in the arc of time.
We colloquially appreciate that growing up is in part learning to take 
responsibility. What is not often appreciated is that this amounts to being 
able to view the future as a place in which to act, as well as a place for 
enjoying the fruits of one’s labor. It’s a place to inhabit. This is something 
that one does not appreciate in one’s youth. In young ­adulthood, one 
begins (and practices) taking longer and longer views on the future. Young 
adulthood is a time in which many people (if they’re sufficiently fortu-
nate in life, which obviously means not everyone) buoyantly endeavor. 
They explode in an overabundance of thinking about what can be—both 
what one can experience when grown up and what one can be and accom-
212 
M. Thalos

plish there, by way of leaving one’s mark as an individual. Some people 
prioritize accomplishment; others may be less accomplishment-­oriented. 
Whether or not one is accomplishment-oriented, there is the question of 
companions on the journey as well as accomplices in one’s life projects. 
To have companions and/or accomplices, one has to learn to work and 
plan with others. This is no small skill. In fact, to work with one’s own 
future self is itself a major skill, and importantly intertwined with the 
skills needed for working with others. Here is what I mean.
In the reactive phase of development, the present moment is where 
action takes place. Past and future are both different countries. Now is all 
the time there is for action. This is fundamentally the perspective taken 
by EU: there is only one calculation to make, one view of what is desir-
able, and it is to be performed now. Even when EU considers a “policy” 
choice, it assumes that the choice is made now. Even if the existence 
of the future is acknowledged, it is acknowledged as a place simply for 
reaping the rewards of the choices taken now. I have a phrase for this pic-
ture: the space of decision is isotropic—it’s the same everywhere you look, 
whether forwards or backwards. This is depicted in Fig. 11.1a.
The future stance, by contrast, is depicted in Fig. 11.1b: this is the 
grown-up way of being oriented to time, and future time specifically. The 
grown-up’s vision of the time field is, by contrast with that of a youth, 
is one that admits of more than one locus of agency for oneself as well 
as for Others. The space is therefore not the same in every direction you 
look: there is no locus of agency in the past, only the in the future. These 
are copies of me. What’s more, the more nuanced grown-up vision—the 
vision that one grows into if one is not autistic or sociopathic—is one 
where there is not only me, but also Others. I practice working with 
the Me of the future by working with Others in the now. This is how 
the future stance is intertwined with what we might wish to call the We 
stance.
Part of what we mean when we say that something is more grown-up, 
is that it is at least in some contexts, the right way of proceeding—it is to 
be preferred, or to be prescribed, over the less grown-up. We would like 
in some way to shine a light of approval upon it. At least part of what 
we have to do to represent growing up in its fullest, is to give an account 
of how grown-up stances are in some sense deserving of approval. That 
11  Attitude: How We Learn to Inhabit the Future 
213

means we have to appreciate the standards of assessment associated with 
the stances, as well as with progress through them. And that locates study 
of the future stance at least partly in the sphere of philosophy, just as it is 
located partly in the spheres of psychology and biology.
It bears emphasizing that, as Fig. 11.1 makes clear, the future stance is 
nowise about predicting the future—about being able in some way, how-
ever approximate or tentative, to foresee it. It’s not about having theoreti-
cal knowledge regarding things that enable you to predict how they will 
tick, so that you can outwit them. (That kind of knowledge, even if it 
were available, would only make you as canny as a psychopath.) Because 
neither the future stance nor the We stance involves employing knowl-
edge of alleged law-like regularities to calculate the future from informa-
tion about the past and present. Each stance is involved with inhabiting 
the still-absent future much as we inhabit the present. Obviously I don’t 
mean time travel. So what do I mean?
Fig. 11.1  (a) Phase 1, the “I” in isotropic time; (b) grown-up phase, “I” and 
others tracing arcs in anisotropic time
214 
M. Thalos

You might think that you as an adult are always inhabiting only the 
here-and-now. But that’s not true. Look around you and the past comes 
alive: a cup evokes a shared conversation, a book an important develop-
ment in your thought, a photograph an entire lifetime with someone you 
once loved. And of course we are (as I like to think) surrounded by the 
triumphs of our predecessors—for example this page of text, written or 
virtual, is a testament to the ingenuity of generations of language-loving 
and technology-creating human beings. We can no longer move an inch 
without falling into the orbit of some dead person’s legacy. Jean-Paul 
Sartre puts this well:
When knowledge and feeling are oriented toward something real, actually 
perceived, the thing, like a reflector, returns the light it has received. As a 
result of this continual interaction, meaning is continually enriched at the 
same time as the object soaks up affective qualities. The object thus obtains 
its own particular depth and richness.
Objects and places themselves take us into the past. Keith Basso writes 
about how the Apache take their children to certain places in their land-
scape to tell them stories about what happened there—tales of both hero-
ism and folly; the children’s lessons, like the Apache wisdom, inhabit 
those very places. The moral is that familiar objects and places are not 
inert: our interactions with them take us into the past. The life of an adult 
is one that is enlivened by and intertwined with objects that are them-
selves intertwined with the past. We think that being so alive to things is 
actually being alive simpliciter, or alive in the present—and for good rea-
son: if you’re not alive to the meanings of things around you, you’re really 
not alive at all. But we should also appreciate that what these objects do 
is help us inhabit the past.
I maintain that to be alive, as an adult, also means being oriented 
towards the future in the same way. Yes, once more you’re not literally 
time traveling. But your cognition has to encompass the future in a cer-
tain way, indeed to hold multiple possible futures, and to navigate your 
way in the here-and-now around those possible futures, all without being 
entirely sure which of the alternative possibilities is in fact the actual 
future—the one that will one day be your past. We comfortably move 
11  Attitude: How We Learn to Inhabit the Future 
215

among alternative futures—they’re the furniture of our lives as much as 
the objects wrought by the past.
Indeed it’s impossible to predict the future to any significant degree 
unless you’re able to think in a grown-up way about how other human 
beings genuinely figure in it—how they contribute to bringing the future 
about even as they move through the here and now. That includes your-
self: you cannot predict the future unless you’re able to appreciate how 
you figure in it as an entity who moves through the here and now as you 
reach for that future. This means that the future is best coped with via 
treating it as if it were a very long present—very long indeed—and one 
in which things may turn on a dime.
EU asks us to proceed as though we were still in the reactive phase in 
relation to time, and not developed into more grown-up stances. It asks of 
adults that they deny themselves the complex ways of embedding them-
selves in time. It asks us to take a very simplistic perspective on ourselves 
(and Others) in time. It might seem reasonable to “discount” the future 
from this simplistic perspective, but discounting is something that would 
be completely irrational from the perspective of someone who inhabits 
the future as well as the present, and so triangulating their behavior in the 
now from that more complex perspective.
The point I’m seeking to make about EU was made a long time ago 
by Leonard Savage. He distinguished between “small worlds” and “grand 
worlds”. He said that that EU is appropriate to “small worlds”—worlds 
where you can effectively localize the consequences as well as the entirety 
of the actions themselves that you are now contemplating. (And we could 
agree with Macbeth: “If it were done when ’tis done, then ’twere well/ It 
were done quickly.”) In small worlds, the following slogan is appropri-
ate: “Look before you leap”—which is effectively the slogan of EU. In 
the grand world, by contrast, you have to work more piecemeal, the 
more applicable slogan is: “You can cross that bridge when you come 
to it”—meaning: “these considerations can wait a while; more decisions 
are ­coming relating to the things you are considering here-and-now, so 
proceed accordingly, mindful of that fact.”
Here are some further remarks that Savage makes in this context:
Though the “Look before you leap” principle is preposterous if carried to 
extremes, I would none the less argue that it is the proper subject of our 
216 
M. Thalos

further discussion, because to cross one’s bridges when one comes to them 
means to attack relatively simple problems of decision by artificially con-
fining attention to so small a world that the “Look before you leap” prin-
ciple can be applied there.
I read Savage here as imagining (falsely, I believe) that one can, without 
loss, always proceed by “artificially confining attentions” to relatively sim-
ple decision problems. However, those who’ve come after Savage simply 
didn’t even recognize the concerns he had, and have ridden fairly rough-­
shod over the careful points he was trying to make—namely, that we can’t 
use the sort of decision theory we currently have (and for which we have 
Savage, among others to thank) for contexts in which one cannot break 
the decision problem down without loss. Savage, in the end, was wrong 
that we could turn grand worlds into small ones by simple acts of deci-
sion engineering.
Unfortunately those who have come after Savage have not had so 
much as a second thought about the subject of the relation between 
small and grand worlds. We have done nothing but employ EU abso-
lutely everywhere. Because we seem to have nothing else to use. If we 
don’t use EU, what shall we use instead? That’s a substantial philosophi-
cal question. My answer here is that we simply haven’t done enough 
work on the theory of decision; we have not even begun to examine the 
differences between young and old in relation to how they approach 
decision-making. And when it comes to the normative, we absolutely 
require a theory of how possibly to put off crossing bridges, but to do it 
in a rational way, mindful of the fact that we cannot always (or perhaps 
ever) take all relevant consequences and considerations before taking 
our first steps toward an outcome; we absolutely require a theory of 
how to this in a way that doesn’t undermine aims—not only those we 
currently embrace, but aims we will or simply might come to embrace 
later. And this is at least partly what it takes to look after your future 
self, never mind those Others who will come after you and those who 
walk alongside.
So what sort of hard intellectual work is required to appreciate and 
apply the reasoning “You can cross that bridge when you come to it”? 
Let’s look a bit more closely at what adults can actually do.
11  Attitude: How We Learn to Inhabit the Future 
217

7	
The Next Stance
An adult’s vision of the time field is, by contrast with that of a youth, a 
stance that admits more than one locus on the map of decision-making. 
The adult acknowledges multiple loci of action, and treats them as such. 
In some instances, the sites of agency are contemporaneous—others with 
whom I am coordinating or collaborating or vying. In other instances, it 
is myself at different points in time whose (alien) concerns I am anticipat-
ing. In yet other instances, both types of sites are important to treat as 
such. The topic of multiple sites of agency is the province of game theory. 
And the form decision-making takes there is strategic—it involves taking 
into consideration the deliberations of Others as one proceeds to settle 
one’s own. What I am saying here is that grown-up decision-making—
decision-making for a grand world—is always strategic, because of the 
pervasive reality of multiple sites of agency.
But appreciating one’s timeline as one with multiple sites of agency 
is not simply about courting (any way one can) and ultimately enlisting 
the aid of others for the sake of one’s own ends and ambitions. Rather, 
the adult’s vision of the future includes other people because an adult can 
see the point of joining in collaborative projects as well. Thus, the adult’s 
goals themselves, and not only the means to them, are often shared and 
collective. Adults join projects already underway, as well as seeking to 
organize others to advance their own projects. In an adult’s mind, other 
people’s very participation renders the achievement of individual goals 
that are part of a larger collaborative system of interaction genuinely 
satisfying—and valuable in ways that the individual goals, if they did 
not cohere in a larger system of collaborations, could never be. Science, 
Art, and Philosophy are just a few of these larger systems of collabora-
tive undertaking that one joins already underway, systems that would 
be drained of their richness if the goal-oriented participation of others 
were scrubbed from them. This is the insight encapsulated in Samuel 
Scheffler’s brilliant book (Scheffler 2013). He shows us that we need 
future generations—most of whom we will not be related to either by 
birth or acquaintance—to exist and carry torches for undertakings we 
value today, just as we need those who have already gone before us in 
218 
M. Thalos

history; we would be profoundly diminished if those future people were 
not to exist. Philosophy, for instance, would be much diminished today, 
if we knew the world as we know it would end in a month’s time—for 
whatever reason. To inhabit the present as an adult is at least partly to 
inhabit it as a member of a community with a wide variety of projects, 
many of which will outlast any one of our own short lives. Vast stretches 
of grown-up life, like grown-up decision-making itself, are thorough-­
going collaborative, even if on reflection we think of ourselves as doing 
it all by our lonesome. And to appreciate this fact requires distinguishing 
between predicting (forecasting) what others will do, on the one hand, 
and anticipating them as either collaborators or opponents, on the other. 
This distinction is crucial in contexts of decision-making.
The contrast between predicting and anticipating is important. Agents, 
as game theory itself appreciates, are never subject to prediction: they 
cannot be predicted but might be anticipated, whereas the non-agentic 
world might (if we’re lucky) be subject to forecast or partial forecast. 
When all is forecast-susceptible, the action space is isotropic—there is 
only me acting in the now. When it also includes that which is only to be 
anticipated, the action space is anisotropic.
One important developmental fact to emphasize is that a youth can 
learn how to work with a future self, by working with others in the pres-
ent (the latter is simpler in many ways than working with future agents, 
oneself included). Only then can one begin contemplating working with 
others in the future. And, as is now obvious, the capacity for working 
with one’s future self is very much dependent upon and intertwined with 
that for working with others. Because your future self can be as alien as 
another person. (It is well known that sociopaths have difficulty with 
long-term life plans, and generally with living time-coherent lives.)
8	
Conclusion: Human Agency
Human agency is much more than a matter of causing one’s limbs to 
move in service of current ambitions.6 Human agency is fundamentally 
distributed in time, as well as across the boundaries of “I”. We has a spe-
cial role in human life—a role that grows over a person’s lifetime. Like 
11  Attitude: How We Learn to Inhabit the Future 
219

the development of a stance on the future, the ability to think We (like 
the ability to think will) is pervasive and transformative of a wide spec-
trum of our practical operations in life, intellectual and motivational 
alike. They are not merely transformations of “cool” reason—of our 
capacities for knowledge—but also of our ways of inhabiting the world 
with the fullness of our entire suite of cognitive functions. We require a 
theory of decision-making that can do full justice to this reality. Many 
features of decision and game theories as we know them today are not 
up to the task.
Notes
	1.	 Ken Binmore (2006) agrees. But his way with it is quite different from 
mine, and reductionistic in the same way that EU is.
	2.	 One argument that might be made here by an opponent is that feed-
back or training of some sort might improve performance of a func-
tion without the multiplicities I am about to propose. This might well 
be the case for some sorts of functionalities, but not the sorts of func-
tionalities that are as transformative as the ones I will be discussing.
	3.	 You may perhaps be wondering if it’s unfair to refer to EU’s stance as 
an “assumption”—after all, it might seem as though EU’s modeling 
choices rest on solid normative ground. While this is not the place to 
pursue the argument at any length, I would simply point out here that 
the proofs offered for the fundamental Expected Utility Theorem 
include many assumptions about preference that go proxy for the idea 
that there must be a single “answer” to the question of what to pick in 
a decision context, and these are simply assumed to cohere into a sin-
gle function with certain mathematical characteristics.
	4.	 Nations may not be subject to this tyranny. Barry Smith has argued 
(1997) that throughout history some nations have popped in and out 
of existence—for example, Poland. But as Leo Zaibert notes (private 
correspondence), his point may apply only to Poland the country and 
not Poland the nation (nor to Poland the cultural community).
	5.	 This is the basis of our ordinary exercises of caution. More sophisti-
cated management of cautionary strategies belongs to a larger stance 
220 
M. Thalos

that is oriented towards judicious activities in the face of risks of all 
kinds. There is no space here to discuss that stance.
	6.	 In fact, I believe that the familiar conception of action itself as a mat-
ter of a coupling of a belief and a desire, that results in a bodily move-
ment of some sort, is implausible and simplistic in the extreme. See 
Thalos (2016).
References
Binmore, K. 2006. Making decisions in large worlds. Talk delivered at the 2006 
ANDRES conference in Marseilles.
Carstensen, L. 2006. The Influence of a Sense of Time on Human Development. 
Science 312(5782): 1913–5.
Eckert, Mark A. et al. 2010. Age-Related Changes in Processing Speed: Unique 
Contributions of Cerebellar and Prefrontal Cortex. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 
doi:10.3389/neuro.09.010.2010
Joyce, J. 1999. The Foundations of Causal Decision Theory. New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
Paul, L.A. 2015. Transformative Experience. Oxford University Press.
Ramachandran, V.S. 2011. The Tell-Tale Brain. Norton.
Savage, L. 1954/1972. Foundations of Statistics. New York: Dover.
Scheffler, Samuel. 2013. Death and the Afterlife. Oxford.
Smith, B. 1997. The Cognitive Geometry of War. In Peter Koller and Klaus 
Puhl (eds), Current Issues in Political Philosophy: Holder-Pickler-Tempsky, 
394–403.
Thalos, M. 2016. A Social Theory of Freedom. Routledge.
Thalos, M. [under review]. Three Stances of Practical Reason, available at: 
https://www.academia.edu/7888321/Three_Stances_of_Practical_Reason 
accessed August 27, 2016.
11  Attitude: How We Learn to Inhabit the Future 
221

223
© The Author(s) 2016
L. Zaibert (ed.), The Theory and Practice of Ontology, 
DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-55278-5_12
1	
Introduction
“The art of motherhood involves much silent, unobtrusive self-denial, 
an hourly devotion which finds no detail too minute”, wrote Honoré de 
Balzac (1996). De Balzac has a point. Life changes after you have a child. 
Hormones rage, chores and burdens multiply and social roles change. 
Losing the freedom you used to have is a major life-altering event. A 
hindrance. An encumbrance. An obstruction of happiness and justice.
It can be a full-blown soul-draining, tear-inducing experience. Donna 
Wick, mother of three and co-producer of the documentary Bringing Up 
Baby explains:
You feel alone and think you’re crazy. We want women to be able to say it’s 
O.K. to dislike parts of being a mother. It’s boring, lonely, not valued and not 
paid. It’s mindless and repetitive and no one ever says to you, “It looks like 
you’re having a tough day, go for a cup of coffee” like they do at the office.1
12
B. Brogaard (*) 
University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA
e-mail: brogaardb@gmail.com
Parental Love and the Meaning of Life
Berit Brogaard

Having a kid is soul-draining for fathers too. One dad, who is in his thir-
ties and has three young children, confesses to Reddit that he regrets his 
decision to have kids2: “The major problem is the loss of freedom. And 
the financial costs,” he writes,
I barely see my friends anymore. I hate coming home from work and hav-
ing to watch the kids by myself ... I hate never being able to travel. I hate 
that I don’t have my weekends off anymore. I actually look forward to 
Mondays because of how much work it is to watch the kids ... I hate that I 
had to move to a city I don’t like because we needed help from my parents. 
I hate being stuck in a job I don’t enjoy because of our financial situation. 
… There are nice moments, but overall it’s just pure stress. I just feel like 
I’ve given up my entire life and I’ve barely gotten anything out of it.
The question I wish to address is: How can parental love, devotion and 
commitment overcome what appears to be a loss of personal autonomy 
and life satisfaction? And I will argue that the special ontological struc-
ture of parental love makes it unique in a way that can add value to a life, 
despite its costs.
2	
Parenting and the Loss of Autonomy
When you make decisions and act on those decisions, your decisions 
and actions are more or less autonomous. When fully based on what you 
value and identify with, we say that your decisions and choices are fully 
autonomous. Say you value your romantic relationship. Deciding to act 
lovingly toward your beloved is based on what you value, beating him or 
her senseless is not. Personal autonomy is itself valued cross-culturally, as 
it is universally taken to be crucial to the possibility of leading a satisfying 
life. People need to feel autonomous to feel satisfied. As Walt Whitman 
put it in Leaves of Grass:
Not I, not any one else can travel that road for you,
You must travel it for yourself.
…
It is not far, it is within reach,
224 
B. Brogaard

Perhaps you have been on it since you were born and did not know,
Perhaps it is every where on water and on land.
But what exactly is it about autonomy that makes it so important?
According to Stephen Darwall, when we (paternalistically) limit some-
one’s autonomy for their own best interest, we are acting wrongly (Darwall 
2006). The wrongness of this paternalism is the result of our not respect-
ing this person as an equal person, or as a fellow rational agent who, like 
us, can make her own decisions. We all have the same dignity: “Every life 
deserves a certain amount of dignity, no matter how poor or damaged the 
shell that carries it” (Rick Bragg), “All human beings are born free and 
equal in dignity and rights” (Universal Declaration of Human Rights), 
“Without dignity, identity is erased (Laura Hillenbrand), “Any man or 
institution that tries to rob me of my dignity will lose” (Nelson Mandela), 
“One’s dignity may be assaulted, vandalized and cruelly mocked, but it 
cannot be taken away unless it is surrendered” (Morton Kondrake).
Respect is not the only source of the value of autonomy. A person has 
a right to demand autonomy, but as Darwall (2006) points out, auton-
omy is also valuable as a benefit. Autonomy preserves personal value and 
contributes to what we might call flourishing in an agent-relative sense. 
Eating broccoli may be something that is objectively good for me, just 
as it is good for you, but if I genuinely dislike broccoli, eating broccoli is 
not of personal value to me. The reason we should care about whether an 
activity contributes to our personal values also turns on the equal dignity 
of people. Because we have equal dignity, we have a right to value one 
thing but not another and act accordingly. When we lose autonomy, we 
lose that right to decide what we want to do.
The problem with activities that imply a loss of autonomy, then, is 
that people need to feel autonomous to flourish as people and avoid los-
ing their dignity. We need to feel we are the authors of our own behavior 
rather than feeling that our behavior is controlled by external forces 
that are not truly a part of our self. Because autonomy is a basic human 
need, it can be a traumatic experience to see it diminished. In extreme 
cases it can result in a loss of a person’s identity, or what is also known 
as “mental death” (Ebert and Dyck 2004), which occurs in contexts of 
entrapment and totalitarian control that seriously limit one’s choices, 
such as torture.
12  Parental Love and the Meaning of Life 
225

Of course, the pressures that normally come along with parenthood 
are quite unlike torture. But there are similarities. One classical form of 
torture is to keep people awake. Keeping someone awake intermittently 
or for long periods of time is a highly effective way to break the will of 
a person and for that reason it has often been used in military interro-
gations. Sleep deprivation radically increases stress levels, increasing the 
chances the tortured might divulge important information. Over lon-
ger periods of time, sleep deprivation can cause cognitive impairment, 
psychosis, and a malfunctioning immune system. US military person-
nel were ordered to keep prisoners awake by blasting ear-splittingly loud 
music at them—for days, weeks or even months on end—at prisons in 
Iraq, Afghanistan and Guantánamo Bay.3
For many parents, minding an infant is not unlike having loud music 
blasting in their ears, preventing them from sleeping. It’s estimated that 
up to 40 % of all infants have colic, a condition associated with inconsol-
able fussiness and screaming that can go on for hours on end.4 Colicky 
babies’ senseless crying, screaming in fact, can be incredibly difficult to 
endure. As one parent of a colicky baby puts it:
On top of the regular newborn workload, i.e. feeding and changing him a 
dozen times a day while trying to squeeze in small increments of sleep 
around his day/night confusion, my wife and I were in a constant state of 
staving off crying. I remember experiencing such hopelessness that I told 
my wife, “I feel like I have nothing to look forward to.” … We’d fight, of 
course. You can’t fight with the baby, even though you pretty much want to 
throw him out the window. So who else can you blame but your spouse? Or 
your mother, or her mother. “You’re holding him wrong!” “I’m trying!”5
But even for those 60 % of parents who do not have to deal with col-
icky babies, sleep deprivation takes its toll. A poll by the National Sleep 
Foundation found that 76 % of parents have frequent sleep problems.6
Sleep, of course, is but one of the countless things you do not get 
enough of during the first years of becoming a parent. Even worse: verbal, 
psychological, and emotional abuse in relationships are forms of mistreat-
ment that can resemble many parental scenarios.
Psychological, emotional, or verbal maltreatment causes a person to 
lose her ability to react normally and can result in a mental numbing, 
226 
B. Brogaard

or mental death. A psychologically, emotionally, or verbally abused per-
son might never realize that she is abused. Psychological, emotional, and 
verbal abuse can lead to feelings of guilt, shame, ineffectiveness, despair, 
hopelessness, distrust, and being on the edge, attachment problems, long-­
term personality changes, and changes in core beliefs and assumptions.
While some parents, regrettably, abuse their children, the parent–child 
relationship is frequently abusive in the opposite direction. Who has not 
put up with their children shouting “I hate you”, “I will kill you”, or 
“you’re an idiot”? Temper tantrums, eye-rolling, feet stomping, doors 
slamming and heavy sighs are genuine cases of psychological abuse that 
can have the same psychological consequences as psychological abuse in 
romantic relationships.
But it’s not just torture-like scenarios and psychological abuse that 
makes parenting a case par excellence of a long-term situation that deeply 
threatens personal autonomy. On top of that, there are the gazillion 
things you would never have chosen to do or possess, if you had not had 
babies. After having a child, you are suddenly forced to plan your life 
around hours of screaming, midnight breast feedings, diaper changes, 
afternoon naps, proper bedtimes, ear infections, children’s sick days, hur-
ricane days, play dates, soccer games, bullying, winter school concerts, 
science projects, Spanish homework, final exams, puberty mood swings, 
little punk breakups, broken hearts, teens talking back to you, bathrooms 
being invaded for hours.
Having a child means giving up on basic needs that sustain you as 
a human being, and it means losing a bit of your dignity as a person. 
Occasionally one wonders how the human species has survived.
3	
Parenting and Life Satisfaction
It may seem self-evident that parenting involves a loss of autonomy. But 
things are a bit more complicated than that. It is not simply a conclu-
sion we can come to by thinking hard enough about it while sipping 
green tea in an armchair. This is because not everything that is stressful 
and involves sacrifices implies a loss of autonomy. Sometimes hard work 
and encumbrances are a means to an end. Taking an abominable and 
12  Parental Love and the Meaning of Life 
227

­mind-­numbing yet required course in college may be demanding and 
deeply displeasing and yet, for most people, it is not the sort of thing that 
subtracts from their autonomy.
But the sacrifices that come along with parenting are not merely a 
means to an end, the way that taking dreadful college courses is a means 
to a college degree. Empirical studies of life satisfaction, happiness, and 
meaning suggest that we do not value raising children to nearly the same 
extent that we value other routine activities. Most surveys use a common 
format to measure happiness and life-satisfaction. The main question 
about happiness asks people to rate their psychological state on a three-­
step scale. It is stated as follows: “Taken all together, how would you say 
things are these days–would you say that you are very happy, pretty happy 
or not too happy?” Life-satisfaction is frequently measured on a four-step 
scale that includes the question. “On the whole, are you very satisfied, 
fairly satisfied, not very satisfied, or not at all satisfied with the life you 
lead?” The answers from these surveys are then correlated with numerous 
demographic and personal data, such as country of residence, income, 
highest level of education, number of children, and marital status. The 
World Database of Happiness, which is publicly available, summarizes 
the result of these measures of life-satisfaction and happiness in more 
than 100 countries.7 In the majority of countries, including the United 
States, the data indicate that life satisfaction is lower among people with 
children. In poorer countries with higher fertility rates than in wealthy 
countries like the US, being a parent is consistently associated with lower 
life satisfaction.
The data from the World Database are consistent with a 2006 study 
published in the Journal of Health and Social Behavior. Using data from 
the National Survey of Families and Households, Robin Simon, a soci-
ologist at Florida State University, and his co-author found that parents 
are more likely to be depressed than people without children (Evenson 
and Simon, 2005). Another study published in 2011  in the journal 
Psychological Science points out that even apparently happy parents may 
be covering up their true feelings. On average, parents exaggerate how 
happy their kids make them in spite of financial and physical stressors.
Although most empirical studies point toward a loss of life satisfac-
tion as a result of parenting, there are two rather surprising results in 
228 
B. Brogaard

this arena. Research published in the January 2013 issue of Psychological 
Science appeared to demonstrate for the first time in years that parent-
ing really is associated with more happiness and meaning in life (Nelson 
et al. 2013). Psychologist Elizabeth Dunn and her colleagues conducted 
three studies that explored whether parents are happier, more satisfied 
and think more about meaning than their child-free peers, while also 
looking at whether age and the parents’ sex matter to their feelings about 
parenting.
The first study aimed at determining whether parents evaluated their 
lives more positively than non-parents, collecting data using the World 
Values Survey, a widely used survey of well-being. Participants completed 
single-item measures of happiness, life satisfaction, and thoughts about 
meaning in life. They were asked how happy they were, “taking all things 
together” (1= very happy, 2 = quite happy, 3 = not very happy, 4 = not 
at all happy), how satisfied they were with their lives “these days”, with 
responses ranging from 1 = dissatisfied to 10 = satisfied, and how often, 
if at all, they thought about the meaning and purpose of life, on a scale 
ranging from 1 (often) to 4 (never).
The second study looked at whether parents feel better than non-­
parents on a day-to-day basis. Participants were given an electronic pager 
and were instructed to complete a response sheet each time they were 
paged. The response sheet asked them to determine how much they were 
feeling each of 19 emotions on a scale from 1 (not at all) to 7 (extremely). 
The 19 emotions included were happiness, joy, contentment, excitement, 
pride, accomplishment, interest, and amusement (positive) and anger, 
sadness, fear, disgust, guilt, embarrassment, shame, anxiety, irritation, 
frustration, and boredom (negative). During the following week partici-
pants were randomly paged five times a day during waking hours.
The third study examined whether parents experience more positive 
feelings when taking care of children than during the rest of their day. 
Participants who had at least one child 18 years old or younger at home 
were asked to report what they did on the previous day for a predeter-
mined set of eight episodes. Participants could choose from a list of five 
common daily activities (e.g., taking care of children, watching TV, cook-
ing). Participants were furthermore asked to rate the extent to which they 
felt “happy”, “warm-friendly”, or “enjoying myself” and the extent to 
12  Parental Love and the Meaning of Life 
229

which they felt “a sense of meaning and purpose in life” during the epi-
sode, in both cases on a scale from 0 (not at all) to 6 (very much).
In the first study the researchers found that parents are happier and 
more satisfied with their lives than their child-free peers. When control-
ling for the sex of the parent, however, it turned out that only fathers 
experienced greater overall happiness and life satisfaction compared 
to their child-free peers. Both mothers and father had more frequent 
thoughts about meaning. Married parents were found to be significantly 
happier than unmarried parents, although the researchers did not find 
any significant difference in the frequency of thoughts about meaning. 
Younger parents between the ages of 17 and 25 were found to be sig-
nificantly less satisfied with their lives than their child-free counterparts. 
Mid-range parents between the ages of 26 and 62 were significantly more 
satisfied with their lives than their child-free peers. Older parents (63 
or older) scored the same as older non-parents on the life-satisfaction 
measure.
In the second study it was found that parents experienced positive 
emotions and fewer negative emotions than their child-free counter-
parts. As in the first study, parenthood was more consistently linked to 
increased positive emotions for fathers compared to their child-free peers, 
but there was no significant increase in positive emotions for mothers.8 
Mothers did report slightly fewer depressive symptoms.9
In the third study, the researchers found that parents reported more 
positive emotions and a stronger sense of meaning in life when they were 
taking care of their children than when they were not. They did not find 
that the sex of the parent mattered in this study but they note that the 
sample size of this study was small and that this effect therefore cannot 
be ruled out.
The title of the article is “In Defense of Parenthood: Children are 
Associated with More Joy than Misery.” This title, however, is misleading. 
The study does not predict that a parent, regardless of biological sex, will 
be more satisfied with their lives than non-parents. One of its main find-
ings was that fathers gain in happiness and life satisfaction from being 
parents, whereas mothers do not. No big surprises here: there are fathers 
who change the diaper of their “baby girl” for the first time, and after 
being showered down by a yellow sprinkler discovers that “she” is a boy.10
230 
B. Brogaard

Societal expectations for mothers and fathers remain firmly rooted in 
the traditional. Accordingly, the majority of fathers do not partake in 
parenting to nearly the same extent as mothers. It is still considered the 
woman’s job to make sure the children thrive, get fed, arrive at their 
extra-curricular activities on time and get to their yearly check-ups with 
their pediatrician. Still living in the unplanned world of their college 
years, many men shun scheduled activities. I have male colleagues who 
upon discovering their watch is three hours behind would rather make a 
spontaneous relocation to L.A. than schedule an appointment at a store 
that can fix it (well, not really).
If mothers do most of the chores associated with parenting, it’s no 
wonder that fathers find parenting awesome. A lot of things become 
magnificent when you do not need to do the work to make them hap-
pen. Owning a house is particularly awesome if you have staff doing 
the yard work, cleaning, and maintenance. Being the president of an 
association is awesome if all you need to do is include the fancy title 
in your email signature and give a presidential address at an annual 
meeting, while program chairs and secretaries put together the pro-
gram, make plans with the caterers, inquire with local hotels, and 
book the rooms.
The other apparent challenge to the finding that parenting does not 
make people happy came from German sociologist Matthias Pollmann-­
Schult (2014). He conducted a longitudinal study of how much life sat-
isfaction parenting adds to people’s lives lasting from 1994 to 2010. He 
reports on the basis of his findings that “parenthood by itself has a sub-
stantial and enduring positive effect on life satisfaction”. The conclusion, 
however, cannot be taken at face value. The reported data revealed that 
non-single parents and non-parents reported similar levels of life satisfac-
tion throughout the observation period, whereas single parents reported 
less life satisfaction than non-parents. The reported conclusion of the 
study is based on a fairly common way of controlling for various factors 
before reporting the results of data collection. In this study Pollmann-­
Schult controlled for the cost and time it takes to rear a child. Basically, 
the conclusion, then, is that if it did not cost anything and did not take 
any extra time to raise children, then raising children would add signifi-
cantly to people’s life satisfaction.
12  Parental Love and the Meaning of Life 
231

It is not clear, however, that controlling for these factors gives us any 
interesting insight into the life-satisfaction of parents. If being a parent 
did not cost anything and were not accompanied by significant chores, 
then there would be no issue concerning the feelings associated with par-
enting as opposed to simply being a parent. The teen sitcom Jessie, starring 
Debby Ryan as Jessie Prescott, depicts a case in which a small town Texas 
girl becomes a nanny to a high profile couple’s four multicultural chil-
dren. The mother is a business magnate and the father a movie director. 
Both are on the road during most of the episodes.
Clearly, if you have enough money to hire a 24 hour/day nanny, along 
the lines of what is depicted in Jessie, standing in the parent relation to 
four children, three of which are adopted, may add significantly to your 
life-satisfaction. But in these extreme cases we are not really evaluating 
parenting but rather the role of being a parent—the role without the hard 
work and the financial burden. The fact is that parenting costs a lot of 
money and involves a considerable number of fairly unpleasant chores. 
As French psychoanalyst Corinne Maier puts it,
Children cost a fortune. They are among the most expensive purchases the 
average customer can make in a lifetime. In monetary terms alone, they 
cost more than a high-end luxury car, or a world cruise, or a two-room 
apartment in Paris. Even worse, the cost goes up as time goes by. (Maier 
2007, 49).
In a study published in the November 2012 issue of the Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology, social psychologist Kostadin Kushlev and 
his colleagues found that even just thinking about money can negatively 
affect people’s otherwise positive experiences while taking care of their 
children (Kushlev et al. 2012). When they implicitly encouraged people 
to think about money and productivity while filling out a questionnaire 
at a festival with their children, parents reported less positive experiences 
than parents who were not encouraged to think about money and pro-
ductivity (in fact, people who were asked to think about money reported 
that taking care of their children was less meaningful than people who 
were encouraged to think about child-minding. The effect was most pro-
found in women. This is not surprising, given that women usually make 
the greatest career sacrifices when having children.
232 
B. Brogaard

Parenting that takes no time and costs nothing is not really parenting. 
If you control for the cost and time it takes to rear a child, the results you 
end up with do not reflect the life satisfaction of parenting but rather the 
life satisfaction of parents who have other care-givers raise their children. 
The natural conclusion to draw on the basis of these considerations is 
that the extra chores and additional financial stress that comes along with 
parenting takes away from the positive experience of being a parent.
Parenting is stressful. Period. And constant worry, stress, and anger are 
strong contributing factors to the loss of life-satisfaction. Adrian White 
conducted a meta-analysis of previous happiness surveys published by 
UNESCO, the CIA, the New Economics Foundation, the WHO, the 
Veenhoven Database, the Latinbarometer, the Afrobarometer, and the 
UNHDR. In the original studies participants were asked to rate their 
own happiness and satisfaction with life. The meta-analysis looks at fur-
ther factors, including population density, health, wealth, access to edu-
cation and the effects of war, famine, and national success on happiness. 
The meta-analysis indicates that a nation’s level of happiness is closely 
correlated with health levels (correlation of 0.62), wealth (0.52), and 
access to education (0.51).
If stress and life satisfaction are incompatible, it is to be expected that 
stressful parenting lowers life satisfaction. The added stress easily leads to 
independent problems that add further stress to life. For example, parent-
ing can be the cause of marital problems. As Jennifer Senior, contributing 
editor to the New York Times Magazine, argues in her book All Joy and 
No Fun: The Paradox of Modern Parenthood, children are far more likely 
to break up marriages than to repair them or leave them in the condition 
they were in before having children. It is not hard to imagine that argu-
ments about dividing up chores and distributing finances as well as per-
sistent subtle resentment when one parent does more than their fair share 
of the childcare and housework might escalate the loss of life satisfaction.
That the added stress that comes along with parenting is stealing away 
parent’s life satisfaction was confirmed by Katherine Nelson and colleagues 
of the University of California, Riverside in a meta-analysis published in 
the January 2014 issue of Psychological Science (Nelson et al. 2014). They 
reviewed more than 100 studies of parenting and life-­satisfaction; people 
with financial problems, sleep disturbance, and troubled marriages have 
12  Parental Love and the Meaning of Life 
233

the greatest negative experiences in the role as parents, whereas affluent 
people and people in stable, well-functioning marriages experience the 
greatest joy as parents.
These meta-analyses of parental satisfaction suggest that life-­satisfaction 
partially consists in the lack of negative factors, such as a failure to have 
one’s basic needs met (such as sleep), untreatable disease, and financial 
hardship. This insight concerning the underlying nature of life satisfac-
tion is consistent with recent brain research. Richard Davidson suggests 
that happiness, or life satisfaction, arises when there is a relatively low 
activation of the fear center in the emotional brain (the amygdala) and 
the right prefrontal cortex, and high activation of the left prefrontal cor-
tex, which is associated with reasoning, decision-making, and logical 
thought.11 In other words, feeling happy, or being satisfied with one’s life, 
mostly amounts to a lack of stress factors.
4	
The Ontological Structure 
of Parental Love
Absentee-parenting and helicoptering can partially preserve your life sat-
isfaction and personal autonomy after you have kids. In the former case, 
it preserves it by avoiding parenting, in the latter, it preserves it by mak-
ing the child an extension of yourself. For the rest of us: we lose part of 
our personal autonomy. So, what’s in it for us? I think the answer lies in 
the very special ontological structure of parental love.
In the case of romantic love, there can be no rational requirements 
to love one particular person rather than another, although there can be 
other kinds of requirements, such as those raised by promises and con-
tracts. Parental love is different. When becoming a parent, you stand in a 
unique relation to the child. There no doubt are parents who continue to 
love their dead children and people who imagine being parents who love 
their non-existing children. So, parental love cannot be a union consist-
ing of a parent and a child. Like romantic love, parental love is a complex 
emotion but one that differs in important ways from romantic love and 
not just in terms of how it feels.
234 
B. Brogaard

In the case of parental love, a particular relationship obtains between 
parents and children. It needn’t be a relationship definable by the idea of 
a union, rather it’s a relationship that involves a mental attitude toward 
a relationship of this type. I take the following uniqueness constraint to 
obtain for parental love: parental love requires a belief to the effect that 
you stand in a parenthood relation to a child, and that that relation in 
part makes your love appropriate.
This view is fairly similar to the relationship view defended by Niko 
Kolodny (2003). However, while a uniqueness constraint cannot realisti-
cally obtain for all cases of romantic love (Brogaard 2015), it seems to 
accurately capture an important aspect of parental love.
There has been much debate in the literature on love about how our 
theories of love can accommodate the feeling that our loved ones are 
irreplaceable. Elsewhere I have argued that they cannot and should not 
explain that feeling (Brogaard 2015, 2016). Despite what Kolodny main-
tains, his view is committed to the replaceability of our loved ones. On 
his view, you love another person only if you believe that a particular 
love relationship exists between you and your beloved. As this sort of 
belief could persist even if your beloved were replaced by a doppelganger, 
Kolodny’s view does not imply irreplaceability.
Now, this does not mean that your loving feelings could not change 
if you were to learn that your loved one had been replaced by a per-
fect replica. Over time, your affectionate response toward your beloved 
may come to be in part a response to your memories of the history you 
have had together. This would in many cases suffice for explaining why 
you would not love the replica (who after all has all the same contin-
gent ­features as your beloved). But even if love can come to be partially 
a response to such memories, it could also easily be the case that your 
love would persist, even if your beloved were replaced by a doppelganger. 
After all, you might not know about the swap.
Parental love, as formulated, does not imply irreplaceability for exactly 
the same reasons than romantic love does not. We can add, however, 
that in most circumstances, parental love goes beyond a mere belief that 
a unique relation exists between you and a child. In most cases a unique 
relation actually does exist between you and a child. A union is like a set. 
12  Parental Love and the Meaning of Life 
235

Its existence depends on the existence of its members. If one is replaced, 
the union is dissolved. In actuality, then, parental love often implies irre-
placeability, even though the real explanation of our loving feelings in all 
likelihood is more complicated than a mere feeling of not wanting your 
children replaced.
5	
Parenting and the Meaning of Life
The difficult question that remains is that of how a belief in a unique 
relation that makes parental, loving feelings appropriate could somehow 
positively make up for the loss of life satisfaction and personal autonomy 
that accompany having a child. The short answer is that the relationship 
that ordinarily obtains between you and your child always makes it the 
case that you have obligations to do what is in your child’s best interest 
(this is a claim I cannot defend here, so let us treat it as an assumption). 
Typically what is in your child’s best interest is that you organize your and 
their lives in a way that happens to contribute to the meaning of your life.
To illustrate this I will draw on the theory of the meaning of life 
defended by Barry Smith and myself in “On Luck, Responsibility and 
the Meaning of Life” (2005). On our view, if you want to lead a mean-
ingful life, then you will need to decide how to shape your life, and the 
world in which you live, and set goals accordingly. These goals must be 
effective in giving rise to corresponding actions on your part, and they 
must culminate in a shape or pattern that is non-trivial.
The realization of the goals you set must further represent what is for 
you a genuine achievement. Your goals must match (or challenge) your 
mental and physical abilities. The sorts of achievements here relevant go 
hand in hand further with a willingness to sacrifice one goal for the sake 
of other, less trivial goals and to delay immediate gratification for the 
sake of the realization of long-term plans. They involve the sort of mak-
ing and realizing of plans which rests on the use of reason, and thus 
on knowledge or one’s own capacities and features of your physical and 
social environment.
The effort in question must furthermore be directed and calibrated in 
relation to some independent standards of success and failure, standards 
236 
B. Brogaard

which are “objective” in the sense that they could be applied by some dis-
interested observer. There exist genuine, public measures of success and 
therefore also the risk of failure.
Activities closely associated in our minds with the possibility of lead-
ing a meaningful life—medicine, chess, athletics, opera-singing, natural 
science, exploration, invention, house-building—are characteristically 
those activities for which there are standards of the sort described, stan-
dards which can be easily applied in the public light of day and which are 
calibrated against the amount of care, effort and skill that is invested in 
the realization of the corresponding achievements.
To engage in these activities is to discover what the relevant stan-
dards of achievement are. Daydreaming, in contrast, which is calibrated 
against nothing in external reality, is an activity which is characteristic 
of a quite different sort of life—where there are no standards of bet-
ter and worse and no widely disseminated culture of honest admiration. 
Activities which have to be practiced in the dark, in secret (petty crime, 
for instance), are lacking such public measures of success, and thus they, 
too, are associated in our minds with meaninglessness.
Some activities, such as genocide and gratuitous torture, cause prob-
lems for this criterion. However, we suspect that, upon further scrutiny, 
these activities also will be found to be such that they need at least to 
some extent to be practiced in the dark. Hitler, Stalin and Mao did not, 
after all, openly advertise what was happening to the victims in their 
concentration camps.
Whether a person leads a meaningful life depends in every case not on 
that person’s, or other people’s, beliefs or feelings, but on what the person 
did as a consequence of his or her own decisions, as evaluated (actually or 
potentially) against the relevant public measures of success.
Our account requires that people must be responsible for their achieve-
ments in order for their life to be meaningful. The Forrest Gump figure, 
whose actions affect the world positively but who is not responsible for 
his achievements, does not lead a meaningful life. This raises the ques-
tion of how the factor of responsibility contributes to the meaning of a 
life. Notice that simple causal responsibility is not what matters here. 
One can be responsible in a causal sense, just as a short circuit can be a 
cause of a fire. Even if Forrest Gump is a cause of the positive outcomes 
12  Parental Love and the Meaning of Life 
237

of his actions, he is still not responsible for his actions in the sense that is 
relevant here. A person is responsible for an achievement roughly insofar 
as (1) it is caused by the person, and (2) it is reflective of his character. 
In order for an action to be reflective of a person’s character, this charac-
ter—roughly a constellation of dispositions—must be such as to lead the 
person to produce similar actions under a broad enough range of alterna-
tive conditions.
In this objective sense, it seems quite clear that raising a child can be an 
activity that can contribute to the meaning of your life. Empirical studies 
do not quite confirm that. A study published in the January 2013 issue 
of Psychological Science allegedly showed that parents experience more 
meaning in life associated with parenting than non-parents (Nelson et al. 
2013). The researchers claimed to have found that parents reported “a 
stronger sense of meaning in life”. “Having children really has made my 
life more meaningful”, is indeed a common party line. But was that in 
fact what the researchers showed?
It wasn’t. One of the main conclusions of the study was that parents 
are “thinking more about meaning in life than non-parents do”. This 
strongly suggests that parents are more desperately searching for mean-
ing in life compared to non-parents, but not that they experience more 
meaning in life than non-parents.
The lack of determinate results here, however, is unsurprising. 
Meaning is associated with longer-term gratification, not short-term 
gratification. So, if parents really did find that care-giving gave rise to a 
significant amount of additional meaning in life, it would be something 
that could only be experienced following long stretches of parenting—
once the ­care-­givers see what comes of their parenting and in particular 
their parental love. The fictional character Eva in We Need to Talk about 
Kevin, who is unable to bond with her son and who ends up feeling 
responsible for a Columbine-style massacre at her son’s school, would 
hardly sincerely claim that her parenting has contributed a significant 
amount of meaning to her life. Quite the contrary. The world would 
have been a better place to be had she chosen not to have any children. 
Her parenting job simply wasn’t a meaningful activity, however you 
look at it. But, of course, she had no way of knowing this at the early 
stages of child-rearing.
238 
B. Brogaard

In more fortunate cases, however, it seems that parenting can be a mean-
ingful activity in part because it involves the sort of making and realizing of 
plans that rests on the use of reason, and thus on knowledge of your own 
capacities and the standards of your physical and social environment.
What makes parenting special compared to being in a partnership is 
that it is so damn hard to get right; it requires enormous amounts of 
planning and exploits people’s capacities to the fullest. If you succeed, 
parenting can contribute to the meaning of your life. But it takes will-
power and sacrifices that few other activities can measure up to.
Notes
Thanks to Leo Zaibert for helpful comments on and edits of an earlier 
version of this paper.
	 1.	 http://www.nytimes.com/2002/05/12/style/admitting-to-mixed-­
feelings-about-motherhood.html Accessed on May 6, 2015.
	 2.	 http://thestir.cafemom.com/toddler/168247/man_who_regrets_
his_three Accessed on May 8, 2015.
	 3.	 http://www.andyworthington.co.uk/2008/12/15/a-history-of-
music-torture-in-the-war-on-terror/ Accessed on August 27, 2016.
	 4.	 http://kidshealth.org/parent/growth/growing/colic.html 
Accessed 
on August 27, 2016.
	 5.	 http://www.babble.com/baby/colic-dealing-with-crying-baby- 
harm-to-parents/ Accessed on August 27, 2016.
	 6.	 http://sleepfoundation.org/sites/default/files/FINAL%20SOF%20
2004.pdf Accessed on April 16, 2015.
	 7.	 Veenhoven, R., World Database of Happiness, Erasmus University 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands Accessed on December 13, 2014 at: 
http://worlddatabaseofhappiness.eur.nl
	 8.	 The p-value was higher than 0.05, which means that there was no 
significant correlation.
	 9.	 The p-value was 0.04, which is just below the cutoff for significance.
	10.	 This anecdote was relayed to me by my colleague Michael Slote.
	11.	 Lab for Affective Neuroscience http://psyphz.psych.wisc.edu/ Accessed 
on November 11, 2014.
12  Parental Love and the Meaning of Life 
239

References
Balzac, Honoré. (1996). In: Andrews R., et  al., editors. Columbia World of 
Quotations. New York: Columbia University Press.
Brogaard, Berit. (2015). On Romantic Love: Simple Truths about a Complex 
Emotion, New York: Oxford University Press.
Brogaard, Berit. (2016). “Does True Love Need to Be Unconditional?”, Emotion 
Researcher: ISRE’s Sourcebook for Research on Emotion and Affect. http://emo-
tionresearcher.com/does-true-love-need-to-be-unconditional/ Accessed on 
August 27, 2016.
Brogaard, Berit and Barry Smith. (2005). “On Luck, Responsibility and the 
Meaning of Life”, Philosophical Papers Vol. 31, no. 3 (November): 113–158.
Darwall, Stephen. (2006). “The Value of Autonomy and Autonomy of the 
Will”, Ethics 116 (January): 263–284.
Ebert, A. and Dyck, M.J. (2004). “The Experience of Mental Death: The Core 
Feature of Complex PTSD”, Clinical Psychology Review, 24(6) (October): 
617–635.
Evenson, Ranae J. and Robin W. Simon. (2005) “Clarifying the Relationship 
Between Parenthood and Depression”, Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 
46(4) (December): 341–358.
Kolodny, N. (2003). “Love as Valuing a Relationship”, Philosophical Review 112: 
135–89.
Kushlev, Kostadin, Elizabeth W. Dunn, and Claire E. Ashton-James. (2012). “Does 
Affluence Impoverish the Experience of Parenting?” Journal of Experimental 
Social Psychology, 48(6): 1381–1384. DOI:10.1016/j.jesp.2012.06.001.
Maier, Corinne. (2007). No Kids: Forty Good Reasons Not to Have Children. 
Toronto: McClelland & Stewart.
Nelson S. K., Kushlev K., English T., Dunn E.W., and Lyubomirsky S. (2013). 
“In Defense of Parenthood: Children Are Associated with More Joy Than 
Misery”, Psychological Science 24(1): 3–10;
Nelson S. K., Kushlev K., English T., Dunn E. W., and Lyubomirsky, S. (2014). 
“Parents Are Slightly Happier Than Nonparents, but Causality Still Cannot 
Be Inferred: A Reply to Bhargava, Kassam, and Loewenstein (2014)”, 
Psychological Science, 25(1): 303–304.
Pollmann-Schult, Matthias. (2014). “Parenthood and Life Satisfaction: Why 
Don’t Children Make People Happy?” Journal of Marriage and Family, 76(2): 
319–336.
240 
B. Brogaard

241
© The Author(s) 2016
L. Zaibert (ed.), The Theory and Practice of Ontology, 
DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-55278-5_13
1	
Foolishness
What is foolishness (sottise, Torheit, stultitia)? Foolishness and stupidity 
are by no means the same thing. Stupidity is opposed to intelligence. 
Someone who cannot calculate in his head, who stumbles in her native 
language, or cannot spot an opportunity, or….—the list is very long—is 
sometimes said to be stupid or, slightly less stupidly, to be more stupid 
than some mean. Perhaps intelligence is what intelligence tests measure. 
Perhaps it is the ability to grasp a variety of internal relations without 
experiments. Whatever stupidity is, it is no vice, unlike foolishness. In 
13
K. Mulligan (*) 
University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
e-mail: kevin.mulligan@unige.ch
This paper is in part a translation of Mulligan (2009); cf. Mulligan (2014, 2016). I am grateful to 
Philipp Blum, Pascal Engel, Ingvar Johansson, Joachim Schulte and Denis Whitcombe for their 
suggestions, and to Riccardo Braglia, CEO, Elsin Health Care and the Fondazione Reginaldus 
(Lugano) for financial support of work on this translation.
Foolishness and the Value 
of Knowledge
Kevin Mulligan

order to see what the vice consists in, let us consider some traditional 
examples of foolishness.
Vanity is a form of foolishness. The vain man wants to be applauded 
and admired. But not everyone who seeks admiration and applause is 
vain. Some (hope that they) prefer admiration, applause, and approba-
tion which are justified to their unjustified cousins. But the vain are indif-
ferent to the distinction between justified and unjustified admiration and 
applause. “The vain man,” says Nietzsche, “rejoices in every good opinion 
he hears about himself (quite apart from all considerations of usefulness 
and quite apart from truth and falsity.”)1
Consider Sam. An old, rich man, he behaves as though he really believes 
that his mistress, poor, young Maria, really loves him rather than his large 
apartment. “As though” because although Sam regularly asserts to his 
aging male friends, that Maria loves him, apparently quite sincerely, and 
uses this apparent conviction as a premise for practical and non-practical 
inferences, he carefully avoids the company of Maria’s young friends, who 
would be more than happy to shatter Sam’s illusions. Sam does not men-
tion his relationship to Maria when he finds himself in the company of 
her young friends who, although they are not exactly lovers of truth, fully 
appreciate the usefulness of certain types of knowledge when it comes to 
cruelly puncturing the illusions of someone like Sam. Sam, as his ex-wife 
puts it, is an old fool.2
The fox in the fable of the sour grapes is also a fool. He knows that 
the grapes are ripe and so good to eat. He discovers that he is incapable 
of getting his claws on the grapes and so changes his evaluation of the 
grapes: they are suddenly no longer ripe and good but sour and bad. 
Abelard gives a similar example. A young student comes to see that logic 
is the heart of philosophy and therefore the most valuable part of phi-
losophy. After discovering his inability to do logic, he declares, apparently 
quite sincerely, that in philosophy rhetoric is more important than logic. 
The fox and the student are victims of the mechanism of ressentiment and 
to that extent fools.
The frequent resource to clichés, platitudes, tautologies, triviali-
ties, and stereotypes—“Women will be women”, “Business is busi-
ness”—is the mark of one type of fool in the writings of Flaubert, 
Bloy, and their successors, in the literary tradition which has perhaps 
242 
K. Mulligan

devoted more attention to foolishness (bêtise) than any other literary 
tradition.3
The four simple examples have some properties in common. The exten-
sive appeal to clichés and platitudes is a very good indicator of a desire 
not to think or reflect. The vain man does not care whether the praise 
and admiration he seeks and gets is justified or not. Sam does not want 
to confront what he seems to believe with reality. The man of ressentiment 
does not modify his evaluations on the basis of new information about 
the objects of his evaluations. No new information about the grapes justi-
fies the fox’s change of heart. No new information about the place of logic 
and rhetoric in philosophy justifies the student’s evaluation that rhetoric 
is more important than logic. It is true that the vain man has a reason for 
doing whatever is necessary to be on the receiving end of admiration and 
praise—they are pleasant and agreeable. Since his reason is a reason to 
do something, it is a practical reason. The fox, too, has a practical reason 
to do whatever is necessary to change his beliefs and preferences about 
the grapes—to leave his beliefs and preferences unchanged is to be con-
fronted with his own impotence and its (and his) disvalue. Sam’s life is 
much sweeter so long as he avoids putting his beliefs about Maria to the 
test. But a reason to do something, a practical reason, is not a reason to 
believe something. Indeed it is not always  a reason to feel or desire either.
The four examples, and many other similar examples, such as bullshit, 
the susceptibility to ideology, what was once called “enthusiasm” 
(Schwärmerei), cant, and many forms of snobbery,4 suggest a simple gen-
eralization. If foolishness is a vice and if, at the heart of a vice, one finds 
one or more affective attitudes or attachments to a value,5 then the affec-
tive attitudes at the heart of foolishness are hostility and indifference to 
cognitive values, an indifference which may or not be rooted in blindness 
to cognitive values. In what follows, I examine the different components 
of this suggestion. But before looking at these it is worth considering 
another putative example of foolishness, an example which is of a dif-
ferent kind than the examples already given. Our first four examples 
belong to ordinary life. But philosophies, too, may exemplify an indif-
ference or hostility to cognitive values. If Barry Smith is to be believed, 
that part of twentieth century philosophy which its friends have bap-
tized “Continental Philosophy”, and in particular the movement called 
13  Foolishness and the Value of Knowledge 
243

“Postmodernism”, contain striking illustrations of indifference or hos-
tility to cognitive values. As he has also memorably argued, this claim 
is itself a development of Brentano’s diagnosis of a recurrent tendency 
throughout the history of philosophy.6 If indifference to cognitive values 
is indeed tantamount to foolishness, then Continental Philosophy and 
Postmodernism are often foolish. This, it may be thought, is a pleas-
ing consequence of the present account of foolishness. But it would be 
foolish to draw the pleasing consequence before making any attempt to 
understand the very idea of indifference or hostility to cognitive values 
and the relation of this idea to foolishness. It is also true that it is possible 
to argue for indifference to cognitive values or for the view that the very 
idea of value is an empty or confused idea. This is not the place to under-
take an evaluation of such arguments. But it is worth noting the existence 
of an apparent inconsistency in arguing for hostility to cognitive values.7 
For the attempt to provide such arguments is surely a manifestation of 
epistemic virtue.
2	
Cognitive Values
What are the cognitive or epistemic values? What is it to be a cognitive 
value? Before answering these questions, it will be useful to draw two dis-
tinctions which belong to the theory of value. First, being a value is one 
thing, being a value-property another thing. Injustice is a negative value, 
being unjust is a value-property, for example, a property of an action or a 
person. Secondly, expressions of the form “the value of x” do not always 
function in the same way. Expressions such as “the value of justice” and 
“the value of the sublime” function in appositive fashion, like “the num-
ber 2” and “singleton Socrates”. Justice and the sublime are values. But 
in expressions such as “the value of pleasure” and “the disvalue of unplea-
sure” the expression “the value of” takes “pleasure”, and yields “the value 
of pleasure”. What is this value? One answer is that the value of pleasure 
is pleasantness. The expression “the value of pleasantness” itself functions 
in appositive fashion. When expressions of the form “the value of x” do 
not function appositively, they are often terms for values for which no 
244 
K. Mulligan

names exist. We often speak of the value of freedom. But if freedom can 
be characterized in non-axiological terms, for example, as the absence of 
constraint, then freedom itself is no value but is valuable. The value it has 
has no name. Aristotle pointed out that there are nameless virtues. The 
same seems to be true of values.
Let us return to our question. What are the cognitive values? The two 
most common answers are: truth is or has a cognitive value; knowledge is 
or has a cognitive value. But there are many other plausible candidates—
the values of clarity, distinctness, exactness, justification, and intellectual 
modesty and the disvalues of illusion, error, bullshit, obscurity, obscu-
rantism, and nonsense.8 It may seem plausible to think that the values of 
clarity, distinctness etc. are derivative or consecutive values with respect 
to the values of truth or knowledge or of the values that truth and knowl-
edge are. But Wittgenstein, for one, claimed to be interested in clarity for 
its own sake. In what follows, I shall nevertheless assume that the value 
of truth or of knowledge explains the value of clarity, distinctness etc. It 
may well be thought that this assumption oversimplifies matters. Perhaps 
because the value and virtue of frankness or candor and the disvalue of 
insincerity and accommodation, unlike the values clarity and distinct-
ness, have a distinctly ethical dimension.9
Is truth a value? Is being true a value-property? The main types of truth 
talk are:
It is true that p
That p is true
The proposition that p is true
There is a Catholic dogma which is true
The belief that p is true
Instances of the first three claims do not entail any axiological claims 
unless what is substituted for the variable has axiological content. As to 
instances of the fifth claim, as Husserl pointed out, to call a belief true 
is to use the term improperly. Beliefs are correct or incorrect. Of course, 
if the belief that p is correct, it is true that p. Furthermore, correct-
ness is often thought to be a deontic property: to believe correctly is to 
13  Foolishness and the Value of Knowledge 
245

believe as one ought. Not only is truth not a value, it is hard to believe 
that for a proposition or dogma to be true is for it thereby to possess a 
­value-­property. Some propositions perhaps exemplify aesthetic values. 
But the truth of a proposition is not any sort of value property. And 
although it may well be the case that it is better to have correct beliefs 
than incorrect beliefs, correctness itself is no value-property for there are 
no degrees of correctness.
Is knowledge a value? Does it have a value? It clearly often has extrin-
sic value. It is very useful. But is knowledge itself something which 
has intrinsic axiological features? A theory of knowledge which takes 
knowledge-­that to be the result of the exercise of cognitive virtues must 
presumably take knowledge to be something which cannot be character-
ized without referring to values or goods. But if knowledge is a mental 
relation to facts10 it is as little plausible to say that it is an axiological rela-
tion as it would be to say that perceptual relations to facts are axiological 
phenomena. On the other hand, according to many popular accounts of 
knowledge, justification is constitutive of knowledge and the relation of 
justification is taken to be a normative relation.
But in what follows, I shall assume that truth, once distinguished from 
correctness, is no value or norm and is not intrinsically valuable, and that 
at least some kinds of knowledge are valuable in a non-extrinsic way, and 
that their value is an example of what I have called nameless values.
One candidate for the role of intrinsically valuable knowledge will be 
given in the following section. One candidate about which there is little 
agreement is the value of systematic, theoretical knowledge, empirical 
and non-empirical. One very large part of culture, the part consisting 
of universities and scientific institutions and their members, has, some 
of us say, a value which derives from the intrinsic value of certain kinds 
of knowledge, in the optimal case, systematic, theoretical knowledge. A 
similar claim is that the value of another part of culture, the part which 
consists of theatres and concert halls, poets and conductors, derives in 
part from the intrinsic aesthetic values of works of art.11
The view that some kinds of knowledge are intrinsically valuable is, 
of course, congenial to those who think that the best candidates for the 
role of bearers of intrinsic value are mental, psychological, vital and 
sensory states.
246 
K. Mulligan

3	
Interest, Epistemic Desire, Curiosity, 
and Questions
I suggested that at the heart of the vice of foolishness we find affective 
attitudes towards cognitive values, and so, too, certain desires and proj-
ects. The acts, states and attitudes which are most closely connected to 
cognitive values and their bearers form a family with many distinctive 
features. It comprises phenomena such as interest, attention, curiosity, 
enjoyment, the desire or will to know, wonder, surprise and questions.
What does the fool want or desire? She desires above all not to know, 
more precisely, she desires not to know certain things in certain con-
texts, to avoid questions of justification, confrontations with reality, 
clarity and distinctness. What, then, is the desire or will to know or not 
to know? How, if at all, do epistemic desires differ from other desires, 
in particular, practical desires, for example, the desire to smoke, own a 
Porsche or be successful? How, if at all, does the will to know differ from 
practical willing?
Ordinary language sometimes compares epistemic desires to hunger, 
thirst, and to urges (Wissensbegier, Wissensgier, Wissensdurst, Wissenshunger). 
But one difference between epistemic and practical desires is that one 
desires to smoke but desires to know whether this or that is the case (or 
who killed the nanny…). The desire to smoke is satisfied only if one 
smokes. The desire to know whether p is satisfied either by the discovery 
that p or by the discovery that not-p. A second difference between epis-
temic and practical desires was pointed out by Meinong and his students. 
According to Meinong, to desire to smoke is to desire that one smokes, a 
desire founded on the representation of the state of affairs in which one 
smokes. To desire to smoke is to represent a certain state of affairs in a 
conative way. But in the case of epistemic desires (Wissensbegehrungen) 
what exactly, asked Meinong and his pupils, do we represent in a desiring 
way? Meinong quotes and endorses Frankl’s view:
Whoever asks a question, certainly thinks of the object of the question, but 
it is by no means obvious that she also thinks of knowledge of this object, 
and thus one may even wonder about the desire character of questions. 
(Meinong 1977)
13  Foolishness and the Value of Knowledge 
247

Frankl here assumes that asking whether expresses or manifests a desire 
to know, in the same way in which assertions are said to express belief or 
knowledge. We shall return to questions. Another pupil of Meinong’s, 
Tumlirz, makes a similar point without any reference to questions:
The desire to know is directed towards a piece of knowledge, but knowl-
edge is not what is really desired, as being is desired in the case of other 
desires, for in normal circumstances, the desirer does not think of knowl-
edge of (Wissen um) the desired objective but of the objective itself. (Tumlirz 
1919, 26).
An “objective” is what Husserl more influentially called a state of affairs 
(Sachverhalt). In the case of desires other than epistemic desires, argues 
Tumlirz, one desires the being or obtaining of a certain state of affairs. 
One might, of course, object that to desire to know whether p is just to 
desire that (one knows that p, if p) and (one knows that not-p, if not-p).12 
But is the object of a typical, epistemic desire really as complex as this? If 
Meinong is right, the desire to know whether is not typically a desire that.
Nietzche and those who follow him, for example, Foucault, speak of 
the will (not) to know. To desire is not to will. One may give in to a desire 
but not to one’s will. One may be overcome, even unmanned, by a desire, 
but not by one’s intentions. Thus willing cannot be understood in terms 
of desire, not even in terms of second-order desires, desires which bear 
on first-order desires. Many philosophers seem to have concluded that 
the category of willing is an empty folk-psychological category, although 
some of them make an exception for intentions or decisions. If willing is 
a mental (geistig) phenomenon, and desire a psychological phenomenon, 
then a common contemporary view seems to be that we can do without 
the former. An alternative explanation for the disappearance of the will is 
the absence in English of a fully-fledged verb “to will”. But the upshot is 
the same. The will to know just is the desire to know.
Whether or not this is the case, willing and desiring come in a posi-
tive and a negative form. Positive willing and desiring stand opposed 
to negative willing and desiring, much as joy is opposed to sadness and 
being pleased to being displeased. This claim has not been very popular 
in recent philosophy either. But aversion seems to be the name for one 
248 
K. Mulligan

central type of negative desire and we strive for or against this or that (cf. 
nolo, Widerstreben, unwilling, and Dante’s disvogio). If this is correct, then 
there is not only the desire not to know whether p but also a negative 
desire to know whether p. And the same is true of the will to know. Thus 
we may distinguish:
x wants/desires to get up
x wants/desires not to get up
x is averse to getting up
x wants/desires to know whether p
x wants/desires not to know whether p
x is averse to knowing whether p
Since, as we have seen, the desire or will to know can be understood in 
two different ways, as involving a representation of, a thinking of knowl-
edge or, as Meinong suggests, not involving any such thought, there are 
two ways of understanding each of the last three cases. Desiring, will-
ing not to know, and shunning knowledge are the main forms of what 
has been called cognophobia (David Stove). Sam, the fox, and the vain 
woman, we may assume, sometimes desire very strongly not to know, and 
at other times are averse to knowledge.
If Meinong is right about the desire or will to know when he says 
that they involve no thought of knowledge, what positive account of 
epistemic desires and the will to know should be given? One possibility 
is that desiring to know should be understood not as desiring that one 
knows but rather as desiring-to-know. In terms of the distinction intro-
duced by Brentano and his students between the modes, the contents and 
the objects of mental acts, in the phenomenon of desiring to know, it is 
not the case that the mode is desire and the object knowledge. Rather, 
the mode is desiring-to-know. Clearly, an analogous account of the will 
to know might also be given. Against the suggestion that there is a mode 
of desiring-to-know is the fact that it is not clear that it can tell us what 
the object of the desire-to-know could possibly be. But perhaps it is the 
common view that desires, beliefs and other propositional attitudes have 
propositions or states of affairs as objects which is the source of the problem 
here. This view, which goes back to James and Meinong, parses
13  Foolishness and the Value of Knowledge 
249

x believes/desires that p
as
x believes/desires that-p
and takes the that-clause to specify a proposition or state of affairs. But 
if Prior is right, the correct form of ascriptions of belief and desire is “x 
believes/desires-that p”. “Desire that” is a hybrid connective or prenective 
which takes a name and a sentence to make a sentence. If the desire that 
Mary be happy has an object, its object is Mary and not any proposition 
or state of affairs. One possible extension of Prior’s view of “that” is to 
“whether”: to desire to know whether p is to desire-to-know-whether p.13
In favor of this suggestion is the fact that it allows us put forward 
an independently plausible account of curiosity and related phenomena. 
Curiosity, language suggests, is a distinctive, intentional mode, in par-
ticular, an attitude. And the same is true of the attitudes ascribed by 
such translations of “curiosity” as “Wissbegier” and “Neugier”. Is it not 
the mode of desiring-to-know, of the urge-to-know? If there is a mode 
of desiring-to-know, then it would follow that whoever desires-to-know 
need not think of knowledge, have an impression of knowledge or even 
possess the concept of knowledge.14 In addition to the view that in the 
desire to know the mode is desire and the view that the mode is a desire-
to-­know, there is also a third view, that epistemic desire differs from prac-
tical desire without being a desire-to-know.
If curiosity is a desire to know and the desire to know is not the will 
to know, is there any reason to think of the will to know as a will-to-­
know? In order to outline a positive answer to this question, we must first 
consider another phenomenon which is intimately linked to cognitive 
values—the question.
“Question” may means at least four very different things. There is the 
speech (social) act of asking a question, of putting a question to some-
one. There is the episode of wondering or asking oneself whether, who, 
when… There is also the question we ask, the question whether p or the 
question who did this or that, and when, and where. The question we ask 
is something many different people may ask at different times. It is an 
250 
K. Mulligan

impersonal question. It behaves in many respects like what is often called 
a declarative proposition, something which, it is said, may be judged 
believed or disbelieved by different people at different times. (Friends 
of the view already mentioned that the objects of desires and beliefs are 
propositions may well think that questions conceived of in this way are 
the objects of some acts and states.15) Questions as social acts or mental 
episodes and questions as what is asked differ from what Reinach called 
the interrogative stance (Frageeinstellung).16 The social act of asking a ques-
tion, like the social act of promising or ordering, has to be expressed. 
The interrogative stance, like judging and wondering whether at a time, 
need not be expressed, although it typically manifests itself in putting 
questions to those likely to have answers, in wondering, in deliberation 
and theoretical activity. To be the bearer of an interrogative stance is to 
wonder whether, who, what over time. The category of the interrogative 
stance is rarely accorded much importance in contemporary philosophy. 
In this respect, it resembles the categories of willing and judging. But if 
Reinach is right, it is what explains the unity over time of deliberations, 
practical and theoretical.
Here we see a possible rôle for the distinction between the desire and 
the will to know. Is the constancy of an interrogative stance over time not 
a form of the constancy of the will over time? After all, asking someone 
whether p is a form of the will in action, if anything is. There is, however, 
one reason for thinking that none of the three types of personal question 
distinguished so far should be understood in conative terms. Desires and 
the will, unlike questions, come in polarly opposed kinds. So personal 
questions are not conative phenomena. But perhaps not all forms of the 
will come in polarly opposed kinds. Edith Stein points out that inten-
tions and intendings do not have a polar opposite (Stein 1970, 311). And 
the same is true of decisions and decidings, choices and choosings. Thus, 
provided the distinction between the will and desire is accepted, the view 
that all three types of personal questions are forms of the will has much 
to recommend it. It is also consistent with the view that although desire 
is always positive or negative, willing is invariably positive. Of the three 
main theories of personal questions, the voluntarist and the intellectualist 
views, and the view that they are forms of desire, the voluntarist view is 
the least implausible.
13  Foolishness and the Value of Knowledge 
251

Wonder, according to a long tradition, is an epistemic emotion. So is 
interest. Interest, like wonder, lacks a negative polar opposite. It is not 
opposed to boredom, as sadness is to joy. For boredom is the unpleasant 
awareness that nothing is of any interest. It is a meta-state. Interest and 
its modalities such as taking an interest in, fascination, absorption, being 
intrigued by, the greater or lesser liveliness it has, motivate, other things 
being equal, a desire or will to know, and personal questions, as do prac-
tical desires. But interest motivates not only the desire to know whether, 
who, or what. It motivates, above all, the desire to know more about its 
object and so to know new facts. The epistemic desires motivated by 
practical desires are not open-ended as are the epistemic desires motivated 
by interest. Someone who desires to be treated for a disease desires to 
know who the best doctor is, where she is to be found. His desires are 
satisfied when he has discovered whatever is relevant to his treatment and 
what his prospects are. “Curiosity” is sometimes used to refer simply to 
a desire to know. But it is also used to refer to interest-driven desires to 
know.17
Interest, the episodic emotion and the disposition thereto, motivates 
not only epistemic desires but also, according to a view which is again 
popular, attention, both active and passive. Attention is not an emo-
tion but an intellectual phenomenon. And absorption in a task or being 
absorbed by another person are perhaps best characterized as interest-­
driven active attention. Active attention, the attention we pay to some-
thing, admits of degrees, unlike passive attention. Each type of attention 
lacks a polar opposite. On one view, this is because it is an intellectual 
phenomenon. But one paradigm intellectual attitude, belief-that, has a 
polar opposite, disbelief-that, as certainty is opposed to uncertainty.
Curiosity, understood as the interest-driven desire or will to know, 
as well as the interrogative stance, interest, wonder and attention, then, 
unlike the will and the desire to know, lack polar opposites. This seems 
to be a distinguishing feature of the acts, states, and attitudes most 
closely bound up with cognitive values and their bearers. There are emo-
tions other than interest and wonder which lack negative opposites, for 
­example, anger. But the epistemic emotions and attitudes seem to be the 
only family of emotions and attitudes in which polar opposites play such 
a small role.
252 
K. Mulligan

4	
Cognitive Values, Motivation 
and Interest
We have considered very sketchily what the cognitive values are and, in 
a little more detail, the structure of the acts, states, and attitudes most 
closely bound up with knowledge and its value. In order to better under-
stand hostility, indifference, and blindness to cognitive values, let us look, 
first, at the relation between values and motivation.
There are, of course, many philosophies of value and motivation, in 
particular the view that nothing could possibly exemplify a value-property 
and the view that value-ascriptions have no truth values. In what follows, 
I shall simply presuppose an account of values and motivation which was 
endorsed by some of the heirs of Brentano I have already referred to and 
consider its applications to the cases we are here interested in.
The view of value and motivation to be presupposed here runs as fol-
lows.18 There are many different types of value—sensory or hedonic, 
vital, aesthetic, economic, epistemic, legal, political, religious, prudential 
and ethical. Emotions and sentiments, desires and the will are motivated 
by (apparent) knowledge of actual or possible exemplification of value. 
One view of such knowledge of value, defended by both Husserl and 
Meinong, is that emotions, correct emotions, reveal the exemplification 
of value.19 On this sort of view, admiration of a person may reveal his 
charm and this may in turn motivate the desire to spend more time with 
the charmer. Similarly, indignation may reveal the injustice of a situa-
tion and so motivate the desire to remedy the injustice. Another, rival, 
view is that the exemplification of value is first grasped, for example, felt, 
and that emotions are reactions to such prior grasp of value. On this 
sort of view, one is first struck (or seems to be struck) by the charm of 
a person and this motivates admiration and then a variety of desires.20 
Each view can allow for correctness-makers and correctness-conditions 
for emotions: admiration is correct only if what is admired is admirable, 
e.g. charming; indignation about a situation is correct only if it is unjust; 
a person’s charm makes admiration of him correct, the injustice of a situ-
ation or action makes indignation about it correct. But from the point of 
view of the second view, the first view fails to respect the general struc-
ture of motivation or wants to make an exception to it in the particular 
13  Foolishness and the Value of Knowledge 
253

case of the emotions. For if x motivates y, x and y are different and x is 
not a part of y. If perception that p motivates the conviction that p, the 
perception is one thing and the conviction another and the conviction 
does not contain the perception. Similarly, according to the second view, 
what motivates an emotion must be distinct from the emotion. The view 
that emotions reveal what motivates them, what they are a reaction to, 
is encouraged by the view that emotions are in some sense about values. 
But fear of a dog is about the dog, and not about its danger; indignation 
about a situation is about the situation, not about its injustice. Fear pre-
supposes some knowledge or impression of danger but this knowledge 
or impression is not itself any sort of emotion. In what follows, I shall 
presuppose the second view.21
It is a view which is easily applied to a great variety of cases, as the 
examples of danger, injustice and charm indicate. In particular, it imme-
diately allows us to make sense of the phenomena of hostility, indiffer-
ence and blindness to values. One is blind to a particular value if one is 
incapable of being struck by it, if, as it used to be said, one has no “sense 
for” or “of” injustice, charm, elegance, grace, the sublime, the disvalue of 
bullshit etc. And as the phenomenologists point out, in/sensibility to cer-
tain values, in general, or in certain situations, need not be in harmony 
with one’s axiological beliefs. Indifference to a certain value is simply the 
absence of whatever reactions are appropriate to exemplification of the 
value. Hostility to a certain value presupposes a certain sense for the value 
in question and consists either in an intellectual refusal to allow that it is 
really a value or a rejection of its real relations to other values. The puritan 
or moral rigorist who is hostile to elegance or charm is not blind to these 
qualities but denies that they are really value qualities or that they have 
any importance. The aesthete who is hostile to cognitive or economic 
or ethical values denies that they are really value qualities or denies that 
justice is more important than elegance.
Does this sort of view readily apply to cognitive values and the emo-
tions, desires, projects, and stances bound up with these values? I think 
not. There is an asymmetry between cognitive and other values. That this 
is the case is suggested by Meinong’s point that our epistemic desires do 
not typically contain a thought or representation of knowledge, that the 
desire to know whether is not typically a desire that. To the extent that 
254 
K. Mulligan

we do not think of ourselves or others as possible knowers, discoverers, 
understanders etc. to that extent we are not aware of the value of knowl-
edge. Husserl seems to have arrived at a similar conclusion:
If all willing which results in external acting is grounded in striving which 
values (wertenden Streben), in striving for possession of a good as something 
useful, pleasant etc., here [in the case of the striving for knowledge] there is 
no such striving which values but rather the manifestation (Auswirkung) of 
a mere tendency towards self-givenness: the self does not live in the act of 
valuing and in the desiring striving grounded in it, it lives rather in the act 
of objectifying (Objektivierung). (Husserl 1954, 235–236).
Valuing an object as pleasant may motivate the desire for possession of 
the object. Practical striving, Husserl thinks, always presupposes some 
valuing. But, he also thinks, cognizing striving, the goal of which is 
knowledge (Husserl 1954, 237), does not presuppose any valuing. In the 
most basic cases, the value of knowledge does not seem to play a rôle in 
bringing about the striving for knowledge.
There are of course cases where cognitive values do play such a rôle. 
There is the “amour violent pour la vérité” which Baillet famously ascribed 
to Descartes (Baillet 1946, 285). And the very similar passion Russell 
ascribes to himself and to his most influential pupil: “[Wittgenstein] even 
has the same similes I have—a wall parting him from the truth which he 
must pull down somehow”.22 But if Meinong is right, the desire to know 
and, we may add, the interrogative attitude and interest, are not typi-
cally motivated by the value of knowledge because they often involve no 
thought or impression of knowledge.
What, then, motivates the desire or will to know and the interrogative 
stance when the value of knowledge does not play this rôle? Interest, tak-
ing an interest, on the one hand, and practical desires and projects, seem 
to be the best candidates. And, as we have seen, it is the first candidate 
which motivates the desire or will to know more about something and 
also enduring, interrogative stances.
But what motivates interest? An old answer, which is again popular, 
is that many emotions and sentiments, but not, for example, shame and 
many forms of disgust, motivate interest in their objects.23 Just as wonder 
13  Foolishness and the Value of Knowledge 
255

has been supposed to motivate the will to know and, in particular, to 
know more, so, too, both love and hate motivate interest, the desire and 
the will to know, as well as interrogative stances. Augustine formulates an 
interesting version of this idea:
One does not love what one does not in any way know. But if one loves 
what one knows only a little, love brings it about that one knows it better 
and more completely. (Augustine 1998, 286).24
Interest, we said, like the desire and will to know and interrogative stances 
need involve no awareness of any knowledge. Meinong makes a related 
point about the positive emotions due to the acquisition of knowledge, 
which he calls “knowledge feelings” (Wissensgefühl). His example is a 
historian who is interested in the authenticity of a document and, after 
inquiry, rejoices in the successful result of his inquiries. What exactly is the 
object of his joy? “The aspect of knowledge,” Meinong plausibly replies, 
“is not an obligatory aspect of the matter of such an emotion” (Meinong 
1968, 378). Meinong contrasts the joy of the inquirer with that of some-
one who discovers that a document whose authenticity is required if he is 
to win a court case is in fact authentic. In this case, the joy is a knowledge 
value feeling (Wissenswertgefühl). Meinong’s claim about the historian is 
a plausible consequence of his rejection of the reduction of the desire to 
know whether to a desire to know that. If the object of joy on the occasion 
of a discovery is not knowledge, the joy cannot be motivated by the value 
of such knowledge. But Meinong unfortunately does not give a positive 
account of the relation between the two modes which are the historian’s 
joy and his discovery or coming to know. He simply asserts that the his-
torian’s joy involves no representation of any discovery.
Similarly, I suggest, interest is not typically motivated by the value of 
knowledge but rather by the non-epistemic values of its objects, which 
are also what motivate the emotions and sentiments which give rise to the 
interest in the first place. Admiration of a handbag based on awareness of 
its elegance leads to interest in the handbag, in how it is made, and so to 
a desire to know more about it. In this sequence, and in all similar cases, 
the value of knowledge need play no role at all. The interest-worthiness 
of objects, like such categories as trust-worthiness, and admirableness, is 
256 
K. Mulligan

an axiological place-holder rather than a value. The values which make 
objects interest-worthy are typically not the values of knowledge.
If interest plays the rôles I have ascribed to it, it is plausible to think it 
must play an important part in cognitive vice and virtue. In what follows, 
I sketch one possible rôle for interest in the development of cognitive 
virtue.
The motivational chains of the form sentiments/emotions ➞ impres-
sion of interest-worthiness ➞ interest ➞ desire/will to know are typically 
interrupted or blocked, when sentiments and emotions involving what 
is in one’s interest come into play. For what is in one’s interest is a source 
of practical reasons for and against doing this or that. Sam’s love of Maria 
motivates a certain degree of interest and certain epistemic desires. But 
Sam’s interest is limited. He avoids all epistemic desires which might lead 
to painful knowledge, the unpleasant revelation of his illusions. To the 
extent that the avoidance of such unpleasantness is in his interest, the lat-
ter is the enemy of his interest in Maria.
In the epistemically virtuous, what is of interest does not lose out to 
avoidance of what is unpleasant, and so to what, in this sense, is not in in 
one’s interest. The education and development of interest, I suggest, play 
a rôle in the development of epistemic virtue which is comparable to the 
education and development of animal spirits and anger (thumos) in the 
development of the virtue of courage or of fellow-feeling in the develop-
ment of the virtue of generosity.
What is the relation between epistemic virtue so conceived and aware-
ness of cognitive values? A similar question arises in the case of the differ-
ent non-epistemic virtues and non-epistemic values. At some time in the 
acquisition of a virtue a grasp of value and a mastery of axiological con-
cepts must begin to play a rôle. At some time, one has to make one’s own 
the platitude that cowardice is a bad thing. At some time, the axiological 
platitude that it a bad thing to put forward an assertion for which one 
has no justification has to be dinned into one.25 An epistemic hero or saint 
is presumably someone who has a grasp of the fact that correct beliefs are 
better than incorrect beliefs, that correct emotions and desires are better 
than their incorrect counterparts, that it is better to do what one may do 
than to do what one may not do. Reason is not merely theoretical and 
practical but also affective. There are reasons to—and not to—believe, 
13  Foolishness and the Value of Knowledge 
257

feel, desire and act.26 One reason for thinking that affective reason wears 
the trousers with respect to theoretical and practical reason is that an epis-
temic hero will not merely have a grasp of the facts just mentioned he will 
also prefer correct beliefs to incorrect beliefs, correct emotions to incor-
rect ones etc. And he will prefer correct preferences to incorrect prefer-
ences and knowledge—axiological and non-axiological—to illusion and 
error. Finally, he prefers correct attitudes which are based on knowledge 
of what makes his attitudes correct to correct attitudes which are not so 
based. The life of an epistemic hero is thus not an easy one. Fortunately, 
heroism is supererogatory.
If it is plausible to say that a grasp of the different varieties of the value 
of courage and of the disvalue of cowardice builds on the education of ani-
mal spirits and anger, an analogous claim about the roots of a grasp of the 
variety of cognitive values and values is surely also plausible. The axiological 
knowledge and the preferences of our epistemic hero build on an education 
and development of interest (and the training this requires). Then, just as 
an epistemic hero or saint may be said to have a sense for cognitive value, 
and to prefer cognitive values to cognitive disvalues, so, too, an epistemic 
sinner may be said to be blind to cognitive value, indifferent or hostile to 
such values. And the root of such blindness, hostility, or indifference, cog-
nophobia, misology (Kant) and “alethophobia” (or rather, fear of correct 
beliefs), is a past in which interest, interest-­driven epistemic desires and 
interrogative stances have regularly lost out to a variety of practical consid-
erations in particular to fear of unpleasant discoveries.
Since our topic is cognitive virtue in everyday life, our hero is no 
theoretician or theory-builder. His epistemic desires, projects and inter-
rogative attitudes do not aim at systematic theories. However much one 
wants to know about an enemy or loved one, one does not typically aim 
to construct a theory about him or a theory which applies to her. But the 
existence of theorists and theory, of scientific institutions and science and 
the ideal of an epistemic, theoretical hero presumably interact in complex 
ways with the structures of epistemic virtue and vice in ordinary life, for 
good and bad (sour grapes about science). The explicit theoretical attacks 
on traditional conceptions of cognitive values since Nietzsche and in con-
temporary postmodernism, as is often the case with philosophical views, 
enjoy great popularity outside the academy.
258 
K. Mulligan

In everyday life, as opposed to the pursuit of systematic knowledge, 
what are the main objects of interest and so of interests which may be 
thwarted by cognitive vice? One is the persons who are the objects of 
our attachments, preferences and dislikes. Another comprehends all the 
political questions which face a citizen or subject. One type of person, 
which is particularly important in the case of political options, is the 
collective or fictitious person called a state, for example a nation-state, 
to which one belongs. Yet another is the sort of person one really is and 
would like to become. Self-love, as opposed to amour propre, motivates a 
degree of interest in what sort of a life is the life for me, the life one should 
(not) lead. The value to a person of knowledge about the sort of life she 
should lead is an example of intrinsically valuable knowledge, if anything 
is.27 If such knowledge is intrinsically valuable for a person, it is valuable 
because a certain way of life is intrinsically valuable for that person, is her 
“vocation”. Here, cognitive value is determined by non-cognitive value. 
Its “valifier” is a non-cognitive value. The value of knowledge of this type 
contrasts strikingly with the value to a person of the knowledge required 
to realize more or less transient desires and projects.28
The present account of epistemic virtue consists of two strands, first, 
the development and education of interest and of the capacity to resist 
the enemies of interest in what is interest-worthy, and, secondly, the 
inculcation of an appreciation of the different platitudes about cogni-
tive values. The first requires no awareness of knowledge or of its value. 
Just what the relation between these two strands is and could be is an 
empirical matter. Until more is known about this relation, many norma-
tive questions about the relation must remain unanswered. But one such 
question deserves mention here. What is the proper rôle of platitudes 
about epistemic value?
Pharisaism, it has been said, is ethics in the wrong place. The con-
temporary obsession with “ethical” banking, coffee, hacking, and foreign 
policy is sometimes accused of pharisaism,29 as is the habit of (ethical) 
virtue-signaling. The pharisee in matters ethical has a counterpart, the 
epistemic or cognitive pharisee (Mulligan 2003, 277–278). For example, 
the Victorian Sage who regularly asks himself what his Duty to Truth is. 
Epistemic virtue, it may be thought, should not be so loud. Someone 
who has learnt to develop strong interests rarely needs to ask the ­question 
13  Foolishness and the Value of Knowledge 
259

of the Victorian Sage. (According to the most extreme account of ethi-
cal pharisaism, virtue and value, that given by Max Scheler, it is always 
immoral to ask what one’s ethical duty is or what ethical goodness requires; 
it is our relation to the different non-ethical values which determines our 
ethical status).30 The grotesque contemporary alternative to the epistemic 
pharisee is the postmodernist who loudly proclaims his indifference or 
hostility to cognitive values.
5	
Foolishness—Thick or Thin?
Is foolishness a vice at the center of which we find a blindness, indiffer-
ence, or hostility to the value of knowledge? We have now examined all 
the components of the right hand side of the proposed analysis. Should 
foolishness be analyzed in this way?
Different values and disvalues trigger different sorts of reactions. 
Examples are the couples awe or reverence and the sublime, feelings of 
shame and shamefulness, feelings of guilt and objective guilt, as well as 
the already mentioned couples fear and danger, indignation and injus-
tice. Foolishness is a bad thing. Is there, then, a typical reaction to fool-
ishness? And if so, is it triggered by the features which, according to the 
present account, constitute foolishness?
The examples of Erasmus, Swift, Stendhal, Flaubert, and Musil 
point the way to an answer. Foolishness provokes irony.31 As Rougier 
says: “faced with universal foolishness, the reply of the homme d’esprit 
is irony” (Rougier 1965, 25). Irony stands to foolishness as satire to 
political and ethical disvalues.32 The satirist wants to condemn non-
intellectual vice and improve the world. The ironist’s target is fool-
ishness but, other things being equal, the ironist does not want to 
improve the world or even persuade. She is not angry and she does not 
laugh. At most, she smiles, imperceptibly. In her most sublime forms, 
she cares little about whether her ironies are recognized. Cognitive vice 
and disvalues excite much less than ethical and political vices and dis-
values. Cowardice and corruption attract condemnation more readily 
than unclarity. Bullshit and insincerity irritate more than blethering 
and obscurantism.
260 
K. Mulligan

Many ironic utterances, I suggest, can be paraphrased as exclamations of 
the form
“How foolish of x to think, assert, claim, feel this or that!”
The ironist’s victim is foolish, the ironist thinks, because unreasonable. 
If he cared more about being reasonable, he would not think, feel or act 
as he does. The ironist merely pretends to share his victim’s unreason-
able beliefs and attitudes in order to exhibit their unreasonableness. Of 
course, irony is a tool which has many uses. Persons are not always the 
objects of irony. Sometimes an absurd claim rather than its author is the 
object of irony. But the favorite targets of irony about another person 
are just the examples with which we began, self-deception, vanity, sour 
grapes, the attachment to platitudes, and bullshit. Another form of irony 
about a person, the most innocent, and perhaps the rarest, is self-irony, 
the appropriate indeed correct reaction to one’s own foolishness and fol-
lies. This is the form of irony which seems to irritate less than other forms 
those who disapprove of irony.33
The relation between irony and foolishness, then, provides some sup-
port for the view proposed here.
Postmodernists claim to understand and appreciate irony. Examples of 
postmodern irony are mentions of words such as truth, clarity, objectiv-
ity, justification within quotation marks, written, spoken, or mimicked. 
Everyone familiar with the contemporary academy has heard sneering 
mentions of such words enclosed within “scare quotes”. The speaker does 
not take seriously uses of such words and indicates that to do is to be 
guilty of foolishness. One predecessor of the postmodernist way of talk-
ing are the speech habits of communists in the 1930s.34 If the present 
account is correct, postmodern ironists intend to condemn foolishness 
but do so by mocking the very idea of reasonableness. Are postmodernists 
aware of this? Is the ironic postmodernist not, in fact, someone who lives 
a practical inconsistency?
Traditional accounts of foolishness and wisdom have three features 
which the proposed account does not have. First, wisdom has tradition-
ally been characterized in terms of certain types of knowledge—knowl-
edge of the last things, of first principles and causes, of God, of happiness, 
of many different types of value and their relations, and much else. 
13  Foolishness and the Value of Knowledge 
261

Secondly, foolishness or folly are often understood as the absence of such 
knowledge.35 Thus, traditional accounts of foolishness are thick accounts: 
there is a lot you have to know in order to be to be wise, and foolishness 
is the absence of such knowledge.36
The present account is a thin or minimal account of foolishness 
and wisdom. Suppose the epistemic hero described above is invariably 
guided by and acts on his very demanding preferences and is there-
fore epistemically virtuous. He prefers knowledge to error and illusion 
because he knows that the former is better than the former. He is not, 
for all that, necessarily very knowledgeable about life, politics, art, sci-
ence, the last things, God, non-epistemic values, or indeed about any-
thing very much. Indeed, he may not even be very intelligent. A second 
respect in which the present account is a thin account is that it respects 
only partially the received view according to which foolishness is the 
absence of wisdom. One of two strands in the present account does 
indeed ascribe to the epistemically virtuous an appreciation of all the 
platitudes about cognitive values and the habit of acting on the basis of 
this appreciation; one who lacks this appreciation is therefore foolish. 
But the other strand in the present account is the idea that at bottom 
and to a large extent epistemic virtue consists in not allowing the devel-
opment of one’s interests in what is worthy of interest to be thwarted 
by one’s attitudes towards other types of value. In this respect, wisdom 
has no positive content. It is merely the absence of foolishness in some-
one who is essentially capable of foolishness. Here the relation between 
foolishness and wisdom resembles that between justice and injustice 
(according to the liberal), and health and illness, according to a once 
traditional view. Just as to behave justly is to avoid behaving unjustly, 
and to be healthy is not to be ill, so too, wisdom, at least to begin with, 
is merely the avoidance of folly.
The final difference between the present account of foolishness and 
traditional accounts is that where “foolish” and its translations have not 
been used to mean simply stupidity, they have often connoted simply 
the opposite of practical wisdom (Klugheit).37 But the failures of practi-
cal reason, it may be thought, are often simply failures to appreciate the 
importance of cognitive values.38
262 
K. Mulligan

Notes
	 1.	 Nietzsche Jenseits von Gut und Böse, §261; cf. Lovejoy (1961, 
262–264).
	 2.	 Figures like Sam loom large in many accounts of self-deception. 
These accounts often pay little attention to cognitive values.
	 3.	 Cf. Adam (2004, 207ff.), Roger (2008).
	 4.	 On bullshit, cf. Frankfurt (2005) and McGinn (2008); on ideology, 
cf McGinn (2008); on cant, cf Mulligan (2003). On these and other 
examples, cf. Engel (2016).
	 5.	 Cf. “[T]here belongs to the virtue of justice the readiness to fight for 
justice as well as to observe its laws; and there belongs to truthfulness 
not only the avoidance of lying but also that other kind of attach-
ment to truth which has to do with its preservation and pursuit. A 
man of virtue must be a lover of justice and a lover of truth. 
Furthermore he will seek the special good of his family and friends” 
(Foot 1985, 207).
	 6.	 Cf. Mezei & Smith (1998, 37–74). Many of the ideas discussed in 
what follows were first put forward by the earliest heirs of Franz 
Brentano, in particular by the realist phenomenologists. This is, I am 
sure, appropriate in a tribute to Barry Smith, who played a central 
rôle in bringing the work of these philosophers to the attention of 
the wider world. This is now well-known. Less well-known is the fact 
that when Smith began his pioneering explorations, early realist phe-
nomenology was completely unknown to or ignored by the large and 
influential phenomenological communities dominating philosophy 
in Germany, France, and Italy, simply because the early realist 
­phenomenologists wrote much more clearly than later phenomenol-
ogists and were realists.
	 7.	 Inconsistency of this type is what Husserl called “noetic absurdity”. 
More recently, it has been called “operational self-refutation”.
	 8.	 Cf. Cooper (1994).
	 9.	 On accommodation, cf. Morley (1923). On the variety of intellec-
tual vice, cf. Cassam (2016), Engel (2016), Haack (2013), Mulligan 
(2014, 2016).
13  Foolishness and the Value of Knowledge 
263

	10.	 Cf. Smith (1984), Williamson (2000), Mulligan (2007).
	11.	 Cf. Scheler (1966, 125).
	12.	 Cf. Mulligan (2003, 277–278, 285).
	13.	 It may be thought that such an extension is not possible in the case 
of desiring to know who or when.
	14.	 Cfr. Whitcomb (2010a); Kvanvig (2003), Mulligan (2003). For the 
view that curiosity is an emotion, cf. Brady (2009). For the view that 
the object of curiosity is the truth, cf. Kvanvig (2003).
	15.	 For the view that impersonal questions are the objects of some attti-
tudes, cf. Tumlirz (1919); for the view that such questions are the 
contents of certain attitudes, cf. Löw (1928), Whitcomb (2010a). Cf. 
also Mulligan (2017, forthcoming).
	16.	 Reinach (1989), 282 ff … The seminal paper on the pioneering phi-
losophy of questions in early phenomenology is Schuhmann and 
Smith (1987).
	17.	 On interest, cf White (1964), Silvia (2006, 2008). On interest and 
curiosity, cf Inan (2012).
	18.	 Cf. Mulligan (2008b).
	19.	 Cf. Tappolet (2000), Johnston (2001), Teroni 2007.
	20.	 Cf. Mulligan & Scherer (2012).
	21.	 Cf. Mulligan (2007).
	22.	 Quoted by Monk (1990, 43). On clarity and clarification in 
Wittgenstein and his hero, Weininger, cf. Mulligan (2016).
	23.	 Cf. Wells and Matthew (1994), Faucher & Tappolet (2002), Brady 
(2007), Tappolet (2009).
	24.	 Scheler quotes this passage (1976, 257) and calls Augustine‘s claim a 
“law of the progress of knowledge”. That love and hate always involve 
taking an interest and that interest determines attention are claims 
Scheler often repeats.
	25.	 This aspect of the acquisition of intellectual virtues, like the rôles of 
training and what Barry Smith likes to call drill, is invariably missing 
in pedagogical theories which attach great importance to interest and 
its cultivation.
	26.	 Cf. Mulligan (2007).
	27.	 On personal value, goodness for someone, cf. Ronnow-Rasmussen 
(2011).
264 
K. Mulligan

	28.	 On what is known about the psychology of vocations and long-­
standing interests, cf. Silvia (2006).
	29.	 Cf. Minogue (2010).
	30.	 Cf. Scheler (1966, 186–192).
	31.	 Cf. Mulligan (2008a).
	32.	 Byron disagrees: “Fools are my theme, let satire be my song” (English 
Bards and Scotch Reviewers).
	33.	 On pretence and irony, cf. Jancke (1929), Currie (2006), Mulligan 
(2008a). Jancke also gives the beginnings of an account of 
self-irony.
	34.	 “[I]rony was a desirable method in polemics, but its application was 
restricted to the use of inverted commas; e.g.: the ‘revolutionary’ past 
of Trotsky; the ‘progressive` measures of the ‘Socialist’ government 
…” (Koestler 1956, 27).
	35.	 Cf. Gent (1966).
	36.	 Whitcomb’s recent, carefully argued account of wisdom, a view he 
calls “two-fold consequentialism”, is a thick account: “To be practi-
cally wise is to know how to live well. To be theoretically wise is to 
have deep understanding” (Whitcomb 2010b).
	37.	 Cf. Bollnow (1958, 99–114), Whitcomb (2010b).
	38.	 This tribute to Barry Smith has touched on a only a few of the topics 
he has illuminated over a long and extraordinarily productive career, 
a career driven by an unusually large range of strong interests pur-
sued in a very determined fashion. Barry Smith, his friends and 
admirers all agree, is in many ways an epistemic hero.
References
Adam, M. 2004. Essai sur la bêtise, Paris: La table Ronde.
Augustine. 1998. Oeuvres de Saint Augustin, Homélies sur l’Évangile de Saint 
Jean LXXX-CIII, Steenweg op Tielen.
Baillet, A. 1946. Vie de Monsieur Descartes, Paris: La Table Ronde.
Bollnow, O. 1958. Wesen und Wandel der Tugenden, Frankfurt am Main: Ullstein.
Brady, M. 2007. Recalcitrant Emotions and Visual Illusions. American 
Philosophical Quarterly, 44, 273–284.
13  Foolishness and the Value of Knowledge 
265

Brady, M. 2009. “Curiosity and the Value of Truth”, in Epistemic Value, eds. 
A. Haddock, A. Millar, and D. Pritchard, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
265–284.
Cassam, Q. 2016. Vice Epistemology, The Monist, 99, 159–180.
Cooper, N. 1994. “The Intellectual Virtues”, Philosophy, 69, 459–469.
Currie, G. 2006. “Why irony is pretence”, in ed. S. Nichols, The Architecture of 
the Imagination. New Essays on Pretence, Possibility, and Fiction, Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 111–136.
Engel, P. 2016. The Epistemology of Stupidity, (eds). F.  Vargas, M.  Angel, 
Performance Epistemology: Foundations and Applications, Oxford University 
Press, 196–223.
Faucher, L., and C. Tappolet. 2002. Fear and the Focus of Attention, Consciousness 
and Emotion, 3, 105–144.
Foot, Ph. 1985. “Utilitarianism and the Virtues”, Mind, 94, 374, 196–209.
Frankfurt, H. 2005. On Bullshit, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Gent, W. 1966 « Der Begriff des Weisen », Zeitschrift für philosophische Forschung, 
20, 77–117.
Haack, S. 2013. Putting Philosophy to Work. Inquiry and Its Place in Culture, 
New York, Prometheus Books.
Husserl, E. 1954. Erfahrung und Urteil, Hamburg: Claassen.
Inan, I. 2012. The Philosophy of Curiosity, London: Routledge.
Johnston, M. 2001. “The Authority of Affect”, Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research, 63, 181–214.
Jancke, R. 1929. Das Wesen der ironie, Leipzig: Barth.
Koestler, A. 1956. The Invisible Writing. An Autobiography, Boston.
Kvanvig, J. 2003. The Value of Knowledge and The Pursuit of Understanding, 
Cambridge University Press.
Löw, Fr., 1928. Logik der Frage, Archiv für die gesamte Psychologie, 66, 357–436.
Lovejoy, A. 1961. Reflections on Human Nature, Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins 
Press.
McGinn, C. 2008. Mindfucking: A Critique of Mental Manipulation, Acumen 
Publishing/McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Meinong, A. 1968. Abhandlungen zur Werttheorie, Graz: Akademische Druck- 
u. Verlagsanstalt.
Meinong, A. 1977. Über Annahmen, Graz: Akademische Druck- u. Verlagsanstalt.
Mezei, B. M., and B. Smith. 1998. The Four Phases of Philosophy, Amsterdam: 
Rodopi.
Minogue, K. 2010. The Servile Mind, New York, London: Encounter Books.
266 
K. Mulligan

Monk, R. 1990. Ludwig Wittgenstein. The Duty of Genius, New York.
Morley, J. 1923. On Compromise, London: Macmillan.
Mulligan, K. 2003. “Searle, Derrida and the Ends of Phenomenology”, in John 
Searle, ed. B.  Smith, Contemporary philosophy in Focus, Cambridge 
University Press, 261–286.
Mulligan, K. 2007. “Intentionality, Knowledge and Formal Objects”, Disputatio, 
23, 154–175.
Mulligan, K. 2008a. “Ironie, valeurs cognitives et bêtise”, Philosophiques, 35, 
89–107.
Mulligan, K. 2008b. Value, The Routledge Companion to Metaphysics, (eds.) 
R. Poidevin, P. Simons. London: Routledge.
Mulligan, K. 2009. “Torheit, Vernünftigkeit und der Wert des Wissens”, Wissen 
und Werte, ed. G. Schönrich, Paderborn: mentis Verlag, 27–44.
Mulligan, K. 2014. “Foolishness, Stupidity and Cognitive Values”, The Monist, 
The Philosophy of Robert Musil, 97, 1, 66–85.
Mulligan, K. 2016. “Anatomies of Foolishness 1927–1937”, (eds.) J. M. Ariso, 
A.  Wagner Rationality Reconsidered: Knowledge, Belief and Practice in the 
Philosophy of Ortega and Wittgenstein, Berlin: de Gruyter, 215–236.
Mulligan, K. 2017. “Interest, Questions & Knowledge”, forthcoming.
Mulligan, K., and K.  R. Scherer. 2012. “Toward a Working Definition of 
Emotion”, Emotion Review, 4, 345–357.
Roger, A. 2008. Bréviaire de la bêtise, Paris: Gallimard.
Ronnow-Rasmussen, T. 2011. Personal Value, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rougier, L. 1965. « Introduction », Celse, Discours vrai contre les Chrétiens, 
Utrecht: Jean-Jacques Pauvert.
Scheler, M. 1966. Der Formalismus in der Ethik und die materiale Wertethik. 
Neuer Versuch der Grundlegung eines ethischen Personalismus, Berne: 
Francke.
Scheler, M. 1976. Späte Schriften, Berne: Francke.
Schuhmann, K., and B.  Smith. 1987. “Questions: An Essay in Daubertian 
Phenomenology”, Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, XLVII, 3, 
353–384.
Silvia, P. 2006. Exploring the Psychology of Interest, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Silvia, P. 2008. “Interest. The Curious Emotion”, Current Directions in 
Psychological Research, 17, 57–60.
Smith, B. 1984. “Acta cum fundamentis in re”, Dialectica, 38, 157–178.
13  Foolishness and the Value of Knowledge 
267

Reinach, A. 1989. Sämtliche Werke, Vol. I, eds. K. Schuhmann & B. Smith, 
Munich, Philosophia Verlag.
Stein, E. 1970. Beiträge zur philosophischen Begründung der Psychologie und der 
Geisteswissenscahften. Eine Untersuchung über den Staat, Tübingen: Max 
Niemeyer Verlag.
Tappolet, C. 2000. Emotions et Valeurs, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
Tappolet, C. 2009. “Emotions, Perception and Emotional Illusions”, The 
Crooked Oar, (ed.) C. Calabi Cambridge (Mass.): MIT Press.
Teroni, F. 2007. “Emotions and Formal Objects”, Dialectica, 61, 395–416.
Tumlirz, O. 1919. Das Wesen der Frage. Beiträge zu ihrer Psychologie, 
Gegenstandstheorie und Pädagogik, Leipzig: Prag und Wien.
Wells, A. M., and G. Mathews. 1994. Attention and Emotion: A Clinical 
Perspective, Hove and Hillsdale.
Whitcomb, D. 2010a. “Curiosity was Framed”, Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research, 81(3), 664–687.
Whitcomb, D. 2010b. “Wisdom,” Routledge Companion to Epistemology, 
S. Bernecker and D. Pritchard (eds.), London: Routledge.
White, A. 1964. Attention, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Williamson, T. 2000. Knowledge and Its Limits, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
268 
K. Mulligan

269
© The Author(s) 2016
L. Zaibert (ed.), The Theory and Practice of Ontology, 
DOI 10.1057/978-1-137-55278-5
A
Abbot, Francis Ellingwood, 149
admiration, 124, 242, 243, 253, 256
adulthood, 203, 212
alethophobia, 258
Alexander von Humboldt 
Foundation, 2, 4
Alps, 59, 60
amorphous lump, 63
Analytic ontology, 9
Ancel, J., 72n40
Anglo-American bombing, 123
Anglo-Saxon legal scholarship, 86
anti-realism, 48, 53–61, 67, 130
anti-Semitism, 118–19, 125, 129, 
130
applause, 242
approbation, 242
Armstrong, David, 28, 33, 35–6
attitude, 203–4
committal (Reductionistic) EU, 
206–9
human agency, 219–20
next stance, 218–19
postures in focus, 209–10
reactive self, 210–11
reaping what we sow, 211–17
Theory of Expected Utility, 205
Augustine, 256, 264n24
Austin, John, 88
autonomy, 6, 85, 224–7, 236
axiological significance, 150–2
B
bar limit principle, 195–7, 199
Basic Formal Ontology (BFO), 10, 
23, 180
Bentham, Jeremy, 87
Bierce, Ambrose, 72n40
Index

270 
Index
Binmore, Ken, 220n1
Black Notebooks, 115, 117, 120, 
125–8
Bona, Jonathan P., 6
Borges, J.L.
Chinese Encyclopedia, 58, 65
Breivik, Anders Behring, 110
Brentano, Franz, 136–44, 263n6
Last Judgment, 147
organic wholes, types of, 146
The Origin of Our Knowledge of 
Right and Wrong, 136
Bringing Up Baby, 223
British Cartographic Society, 71n29
British Empire, 46
Brogaard, Berit, 70n25, 83–4
brute facts, 64, 79, 84–6
C
canonical notation
intentionality in, 39–42
Quine, Willard van Orman, 34–8
Carnap, Rudolf, 39
Casati, Roberto, 6
Ceuster, Werner, 6
Chiodi, Pietro, 118
Chisholm, Roderick M., 137, 143, 
144, 146, 147
classical utilitarianism, 89, 138, 141, 
151
Coastal Zone Management Act, 
72n41
cogito ergo sum, 39, 41
cognitive values, 243–6, 253–60
collective violent acts, 104–9
committal (reductionistic) Expected 
Utility, 206–9
Component History and Concept 
Model, 177
component history table, 160, 165, 
168
concatenation, 191, 193
concepts table, 160
connected segment, 189
consequentialism, 135
constructivism, 63, 64, 121
Continental Philosophy, 243,  
244
continuant–occurrent dualism, 
18–19
continuants, 10–13, 21–2
contract law, 85
copyright law, 83
Cottingham, John, 153n5
cuique suum, 149
curiosity, 247–52
Curzon, George, 45, 46, 48, 49, 55, 
56, 59, 60, 65
Romanes Lecture, 45, 47, 60
Curzon Line, 68n2
Cyclops, 103
D
damaging act, 97–103, 106, 108
Darwall, Stephen, 225
DATES table, 167
de Balzac, Honoré, 223
de-Nazification, 123, 124
deontology, 86–9
Department of Defense, 2
Derrida, 118, 119, 129
descriptions table, 160–1
dictator mode, 212
disjunctive predicates, 52

  Index 
271
double computation hypothesis, 
197–200
Dunn, Elizabeth, 229
E
École Militaire, 13
ecological niches, 68n6
electronic healthcare records (EHR), 
158, 159
Elgin, Catherine, 58–9
eliminativism, 16
emotional abuse, 226–7
emotions, 253, 254
empiricism, 39–41
Endangered Species Act, 72n41
enthusiasm, 243
epistemic desire, 247–52
epistemological naturalism, 41
Euler, L., 52
European Network on Social 
Ontology, 111n1
European Union, 2
expected value computation, 206
extreme constructivism, 66
extreme idealism, 54, 57
F
fantology, 25
default ontologization, 27–34
intentionality in canonical 
notation, 39–42
Quine’s canonical notation, 34–8
Fawcett, C.B., 68n1
Febvre, Lucien, 61
Feldman, Fred, 139, 140, 143
Ferraris, Maurizio, 6
fiat, 48–51, 55–8, 61–7, 81
figure–ground organization, 50
first-order predicate logic, 26, 28, 
31–4, 39
Florida State University, 228
foolishness, 241–4
cognitive values, 244–6, 253–60
epistemic desire, curiosity, and 
questions, 247–52
interest, 247–60
motivation, 253–60
thick/thin account, 260–2
formal ontology, 9
Forrest Gump, 237–8
four-dimensionalism, 16, 18, 34
Frege, G., 52, 63
French Embassy, 104
fullness, 194, 196
Fully Specified Name (FSN), 161, 
178
G
game theory, 218, 219
genidentity, 21
geographic predestination, 60–1
geography, 6, 10, 48–53
Germany, 116, 117, 120
Gibson, J.J., 49, 56
Goodman, N., 57, 72n36
Great Britain, 71n29
grundnorm, 88
H
harmony, 143–9
Hart, H.L.A., 85, 88
hedonistic utilitarianism, 141, 142

272 
Index
hermeneutical fallacy, 127
hermeneutics, 123–4
hermeticism, 116–18
Historic Pain Concept Table 
(HPCONC), 167–8
historic relationships, 159, 163, 164
Historic Relationships Table 
(HISREL), 166
Historic Subsumption Table (HST), 
166, 167
Hitler, Adolf, 123
Holdich, T.H., 68n1
Honderich, Ted, 153n5
hostility, 243, 244, 254
human agency, 219–20
Husserl, Edmund, 3, 144, 145, 245, 
253, 255
I
idealism, 61, 62, 73n42, 129
ideal utilitarianism, 137, 138
important debate, 54, 56, 61
inferred relationships, 163
information content entity (ICE), 
158
initial connected segment, 189
Institute for Formal Ontology and 
Medical Information Science 
(IFOMIS), 3, 5
institutional reality, 81
intellectual property (IP), 82, 83,  
93
intentionality, 39–42, 79, 105
interest, 247–52
intermediate tables, 166–8
International Court of Justice, 66
International Health Terminology 
Standards Development 
Organization (IHTSDO), 158, 
159, 168, 179, 180
interoperability, 82
intrinsic value, 137, 145, 148, 246
IP law, 83
isotropic time, 213, 214
Italian Republic, 107
J
Jeffersonian entities, 56, 70n24
Jeffers, Thomas, 65, 70n24
Johansson, Ingvar, 5–6, 26
Johnson, W.E., 10
Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 
228
justice, 86–9, 92–3
ontology and, 90–2
venerable conceptions of, 149
K
Kanizsa, G., 51
Kant, Immanuel, 69n8, 73n42, 87
Opus Postumum, 53
Kelsen, Hans, 88
knowledge, 108, 242, 245–6
cognitive values, motivation and 
interest, 253–60
interest, epistemic desire, 
curiosity, and questions, 
247–52
Koepsell, David, 6
Kolodny, Niko, 235
Kushlev, Kostadin, 232

  Index 
273
L
law, 64, 81–5
deontology and positivism, 
failures of, 86–9
legal ontology, 64, 82–6
ontology and justice, 90–1
soft normativity and social 
ontology, 92, 93
Leaf Nodes Table (LEAFS), 166
legal ontology, 82–6
legal positivism, 86–9
Lewin, Kurt, 21
Lewontin, Richard, 50
lexicon, 192, 200n3
life satisfaction, 227–34
logical language, 27, 28, 35
logical monism, 29, 139
M
Macchiarini, Idalgo, 95
Mackie, J.L., 153n5
magical Nazism, 117
Maier, Corinne, 232
Mann, Thomas, 119
Manzoni, Alessandro, 125
marriage, 81, 233
Mazzini, Giuseppe, 59
meaning of life, 236–9
Meinong, Alexius, 33
mental death, 225
metaphysical anti-Semitism, 119, 
132
metaphysical theory, 23, 55
metaphysics, 2, 48–53, 121–3
Middle East, 60
Migratory Bird Treaty Act, 72n41
moderate realism, 54, 55, 61
modern liberalism, 87
molecular expressions, 191–3, 194, 
195
Moore, A.W., 40
Moore, G.E., 34, 136–46, 148, 153
moral wrongness, 90
Moro, Aldo, 95, 106–7
movementism, 121
Mulligan, Kevin, 6, 126
multiculturalism, 89
music formula, 191, 193
music pieces, 193
fullness, 194
non-overlap, 194
music scores, 193, 197
N
Napoleon-processes, 17, 18
narrow-scope assessments, 208
n-ary molecular expression, 191
National Environmental Policy Act, 
72n41
National Institutes of Health, 2, 5
National Library of Medicine 
(NLM), 159–60
national mapping agency, 71n29
National Science Foundation, 2
National Sleep Foundation, 226
National Survey of Families and 
Households, 228
natural frontiers, 60, 65
naturalistic fallacy, 84
natural kinds, 58
natural languages, 27, 30, 157, 196
natural law, 86–8

274 
Index
Nelson, Katherine, 233
neutral monism, 39
noetic absurdity, 263
non-overlap, 194
North Sea, 64
Northwest Ordinance, 70n24
O
occurrents, 10–13, 21–2
Ontologia Utens
consequences, 13–14
continuant–occurrent dualism, 
18–19
continuants and occurrents, 
10–13
continuants from occurrents, 
21–2
ontology and ontologies, upshot 
for, 22–3
problem, 15–16
process-only philosophy, 16–18
useful ontology, 9–10
ontologically perfect language, 30
ontological sextet, 31, 38
ontological square, 31
ontology, 2
and social reality, 79–82
and justice, 90–2
Ontology of General Medical 
Science (OGMS), 180
Open Biomedical Ontology 
Foundry, 180
Ordnance Survey, 71n29
organic wholes
Brentano, Franz and Moore, 
G. E., 136–43
to each his own, 149–53
harmonies and values, 143–8
P
Pain Component Table (PCT), 168
Pain Descriptions Table (PDT), 167
Pain Graph Nodes Table (PGN), 167
Pain Historic Subsumption Table 
(PHST), 167
Pain History Table (PHIS), 168
Pain Terms Table (PTT), 166, 171
parental love
and life satisfaction, 227–34
and meaning of life, 236–9
loss of autonomy, 224–7
ontological structure of, 234–6
pharisaism, 126–8, 259
anti-semitism, 118–19
“can you still be a Heideggerian?”, 
130–3
coming out, 115–16
Heidegger’s Heirs, 128–30
hermeneutics, 123–4
hermeticism, 116–18
metaphysics, 121–3
philosophy, 125–6
politics, 119–21
phase sortals, 52
philosophical tradition, 136
philosophy, 125–6, 218, 219
physicalism, 39, 41
Pichois, Claude, 124
Pickwick-picture, 72n36
Platonism, 121
pluralism, 88, 89, 138, 152, 153
pluralistic, 137, 138
political geography, 48, 49
politics, 119–21, 130
Pollmann-Schult, Matthias, 231
Polyphemus, 103
positivism, 86–9
postmodernism, 244

  Index 
275
Prescott, Jessie, 232
primitive symbols, 188, 190
process-only philosophy, 16–18
projectable predicates, 52
psychological abuse, 226–7
Psychological Science, 228, 229, 233, 
238
PTT Subsumer Table (PTTST), 166
punishment, justification of, 135, 
136
Q
Quine, Willard van Orman, 26, 
34–8
R
Ramachandran, V.S., 207
Rashdall, Hastings, 153n1
raster, 188–90
Ratzel, Friederick, 59, 68n1
Rawls, John, 85, 88, 90, 139
readability, 197–200
real estate, 84
realism, 53–61
reality, 34, 42, 50, 63, 79
Reclus, Élisée
L’homme et la terre, 60
Rectorial Address, 124
Red Brigades, 105
references table, 163, 167
regional ontologies, 9
Reinach, Adolf, 85
relationships table, 160, 161
Release Format 1 (RF1), 160, 165
retributivism, 135, 145, 149, 153n5
revisionism, 16
Roe v. Wade, 70n26
Ross, W.D., 141–3
Rougier, L., 260
rule-utilitarianism, 89
Russell, Bertrand, 28, 31, 34–6, 39
Ryan, Debby, 232
S
Safe Drinking Water Act, 72n41
Salice, Alessandro, 6
Sapir–Whorf hypothesis, 27
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 215
Savage, Leonard, 206, 216
Scheffle, Samuel, 218
scientific theories, 80
Searle, John, 64, 68n5, 79, 85
semantic content, 27
Senior, Jennifer, 233
sentiments, 253, 255
Simon, Peter, 5
Simon, Robin, 228
single-assessment model, 208
single-function model, 207
sleep deprivation, 226
Smith, Barry, 1–7, 70n25, 83–4, 91, 
111n1, 136, 220n4, 236, 
265n38
social ontology, 82, 84, 92–3
social reality, 79–82, 92–3
soft normativity, 92–3
software, 83
Solid Waste Disposal Act, 72n41
Spackman, Kent A., 177
SPAN ontologies, 11, 18
speculative cosmology, 9
Standard Music Notation (SMN), 
187–8
lexicon, 192–3
molecular expressions, 190–3

276 
Index
Standard Music Notation (SMN) 
(con.)
music formulae, 193
music pieces, 193
readability, 197–200
temporal fragment, 188–90, 194–7
The Stanford Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy, 25
stated relationships, 161, 163
Stein, Edith, 251
stupidity, 244
subject–predicate logic, 28–9, 31, 34
substance sortals, 52
Swainson, W., 71n28
systematic knowledge, 259
Systematized Nomenclature of 
Medicine—Clinical Terms 
(SNOMED CT), 158
concept, 158–9
data analysis, 168, 171
distribution of, 159–65
epilogue, 181
examples of, 162
FSNs, 172
historical subgraph of, 171
intermediate tables, generation of, 
166–8
pain terms, 172, 176–7
partial historical subsumption 
hierarchy of, 173, 181, 182
semantic tag changes, 172, 174
semantic tags, evolution of, 172, 
175
T
temporal fragment, 188–90
and SMN, 194–7
lexicon, 192
molecular expressions, 192–3
music formulae, 193
music pieces, 193
temporal reading challenges, 198
terrorism, 96–8
acts, 104–9
kinds of, 96–7
violent and damaging acts, 
98–103
Thalos, Mariam, 6
Theory of Expected Utility (EU), 
205
two-fold consequentialism,  
265n36
U
UK Clinical Terms project, 167
Ultimate God, 121, 124
U.N. General Assembly, 2n41
Unified Medical Language System 
(UMLS), 160
University of California, 233
utilitarian ethical theory, 89
utilitarianism, 87, 90, 135
V
van Inwagen, P., 70n23
vanity, 242
Varzi, Achille, 6
Vattimo, Gianni, 120
verbal abuse, 226–7
violence, 96–106
violent acts, 97–103
Volkswagen Foundation, 2, 5
Volpi, Franco, 125

  Index 
277
W
war, 46, 67, 80, 233
West Bank, 66
Whitcomb, D., 265n36
White, Adrian, 233
Whitman, Walt, 224
Williams, Bernard, 96
Williams, Donald, 9
Wittgenstein, L., 62
Wittgenstein’s Nephew, 116
Wolff, Christian, 9
World Database, 228
World Database of Happiness, 228
Z
Zaibert, Leo, 6, 84, 85, 86, 91, 
220n4

