Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=sold20
Scandinavian Journal of the Old Testament
ISSN: 0901-8328 (Print) 1502-7244 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/sold20
The mythic mind
N. Wyatt
To cite this article: N. Wyatt (2001) The mythic mind, Scandinavian Journal of the Old
Testament, 15:1, 3-61, DOI: 10.1080/09018320152395903
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/09018320152395903
Published online: 05 Nov 2010.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 180
View related articles 

Scandinavian Journal of the Old Testament vol. 15 no. 1 (2001)
© Taylor & Francis
THE MYTHIC MIND1
N. Wyatt,
New College, Mound Place, Edinburgh EH1 2LX, Scotland
The problem
The term “myth” has endured a confused perception in recent years.
On the one hand there has been a long tradition of hostile intent to-
wards it, typical for the most part, curiously, among biblical scholars
and systematic theologians. Many have been at pains to distance
themselves and the biblical literature from any association with it. I.
Strenski, writing in a different context, even felt compelled to remark
sardonically on its altogether false status:
... instead of there being a real thing, myth, there is a thriving
industry, manufacturing and marketing what is called “myth”.
“Myth” is an “illusion”—an appearance conjured or “construct”
created by artists and intellectuals toiling in the workshops of the
myth industry...2
He was here playing on the sheer elusive nature of the concept to
deny it any real ontological or even conceptual validity. On the other
1 
My thanks to David Reimer, who discussed a draft of this paper with
me, to Laura Joffe, who as always offered trenchant criticisms, and to
Larry Hurtado, who has a gift for discerning wood through the trees.
An early form of the paper was delivered to SOTS, University of
Nottingham, 20 July 1998, and a revised version to the Edinburgh
Biblical Studies Seminar on 25 January 1999. A number of
adjustments and additions were consequently made.
2 
Strenski 1987, 1-2. These views did not prevent Strenski from adding
to the industrial output.

4    N. Wyatt
hand, an increasing number of studies3 has brought about a process
of rehabilitation, bringing a prodigal son back into the fold, as it
were, and enriching the discipline with the insights he had gained
while out in the cold, among alien peoples such as anthropologists
and psychologists. While there is undoubtedly a positive reception in
many quarters, even among some contemporary biblical scholars, of
such a revisionist view of a category long held in deep hostility
within this discipline, some elements of that hostility remain, and are
still vocal.
It still remains true to say that there is a powerful current of
thought among biblical scholars that the Hebrew Bible is emancipated
from myth4. Some would perhaps go even further, and claim that the
3 
E.g. Dulles 1966, Gibbs-Stevenson 1975, Otzen-Gottlieb-Jeppesen
1980 (though B. Otzen’s view is both ambivalent and ambiguous: see
n. 4), Oden 1981, Cooper 1983, Leach 1983 (though his approach
undoubtedly horrifies some biblical scholars!), Day 1985, Barker 1991,
178-81, Batto 1993, Smith 1994, Epstein 1996, Wyatt 1996b.
4 
See the final chapter by H. and H. A. Frankfort in Frankfort et al.
1946, 1949, and the chapter by W. A. Irwin in the former. Note also
Clapham 1976. See also Day 1985, 49, for the assertion that Gen 1 has
demythologized the Chaoskampf, though he accepted the survival of
myth in other passages. Similarly Murray 1992, 11. B. Otzen (Otzen-
Gottlieb-Jeppesen 1980, 28-39, extended to Gen 2-3, p 45!) also wished
to consider Gen 1 as demythologized: “... what happens to the
mythical dimension when it has been accommodated in this system of
dry, priestly erudition?” (p 28). Is myth now a matter of style? On p 39
he wrote “we can again sense the efforts of the priestly craftsmen to
suppress a mythological idea and thus pre vent the hearers from
wandering into paths of thought which, according to the priestly
point of view, lay uncomfortably close to paganism”. On p 45 he
asserted that “we do not have myths as such in this part of the OT”
(sc. Genesis, and in particular the primaeval history); but immediately
afterwards (p 46) he observed that “it should hardly surprise us that
someone felt compelled to use myth in speaking of these important
events”. He appears to have wanted it both ways. Later his
judgments are vaguely couched, as though to keep both options
open, for on p 57 he regarded Gen 4 and 6,1-4 as “strongly marked
with mythological characteristics”; the latter text is described on p 58

The Mythic Mind    5
religion of ancient Israel was also emancipated from myth5. One rea-
as “one of the most mythological texts in the OT”, and on the same
page he wrote of “the more or less mythologically coloured accounts
of the opening chapters of Genesis”. To summarize Otzen’s view, Gen
1 is demythologized because a) there is no personification of natural
phenomena or creatures, b) there is no deification of natural
phenomena or creatures, c) there is no conflict (but see his own
analysis on p 35!), and d) it is quasi-conceptual. But this is all along
accompanied by some very suspicious perceptions of the “pagan”
material (the term itself gives the game away, in terms of our two
disciplines discussed below) and a complete mis representation, in my
view, of the theology of both Ugaritian and Babylonian texts. Indeed
Otzen’s ultimate criterion for his reservations on Genesis appears to
have been his a priori conception (pp 59-60) that myth must some
how or other be linked to ritual. It is all handled in a very unsatisfac-
tory manner, but in many respects typifies much of the discussion we
shall encounter. Note how the tone changes: H. Gottlieb (p 69 in the
same volume) on the other hand referred quite naturally to “the
exodus myth”. In Wolff 1974, the term “myth” does not even feature
in the index, in a book which purported to bring the insights of
anthropology into Old Testament studies, but egregiously failed to
do anything of the sort. “Demythologizing”, picked up from its
comparatively useful employment in New Testament studies, has
become a catchword for the thoughtless evacuation from Old
Testament narrative of most of its most precious insights. Oden
1992b, 956-7, attributed the antipathy to myth in part to a negative
response to D. F. Strauss’s Life of Jesus (published 1835). This point
was also made independently by B. Otzen (Otzen-Gottlieb-Jeppesen
1980, 2). It is a long time for such a hangover to persist!
5 
In older studies it was taken more or less for granted that the Hebrew
Bible offered a direct insight into historical Israelite religion. Some
adjustments were necessary, of course, but by and large a “history of
Israelite religion” could be written, as offered for example by
Oesterley-Robinson 1930, Kraus 1966, Ringgren 1966, Rowley 1967,
Fohrer 1973. This is generally no longer considered to be possible,
though a further (sophisticated) example has recently appeared:
Albertz 1992 (1994). Such a programme has been in irreversible retreat
for some time. But this does at least clear the way for a more realistic

6    N. Wyatt
son for this may be the explanation offered by H. Eilberg-Schwartz
for the discontinuity often asserted between the subject matter of an-
thropology, that is “primitive peoples” and “primitive religion”, and
Judaism. He averred that
Since the Enlightenment, Judaism has typically been regarded as
superior to other religions, with the single exception of Christianity.
Although inferior to Christianity, “the absolute religion”, Judaism
was not considered sufficiently primitive to be classified with the
religion of savages. This judgment gave rise to the conviction that
interpreters of Judaism had little if anything to learn from either the
discipline of anthropology or comparative enquiry.6
A similar point was made by M. M. Epstein, who observed that
… the idea of myth did not fit their [ Jewish scholars’] conception of
what Judaism should be...7
history, though it is likely to remain fragmentary.
6 
Eilberg-Schwartz 1990, ix.
7 
Epstein 1996, 352. He continued (p 353): “Liberal reformers and
rationalist neoorthodox scholars alike believed that the essence of
Judaism should be rational, not mythical or mystical. Most did not
even acknowledge that such an entity as Jewish myth existed. Much
like contemporary apologists for Christianity, they defensively
contended that Judaism needed to cut itself free from the stultifying
and the ridiculous fantasies that were embarrassingly present in
rabbinic literature. This would require a return to the pris tine Hebrew
Scriptures, which were deemed to represent the triumph of rational
monotheism over the fearful and etiological world of pagan myth...”
Thus a common motivation appears to have lain behind the Jewish
and Christian rejection of myth. It was part of the attempt to reconcile
the belief-systems with the rationalist demands of the Enlightenment.
Elements of E. Said’s (Said 1978) and K. Whitelam’s (Whitelam 1996)
strictures also have a bearing on the broad issue of unacknowledged
prejudice. I suppose post-modernism is at least to be credited with
recognizing the need for deconstruction to be brought to the
forefront of discussion. (The virulent ad hominem attacks on
Whitelam since the publication of his book illustrate all too well the
enormous power of the mythic mind even in today’s seemingly ra-
tional academic community.)

The Mythic Mind    7
and went on to deplore the dogmatic avoidance of a useful literary
category in the interpretation of the Hebrew Bible, from which schol-
ars had deemed myth to be absent. In both instances, while it is
explicitly Judaism which is represented as contrasted with “primi-
tive” religions, it is fair to say that the same judgment applies a forti-
ori to the Hebrew Bible, and explicitly so for Epstein8.
A slightly different account was given by H-J. Kraus, who noted
the excessively speculative nature of both S. Mowinckel’s work con-
cerning the enthronement and New Year festivals9, and what he evi-
dently regarded as the pernicious influence of the British “myth-and-
ritual” school associated with S. H. Hooke10. He was unhappy with a
broad application of phenomenological principles to Israelite religion.
In a barbed passage, he criticized Mowinckel (along with
Pedersen11), but was particularly scathing towards Hooke:
Although the question must be raised whether this phenomenology
of primitive religion offers the right presuppositions for a correct
explanation of Old Testament worship, there is no doubt whatever
that the essential background of Israel’s cult is clearly brought out.
The objection could be made that in Mowinckel as well as Pedersen
the principles of interpretation of the ancient cults and rites are too
uniform, and that they see the manifold reality too much as a uniform
phenomenon of primitive life. But the danger of distortion in these
two scholars is slight compared with the trends to which we must
8 
Lest it be thought that the situation is merely a prejudice by persons
of a particular theological persuasion, Kuper 1988 has identified a
broader need among anthropologists to separate “primitive” societies
from modern ones. Part of the unwritten agenda behind such
procedures was undoubtedly a desire to justify western colonial
control of everywhere in the world beyond Europe. Cf also the
substantival use of the term “savage” to denote other peoples,
usually in a state of colonial dependency. This is the rhetoric of
dominance! It is all part of the attitude criticized by Said 1978.
9 
Mowinckel 1962. For a recent reexamination of Mowinckel’s work see
Petersen 1998.
10 Hooke 1933, 1935, 1958.
11 Pedersen 1926, 1940.

8    N. Wyatt
now turn...12
We may note here the use of the term “primitive” which at least ad-
mits, if it is not deliberately intended to convey, something of the
prejudice noted above. Kraus went on to criticize G. Widengren13
and I. Engnell14, who characterized “the still more extreme approach
of the Uppsala school”. All these scholars were guilty of a “tendency
to lose sight of the distinctions in worship at different times and
places behind a unifying and all-embracing phenomenology”15. A
phenomenological, rather like a comparative approach to religion,
was evidently in bad odour because it threatened to break down the
sharp barriers that could be maintained between Israelite religion and
other “pagan” traditions, so long as the absolute distinction could be
made. Kraus did not have much to say about myth in general, but
complained (1966, 18) that the approach of the scholars cited tended
to push history out of the arena in favour of myth, and finally (p.
207), in alluding once more to “the dogma of the ‘pattern’ school of
thought”, complained that
there is no evidence within the Old Testament of this idea of a
“mythicizing” of Yahweh, the Lord of history”.
At last his own particular cat was out of the bag! Kraus stated
another common view of the issue, of the kind associated with the
“biblical theology movement” to which we shall refer below.
It is easy to sympathize with Kraus. But even though the views of
the scholars he cited be viewed as excessive, it does not follow that
every category with which they dealt (and here we are concerned
with myth) is therefore to be banished. Kraus, like those he attacked,
appears to have regarded myth and ritual as a largely indissoluble pair
of categories, quite apart from his evident concern to grant to
Israelite religion a privileged status.
Anti-mythic views of this kind have at times been taken as axio-
matic, as though the problem is over and done with, so that we can
now get down to the serious business of an adequate, non-
12 Kraus 1966, 15.
13 Widengren 1941.
14 Engnell 1943.
15 Both quotations from Kraus 1966, 16.

The Mythic Mind    9
mythological study of the text and the religious beliefs to which it
bears witness. Unfortunately, however, myth remains obstinate.
Even apparently outvoted, it will not go away, and returns again and
again to haunt us.
One of the problems which besets the whole issue is that no ade-
quate definition of myth has ever been agreed16, and this is perhaps
especially true among among biblical scholars, with the result that in-
adequate definitions have been paraded briefly, adopted uncritically,
applied indiscriminately, and used dismissively.
The brothers J. and W. Grimm once defined myths as “stories
about the gods”17, a definition taken up by H. Gunkel18 and O. Eiss-
feldt19, thus conveniently excluding from the genre stories about God
16 Kirk 1970, 7 remarks that “there is no one definition of myth. Myths...
differ enormously in their morphology and their social function.”
17 See Oden 1992a, 947-48. Eliade 1964, 5, has a similar view: “Myth...
tells how, through the deeds of supernatural beings...” Cf the view of
Spence 1921, 11, which allows one such actor: “A myth is an account
of the deeds of a god or supernatural being...”. Contrast Kirk 1970, 9:
“The dogma that all myths are about gods can be easily disposed
of...” In a penetrating study of Egyptian myth (where some similar
prejudices as those discussed above may be found among some
scholars), J. Baines himself offers a minimal definition: “myth… is a
sacred or central narrative” (Baines 1991:94). His title is revealing, for
it recognizes the quasi-mythological nature of iconography, a point
also made by Keel¾
Uehlinger 1992, 13-4 = 1998, 12-3; they
acknowledge a debt to Assmann 1982, 13-61, 1983, 54-95. (The close
link between visualizing and verbalizing will emerge in our further
discussion.)
18 Gunkel 1901b (1964), 15. The section is headed “Monotheism hostile
to myths”. For an analysis of Gunkel’s enormous influence on biblical
scholarship see Rogerson 1974, 57-65, who noted (p 59) Gunkel’s
inconsistency in this matter, since he called Gen 2-3 myth. (1901a,
4ff.). He explained this (pp 62-3) in terms of developments in Gunkel’s
thought not adequately documented in the successive editions of the
commentary. He was working with two definitions of myth: (i) stories
about gods, and (ii) stories about matters of universal concern.
19 Eissfeldt 1944 (reprinted in 1963, 496): “For at least two deities, in
principle distinguishable from one another, are required for myth,

10    N. Wyatt
(singular) or stories about people (not gods). This somewhat restric-
tive view was attractive to generations of biblical scholars who felt
constrained to contrast the allegedly mythical and primitive world-
view of the surrounding cultures, to their disparagement, with the
allegedly non-mythical and mature world view of ancient Israel. It
spilled over into all the agonized debates as to the precise genre into
which individual compositions were to be fitted, and was paralleled in
New Testament Studies with the “demythologization” programme of
R. Bultmann and his allies, even washing up on the shores of sys-
tematic theology20.
which speaks of the gods”. Cf ibid. 1965, 35: “... real myths are not to
be found in the Old Testament, at least none which originated in
Israel, but only some borrowed from elsewhere. This no doubt is
connected with the henotheistic [sic: why not “monotheistic”?
henotheism at least concedes the existence of other gods!] nature of
Israel’s belief in God, which recognises as the really powerful and
authoritative deity only the one, Israel’s tribal and national God
Yahweh. A real myth presupposes at least two gods, the one
contesting with the other... For this reason, a real myth could not
come into existence in Israel. What the Old Testament offers in the
way of myths or allusions to myths has quite clearly come into Israel
from outside and has been in large measure at least deprived of its
really mythical character.” He goes on to assert that Gen 1 has
demythologized the Chaoskampf tradition, “though in poetic
passages like Ps. civ, 6-9; Job xxxviii, 10-11, it has retained clear traces
of its original nature” (p 36).
A Zen response to Eissfeldt’s remark on conflict might be that “a
myth is the sound of one god fighting”!
20 The point of the controversy raised by R. Bultmann’s 1941 essay (see
conveniently Bartsch 1972) was precisely that the New Testament
was couched in mythological language, and inhabited a mythical
world-view, which had to be translated for the modern reader, who
allegedly would have no inkling of what the biblical writers were
about. This shows just how far removed theologians can be from the
real world of their contemporaries! I have met numerous devout
people who implicitly accept all the mythological language of the
New Testament at face value. (This tendency of the theologian to be
seriously out of touch has unfortunately gone on apace.) The

The Mythic Mind    11
H. Frankfort (1946) had already anticipated Kraus’s objection, con-
trasting the personal, mythological world-view of the ancients with
the non-personal, historical world-view of ancient Israel. This
simple, not to say simplistic and convenient, contrast played into the
hands of the “biblical theology movement” associated with such
names as G. E. Wright21. This was to obtain the desired cultural con-
trast from another measure of rationality. The cyclical and ultimately
purposeless experience of time allegedly to be found in all the other
cultures of the near east contrasted, mirabile dictu, with the
historical and linear view of Hebrew thought. This was self-evidently
right, for it coincided with modern western perceptions of time!
Thus from another perspective the convenient opposition between
primitive and advanced thought could be maintained22.
The most important exponent of the widespread paradigm of
Heilsgeschichte which grew round this approach was G. von Rad.
Acknowledging the earlier foundations of the cultic structures of
Israelite religion, he wrote of
striking feature of this debate, however, contrasting strangely with
the parallel debate among scholars in Old Testament Studies, was
that the latter scholars insisted that the biblical authors had already
demythologized. In order to get it all back in place for the New
Testament? The scholars are clearly out of touch with each other!
The essays in Hick 1977 represented a reassertion of the seriousness
of myth in Christian thought, and recognized that the authors were
making contentious claims.
21 See in particular Wright 1950 and 1952. I have touched on the
problem of his view in Wyatt 1996b, 382-88.
22 J. B. Curtis showed convincingly that biblical thought, like that of the
ancient Near East, was familiar with the concept of cyclical time
(Curtis 1963). The Jews of the Hellenistic era were also evidently at
home in the principle of the Great Year, widely attested throughout
the Near East and the Indo-Iranian region. On the other hand, apart
from Albrektson’s incisive observations (Albrektson 1967) it is also
clear from Glassner’s analysis that Mesopotamian thought was from
the early historical period at least perfectly at ease with different
concepts of time, cyclical and “linear” (Glassner 1993, 25-6; id. 1996,
id. forthcoming).

12    N. Wyatt
the historici[z]ing of what were previously purely agrarian festivals,
that is, the rooting of them in the saving history, the legitim[iz]ation,
indeed, of every ritual event on the basis of historical implantations
on Jahweh’s part. Here a rigorous demythologizing process, by
means of which Jahwism appropriated cultic ideas and usages which
derived from completely different cultic spheres, had been effected in
utter secrecy.23
This passage takes it as axiomatic that myth and history are incom-
patible, and that the redirection of ancient rites to new circumstances
involves an intrinsic programme of demythologization.
In my view neither of these suppositions bears examination.
Firstly, the old opposition of myth and history, while at times a
useful category distinction, suggests mental dispositions of entirely
different kind. It may work if the kind of history (more usefully
historical thinking) is of the modern, quasi-scientific kind, with rules
of evidence and objectivity as its main aspiration. But given the
“theocratic history” (R. G. Collingwood’s expression24) of the
ancient world, with its uncritical amalgamation of historical,
legendary and mythological features, it is simply unconvincing to
23 Von Rad 1962 i 27. Brief reference may also be made to Westermann
1984. He noted that “The event which is presented is freed from myth
and is an event which concerns human beings and their world... The
biblical genealogies describe the history of humankind only and so
acquire an importance they could not have in the realm of myth. The
uniqueness of what happened before history (sic !) or in the primeval
period has moved away from the story of the gods to the story of
human beings.” This is thus a reiteration of the old Grimm approach.
It is difficult to determine why history gives to something an
importance that myth cannot give it. Some might argue the contrary,
that historical events are ultimately insignificant (as ephemeral, here
today and gone tomorrow), while myth grants the event an eternal
status. Cf Church 1975, 39: “history is one damn thing after another”.
24 Collingwood 1936, 14-8. The section is headed “Theocratic history
and myth”. He called both categories “quasi-history”, but also
regarded 
myth 
as 
dealing 
exclusively with gods. 
On 
the
sophistication of historiographical thought and writing in the ancient
Near East see in particular Glassner 1993 and van de Mieroop 1999.

The Mythic Mind    13
claim a complete mental transformation on behalf of Israelite writers.
Both are types of narrative thinking, as well as narrative composition,
of the type to be discussed below. Besides this, the historical status
of the events lying behind Israel’s festivals is scarcely secure; they
constitute legends rather than any kind of sober history, and the
narratives, for example that of the Passover, function as myth in
their relation to the festivals. G. von Rad’s assertion regarding the
“rigorous demythologizing process” of the biblical writers is merely a
rhetorical flourish. No evidence is adduced of what constitutes the
process, let alone its “rigorous” nature. The process of which von
Rad writes, it seems to me, was going on in his own head, not those
of the narrators.
The influence of such expositions as I have outlined above lies
partly in their capacity to express a half-truth. Myths may indeed be
“stories about the gods”, for instance. They may even, as Eissfeldt
asserted, involve a conflict between two gods. It is the implicit
exclusion of all other possible story-lines from such a definition, to
say nothing of matters of personnel and characterization, or even
perhaps the formal insistence on a story-line in the first place, in
view of other possible approaches, which makes it at best unhelpful
in examining more fundamental features of the type25. Myths are
certainly to be distinguished from sober history26 as well, though that
25 For a broader view, in my view altogether more productive, see Kirk
1970.
26 Enunciation of the problem is difficult because of the ambiguity of
words like “history”. Note the wide range of meanings offered in
Gibbs-Stevenson 1975. By “sober history” I mean the “objective
sequence of events” (as far as objectivity here is possible, though
our subjectivity in apprehending them does not detract from their
facticity). “History” as written is best referred to as “historiography”.
It is at this point that subjectivity becomes inescapable. Of course
even modern historiography, as pursued in universities, is subject to
intellectual fashions and ideologies, as is only too clear from even a
cursory study. Marxism, feminism, post-modernism are merely three
such contemporary fashions. For a fascinating insight into Soviet
“historiography” (if the use and misuse of photographs in
propaganda can be so called), see King 1997.

14    N. Wyatt
is not to say that we can make the simple opposition, myth versus
history, into an inflexible principle. Myths may well contain elements
of history27, just as history may contain elements of myth.
The half-truth contained in these and other inadequate definitions
lies partly in the fact that human minds are perfectly able to inhabit
two or more conceptual worlds, and frequently at the same time.
Thus H. Frankfort was quite right to draw attention to the “personal-
ized” world of the experience of ancient people. But he omitted to
say that the very same minds constructed engineering wonders, in-
vented and developed mathematics and astronomy, managed
complex societies, and were clearly as much at home in the real
world of hard facts and pragmatic decisions as the rest of us. He
also implicitly, and later explicitly, excluded “Israel” from such an
experience, by the blanket-application to all Hebrew literature of
features of only one of its genres, historiography.
A view expressed by a number of these writers is that Israel did
not invent any myths, but only (where this is reluctantly conceded),
adopted and adapted the myths of others. Certainly so far as the main
mythic themes of the Bible are concerned, they are not generally late
inventions, but are the perpetuation of ancient forms, of which the
antecedents may indeed be traced, particularly in the Ugaritian and
Mesopotamian traditions. But why should this somehow be
construed as exonerating Israel from the implied moral opprobrium
of using them? It is almost as though they had been discovered
fencing the goods! The view is expressed half apologetically, as
though the biblical writers ought really to have known better. But
how else could they express their tradition except in traditional form?
It is no more than saying that for various Greek myths we can find
an Ugaritian, Mesopotamian or Egyptian Vorlage. This does not
oblige us to make similar pleas on behalf of Greek writers. Why
should biblical writers be subject to such opprobrium, unless it is felt
that they have betrayed a unique situation? That may be a perfectly
27 Cf the typological analysis of Munz 1973, who argued that behind
every myth there lies an event, transformed in the telling into a
paradigm, and slowly redeveloped into a concept.

The Mythic Mind    15
valid theological standpoint28, though it strikes me as rather naï ve,
but it will not do for the historian of religions. Having established
literary debts, in any context, we can then go on to see how a
distinctive use is made of the same theme in its different historical
manifestations. It is here that the peculiar qualities of the host
community may be discerned29.
28 Some Christian theology offers a hostage to fortune in this respect.
While other theologies may quite simply deal in a symbolic structure
entirely at odds with phenomenal reality, Christianity is presented as
claiming to take account of the real world, to engage with real history,
and to transform and redeem them both. This is after all the
implication of a theology of the incarnation. (It seems to me that
idealistic alternatives betray this principle.) In this respect, Christian
theology is obliged to accept the broad principles of historical study,
which includes engaging with such problematic issues as the status
of the resurrection (“historical fact”? “myth”?). This is perhaps the
crux, though for many such other matters as the historicity of events
and persons in the Old Testament (e.g. the patriarchs, the exodus) are
also troubling. This was the chief concern of the “biblical theology
movement”. 
The 
danger 
is 
in 
importing 
modern 
historical
presuppositions into ancient texts (e.g. rules of evidence into the
narrative of the resurrection) and then bringing back the “proof” into
the other field of discourse. But in our terms, many ancient histories
are myths. The real trouble is one of the sociology of knowledge, and
the confrontation of conflicting views. On this see Berger-Luckmann
1967, 122-30. Prof. Fred Berthold of Dartmouth College defined
theology for me as “the study of insoluble problems”! Perhaps in the
final analysis the problem lies in religious claims to “truth”. If truth is
defined in historical terms (see discussion below), then anything
non-historical is untrue. But it seems to me that the whole quest of
cognitive truth in religious beliefs, though it is particularly common in
Christian theology, is misguided. Such a position would force one
into the position of rejecting the truths of one tradition because they
conflict with those of another. This is not a productive line in
academic procedure, whatever theologians want to do with it. For a
useful discussion of the is sues see Lindbeck 1984, 63-9.
29 The situation is not dissimilar to the issue treated in Albrektson 1967.
He demonstrated that biblical commentators were wrong in

16    N. Wyatt
Perhaps in using other people’s myths (if that is the way it was)
the people of ancient Israel felt that these were meaningful and
powerful forms; perhaps in adapting them they were using them in
the time-honoured way, by actually shaping and articulating their
own experience by means of mythic expression, for this is an
important quality of myth; and perhaps they did not feel, as do many
of their modern interpreters, a compulsion to deny the long-standing
intellectual perception of this traditional past in favour of post-
Enlightenment categories.
In broaching the subject again, I am reminded of the apocryphal
story of the man who stopped a passer-by in O’Connell Street in
Dublin and asked him the way to Limerick. “If I were you, I
wouldn’t be starting from here”, was the reply. To start from here
would merely bog our discussion down in controversy which tends
to be inconclusive, since all the evidence shows that scholars of
opposed convictions are merely talking past one another. So let us
begin from somewhere altogether different.
A new starting-point
Another discipline which has suffered quite as many upheavals in re-
cent years as Biblical Studies, and has seen quite as many wars of
words, is Palaeoanthropology. The study of our past fascinates us
like no other subject, except perhaps sex, and discoveries emerging
from the fossil record or the laboratories of our universities require
paradigm shifts almost as frequent as a change of socks. Lest any
reader be tempted to put this article aside on the ground that I may
not legitimately mix disciplines, I reply that the boundaries of our
present academic disciplines are administrative conveniences,
established or at least maintained by university administrators, not
scholars. In legitimate scholarly enquiry, there are no boundaries, for
each discipline shades 
off into 
associated 
disciplines, 
and
biochemists, neurologists and psychologists, to say nothing of
attributing a his torical consciousness solely to Israel. Having shown
that it was quite widespread in the ancient world, he then asked just
what it was that was distinctive in biblical thought. If the biblical
writers did indeed use myths, the question to ask is what was
distinctive in their use.

The Mythic Mind    17
anthropologists and linguists (“linguisticists”!) have as much to
contribute to our discipline as archaeologists, economists, historians,
iconologists, philologists and the various kinds of scholar of religion.
Our study is Man, homo sapiens, and any contribution to our
understanding of this extraordinary creature, from whatever source,
should be thankfully received. Even the study of God can be
approached only by means of Man, since it is through human
experience, human rituals, human language and literary forms, in
short the activities of the human mind, that he, she or it may be
perceived, conceptualized or invented.
We are now used, in Biblical Studies, to a world in which there are
no longer any fixed points. We drift in a sea of uncertainties, unsure
whether the lights we see in the distance are from lighthouses on
terra firma, or from other ships drifting as blindly as ours. Let no
scholar of certain mind assure us on theological grounds that the
lights are indeed fixed points, for our academic discipline finally steps
outside its legitimate boundaries when it invokes theological axioms
to anchor its paradigms. In an intellectual, human pursuit, we are
obliged to obey the rules of the game, which are the implementation
of logical procedures, and the assessment of evidence before us, and
not the conjuring up of a deus ex machina to solve our problems.
Nevertheless, the search for the fixed point, the assured datum, does
provide sufficient motivation to pursue our enquiries wherever they
lead. It is a heuristic tool in the process of our quest, if a dubious
goal in the progress. Even if it be conceded that it is unobtainable, we
can imagine it, though qualifying it sotto voce as “relatively fixed”. It
has catalytic value.
Perhaps in expressing the problem in the somewhat oppositional
terms I have used above we have identified the real fly in the oint-
ment. We are dealing with not one discipline, but two. Theology may
quite rightly accept a number of exegetical principles in accordance
with a broad confessional framework, and one of these is certainly to
reassess past tradition in terms of present perceptions. The History
of Religions, the discipline in which I see myself working, and which
overlaps to some extent with Biblical Studies30, should however be
30 As distinct from “Bible Study” or Theology. A distinction is also to

18    N. Wyatt
very cautious in dealing with such an approach. It should strive
always for a kind of objectivity which is inevitably secular, humanis-
tic, and as far as possible value-free. By this I do not of course mean
that it merely accepts the obscene and the perverse without
judgment; but on the other hand it will be a lot more tolerant of the
bizarre and the exotic, and will recognize a certain moral relativity. It
seems to me that some of the former group of scholars in particular
have at times confused the two disciplines, to the point of
introducing theological judgments (on say, myth, or the “morality” of
Canaanite religion31) into the History of Religions, thus presenting as
sober historical judgments, prejudices that are nothing of the sort. Its
caution will be in direct proportion to its recognition that we never
have the full picture, and that every judgment remains provisional32.
The problem raised by the term “myth” is a product of this duality of
discipline and duality of purpose. To use the term in the context of
theology is evidently considered by some of its practitioners as a
slight on the truth-value of the subject matter, because myths are
commonly considered to be false stories33. Within the field of the
be made between History of Religion (sg.) (Religionsgeschichte) as
used fairly narrowly in the context of biblical studies (Hahn 1956, 83-
118), and referred to, for example, in Bultmann’s essay New
Testament and mythology (Bartsch 1972, 14) and the more neutral
application of Eliade 1959. My usage is in the latter sense. The latter
is strictly History of Religions, Religionengeschichte. J.C. O’Neill has
drawn my attention to the importance of the dis tinction.
31 Canaanite religion and Ugaritian religion are not simply to be
equated. For bibliography on the literature distinguishing “Ugarit”
from “Canaan” see de Moor 1997, 42 n. 5. Of course the confusion is
convenient for those who wish to use the “Canaanite” label, with
deuteronomic overtones, to bela bour all non-Israelite manifestations
of religion. Cf My comments, Wyatt 1999, 529-31.
32 A nice example of the matter is provided by Xella 1996, Zatelli 1998,
where Eblaite antecedents to the scapegoat rites of Lev. 16 are
published. It seems that an Ugaritian antecedent is also found in
KTU 1.127. On the nature of the two disciplines and the uneasy
relationship between them see Davies 1995, 17-55.
33 Cf W. H. Mills’s waspish observation (Mills 1842, ii 9): “The word

The Mythic Mind    19
History of Religions, however, the term is entirely naturally used to
denote a widely attested type of literature which communicates
religious values, doctrines, convictions and paradigms.
Palaeontology is as full of uncertainties, and we are, while striving
for those elusive hard facts, beset with competing theories on every
point of detail34. But it can at least be said here that knowledge is a
little more objectively based, if only because scientific procedures
such as the use of carbon dating or thermoluminescence techniques
are objective, however imperfectly applied or interpreted. Further-
more, while strong opinions are to be found, and the usual claims of
ideological bias are hurled from time to time at the opposition, palae-
ontology does at least work in theory on the principle of falsifiabil-
ity35. In our disciplines, where commitment may be part of the equa-
mythus is a milder as well as a less definite term than delusion or
imposture; and though the assertions are perfectly equivalent, it
shocks less to be told that Christianity stands on the same footing of
mental truth with heathen fables, than to be told, as by the sceptics
of a former age, that it is based on falsehood like them.” The kind of
prejudice to which Mills here drew attention is the one couched in
rather different arguments among biblical scholars, as outlined above.
(I do not believe that myth ¾
 or any other religious formulation or
expression ¾
 has any cognitive content, so that the issue of “truth”,
which so troubles many, is an irrelevance. This is not to say that
such beliefs are false either. The terminology is simply inappropriate.)
34 A number of comparisons may be made between the two disciplines
in terms of data and procedures. In both cases the raw data (bones,
tools or text) come with no certain context, and only the vaguest
“historical” setting. In both cases the scholar is trying to evoke a
complex mental world from extremely sparse data, though the biblical
scholar has a head start in that the texts provide a linguistic record. In
both cases there is a great deal, relatively speaking, of associated and
comparative material, and the crucial matter is to estimate degrees of
“debt” and independence between any two pieces of evidence. In
both cases the overall context is extremely elusive and fluid, and
massive paradigm shifts, to say nothing of massive heat in the
ongoing debates, characterize the two.
35 Donald 1991, 121, complained that “the successive cultures of
hominid evolution have been reconstructed by archaeologists and

20    N. Wyatt
tion, that is at times impossible to concede. Belief in the truth of the
material you study has its drawbacks, and the last thing Theology
seeks is falsifiability!
Let us begin, then, at the beginning, or at least in remote
prehistory. The later hominids have evolved, homo habilis and homo
erectus, the latter colonizing the world beyond Africa, and
Neanderthals (homo neanderthalensis) and Cro-Magnon (homo
sapiens) have lived in close proximity for perhaps fifty thousand
years in the Near East and Europe. Symbolizing skills have slowly
evolved36, and finally speech is developed. The advent of speech
anthropologists on the best available evidence and constitute an
important set of theory and data that has been largely ignored by
psychology, presumably because it is not experimental in nature and
is therefore seen as speculative”. The same problem besets any
historical discipline, because history cannot be repeated or
reexperienced. But the History of Religions ought at any rate to be
open to revision of previous positions in the light of further
evidence. This happens in Theology, too, of course, as any study of
the history of Theology will show. But it seems to me that the need to
preserve the foundations of commitment (“to keep faith”) impedes
real freedom of enquiry.
36 In this discussion, every step of the journey is fraught with
difficulties, and is likely to be in need of constant revision. A recent
cogent account of the origins of symbolizing capacity is found in
Deacon 1997, 376-410. He indicated the sheer difficulty which must
have obtained at the very beginning, in so far as a symbolic system
of communication would not work until there was a sufficient pool of
both symbols and symbolically proficient hominids (this is where it
begins) for it to function. Symbolic capacity was a strategy achieved
at a price. As to location, he placed it within the context of devel-
oping reproductive strategies, which in the human context (though
not exclusively there!) involve not merely the communication of
information between both males and females, and within each gender
group, but also the communication of disinformation in the dynamics
of courtship and bonding. From this narrow base it would very
rapidly broaden out into all social, political and above all ritual
spheres of life.
Deacon proposed that it was the use of meat which was a particularly

The Mythic Mind    21
unleashes hitherto impossible dimensions of experience. Whether it
be interpreted as “distance grooming” (Dunbar 1993) or as a
phonetic extension of non-linguistic communication, a sort of
verbalized pheromone, the development of speech interacted with the
new symbolizing capacity of the early human brain37, each
reinforcing the other on a feed-back loop principle38, and combining
with other distinctive hominid developments such as bipedalism,
opposed thumbs and increasing manual dexterity, the enormous
growth in brain-size and above all of the cerebral cortex, to produce
an ever-more complex world of symbolic capacity and achievement,
which over immeasurable centuries transformed our ancestors from
biological into cultural organisms.
M. Donald (1991) examined this development, and proposed a
number of discrete stages in the development of one crucial feature
in this nexus of processes, that of human memory. He postulated the
important trigger of symbolic behaviour. Although he did not cite
him, this would be entirely in accordance with the theory of Knight
1987, 1991 about blood-symbolism and the correlation between
bleeding meat and bleeding women being taboo, and cooked meat
and non-menstrual women being accessible. Burkert 1983 has shown
the centrality of killing to religious ritual, and it is noteworthy in our
present context that meat-production and the sacrificial cult as the
primary means of its distribution is the most characteristic feature of
ancient near eastern religion, including Israelite religion. Deacon
noted the relationship between the long development of hominid
tool-making, undoubtedly linked to the increasing use of meat, and
the attendant social structuring (long period of child-rearing,
advantages in such conditions of strategies for sexual fidelity
between bonded pairs) and saw here the genesis of symbolizing,
finding its most concentrated form in ritual.
37 Donald 1991, 233, insisted that the capacity to symbolize has already
begun independently of the genesis of language (speech).
38 Donald 1991, 35: “Once some form of verbal communication was in
place, a circular interaction between that system and the capacity for
thought led to the development of an ability for longer and longer
(and presumably more complex) trains of thought and their integral
support system, speech.”

22    N. Wyatt
following kinds of memory (he also used the following terms in
conjunction with “thought” and “culture”), developing in this
sequence:
1 “procedural memory”. This is shared by large numbers of organ-
isms. It is fair to say that evidence of primitive “consciousness” is
being constantly pushed back down the phylogenetic line.
2 “episodic memory”. This is restricted to birds and mammals, that
is, relatively late life-forms in evolutionary terms. It is greatly
enhanced in the great apes39. To contrast this with the following
type, we may cite Donald’s comment that
from a human standpoint, the limitations of episodic culture are in the
realm of representation. Animals excel at situational analysis and
recall but cannot re-present a situation to reflect on it, either
individually or collectively. This is a serious memory limitation; there
is no equivalent of semantic structure in animal memory...
3 “semantic memory”. This final form is found only in man, although
conceivably elementary forms also appeared among the earlier homi-
nids, depending on how far back the genesis of language is pushed.
But it distinguishes the hominid from the simian and pongid lines:
Semantic memory depends on the existence of abstract, distinctively
human representational systems. The cognitive element in human
culture is, on one level, largely the development of various semantic
representational systems.40
None of these stages replaces or displaces the earlier stages41, but is
superimposed on them. What Donald was here describing is the
development of a means of storing and retrieving information. While
it is “abstract”, in the strictest sense that language is itself an abstrac-
tion, a phonetic code for communicating complex ideas, and giving
ideational form to feelings, sensations, and memories, it is of course
not so in the more general sense of abstractions and conceptions of
the kind represented in mathematics or philosophy. In this regard it is
39 Donald 1991, 124-26.
40 Donald 1991, 160.
41 Donald’s approach is a cumulative process, and rather more
sophisticated than the “successive stage” approaches of some
anthropological writing. Cf Krzak 1993.

The Mythic Mind    23
entirely concrete, for the materials encoded in early systems of
thought and communication would be concerned above all with bio-
logical survival, and its many by-forms such as territorial control, so-
cial hierarchy and group-dynamics. The central key to such systema-
tization of experience was the symbol. Language allowed for the first
time a real semantic process, in so far as it allowed ideas to be
related in the mind42.
In his consequent analysis, Donald dealt with two further matters
of relevance to our present discussion. The first is an observation on
the distinction between mimicry, imitation and mimesis:
Mimicry is literal, an attempt to render as exact a duplicate as
possible... Imitation is not so literal as mimicry; the offspring copying
its parent’s behaviour imitates, but does not mimic, the parent’s way
of doing things. Mimesis adds a representational dimension to
imitation. It usually incorporates both mimicry and imitation to a
42 P. Connerton (Connerton 1989) wrote of “social memory”, which is
collective and public, to be distinguished from individual and private
memory. He located the former above all in ritual behaviour, seeing in
myth an altogether more fluid and dynamic phenomenon; “it
constitutes something more like a reservoir of meanings, which is
available for possible use again in other structures” (p 56). The
reapplicability of myth is particularly clear in the Hebrew Bible, where
the three types to be discussed below appear to be used in a number
of different contexts, and for different immediate purposes. Their
fundamental symbolic meaning however appears to have remained
fairly constant. Another distinction of Connerton is germane to our
discussion. On pp 13-4 he distinguished between the collective
enterprise mentioned above and the individual, critical work of the
historian, who questions all his evidence. But the ancient historian
(e.g. the biblical historian) is in no sense working according t o such a
scheme. He is more akin to the Assyrian royal analyst, who on the
king’s behalf lays a historical testimony before Aššur narrating his
deeds (in the first person: the king is speaking), as an act of piety.
The biblical “historians” certainly write a critique of events, but it was
conceived within a theological and even mythical framework. The
“reservoir of meanings” provided by myth determines the overall
shaping of the historiography.

24    N. Wyatt
higher end, that of re-enacting and re-presenting an event or
relationship. 43
Mimesis, he went on to argue, is essentially a public interpretation
and expression of communicable information (we might add, stored
in semantic memory), still in evidence in the arts. “The “mimetic”
customs of a group”, he suggested, “would serve as the collective
definition of a society”44. While the emphasis in the arts today may
be individual self-expression and virtuosity, they have historically
been concerned above all with the reinforcement of social mores.
Human rituals are those mimetic events which are taken with the ut-
most seriousness, and tend to have not only social but above all sa-
cred value. M. Eliade’s insistence on the link between sacredness and
ontology, that the “sacred’ is the “real”45, has a particular
significance in our present context. In so far as human societies
transcend the biological and experience a cultural world, they do so
by a process of reification, by what P. Berger and T. Luckmann
called “the social construction of reality”46.
The second of Donald’s emphases follows on directly from this
train of thought. While we construct reality through mimesis and art,
we do so above all through language. We not only live in, but we
have built, in order to live in it, a “linguistic universe”. The idea even
stands at the heart of religious discourse, in so far as Christ is the
“Word”, or creation began, as in many mythologies, with a divine
utterance. The idea is of course by no means confined to biblical
thought47.
So far as discourse is concerned, Donald distinguished two main
types, narrative and paradigmatic 48. The latter is to be associated
43 Donald 1991, 168.
44 Donald 1991, 173.
45 Eliade 1964.
46 Berger-Luckmann 1971; see also Berger 1973.
47 Divine principles such as Hebrew Ùokmâ, “wisdom”, Egyptian ma‚at
(“justice, truth”) or Sanskrit VÊc (“speech”, daughter of PrajÊpati the
creator-god) express similar conceptions. Conceptual abstractions, as
we might call them, appear as goddesses or at least divine
hypostases.
48 Donald 1991, 272, citing Bruner 1986. For the latter, the terms

The Mythic Mind    25
with scientific thought and is a function of modern complex
societies. It is largely lacking from traditional societies, where an
essentially oral discourse is the norm, even in such cultures as
developed writing systems (“external memory-systems”49) early in
their history. It is in the narrative-paradigmatic polarity that we
should recognize the difference between traditional and modern
cultures. L. Lévy-Bruhl attempted without success to characterize
the former as a “pre-logical mentality”50. There was nothing pre-
logical about the earlier form of thinking; it was simply that it
operated in broadly narrative forms. When narrative was at its most
intense, in expressing the sacral values of a community, its most
characteristic genre was myth. And myth harnessed to its full
potential the symbolic dimension of narrative, in creating imaginary,
ideal worlds (such as a typical ancient near eastern cosmology, or a
creation-story like Gen 1) which allowed a coherent encounter with
the untidy real world of common experience51.
“analytic” and “logico-scientific” are also suggested. There is a
certain irony in the use of the term “paradigmatic”, because in so far
as it denotes modern analytical tendencies in thought, its persistent
drive may be said to be to break paradigms (as outlined by Kuhn
1970). In practice, of course, something of the mystery-of-the-guild
mentality characterizes even scientific communities, and old
paradigms take much hard work to overthrow.
49 Dennett 1992 has enlarged on this phenomenon: the growth and
complexification of cultures has been in direct proportion to their
development of external memory-systems, which allow the vastly
increased stores of knowledge necessary for the management of
modern industry, medicine, law and government to function
effectively. The clay tablet, papyrus and parchment have given way
to the printed page and the computer disc. The growth in the power
of this process of externalization is exponential.
50 Lévy-Bruhl 1910. See critique in Rogerson 1978, 46-65. Rogerson
concedes (p 65) that much remains to be done in the analysis of
mentality.
51 While not “pre-logical”, there is a case to answer that mythological
thinking is pre-conscious, though as “tradition”, myth could continue
to be productive even in late periods, as in the rich developments of

26    N. Wyatt
If we may turn to another aspect of the shaping of the human
mind, two further studies have much to offer, Boyer (1994) and
particularly for present purposes Guthrie (1993). Both argue that the
human mind-brain is constructed in such a way that religious ideas
are entirely natural.
S. Guthrie has successfully resurrected another somewhat old-
fashioned idea, E. Tylor’s animism-theory, to a new and useful life,
by meticulous analysis of the psychology of perception, and the rec-
ognition of the principle of anthropomorphism as a primary category
in human experience. Tylor had viewed animism as belonging to a
“primitive” stage in human culture: Guthrie considered it to be a uni-
versal feature of the human mind. Experience is actually determined
by interpretation, he noted (against Schleiermacher and Otto)52, and
went on to argue that the tendency to perceive human faces and per-
sonalities in the external world is innate, and part of an important
defensive strategy, which then developed into a meaning-giving strat-
egy.
hellenistic, early Judaeo-Christian, and purÊçic thought. On the
lateness of consciousnes s as a factor in human experience see
Jaynes 1976. On the pre-analytical aspect of mythic thought, which
he treats as a different mode of consciousness, see Lonergan 1957,
542-3: “Mythic consciousness is the absence of self-knowledge, and
myth is a consequence of mythic consciousness as metaphysics is a
corollary of self-knowledge. Myth, then, and metaphysics, are
opposites. For myth recedes and metaphysics advances in the
measure that the counter-positions are rejected, that the attempt to
understand things as related to us gives way to the effort to
understand them as related to one another, that effective criteria
become available for determining the occurrence and the adequacy of
understanding. As myth and metaphysics are opposed, so also are
they related dialectically. For myth is the product of an untutored
desire to understand and formulate the nature of things.”
52
Guthrie 1993, 9: “Since experience depends on interpretation, it
cannot be prior to beliefs and concepts, but is generated partly from
them. Schleiermacher and others cannot claim simultaneously that
religious emotions are simple, immediate, or unconditioned by belief
and that they constitute an experience.”

The Mythic Mind    27
He cited W. Proudfoot’s example of the man who thinks he sees a
bear on the forest path53. This perception may be false, but it is a
better bet to think it may be a bear, and to discover that it is only a
boulder, rather than to think the reverse. But even more useful than a
bear, or any other dangerous but different creature as a symbol, is
the imagining of a human form in the external world. R. Horton had
defined religion as “the extension of the field of people’s social rela-
tionships beyond the confines of purely human society”54. Guthrie
glossed this with the comment that “humans thus model their rela-
tions with the world on their relations with other people”. In criticiz-
ing Horton, who, he argued, regarded this as simply the idiom rather
than the essence of religion, and thus failed to isolate the distinctively
religious aspect of this interpretation, Guthrie himself went on to in-
sist that anthropomorphism lies at the very foundation of religion, not
merely in an idiomatic sense, but more profoundly, for when it
developed into religion a personal relationship was developed with the
external anthropomorphic form. Thus the matter of loyalty and social
bonding came to lie at the heart of the relationship. While in practical
terms the “idiom” could be switched off at will, as in the
development of technology and science, for which it no longer had
any useful function, in religion it lay, and remained, at the heart of
the experience55. We may even think of this as a kind of primitive
“covenant relationship” developing between a community and its
gods, who were the developed personifications of these anthropo-
morphic reflections of the community itself 56.
The anthropomorphic imperative persists. The characterization of
Vedantic thought as non-theistic, or of Buddhist thought as atheistic,
as is often done by western commentators, is misleading. Both have
attempted a language of transcendence (the noumenal) which goes
53 Guthrie 1993, 9, 31, 37; see Proudfoot 1985, 192.
54 Horton 1960, 211, cited by Guthrie 1993, 33. Cf also Mithen 1996, 164-
7, 
where 
the 
author 
offers 
a 
theory 
on 
the 
origins 
of
anthropomorphism and totemism in the Upper Palaeolithic.
55 See Guthrie 1993, 34-6.
56 This in turn lends some new basis for Durkheim’s view that in
worshipping gods, society essentially worships itself (that is, reifies
and authenticates its ontological status).

28    N. Wyatt
beyond the personal (the phenomenal, anthropic), but does not deny
it. In western religion, attempts to go beyond the personal have been
limited to a few metaphysicians, who have introduced the language
of paradigmatic thought. For the vast majority, particularly in so far
as they experience rather than rationalize religion, and most
importantly for the writers of the sacred texts, biblical or qur’anic,
which so profoundly influence the mind of all subsequent members
of the believing community, the deity is emphatically personal, and
even aggressively anthropomorphic. After all, the very attribution of
mind to a deity is the transference of a human category. It is only
contemporary exegesis, frequently embarrassed by the powerfully
corporeal language, that has sought to explain it as purely
metaphorical.
The principle of “patterning”, of seeing in the evidence what we
expect to see, or want to see, is familiar enough to biblical scholars.
It lay at the heart of Kraus’s critique of Scandinavian and British
scholarship discussed above, just as much as within that scholarship.
The principle is best illustrated by the story of the inmate of Friern
Barnet hospital who was given some Rorschach tests by his
consultant. As the psychiatrist turned the pages in the test book,
revealing a succession of abstract blot-designs, the patient, on cue,
said what first came into his mind: “sex... sex... sex... sex...”  “Good
heavens!” cried the consultant, “you really are obsessed by sex!”
“What do you mean?” was the reply; “you’re the one who’s been
showing me all the dirty pictures!”
But the anthropomorphizing trait is always with us. It is simply part
of the operation of the mind. It becomes a problem only when it con-
tinues to misinform the mind beyond the point of usefulness. We see
it in the relationship of two disciplines noted above. Theology, as
confessional, and operating, as P. Davies has noted, on “emic”
grounds 57, has tended to remain within the narrative culture
described by Donald. The historian of religions will be at odds with
theologian-colleagues who see monotheism in every passage in the
Hebrew Bible which looks to him like evidence of polytheism, or at
57 Davies 1995.

The Mythic Mind    29
the very least henotheism58. To the historian of religions, people who
write books on Christian ethics based on Iron Age Hebrew ethical
stances 59 can seem peculiarly perverse. We all impose a pattern of
sorts on the data, of course, depending on where we start from, a
phenomenological or a theological perspective, or somewhere in
between. But some starting-points have far-reaching consequences.
Once the Hebrew Bible is accorded the status of sacred text, “scrip-
ture”, the ideological battle is lost, for canonizing the text (or nowa-
days accepting the canon of the text) precludes all relativity and
comparability, which are arguably essential components of free
enquiry, the historian will argue. It can only be on axiomatic
grounds, that myth is somehow incompatible with canonical status,
that it is ruled out of court as a legitimate biblical category. It is even
arguable that this presumption is itself an essentially mythic position.
Just as the atheist is accused of adopting a theological position in
denying the existence of God60, so the anti-mythicist falls into the
58 Perhaps one of the most striking examples of seeing what you think
ought to be there is the interpretation of the Aten cult at the time of
Amenhotpe IV (Akhhenaten) as monotheistic. That is certainly one
possible interpretation, but is scarcely the most probable. It led J.
Assmann (Assmann 1972, 1982), followed by J. C. de Moor (de Moor
1997, 41-102), to postulate a “crisis of polytheism” which allegedly
crippled the polytheistic theologies of the Near East in the Late
Bronze.
59 Cf Wyatt 1997, 791-3. What is actually done is that the biblical
material is forced into the strait-jacket of contemporary dogmatism.
But this is the danger of all commentary carried on for theological
motives, and it is that motivation that sells books.
60 Cf Spengler 1926, 380: “even atheistic science has religion; modern
mechanics exactly reproduces the contemplativeness of faith”. This is
an absurd position, based as so often on a half-truth, in this case the
fact that the human mind obviously rationalizes and cogitates about
any experience within a certain framework, because this is the way
the human mind works. To pre tend that the scientist is bound by
dogma, however, is preposterous, even if this was once the case, as
when Galileo fell foul of the Inquisition for failing to conform. There is
of course inertia in science, so that a considerable effort may be

30    N. Wyatt
trap of axiomatic exclusion which intrinsically invalidates his
position. It becomes a mere tautology.
I suppose one of the problems besetting this discussion in a biblical
context involves the matter of the relationship of revelation to all the
issues in hand. If to any attempt at a general approach to mythologi-
cal thought, which sees continuity between the surrounding cultures
of the Near East and “Israel”, the Pavlovian (or Barthian) retort is
simply that the principle of divine revelation changes all that, then of
course advocates on both sides of the debate will continue to talk
past each other. My view here is that a theological concept which,
however elevated its motives, so particularizes its subject matter
(here the revelation mediated through the Bible) as to cut it off in
effect from the mainstream of human consciousness and culture,
cannot be a valid position for the historian to take. But it also looks
dubious to me as a realistic theological position. Even a revelatory
theology speaks of people chosen from the mass, called out from the
body of humanity. To make that additional leap, never demanded by
the tradition, that is expressed in the axiom that the biblical writers
have left common human experience behind, and have gone beyond
myth, is to go an axiom too far.
And why be afraid of the category of myth? It vastly enriches our
understanding of the narratives and symbolic constructions of the
text to see in them localized expressions of universal principles of the
structure and working of the human mind. Indeed, it is probably fair
to say that if we reject the validity of a comparative approach, we
end up not knowing what biblical writers were talking about, because
we are cutting them off not only from an ancient comparable world,
but also from a modern one.
The problem of defining “myth”
One of the problems in our subject matter is the sheer polysemy of
the term “myth”, as Strenski complained. Not only does every spe-
cialist, anthropological, psychological and theological, offer different
definitions, but these are often mutually incompatible. We all define
required to effect a paradigm-shift. See Kuhn 1970. It is also possible
that science may be controlled by ideology, as with Soviet
psychiatry. But this is a perversion, not the real thing.

The Mythic Mind    31
the term as we understand it to operate, so that our own position—
which our opponents call our prejudice—determines our choice of
words, either to conform to our own theory, or to discredit the theo-
ries of others.
Quite apart from the technical issues involved in an academic defi-
nition, and the objective problems faced by scholars, consider the
following: “The persistence of racial thinking and the myth of racial
divergence”. This is the title of a recent article in American Anthro-
pologist61. The term “myth” in this title has two clear uses. Firstly it
means what “myth” commonly means in everyday discourse, that is,
a story which is patently untrue, a fond belief, or in this case a perni-
cious one. Racism has no basis in fact, that is, genetic fact, but only
in prejudice62. “Urban myths”, on the other hand, are an honourable
and generally harmless genre, in which the most extraordinary tales
travel across huge distances—their speed of transmission now vastly
enhanced by the Internet—and of which the ingenuity is matched
only by their incredible status. They generally have no particular axe
to grind, however, no ideology, and are perhaps an example of the
casual misuse of the term even by scholars.
The pernicious example cited, however, has another nuance. It also
carries an ideological burden, which has been so powerful in human
history that it formed the basis of much early physical anthropology,
61 Keita-Kittles 1997.
62 Since it is so pervasive, we may legitimately ask whether racism is not
to be examined in a quasi-biological way. It would stem from the
absolute need to preserve the group, thus regarding all outsiders as a
potential threat. It is a common feature of ancient cultures and
languages that their word for “man” denoted themselves. Other “men”
were usually denoted by other (non-human) terminology. They might
even be assimilated to demons, as with the Sanskrit wordplay on
dÊsu, dasyu, for the non-Aryan population of the Punjab. The terms
probably denoted originally “village-dwellers” (sc. the settled
population of the region), but over time came to have the sense of
“demons”. Hebrew thought is by no means immune to this mode of
thought. Cf the almost demonological value of the traditional list of
other nations to be dispossessed by Israel, in an early form of ethnic
cleansing.

32    N. Wyatt
quite apart from its egregious application in Nazi racial theories. It
has operated at a subliminal level in the growth of empires (notably
the British Empire), justified countless programmes of genocide, as
in the colonization of the Americas, and still controls land-use policy
in modern China (sc. Tibet) or the Balkans63. This use of “myth” is
so insidious that it forms part of the everyday furniture of our minds
and effectively—like all bona fide ideologies—blinds us to the logical
objections, which are filtered out by the mind as irrelevant. An ideol-
ogy is simply a system of thought, as regards its structure, which
admits of no exceptions to the rule. If no amount of evidence to the
contrary convinces the adherent of the falsity of his position, he is in
the grip of an ideology.
It is perhaps in part the right use of the term “myth” in such dis-
tasteful contexts as racism which makes it appear to be an unaccept-
able word in the context of biblical literature and scholarship. But
these are not immune to political agendas, ancient and modern, and
we certainly should not avoid a useful word simply because we do
not like it.
But the ideological dimension of the term is not in any case to be
seen as wholly pathological, and nor do I intend to present it in this
way, for it is undoubtedly an adaptative strategy, adopted in two
main, and commonly interlocking, areas of human experience and
interaction, politics and religion. Theology in its classical, dogmatic
form as apologia for the faith of a community, is simply ideology64.
63 Cf John Carlin’s excoriating attack on American (USA) culture in The
Independent on Sunday (10 May 1998): “... everything is political
calculation and ideological abstraction and in so far as the hundreds
of thousands who perished in Central America have registered in the
national consciousness at all it is in the same way that foreign bad
guys do, ‘communists’ and people who look like Arabs, in Arnold
Schwarzenegger movies. Or, in the immortal words of the chief US
military adviser in El Salvador in 1984 when challenged about a
particularly grisly killing carried out by his local charges, ‘after all,
they’re only little brown men’.” See also Wyatt 1996b, 125.
64 Berger-Luckmann 1967, 141, prefer not to see Christianity in the
mediaeval world as ideology, because everybody shared the belief-
system. Following the industrial revolution, however, it came to be a

The Mythic Mind    33
That is, it is a system of thought designed (or developing, for it is
largely unconscious in its origins) for the articulation and mainte-
nance of a particular world-view, with a built-in response to all
objections. It may parade its myths in the rhetoric of rationalism, but
in so far as it demands orthodoxy, and therefore admits no heresy or
competing world-view to equal status, it belongs to the thought-
world I am trying to characterize. I think this is a fair description of
any religion. On the other hand some religions are more ideological
than others, because they have built into them explicit intolerance of
any opposition and a rejection of pluralism. It is evident from their
history that the Judaeo-Christian and Islamic traditions are of this
order. Since the three are monotheistic, the question is certainly
worth asking as to whether monotheism is in some way intolerant of
myth. It is certainly the way some of their exponents wish it to
appear (such as Gunkel or Eissfeldt, cited above). But in my view it
is a misperception.
Our problem in the field of Biblical Studies arises from the fact that
half of us wish to act as theologians—however detached we imagine
ourselves to be—and never let objections actually impinge on our be-
lief system, though it may be unconsciously eroded and refined in the
process, always with its back to the wall, a kind of heroic defence à
la Leonidas against the forces of disbelief. We end up writing and
reading books on the theology of the Old Testament which owe
more to Barth than to any ancient author. The rest of us try to
eschew ideology, and certainly a religious ideology, perhaps with
varying degrees of success65, and to give a history-of-religions
account of events and developments. This is admittedly no more
objective, for every judgment we make on the antiquity or origins of
a ritual, a myth or historiographical composition is indebted to all
previous work in a whole galaxy of disciplines; but it may at least be
bourgeois ideology, over against alternatives developing among the
proletariat. I am not clear as to why universal or partial adherence to a
world-view in a society determines its ideological status. I am
evidently using the term rather more broadly.
65 I suppose that we consciously avoid religious ideology, but may well
be caught up in other pervasive currents of thought.

34    N. Wyatt
seen as strengthened by its contextualization in a more universal
treatment of human behaviour. This endeavour then falls foul of the
counter-claim that it errs in over-emphasizing the similar, while
underrating the distinctive and different66. In so far as it avoids
value-judgments, this approach is also open to the charge of
relativism, though perhaps in view of the results of particularism in
world history, this is no bad thing.
At the end of the day, perhaps we can agree to differ. For my part,
the difference will be merely one of labels. The anti-mythicist may
prefer an expression such as “the religious imagination”. To my
mind, that is synonymous with the mythic mind.
If we have to admit the unlikelihood of any advance from within
the disciplines, in which there is fundamental disagreement on mat-
ters of literary genre, let me appeal to the broader issue of mental dis-
position outlined above. We saw that in Donald’s view it is narrative
as distinct from paradigmatic thought which distinguishes the mental
and cultural processes of traditional societies. We saw that according
to Guthrie the propensity to view the external world anthropomor-
phically is built into the very structure of the human mind. Now un-
less we concede that the “Hebrew”, “Israelite” or “biblical” mind is in
some way radically distinct from all other forms of the human mind,
which I find an improbable hypothesis, then it follows that these
features are also characteristic of these particular manifestations.
That is, it seems a reasonable position to adopt that we shall find
narrative discourse, and an anthropomorphic world-perception at the
heart of the culture under review. And at least as I read the texts,
that is precisely what we find.
I am however reluctant to offer a precise definition of myth67, and
66 Cf Kraus above, and see also Frankfort 1951.
67 Cf A. Lang’s observation (Lang 1887 i 22-3): “All interpretations of
myth have been formed in accordance with the ideas prevalent in the
time of the interpreters. The early Greek physicists thought that
mythopoeic men had been physicists. Aristotle hints that they were
(like himself) political philosophers. Neo-Platonists sought in the
myths for Neo-Platonism; most Christians (like Eusebius) either sided
with Euhemerus, or found in myth the inventions of devils, or a

The Mythic Mind    35
especially as a literary genre, because this would naturally tend to ex-
clusivism, as in the common dichotomy between myth, saga, legend
and epic, or more particularly between myth and history. Traditional
literary forms such as these do not fit neatly into slots, whatever the
literary critic may care to say. The genres shade off into each other,
and using Donald’s broad categorization of narrative and paradig-
matic thought, in so far as any of them fits into the narrative mode,
myth may be said to be a broad underlying characteristic of all such
material, rather than being one exclusive category among others. The
kind of discussion we often find as to whether a given biblical narra-
tive constitutes “historicized myth”68 or “mythicized history” seems
to me an exercise in futility, predetermined in any case in most in-
stances by a firm intention to preserve a little bit of “history” at all
costs. The opposition of “myth” and “history” is not always a useful
one. I am inclined to say that all pre-modern history, in the sense of
traditional historiography which presents a national narrative, and
also the conceptual pattern underlying it, tends to the mythical,
because this is to be seen as a certain mind-set, a disposition to im-
pose structure, coherence and meaning on events, which are then
systematically expressed in the narrative. If it be objected that this is
what the modern academic historian is about as well, the difference
surely lies in his willingness to revise or even abandon his views in
the face of new evidence, while the traditional mode is concerned to
preserve a community’s sense of identity, which will often lead to
the suppression of awkward evidence and uncomfortable truths69. If
tarnished and distorted memory of the biblical revelation.” Myth is
like every other human concept in that its precise form has always
varied, and been debated, from age to age. It is no worse than any
other. In Wyatt 1996b I defined myth as “narrative theology”, but
took into account the views expressed in Gibbs-Stevenson 1975 and
Tobin 1989.
68 The expression was used by M. Noth (Noth 1928), a paper discussed
by Rogerson 1974, 147-48. In so far as the process (if it ever
happened) is a naï ve development, it hardly contributes to the
formation of a real history, but only of a tendentious historiography.
69 The release of government archives, usually after periods of fifty
years or so, frequently reveals facts which popular conceptions of a

36    N. Wyatt
the narrative is about a people’s past, we all know how elusive the
application of the traditional genres (saga, legend, history) can be,
and how one shades off into the other, or how they are combined in
a constant reweaving of motifs, shaping this event in the light of that
metaphor, even inventing episodes to act out a fiction.
Even modern historiography is not above mythic invention. The
substantial revisionism of much historical study associated with
famous names such as Michelet or Ranke has been shown by subse-
quent scholarship to be tendentious, to be in the grip of ideologies.
The histories of Israelite religion, we have seen, are not exempt. Von
Rad’s theology, which attempts to set things within an authentic his-
torical setting, so that historical forms condition the theology, is seen
to be the reverse. And nor is this necessarily a bad thing, so long as
the cards are on the table.
Myth in the Hebrew Bible
Now before I take the next step, and claim that this is precisely the
“mythic mind” for which I am searching, let me a address a further
problem. Not so long ago scholars could open the pages of the Deu-
teronomistic History, for example, and have reasonable confidence
that, give or take a few asides by the author(s), we had a fairly reli-
able history of Israel and Judah down to the exile. Some scholars
would still like to maintain this position. But for most of us, such hal-
cyon days are gone for ever, brushed aside without ceremony by the
work of the last two decades.
The thrust of much recent work is the firm distinction between the
categories “Israelite” and “biblical” so far as the witness of the text is
concerned. We see not so much a reflection as a critique of Israelite
religion in the Bible. Because of its self-conscious removal from the
sinfulness of Israel’s religious history, and our limitations in being
nation’s history have conveniently forgotten. Many national
“histories”, such as the growth of a free society in the United States,
the heroic resistance of wartime France, the provision of a land
without a people for a people without a land in Israel, the uniformly
civilizing and enlightened policies of British imperialism, remain
serious myths in the societies in question (in the ideological sense) in
spite of untimely revelations to the contrary.

The Mythic Mind    37
largely bound to the text, all we can hope to achieve is an under-
standing of the text’s position, and not a valid reconstruction of the
history lying behind it.
Let us imagine a worst case scenario in our treatment of the Bible,
according to which it is all late and unreliable as a source for histori-
cal study. The only history we can recapture is that of the text itself.
We cannot get behind it. Now if it can be shown that the Bible is
broadly mythological, in the sense that I wish to maintain, that it is
written by people of essentially “mythic mind”, who operate in a
world of symbols and narrative just like every surrounding culture, it
follows that the (now irrecoverable) historical religion behind the text
was all the more so to be characterized, since at some point the texts
emerged from people subscribing to this religious tradition.
So how far is the Bible still mythological? Let me briefly summarize
my position on this issue with reference to three strands of mythic
tradition found at Ugarit, but already of an international nature, and
the uses of these traditions in the Hebrew Bible. If it can be argued
that the same ideological themes of the earlier material survive, and
are even arguably reinforced, in the later, then there is a case to
answer that the Hebrew Bible is retaining the tradition precisely
because it too is dealing in myth. Indeed the principle should hold
true even if there is a measurable reinterpretation or development of
an older form, so long as it retains its ideological nature.
The traditions I have in mind are firstly the Chaoskampf tradition,
occurring in the Ugaritic Baal cycle of myths (KTU 1.1-6) and also
widely attested in biblical tradition; secondly the theogony tradition
reflected in KTU 1.23 and 1.12 i in particular, and also evident in bib-
lical tradition; and thirdly the narrative referring to Athtar in KTU 1.6
i 43-67. I think that the matter of literary influence is beyond serious
dispute for the former two, and in the third instance there is a
continuity of theme, though it is significantly modified in the trans-
mission. So the matter at issue (the problem of the presence of myth
in the Hebrew Bible) may be confined to the respective meaning of
the traditions.
Now my analysis of the Chaoskampf tradition70 leads me to one
70 Wyatt 1996b, 117-218, 1998a.

38    N. Wyatt
important conclusion: that is that the ideological basis for this par-
ticular myth, as it is to be discerned in the oldest forms thus far
recovered, from Eshnunna, Mari and Ugarit, does persist. It has
nothing to do with any seasonal interpretation, furthermore, but is
already from its earliest appearance in the Amorite myths of Tishpak
from Eshnunna bound up inextricably with royal ideology. It has to
do with social organization and royal authority. This significance per-
sists, in my view, throughout the Marian and Ugaritic tradition, on
into the Bible, in both Testaments, and out into the traditions of Per-
seus and Andromeda and on to George and the dragon, though by
this time perhaps the formal ideology is beginning to weaken into
folkloric musing on the theme. Even the Arthurian cycle, which is
most emphatically ideological in its purpose, is tinged with aspects of
the theme71.
Within this strong current of tradition, in which the god who fights
a marine monster and wins a kingdom latterly becomes a hero72 who
fights a marine monster and wins a kingdom, cuts through Hebrew
literary tradition in a great swathe, forming the paradigm of creation
(Gen 1), of redemption from Egypt (Exod 15), of redemption to
come (Isa 27:1) and even of redemption made manifest, if traced on
into the New Testament (Mk 4:35-41, 6:45-52 and synoptic parallels,
Jn 6:16-21 and cf. perhaps Jn 21:1-23)73. The theme is securely
71 Wyatt 1998a, 872-3. A striking feature of the Eurasian cultural zone is
the persistence of a mythic tradition that is arguably from one original
source (traced back thus far to the Amorite myth of Tishpak in
Eshnunna).
72 Or an angel: Michael in Rev. 12:7-9. Michael also serves in Christian
iconography as the latter-day transformation of a deity: the mediaeval
motif of the weighing of souls or sins (as at Autun, Bourges,
Chartres, Santo Domingo de Silos, Torcello etc.) may be traced back
to the role of Thoth at the weighing of the heart in the Egyptian Book
of the Dead. Thoth was identified by the Greeks with Hermes, he in
turn with Mercury and Lug, and ancient shrines of Lug became
Christian sanctuaries dedicated to St Michael. This is a western
parallel to the East Mediterranean development of Khidr and St
George out of Baal.
73 See Heil 1981, Madden 1997, Aus 1998, 51-133. While the Jesus narra-

The Mythic Mind    39
established in the Marian text A1968, concerning royal legitimacy, in
which the mythic weapons of the god are ritually delivered into the
hand of the king, so that he too may win victories over the forces of
chaos. Within the Hebrew literary tradition Ps 89 in particular relates
the granting of royal power to the primaeval battle: it is thanks to
Yahweh’s victory that the king will rule in security, and as at Mari,
the rite is sealed with an anointing74.
The theogony traditions of Ugarit, with wide parallels in the ancient
Near East, are also echoed in a number of biblical recensions. In ear-
lier studies I have identified Gen 16-21, 19:30-38, Pss 8, 19 and 110,
Hos 2, Ezek 16 and 23 as being heirs to the tradition75. Some of
these suggestions have been made by earlier scholars as well76. The
precise ideological nuance of the Ugaritic material is uncertain. In
KTU 1.12 the overall theme, to which the birth episode is merely a
prologue, appears to be communal redemption77, while in KTU 1.23
Shahar and Shalem, the “gracious gods”, are born to the geminated
avatars of Shapsh, Athirat and Rahmay. While there is no consensus
on the overall thrust of the text, it is fair to say that in so far as the
Dioscuri are probably to be understood as the mythic counterparts of
the king, we have the broad theme of the good news that a royal
birth brings to a community. It is probably on account of an inherent
ideological element in the twinship motif (we may hypothesize the
dual nature of the king78) that we have so many stories of twins and
pairs, such as Ishmael and Isaac, Moab and Ammon (all fathers of
nations), or the girls adopted and then married by Yahweh, who
tives are consciously modelled on the narratives concerning Moses,
the old Chaoskampf tradition still shines through, and the disciples’
question on the nature of the one who commands the wind and the
sea in Mk 4:41b presupposes a divine, not a human, antecedent.
74 On the widespread use of rites of unction see Fleming 1998.
75 Wyatt 1994a, 1994b, 1995, 1996b, 219-82. (Cf Wyatt 1990 for
discussion of Gen 34, related to KTU 1.24.)
76 See Porter 1978 (KTU 1.23 and Gen 19:30-38), Ginsberg 1936 and
Astour 1967, 86-7 (KTU 1.12 and Gen 16).
77 Cf Wyatt 1976, 1998b, 162.
78 See Wyatt 1987.

40    N. Wyatt
seem to be transparent reflexes of the geminated goddesses.
The third motif with ancient near eastern antecedents which
appears in biblical texts is the deposition myth, which H. R. Page Jr
calls “the myth of cosmic rebellion”79. I think that he errs in tracing
this disobedience motif back into Ugaritic tradition and discerning
there a myth of the same type. What he identifies is however the an-
tecedent of the type. The narrative of the enthronement and subse-
quent descent from the throne of Athtar (KTU 1.6 i 56-67) is by no
means a deposition, but rather an enthronement narrative, which
involves the royal ascent to heaven80 to receive kingly power and
learn the secret wisdom of the gods, followed by a return to earth in
order to exercise royal power. The narrative expressly states (ll. 63-
65) that
Athtar the Brilliant came down,
he came down from the throne of Valiant Baal,
and ruled in the earth,
god of it all.81
This narrative remains somewhat isolated in the context on account
of the following gap of some thirty-four lines in the Ugaritic tablet.
What is clear from the surviving material is the ascent of Athtar, his
enthronement and subsequent descent. This is the pattern we may
discern in a large number of other ancient texts from throughout the
Near East. So far as biblical tradition is concerned, we may note the
comparable ascent traditions of Moses at Sinai (Exod 19-24, 32-34).
The modified version, which at some point has picked up the addi-
tional element of the deposition, appears in the taunt songs addressed
to foreign kings in Isa 14 and Ezek 28.
The texts noted here belong to a wide range of literary types in the
Hebrew Bible, prophecy, historiography, and cultic poetry. The
themes mentioned are not therefore a few isolated poetic allusions,
but motifs which permeate the forms which most characteristically
encapsulated the most fundamental convictions of Israel.
79 Page 1996.
80 This too is developed independently in the late literature, as the type
of the prophetic ascent. See Himmelfarb 1993.
81 Translation from Wyatt 1998b, 132-3.

The Mythic Mind    41
Most, if not all the elements in the Hebrew Bible which have been
recognized by some scholars as having mythic status had
antecedents and congeners in the wider near eastern world. It is in
the nature of myth that it knows no boundaries, for the power of its
symbolic and generally ideological content will tend to have carried
weight wherever it went. People “borrow” myths because they are
such effective media for the transmission of cultural and religious
values. “Absorption” may be a better term than “borrowing”, and in
the case of a society such as ancient Israel, we do well to consider
the very diverse origins of the community, as already mentioned in
the tradition, before we try to make a case for the essentially
“foreign” nature of its myths. If the theory of a migration of people
from the Hauran to Ugarit82 is at all cogent, for example, it readily
explains the presence in both Ugaritic and biblical tradition of
familiarity with the traditions and sacred geography of the region. In
such a case Ugarit and Israel are jointly heirs to a common
tradition83. If there were really Israelites in Egypt (there were later, if
not ab origine), we should expect some elements of Egyptian
thought in their later tradition, and if the resulting population of the
Levant, whether by conquest, absorption or any other social
upheaval, incorporated elements of local populations, who is to claim
that this or that enclave is “foreign” to the true Israel?84
82 Cf Margalit 1989, 473-5.
83 Cf Day 1994. He draws a number of parallels between Ugaritic and
biblical material, such as the nature and abode of El, the number of
his sons, as pects of Athirat associated with Asherah, echoes of
Baal’s dying and rising in Ho sea, of the Chaoskampf and the cosmic
significance of Saphon, titles of Baal, mention and evident familiarity
in the Hebrew Bible (and consequently the antecedent historical
Israel) with other members of the Ugaritic pantheon. At the same time
he notes a number of differences (e.g. no child-sacrifice at Ugarit) and
some issues on which certainty is elusive (e.g. the matter of cult-
prostitution). His conclusion, though couched in cautious terms, is
that “there was considerable continuity between the Canaanite
mythology and religion at Ugarit and that presupposed by the Bible”.
84 The claim can only be made by a religious community which seeks to
isolate itself from neighbours. Labels such as “Canaanite”, “Amorite”

42    N. Wyatt
The question of whether a given text is strictly mythological in
terms of formal literary genre may be ultimately unanswerable, given
that such a divergence of views persists with regard to the very defi-
nition of myth. Within the more relaxed world of the History of
Religions, I believe that every text mentioned would be accepted as at
least mythological, if not formally constituting myth. More interest-
ingly there remains the broader question of a type of thinking, which
I have attempted to outline above, typically found in myth, however
precisely defined, but perhaps to be found more widely in all religious
thought. In my view, all religious thought which operates in a
dimension other than the purely conceptual (as in modern conceptual
systematic theology—though I qualify this below) is intrinsically
mythological. Everyone will be perfectly content to see this assess-
ment made of Buddhist, Hindu, Zoroastrian, Islamic or any other
religious world-view, where it would be generally conceived that the
entire metaphysical foundation of the given system is at variance
with the real world we experience and reify through modern
scientific analysis. This is not so far-fetched as it may sound, in view
of Guthrie’s intriguing claim that “religion attempts not to explain
experience, but to contradict it. Empiricism and logic are not merely
irrelevant, but inimical.”85
But there is nothing inherently more scientific about the Judaeo-
Christian view of the world than in any other religious account. As
soon as divine intent, divine creativity, and divine purpose, or indeed
any providential, or human purpose, are read into the world of expe-
rience, as soon as the certainty of God’s presence is perceived in hu-
man life, it ceases to be a rational view, in the sense of the historian
seeing a chain of events which can be explained in terms of historical
causation, the outworking of political strategies or economic cycles,
and so forth, and becomes a mythic one. Stories of the beginning
and end of the world, and of the resurrection, ascension and second
etc. serve such an excluding function in biblical narrative. If we as
modern scholars bring in religious values (sc. prejudices) to
determine the answer to this question, we have left dispassionate
scholarship behind.
85 Guthrie 1993, 13.

The Mythic Mind    43
coming of Christ are not in any sense “historical” narratives, whether
past or future in their application. Couched in historiographical form,
the narrative of biblical historiography bears the veneer of history,
but we know that not only is the facticity of this history largely
tendentious, but that introducing Yahweh as the leading character
removes it from the cold light of day, and takes it into an interior
world of commitment and religious experience. To apply Guthrie’s
point, 
this 
is 
designed 
precisely 
to 
contradict 
the 
drear
meaninglessness of the real history through which Israel moved.
I wrote above of the origins of symbols in the development of the
early human mind. Symbols in the “rich” sense of the term (as dis-
tinct from the mere synonym of “signs”), when we consider the hu-
man capacity to symbolize, are of various kinds, linguistic and non-
linguistic, arbitrary and natural. They allow the concentration in a
brief compass, in one image or one metaphor, of complex cultural,
moral and religious categories. A national flag carries all the feelings,
the ideology, the loyalty, the sense of identity of its nationals. It can
even carry all the opposites of such feelings, as when Palestinian
protesters burn the American or the Israeli flag. A religious icon per-
forms broadly the same function. But while these, as artefacts,
remain mute, a form of words which can encompass all these rich
nuances is of immense power. It can be transmitted over the
generations, and contain within itself not merely the experience, but
the memory of that experience, binding a social, political or religious
group in an indissoluble fashion. Indeed it does not merely transmit
the memory, but generates it anew for every subsequent participating
generation. It need not be a narrative in the strictest sense of a story-
line, but it will be narrative in that it carries various levels of meaning
capable of verbal explication. A national anthem or song, or even just
the music of it, such as strains of The star-spangled banner, Rule,
Britannia! or Land of hope and glory, will evoke all the power of the
flag, but will also allow a verbal articulation of all the concomitant
feelings, and prompt the minds of its hearers to think of the great
moments of national “history”, the causes of pride in being a member
of the group.
The narration of a religious story, or just reference to chosen
words within it, or the strains of a hymn tune, will perform a similar
function in the religious dimension. What will be evoked is the whole
complex of ideas and above all feelings which are part of member-

44    N. Wyatt
ship of the group, which is expressed in most characteristically relig-
ious terms as being in a personal relationship not so much with the
group, as with the deity, though the emphasis here may vary accord-
ing to the theological circumstances. This story, whether narrated in
full, or merely evoked in stereotyped words, I call myth. The relig-
ious group may, just like the national community, think of the great
moments of religious community history, the causes of pride in being
a member of the group. So a real history, or an imagined history,
may just as legitimately belong to this category as an entirely
fictitious and symbolic tale. Within the context of memory and
narration, there is no essential difference between story and history.
Note that I am insisting here as much on the emotional as on the
intellectual content of the story.
These observations allow us to identify some of the chief features
of myth in its serious sense: it is ideology, and a vehicle for the com-
munication and reinforcement of ideology. It will also contain con-
centrations of feeling, so hard to analyse in ancient texts, but of great
vitality and power in the remembering, narrating and transmitting
community. This point should enable us to deal with one of the co-
nundra of contemporary scholarship, voiced in the assertion that
“Canaanite myth” gives way to emancipated forms of thought in the
Hebrew experience. If we accept for the sake of argument that there
is a discontinuity between the two cultural expressions (which I
doubt myself, but that does not matter for the moment), we might
claim, for instance, that whatever ideology lay behind the Ugaritic
forms of the Chaoskampf , such as for example the seasonal
interpretation so long championed by de Moor86, has been discarded
in the process of the appropriation of the narrative line by the
Hebrew tradition. The matter of the appropriation is not in question;
what is at issue is the ideological burden. Now according to my
characterization of myth as vehicle for ideology, we would have to
admit that so long as an ideological message was being
communicated in the Hebrew versions of the narrative, then it too
remains mythical in the formal sense, quite apart from being
mythological in the psychological sense. And we have seen that not
86 See de Moor 1971, 1987.

The Mythic Mind    45
merely ideology, but the same ideology, is present. Nothing has
changed!
So far as the problem of history is concerned, it will now be gener-
ally agreed that the “history” told in the Hebrew Bible is, whatever
else it may be, highly ideological in its intent (just like other historiog-
raphy). Even if we concede that it contains “real history”, its telling
is ideologically motivated, indeed religiously motivated, and therefore,
in conformity with the approach I am taking, is to be classified as
myth. Myth and history are not opposing terms. They may to a
greater or lesser degree overlap. They may even be synonymous.
Heilsgeschichte is myth!87
I see no weakening at all of the ancient power of mythological
thinking, which I call “the mythic mind”, in any biblical treatment of
earlier myths. This is one reason why I have preferred in this study
to write of the “mythic” rather than the “mythopoeic” or
“mythopoetic” mind. These two latter terms inevitably carry a
historical burden, which is in part the supposition that such thinking
is primitive88. It is my contention that it is universal, and still an
integral part of human thought and experience. Another reason why I
have tended to this usage is because, as we have seen, formal
definitions of myth are very difficult, in that it is hard to find one that
will command general assent. Even my general definition, that it is
“narrative theology” or “narrative ideology”, leaves out of account an
important aspect of the broader picture. This is that individual words
or phrases from myth, mere allusions which have the power to
evoke the whole story, are a ubiquitous feature of Hebrew
literature89. The whole principle of intertextuality depends on the
87 Cf Grabbe 1998, 15: “… myth is not just an interpretation of history
but it also served to shape history…” (his emphasis).
88 Oden 1992a, 951, 954.
89 See Wyatt 1996b, 405-6, where I draw attention to the usefulness of
Tobin’s category of “mythotheology”. (See also Tobin 1989, xii
[introduction by Bonnel] and 61.) My only quarrel with the author
would be his incautious separation of Egyptian thought from logical
thought. What is at issue is rather conscious and deliberative, or
unconscious and intuitive thought.

46    N. Wyatt
scholar’s recognition that authorial and redactional minds are
persistently, whether consciously or unconsciously, drawing on a
common fund of tradition in their weaving of new variations on the
theme90. This is no less true, though in a more intuitive form, no
doubt, for the devout reader who reads the text as Scripture.
Apocalyptic Now!
A literary form closely associated with mythological thought is
apocalyptic, and so it is appropriate to conclude with some remarks
which indicate the bearing of the mythological motifs to which I
have drawn attention to this theme, which may also point the way
forward to the way in which, in Donald’s terms, narrative thought
gave birth in turn to paradigmatic thought. It is worth noting, by way
of an aside, that the a fortiori argument mentioned above for a
mythic dimension to Israelite religion applies here as well. If it is
increasingly accepted that apocalyptic literature was not merely some
strange excrescence on the fringes of Jewish society, but belonged
to the main stream91, and exercised the minds of the foremost
literary thinkers of the period, then the undoubtedly mythological cast
of their literary output reinforces a claim for biblical mythology.
The most characteristic feature of the mythic mind may be said to
be its concern with the past, above all with the sacred time which
Eliade called illud tempus92. I believe this to be an obvious function
of the enormous importance of memory in the construction and
maintenance of a worldview, the ideological foundations of culture.
It is very evident in the terminology of orientation, as I have
90 This will have gone on through time immemorial back into a
community’s past, absorbing tradition from contiguous peoples and
weaving it into the national or group narrative tradition. The issue of
borrowing becomes meaningless within the consciousness of the
community down the generations. It is only scholars of a later time,
who can reconstruct past histories and past cultures, who are in a
position to recognize debts and borrowings.
91 Käsemann 1960, cited and discussed in Koch 1972, 14.
92 Eliade 1958, 378, 1964, 75-91, 1974, passim. For analysis see Rennie
1996, 77-87.

The Mythic Mind    47
proposed in an earlier study93. The evidence adduced there may be
supplemented by further examples94, so that we can see a clear and
widely attested pattern. In the present context I need mention simply
the Hebrew instances. The terms qedem, aÙar, semôl and yÊmîn
represented respectively aspects of the body, face, back, left and
right, and by extension the cardinal points east, west, north and
south, on the supposition that “orientation” was achieved by facing
east, towards the rising sun. In addition, the former two terms, by a
further extension of meaning, denoted temporal terminology, the past
and the future respectively.
Thus in ritual positioning of the self, which always began with set-
ting one’s face to the east (“orientation” meant what it said), one
looked, as it were, into the past, which was “before the face” in
memory. This provided the paradigms for dealing with the unseen
and unknown future which lay behind the subject. This ancient
disposition, which was certainly very widespread if not in fact
universal in antiquity, may be seen as appropriate to the authoritative
nature of the contents of the narrative mind. This was shaped, and
its treatment of all new data and experience was in turn shaped, by
the authoritative narrative of the past, the myth.
But religion was also vitally concerned with the future. In a sense it
was a strategy for dealing with the future, for decision-making. With
regard to this need, ritual techniques were developed to read the
signs of the times, the flights of birds, the appearance of animal
organs, the flow of the seasons. The practical needs of agriculture
and industry required to be addressed, as well as the mechanisms of
social control and the emotional sustenance of the community. One
significant possibility in this field of experience was an adaptation of
the narratives which constituted the paradigms for past and present
into the future. Apocalyptic is the logical outcome of this need. The
question of immediate crisis or sense of doom need not necessarily
93 Wyatt 1996a. Here I listed (p 362) just the Ugaritic and Hebrew
vocabulary.
94 See Wyatt forthcoming. Here I have added Akkadian, Arabic,
Sumerian, Egyptian, Latin, Greek, and Sanskrit terminology, which
entirely corroborate the findings from Ugaritic and Hebrew.

48    N. Wyatt
arise, but in times of great uncertainty, when great power succeeded
great power, Persia, Greece, Rome, in the heartless and indifferent
management of the Levant for their own economic and strategic
benefit, when the ancient kingdom of Israel became a mere plaything
of distant emperors, but all-too present armies, the narratives were
adapted into tools for addressing the need. And as with all myth, it
did not have to explain experience, and in fact systematically
contradicted it, displacing the bleak prospect of further taxation and
continuing repression with its heavenly journeys, many-headed
dragons, miraculous births and heroes emerging from the sea, and
the prospect of the final triumph of good. All old friends, all the
familiar furniture of the mythic mind.
Postscript and prescription
Much scholarship is devoted to the demolition of previous positions,
all too often without any constructive alternative to the positions un-
der attack. Let me in closing bring together the positive elements in
the above discussion, in the hope that it will be of some use in
further debate.
The problem with “myth”, we saw, was its ambiguity in common
usage; the lie of the common man, it is the sacred word, the arche-
typal truth, of the phenomenologist of religion. There is no reason
why we may not continue to use the term in its second sense, for it
is a pity to abandon a useful concept because some prefer to misuse
it. Within the disciplines devoted to the study of religion, it is treated
with great suspicion by many biblical theologians, because they have
tended historically to contrast it with “history”, and we have lived for
two hundred years in an intellectual climate of historicism, where
only the historical is true. Hence the need to establish the historical
truth (that is, facticity) of biblical narratives, of the Old and New
Covenants, because to call them “myth” was to impugn their truth.
To assuage such fears, I see no problem in an alternative designation
being preferred in theological circles, such as “sacred tradition” (for
text) or “religious imagination” (as above, for mind-set). In my field,
however, the History of Religions, the hallmark of the discipline is its
refusal to make exclusive truth claims (all religions make them, after
all), but to recognize the need for every tradition to hold that its
sacred traditions are true. There is a relativity which should inform
all our discourse about religions in the plural. We even see an

The Mythic Mind    49
interesting hybrid in some forms of reforming Hinduism which,
influenced by the intellectual climate of the west during the British
Raj, regard their traditions, which any western observer would
classify as myth, as sober history. This is perhaps not dissimilar to
the theological assertion that the truth of Judaism, or of Christianity,
lies in their historicity95. My point is that history in the service of
religion is in any case functioning as myth.
It is the need to classify in the first instance, to distinguish myth
from history, myth from saga, legend, fairy-tale and any other sub-
division beloved of the literary critic, which has led to all the mischief
in the first place. B. Otzen’s remarks (cited in n 4) illustrate the
difficulties into which the commentator can get in trying to have it
both ways, when the matter of strict classification by genre gets in
the way. A text is “mythological”, but it is not “myth”! The flood
story echoes virtually every detail of Atrahasis and Gilgamesh, and
yet somehow is not myth. What kind of useful distinction is really
being made in such Jesuitical nit-picking? It can hardly claim to be an
instance of clear thinking.
My solution is to cut the Gordian knot, to declare that myth is not a
literary genre at all, but a mind-set. While this will sail too close to a
Lévy-Bruhlian wind, or to a Bultmannesque one, which blows from
another quarter, for some readers, it may be regarded as supported
by the insights offered by M. Donald and S. Guthrie. While it
represents an archaic element in the development of the human mind,
it is in no sense prelogical or otherwise outmoded. Rather is it still
emphatically present in all our minds today, as are many other levels
of hominid mental development, an ancient substrate on which we
draw at every turn, whenever meaning is at issue, or we become
emotionally involved in the assessment of our human condition.
Whenever we seek to give meaning to life and our experience, and
even to “history”, the narrative of our common heritage, we engage
in a mythological mode of thought. It is thus almost as broad as the
category of religion itself, though it deals specifically with its mental
disposition, rather than with the broader framework of behavioural
95 This point was well-criticized by T. L. Thompson (Thompson 1974,
326-30).

50    N. Wyatt
and institutional forms into which religion may also be sub-divided. If
this be judged a definition so broad as to evacuate the term of
meaning, the same judgment would have to be applied to “religion”!
Such a reorientation as I have proposed has the added advantage
that it removes myth from the literary field altogether, except in so
far as it may or may not be present in all literary forms, and no
longer requires scholars to decide that a text is or is not myth, or is
merely “mythological” (a problem which evidently taxed B. Otzen).
The “merely” is no longer necessary, because there is no longer any
basis for a fear that the label will somehow subvert the truth-value of
the religious paradigm in question. No further need to declare that a
biblical writer has demythologized the tradition, or that we must
engage in a demythologizing exercise to present the religious core of
a tradition to its believers. This was always a patronizing attitude, in
any case. All religious thinking which tells stories (or histories) about
“reality”, which narratizes experience in terms of an archetype or
paradigm, which uses allusions to such narratives as symbolic short-
cuts in other contexts, as in cult, meditation or prayer, or even
carries such forms across into political thinking, will constitute the
activity of the mythic mind, or the mind in myth-mode. Furthermore,
all academic analysis which attempts to demythologize will succeed
in so doing only at the cost of an illegitimate reductionism.
Some will object to my approach on one of two accounts. The
systematic theologian may simply dismiss this as muddled or, worse,
as wishful thinking. I am simply not facing reality, and recognizing
that ultimately there is only one truth. My response to this kind of
argument is that it is precisely a form of mythic thinking, and a pure
tautology, to say nothing of a circular argument. It belongs within a
self-sustaining system of discourse. The other objection is more
substantial. This is that I have departed from normal methodological
principles, certainly as regards literary criticism. My response to this
is that the thoroughly anarchical pass to which we had come,
compounded by the binary division of our disciplines, as outlined by
P. Davies, really leaves us with no alternative if we are not to
continue the same sterile arguments. If we wish to continue using
the term “myth” to some useful purpose, it is as well to admit that
much of the discussion of the last century has not really achieved
very much.
Perhaps the alternative approach opened up by the serious

The Mythic Mind    51
advances of the last decade into the prehistory of the human mind
will now allow us to advance to more mature forms of analysis.
References
Albertz, R.
1994
A history of Israelite religion in the Old Testament period 2
volumes (London; ET of Religionsgeschichte Israels in
alttestamentlicher Zeit 2 volumes [ATD Ergänzungsreihe 8;
Göttingen]).
Albrektson, B.
1967
History and the gods (Horae Soderblomianae 5; Lund).
Assmann, J.
1972 
“‘Die Häresie’ des Echnaton: Aspekte der Amarna-Religion,”
Saeculum 23:109-26.
1982
“Die Zeugung des Sohnes. Bild, Spiel, Erzählunge und das
Problem des ägyptischen Mythos,” in J. Assmann, W.
Burkert, and F. Stolz (eds) Funktionen und Leistungen des
Mythos: drei altorientalische Beispiele (OBO 48; Fribourg
and Göttingen), 13-61.
1983
Re und Amun: die Krise des polytheistischen Weltbilds im
Ägypten der 18.¾
20. Dynastie (OBO 51, Fribourg: Fribourg
University Press, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht).
(ET Egyptian solar religion in the New Kingdom: Re, Amun
and the crisis of polytheism, London 1995.)
Astour, M.C.
1967
Hellenosemitica (Leiden).
Aus, R.D.
1998
“Caught in the act”, walking on the sea, and the release of
Barabbas revisited (SFSHJ 157, Atlanta GA).
Baines, J.
1991
“Egyptian myth and discourse: myth, gods, and the early
written and iconographic record”, JNES 50:81-105.
Barker, M.
1991
The gate of heaven (London).
Bartsch H-W. (ed.)
1972
Kerygma and myth (London; ET of Kerygma und Mythos

52    N. Wyatt
[1948-1955]).
Batto, B.F.
1993
Slaying the dragon (Louisville).
Berger, P.
1973
The social reality of religion (Harmondsworth). = The sacred
canopy (London 1969).
Berger, P.-Luckmann, T.
1971
The social construction of reality (Harmondsworth). (London
1967).
Boyer, P.
1994
The naturalness of religious ideas. A cognitive theory of
religion (Berkeley).
Brooke, G.J.-Curtis, A.H.W.-Healey, J.F. (eds)
1994
Ugarit and the Bible. Proceedings of the international
symposium on Ugarit and the Bible. Manchester, September
1992 (UBL 11; Münster).
Bruner, J.
1986
Actual minds, possible worlds (Cambridge MA).
Burkert, W.
1983
Homo necans. The anthropology of ancient Greek sacrificial
ritual and myth (Berkeley; ET of Homo necans [Berlin 1972]).
Church, C.D.
1975
“Myth 
and 
history 
as 
complementary 
modes 
of
consciousness”, in Gibbs-Stevenson 1975, 35-55.
Clapham, L.
1976
“Mythopoeic antecedents of the biblical world-view and their
transformation 
in 
early 
Israelite 
thought”, 
in 
F.M.
Cross¾
W.E. Lemke¾
P.D. Miller (eds) Magnalia dei, the
mighty acts of God: essays on the Bible and archaeology in
memory of G.E. Wright (Garden City NY), 108-19.
Connerton, P.
1989
How societies remember (Cambridge).
Curtis, J.B.
1963
“A suggested interpretation of the biblical philosophy of his-
tory”, HUCA 34:115-23.
Davies, P R.
1995
Whose Bible is it anyway? (JSOTS 204; Sheffield).
Day, J.

The Mythic Mind    53
1985
God’s conflict with the dragon and the sea (UCOP 35; Cam-
bridge).
1994
“Ugarit and the Bible: do they presuppose the same
Canaanite mythology and religion?” in Brooke-Curtis-Healey
1994, 35-52.
Deacon, T.
1997
The symbolic species. The co-evolution of language and the
human brain (Harmondsworth).
Dennett, D. C.
1992
Consciousness 
explained 
(London; 
reprinted
Harmondsworth 1993).
Donald, M.
1991
Origins of the modern mind (Cambridge MA).
Dulles, A.
1966
“Symbol, myth and biblical revelation”, TS 27:1-26.
Dunbar, R.I.M.
1993
“Coevolution of neocortical size, group size and language in
humans”, BBS 16:681-735.
Eilberg-Schwartz, H.
1990
The savage in Judaism. An anthropology of Israelite
religion and ancient Judaism (Bloomington, Indianapolis).
Eissfeldt, O.
1963
“Mythus und Sage in den Ras-Schamra-Texten”, 489-501 in
Kleine Schriften ii (Tübingen); reprint of article in Beiträge
zur Arabistik, Semitistik und Islamwissenschaft (1944), 267-
83.
1965
The Old Testament, an introduction (Oxford; ET of
Einleitung in das Alte Testament [Tübingen 1934 3]).
Eliade, M.
1958
Patterns in comparative religion (London; ET of Traité
d’histoire des religions [Paris 1949]).
1959
“Some methodological remarks on the study of religious
symbolism”, in Eliade, M.-Kitagawa, J. (eds) History of
religions: problems of methodology (Chicago). 86-107.
1964
Myth and reality (London).
1974
The myth of the eternal return. Or, Cosmos and history (New
York 1954; 1974 reprint; ET of Le mythe de l’éternel retour:
archétypes et répétition [Paris 1949]).
Engnell, I.

54    N. Wyatt
1943
Studies in divine kingship in the ancient Near East
(Uppsala).
Epstein, M.M.
1996
“Harnessing the dragon: a mythos transformed in medieval
Jewish literature and art”, in Patton, L.L.-Doniger, W. (eds)
Myth and method (Charlottesville, London), 352-89.
Fleming, D.
1998
“The biblical tradition of anointing priests”, JBL 117:401-14.
Fohrer, G.
1973
History of Israelite religion (London; ET of Geschichte der
israelitischen Religion [Berlin 1968]).
Frankfort, H.
1951
The problem of similarity in ancient Near Eastern religions
(Oxford).
Frankfort, H.-H.A. (eds)
1946
The intellectual adventure of ancient man (republished
without 
Irwin’s 
contribution 
as 
Before 
philosophy
[Harmondsworth 1949]).
Gibbs, L.W.-Stevenson, W.T. (eds)
1975
Myth and the crisis of historical consciousness (Missoula).
Ginsberg, H.L.
1936
“Baclu and his brethren”, JPOS 138-49.
Glassner, J.-J.
1993 
Chroniques mésopotamiennes (Paris). (ET in preparation)
1996
Les temps de l’histoire en Mésopotamie, in A. Pury et al.
(eds), Israël construit son histoire (Geneva), 167-89.
Forthcoming
“Le devin historien en Mésopotamie”, RAI Harvard July 1998.
Grabbe, L.L. (ed.)
1998
Leading captivity captive. The “exile’ as history and
ideology (JSOTS 278 = ESHM 2, Sheffield).
Gunkel, H.
1901a
Genesis (Göttingen; editions 19103, 19646; ET Genesis [Macon
GA1997]).
1901b
The legends of Genesis. The biblical saga and history (New
York; 1964 reprint; ET of first section of 1901a).
Guthrie, S.E.
1993
Faces in the clouds. A new theory of religion (Oxford).

The Mythic Mind    55
Hahn, H.
1956
The Old Testament in modern research (London2).
Heil, J.
1981
Jesus walking on the sea. Meaning and gospel functions of
Matt 14:22-33, Mark 6:45-52 and John 6:15b-21 (AnBib 87;
Rome).
Hick, J. (ed.)
1977
The myth of God incarnate (London).
Himmelfarb, M.
1993
Ascent to heaven in Jewish and Christian apocalypses (Ox-
ford).
Hooke, S. H. (ed.)
1933
Myth and ritual. Essays on the myth and ritual of the
Hebrews in relation to the culture pattern of the ancient
East (London).
1935
The labyrinth. Further studies in the relation between myth
and ritual in the ancient world (London).
1958
Myth, ritual and kingship. Essays on the theory and practice
of kingship in the ancient Near East and in Israel (Oxford).
Horton, R.
1960
“A definition of religion, and its uses”, JRAI 90:201-26.
Jaynes, J.
1976
The origin of consciousness in the breakdown of the
bicameral mind (Boston).
Käsemann, E.
1960
“Die Anfänge christlicher Theologie”, ZTK 57:162-85. Re-
printed in ExegetischeVersuche und Besinnungen II (1965 2),
82-104; ET “The beginnings of Christian theology”, JTC 6
(1969) 17-46.
Keel, O.¾
Uehlinger, C.
1992
Göttinen, Götter und Gottessymbole. Neue Erkenntnisse zur
Religionsgeschichte Kanaans und Israels aufgrund bislang
unerschlossener 
ikonographische 
Quellen 
(QD 
134,
Freiburg; ET Gods, goddesses and images of God in ancient
Israel [Edinburgh 1998])
Keita, S.O.Y.-Kittles, R.A.
1997
“The persistence of racial thinking and the myth of racial
divergence”, AA 99:534-44.
King, D.

56    N. Wyatt
1997 
The commissar vanishes. The falsification of photographs
and art in Stalin’s Russia (Edinburgh).
Kirk, G.S.
1970
Myth. Its meaning and functions in ancient and other
cultures (Cambridge).
Knight, C.
1987
“The lunar analogue and the origins of culture”, Cosmos 3:72-
106.
1991
Blood relations. Menstruation and the origins of culture
(New Haven).
Koch, K.
1972
The rediscovery of apocalyptic (London; ET of Ratlos vor
der Apokalyptik [Gütersloh 1970]).
Kraus, H-J.
1966
Worship in Israel (Oxford; ET from second 1962 edition of
Gottesdienst in Israel [Munich 1954, 19622).
Krzak, Z.
1993
“From panshamanism to panrationalism. An outline of
evolution of human thought from the Stone Age to the
twentieth century”, AP 38:51-73.
Kuhn, T.
1970
The structure of scientific revolutions (Chicago).
Kuper, A.
1988
The invention of primitive society. Transformations of an
illusion (London).
Lang, A.
1887
Myth, ritual and religion 2 volumes (London).
Leach, E.-Aycock, A.
1983
Structuralist interpretations of biblical myth (Cambridge).
Lévy-Bruhl, L.
1910
Les fonctions mentales dans les sociétés inférieures (Paris).
Lindbeck, G.A.
1984
The nature of doctrine. Religion and theology in a
postliberal age (Philadelphia).
Lonergan, B.J.F.
1957
Insight. A study of human understanding (London).
Madden, P.
1997
Jesus’ walking on the sea. An investigation of the origin of

The Mythic Mind    57
the narrative account (BZNW 81; Berlin).
Margalit, B.
1989
The Ugaritic poem of Aqht (BZAW 182; Berlin).
van de Mieroop, M.
1999
Cuneiform texts and the writing of history (London).
Mills, W.H.
1842
Observations 2 volumes.
Mithen, S.
1996
The prehistory of the mind. A search for the origins of art, re-
ligion and science (London).
de Moor, J.C.
1971
The seasonal pattern in the Ugaritic poem of Baclu
according to the version of Ilimilku (AOAT 16; Neukirchen-
Vluyn).
1987
An anthology of religious texts from Ugarit (Nisaba 16; Lei-
den).
1997
The rise of Yahwism. The roots of Israelite monotheism (2nd
edition; Leuven).
Mowinckel, S.
1962
The Psalms in Israel’s worship, 2 volumes (Oxford; reprinted
1982; ET of Offersang og sangoffer [Oslo 1951]).
Munz, P.
1973
When the gold bough breaks: structuralism or typology?
(London).
Murray, R.
1992
The cosmic covenant (Heythrop Monographs; London).
Noth, M.
1928
“Die Historisierung des Mythus im Alten Testament”, CW
4:265-72, 301-9. Reprinted in Gesammelte Studien zum Alten
Testament II (Munich 1969).
Oden, R.A.
1981
“Transformations in near eastern myths: Genesis 1-11 and the
Old Babylonian epic of Atrahasis”, Religion 11:21-37.
1992a
“Mythology”, ABD iv 946-56.
1992b
“Myth in the OT”, ABD iv 956-60.
Oesterley, W.O.E.-Robinson, T.H.
1930
Hebrew religion. Its origin and development (London).
Otzen, B.-Gottlieb, H.-Jeppesen, K.

58    N. Wyatt
1980
Myths in the Old Testament (London; ET of Myter i det
gamle Testamente [Copenhagen 1976]).
Page, H.R., Jr
1996
The myth of cosmic rebellion. A study of its reflexes in
Ugaritic and biblical literature (SVT 65; Leiden).
Pedersen, J.
1926-40
Israel, its life and culture. I-II 1926, III-IV 1940. (I-II Copen-
hagen-Oxford; III-IV Copenhagen-London;. ET of Israel, I-II.
Sjæleliv og samfundsliv; III-IV. Hellighed og guddomme-
lighed [Copenhagen 1920-34]).
Petersen, A.R.
1998
The royal god. Enthronement festivals in ancient Ugarit and
Israel? (JSOTS 259; CIS 5; Sheffield).
Porter, J.R.
1978
“The daughters of Lot”, Folklore 89:127-41.
Proudfoot, W.
1985
Religious experience (Berkeley).
von Rad, G.
1962-6
Old Testament theology, 2 volumes (Edinburgh; ET of
Theologie des Alten Testaments [Munich 1957-60]).
Rennie, B.S.
1996
Reconstructing Eliade. Making sense of religion (Albany
NY).
Ringgren, H.
1966
Israelite religion (London; ET of Israelitische Religion
[Stuttgart 1963]).
Rogerson, J. W.
1974
Myth in Old Testament interpretation (BZAW 134, Berlin).
1978
Anthropology and the Old Testament (Oxford).
Rowley, H.H.
1967
Worship in ancient Israel. Its forms and meaning (London).
Said, E. W.
1978
Orientalism  (London; reprinted Harmondsworth 1985).
Smith, M. S.
1994
“Mythology and myth-making in Ugaritic and Israelite litera-
ture”, in Brooke-Curtis-Healey 1994, 293-341
Spence, L.
1921
An introduction to mythology (London).

The Mythic Mind    59
Spengler, O.
1926-8
The decline of the west, 2 volumes (ET New York).
Strenski, I.
1987
Four theories of myth in twentieth-century history (London).
Thompson, T.L.
1974
The historicity of the patriarchal narratives. The quest for
the historical Abraham (BZAW 133, Berlin).
Tobin, V.A.
1989
Theological principles of Egyptian religion (AUS VII 59;
New York).
Westermann, C.
1984
Genesis 1-11, a commentary (London; ET of Genesis [BKAT];
Neukirchen-Vluyn 1976 2).
Whitelam, K.
1996
The invention of ancient Israel. The silencing of Palestinian
history (London).
Widengren, G.
1941
“Psalm 110 och det sakrala kungadömet i Israel”, UUÅ
1941.7.1.
Wolff, H.W.
1974
Anthropology of the Old Testament (London; ET of Anthro-
pologie des Alten Testaments [Munich 1973).
Wright G.E.
1950
The Old Testament against its environment (SBT 2; London).
1952
God who acts (SBT 8; London).
Wyatt, N.
1976
“Atonement theology in Ugarit and Israel”, UF 8:415-30.
1986
“The hollow crown: ambivalent elements in West Semitic
royal ideology”, UF 18:421-436.
1987
“Echoes of the king and his Ka: an ideological motif in the
story of Solomon’s birth”, UF 19:399-404.
1990
“The story of Dinah and Shechem”, UF 22:434-58.
1994a
“The theogony motif in Ugarit and the Bible”, in Brooke-
Curtis-Healey 1994, 395-419.
1994b
“The meaning of El Roi and the mythological dimension of
Genesis 16”, SJOT 8:141-51.
1995
“The liturgical context of Psalm 19 and its mythical and ritual
origins”, UF 27:559-96.
1996a
“The vocabulary and neurology of orientation: the Ugaritic

60    N. Wyatt
and biblical evidence”, in N. Wyatt-W.G.E. Watson-J.B.
Lloyd (eds), Ugarit, religion and culture. Proceedings of the
international colloquium on Ugarit, religion and culture,
Edinburgh, July 1994. Essays presented in honour of
Professor John C. L. Gibson (UBL 12, Münster), 351-80.
1996b
Myths of power. A study of royal myth and ideology in
Ugaritic and biblical tradition (UBL 13; Münster).
1997
“Ilimilku’s ideological programme: Ugaritic royal propaganda,
and a biblical postscript”, UF 29:773-96.
1998a
“Arms and the king: the earliest allusions to the Chaoskampf
motif and their implications for the interpretation of the
Ugaritic and biblical traditions”, in M. Dietrich-I. Kottsieper
(eds) “Und Mose schrieb dieses Lied auf...’. Festschrift O.
Loretz [AOAT 250; Münster), 833-82.
1998b
Religious texts from Ugarit. The words of Ilimilku and his
colleagues (The Biblical Seminar 53; Sheffield).
1999
“The religion of Ugarit: an overview”, in Watson, W.G.
E.¾
Wyatt, N. (eds) Handbook of Ugaritic Studies (HdO I 39,
Leiden), 529-85.
Forthcoming
Serving the gods. Structure and dynamic in the religion of
ancient Ugarit.
Xella,P.
1996
“Il «capro espiatorio» a Ebla. Sulle origini storiche di un
antico rito mediterraneo”, SMSR; FS. D. Sabbatucci; 62:677-
84. (Published 1998).
Zatelli, I.
1998
“The origin of the biblical scapegoat ritual: the evidence of
two Eblaite texts”, VT 48:254-63.
Abbreviations
AA
American Anthropologist
ABD
Anchor Bible Dictionary
AnBib
Analecta Biblica
AOAT
Alter Orient und altes Testament
AP
Archaeologia Polski
AUS
American University Studies
BBS
Behavioral and Brain Sciences
BKAT
Biblische Kommentar zum Alten Testament
BZAW
Beihefte zur Zeitschrift für die alttestamentliche Wissenschaft

The Mythic Mind    61
BZNW
Beihefte zur Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
CIS
Copenhagen International Seminar
CW
Christentum und Wissenschaft
JPOS
Journal of the Palestine Oriental Society
JRAI
Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute
JSOTS
Journal for the Study of the Old Testament Supplement Series
JTC
Journal; of Theology and the Church
QD
Quaestiones Disputatae
SBT
Studies in biblical theology
SFSHJ
South Florida studies in the history of Judaism
TS
Theological Studies
UBL
UF
Ugaritisch-Biblische Literatur
Ugarit-Forschungen
UCOP
University of Cambridge Oriental Publications
UUÅ
Uppsala Universitets Årskrift
ZTK
Zeitschrift für Theologie und Kirche
Abstract
Many biblical scholars (and particularly those specializing in Old Tes-
tament and Hebrew Bible studies) continue to deny the presence of
myth in Israelite literature. Even when mythical elements are
conceded to survive, pains are taken to demonstrate their “foreign’
origin. This paper challenges this reluctant view, attempting to break
down the impasse by applying the analyses of M. Donald and S.
Guthrie, and proposing that myth is a mental disposition rather than a
literary genre, a universal meaning-giving strategy. Far from being
incompatible with history, it has played a significant part in its
shaping, a trait evident even in modern scientific historiography.
Three strands of mythic tradition are noted as determining a wide
range of biblical material, the Chaoskampf, the theogony cum royal
birth and the deposition myth (whose origins lie in enthronement
rites). While myth is generally concerned with the past and its
remembering, its use in apocalyptic literature indicates its importance
in the conceptualization of the future.

