
The Centered Mind
The Centered Mind offers a new view of the nature and causal determinants of
both reﬂective thinking and, more generally, the stream of consciousness. Peter
Carruthers argues that conscious thought is always sensory-based, relying on the
resources of the working-memory system. This system has been much studied by
cognitive scientists. It enables sensory images to be sustained and manipulated
through attentional signals directed at midlevel sensory areas of the brain. When
abstract conceptual representations are bound into these images, we consciously
experience ourselves as making judgments or arriving at decisions. Thus one
might hear oneself as judging, in inner speech, that it is time to go home, for
example. However, our amodal (non-sensory) propositional attitudes are never
actually among the contents of this stream of conscious reﬂection. Our beliefs,
goals, and decisions are only ever active in the background of consciousness,
working behind the scenes to select the sensory-based imagery that occurs in
working memory. They are never themselves conscious.
Drawing on extensive knowledge of the scientiﬁc literature on working mem-
ory and related topics, Carruthers builds an argument that challenges the central
assumptions of many philosophers. In addition to arguing that non-sensory
propositional attitudes are never conscious, he also shows that they are never
under direct intentional control. Written with his usual clarity and directness,
The Centered Mind will be essential reading for all philosophers and cognitive
scientists interested in the nature of human thought processes.


The Centered Mind
What the Science of Working
Memory Shows Us About the
Nature of Human Thought
Peter Carruthers
1

3
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, OX2 6DP,
United Kingdom
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of
Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries
# Peter Carruthers 2015
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
First Edition published in 2015
Impression: 1
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted
by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics
rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the
address above
You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Control Number: 2014960130
ISBN 978–0–19–873882–4
Printed and bound by
CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon, CR0 4YY
Links to third party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and
for information only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials
contained in any third party website referenced in this work.

for Daniel Dennett
—whose work awoke me from my Wittgensteinian slumber—


Contents
Preface
ix
Figures
xi
1. Introduction
1
1. On Reﬂection
1
2. The Importance of the Issues
9
3. Working Memory
12
4. The Sensory-Based Account
14
5. The Road Ahead
15
6. Conclusion
18
2. Propositional Attitudes
19
1. Beliefs and Desires
19
2. Goals, Decisions, and Intentions
24
3. Active versus Passive: A Problem
27
4. The Case for Amodal Attitudes
31
5. The Case for Structured Attitudes
39
6. Conclusion
44
3. Perception, Attention, and Consciousness
46
1. Kinds of Consciousness
46
2. Global Broadcasting
51
3. Consciousness and Attention
54
4. The Nature of Attention
58
5. Amodal Content in Perception
64
6. Conclusion
73
4. The Nature of Working Memory
75
1. Working Memory, Imagery, and Perception
75
2. Working Memory and Consciousness
82
3. Working Memory and Attention
88
4. Mental Rehearsal
92
5. The Sensory Basis of Working Memory
100
6. Conclusion
107
5. The Unity of Working Memory
108
1. An Amodal Workspace?
108
2. The Problem of Self-Knowledge
112
3. The Importance of Working Memory
118
4. The Case of the Missing Variance
124

5. The Default Network
134
6. Conclusion
138
6. Working Memory in Action
139
1. Unconscious Goal Pursuit
139
2. Attention as Action
142
3. Mental Rehearsal and Mental Manipulation
152
4. Generating Inner Speech
161
5. Creativity and Mind Wandering
166
6. Conclusion
172
7. Reasoning, Working Memory, and Attitudes
174
1. Dual Systems of Reasoning
174
2. How System 2 Reasoning Works
182
3. System 2 Reasoning in Action
185
4. A Second Mind?
191
5. An Extended Mind?
197
6. Conclusion
202
8. The Evolution of Reﬂection
203
1. The Central Puzzle
203
2. The Age of Attention
207
3. Episodic Memory and Prospection in Birds
211
4. Working Memory in Mammals
216
5. Evolutionary Developments across Species?
223
6. Conclusion
228
9. Conclusion: The Conscious Mind as Marionette
229
1. Against the Intuitive View
229
2. The Positive Picture
232
3. Implications for Philosophy and Future Questions
234
4. Conclusion
241
References
243
Index of Names
275
Index of Subjects
288
viii
contents

Preface
The project of this book developed out of an aspect of my last one. In The Opacity
of Mind (Carruthers, 2011a), I defended the claim that our knowledge of our own
thoughts (our beliefs, goals, decisions, and intentions) is always indirect and
interpretive, no different in principle from our access to the thoughts of other
people. In order to know our own minds, I argued, we have to turn our mind-
reading capacities on ourselves, drawing inferences from sensorily accessible cues
(including not only our own overt behavior and circumstances, but also such
things as our own inner speech and visual imagery). I argued that this account is
supported by a wide range of data from across cognitive science. But I also
critiqued a number of competing theories proposed by philosophers. One
account that I considered brieﬂy is that we have a special-purpose working-
memory system that enables our thoughts to be conscious and widely available to
many different faculties of the mind. Since the latter include the mindreading
system, we are thereby given direct access to the nature and occurrence of those
thoughts—our judgments, goals, decisions, and the rest. It only occurred to me
later that views similar to this one are quite widespread in philosophy (albeit
using different terminology), as well as having considerable intuitive appeal.
Moreover, what is really at stake in this aspect of the debate goes well beyond
the topic of self-knowledge. Rather, it concerns the very nature of the cognitive
architecture that underlies conscious thinking and reasoning, as well as our
explanation of the so-called “stream of consciousness” more generally. In conse-
quence, the topic is important enough to be worthy of a book in its own right.
I rely on an extensive scientiﬁc literature on working memory and surrounding
issues to make my case.1 Since working memory is the cognitive system that we
employ when we engage in conscious forms of thinking and reasoning, and since
(I shall argue) the contents of working memory are always sensory based
(depending upon visual, auditory, and other forms of sensory imagery), it
seems to follow that conscious thinking, too, is sensory based. In that case non-
sensory (or “amodal”) thoughts (including goals, decisions, intentions, and many
1 The contents of working memory are generally believed to be conscious, drawing from many
different unconscious regions of the mind. Moreover, those contents are likewise made available to
many different unconscious mental systems that consume and respond to them. So working
memory is, as it were, the place where “everything comes together” in the mind. Hence my title,
The Centered Mind.

forms of judgment, I shall suggest) are incapable of being conscious. Rather, on
the account that I provide, they “pull the strings” in the background, selecting,
maintaining, and manipulating the sensory-based contents that do ﬁgure con-
sciously in working memory. Somewhat surprisingly, then, it turns out that the
conscious mind is much like a marionette that is controlled and made to dance by
off-stage actors, who do their work unseen. But the main focus of this book is as
much about developing a positive theory of reﬂection and the stream of con-
sciousness as it is about overturning natural philosophical ideas about the nature
of reﬂection. For while there is a wealth of work in cognitive science that bears on
the topic, no one has, in my view, successfully woven it all together into a uniﬁed
account. As a result, the book should be of broad interest to cognitive scientists as
well as to philosophers.
The genre of this book is a kind of theoretical psychology, and I count myself
(for present purposes, at least) as a theoretical psychologist. Consider an analogy
with theoretical physics. Theoretical physicists generally do not conduct experi-
ments. Rather, they take the data provided by experimental physicists and use
those data to build general models and theories. The training for the two ﬁelds is
different, and there is mostly no overlap between the two groups of scientists. In
psychology, likewise, there is room for people who attempt to unify and explain
the evidence collected by others.2 This is especially likely to be useful where the
data in question cut across disciplinary boundaries (as they do here), or derive
from traditions of inquiry whose participants rarely interact with one another.
Sometimes theoretical psychologists will also engage in experimental work. This
would be true of Steven Pinker, for example. But sometimes they do not. Here
Daniel Dennett provides an obvious instance. In this book (even more than in my
previous one) I try to emulate the latter’s example (albeit without attempting to
match his inimitable writing style, and without sharing many of his views).
The initial work for this book was supported by a Research and Scholarship
Award from the University of Maryland Graduate School, for which I am
grateful. In addition, I wish to thank the following friends, colleagues, and
students for their comments on some or all of an earlier draft: Heather Adair,
Felipe De Brigard, Mark Engelbert, Peter Godfrey-Smith, Andrew Knoll, Neil
Levy, Ryan Ogilvie, Georges Rey, Lizzie Schechter, Julius Schoenherr, Chandra
Sripada, Xuan Wang, Evan Westra, Wayne Wu, and two anonymous readers for
Oxford University Press. I am grateful to Susan Levi for her help in producing
Figures 1, 2, 3, and 4; and to Mark Fox for permission to reproduce Figure 6.
2 Similarly in philosophy, some would say there is room for people who pursue philosophical
questions experimentally—hence the nascent ﬁeld of experimental philosophy. This book is deﬁn-
itely not of that ilk.
x
preface

Figures
Dorsal
Medial
Posterior
Anterior
Lateral
Ventral
Motor cortex
Somatosensory cortex
Parietal cortex
Occipital cortex
Temporal cortex
Prefrontal
cortex
Figure 1. Major regions of the brain together with directional naming conventions. (Left
hemisphere, outside view.)

Intraparietal sulcus
Frontal eye-fields
Ventrolateral prefrontal
cortex
Temporo-parietal
junction
Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
Figure 2. Attentional networks in the brain. (Right hemisphere, outside view.)
Anterior cingulate
cortex
Medial frontal gyrus
Corpus collosum
Posterior cingulate
cortex
Superior colliculus
Orbitofrontal cortex
Basal ganglia
Figure 3. The inside view of the brain. (Right hemisphere.)

Figure 4. The hidden Dalmatian.
Desired
State
Motor
Planning
Motor
Commands
Forward
Model
Comparator
Perception
Affordances
Movement
Efference
Copy
Figure 5. A simpliﬁed model of the action-control system.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Figure 6. An example of a Raven’s Matrix.
One’s task is to select the object missing from the bottom right of the topmost set of
boxes, choosing from among the eight alternatives provided below.

1
Introduction
This initial chapter will introduce the questions that concern us and say some-
thing about their signiﬁcance. It will introduce the scientiﬁc concept of working
memory, and will sketch the account of human thought processes that builds
around that concept. Finally, the chapter will provide an outline of the argument
to be pursued in the chapters that follow.
1. On Reﬂection
This section introduces the phenomena (reﬂection and the stream of conscious-
ness) that constitute the primary topics of this book. A number of distinctions are
drawn, and some initial theses are laid out for later discussion.
1.1. The target phenomena
This book is about the nature of the so-called “stream of consciousness” which
occupies our minds with sequences of thinking and imagining through much of
the waking day. My goal is to understand, at least in outline, the processes that
determine the content of that stream, together with the nature of those contents
themselves (speciﬁcally, whether those contents include propositional attitudes
as well as feelings and images).1 But the book is also, and more narrowly, about
the nature of reﬂective thinking, where we actively organize the stream of
consciousness toward the achievement of a goal of some sort, such as arriving
at a judgment or a decision.
1 Let me emphasize for readers who are psychologists—especially those who are social
psychologists—that I use the term “attitude” throughout in the broad philosophical sense, which
includes all forms of propositional thought. Hence judgments, goals, and decisions, as well as events
of wondering whether something is the case, or supposing that something is so, are all attitudes.
Psychologists, in contrast, often use the term in a highly restrictive sense, to include only evaluative
dispositions. In this narrow sense, being in favor of afﬁrmative action and disapproving of abortion
are both attitudes; but believing that one was born in June, wondering what one’s mother might like
for her birthday, and deciding to set one’s alarm for 6 am tomorrow are not. All of these propositional
thoughts are attitudes in the sense I intend here, however.

What happens when we reﬂect? More broadly, in what does the stream of
consciousness consist? Some answers seem obvious. When we reﬂect, we enter-
tain thoughts: we examine possibilities, consider options, make inferences, arrive
at judgments, and take decisions. And the stream of consciousness can also
include visual images, fragments of song, episodic memories, inner speech, and
many other forms of sensory-like event. But reﬂection can likewise be a conscious
process. So the stream of consciousness can include, as a subset, the kinds of
sequence of thought that constitute reﬂection. If one then believes (as I think one
should, and as I will argue in Chapter 2) that many of our thoughts are abstract
and amodal (non-sensory) in nature, then one will think that the stream of
consciousness is constituted by two kinds of event: a set of sensory-like events of
imagining, episodically remembering, and so on; and a set of amodal propositional-
attitude events of supposing, judging, deciding, and the like.
1.2. On consciousness
Before continuing, we need to pause for a moment to say something about how
consciousness is here understood. (The topic will be considered in more detail in
Chapter 3.) Much of the debate within philosophy concerns the nature of so-
called “phenomenal” consciousness. This is the sort of consciousness that has a
subjective feel to it, or that is like something to undergo (Chalmers, 1996). Some
claim that phenomenal consciousness can be explained in physical terms while
others deny it. This is not our concern here. Rather, our focus is on access
consciousness (Block, 1995), which almost everyone maintains is not nearly so
problematic. Indeed, there is now substantial agreement in the literature that
access-conscious states are those that have a sort of “global availability” to a wide
range of other mental states and processes. This idea is not only scientiﬁcally well
established, as we will see in Chapter 3, but it ﬁts nicely with our everyday
experience. For we know that the events we describe as conscious are ones that
we can report, that can issue in new memories, give rise to emotional responses,
issue in new goals, and help guide our decisions. They must therefore be
accessible to a wide range of different mental states, systems, and faculties.
Hence to say that reﬂection is a conscious process is to say that its contents are
globally accessible in this sense.
It is worth noting, too, that conscious states can be roughly divided into two
classes: those that are exogenously caused, and perceptual in character; and those
that are endogenously caused, brought about through the mind’s own operations.
Events of seeing a sunset, smelling a rose, or hearing an oboe fall into the former
category, whereas the corresponding imaginative acts fall into the latter. When
people talk about the stream of consciousness, I think they generally have in
2
1. introduction

mind the set of endogenously caused conscious events. It is the stream of
conscious thinking and imagining created through the mind’s own activity that
constitutes the stream of consciousness, not the conscious perceptions and
experiences that result from attending to the external world (or to one’s own
body). At any rate this is how I propose to understand the notion for our
purposes. The distinction is not a sharp one, however. For we know that
perception is inﬂuenced by top-down endogenous processes, including the dir-
ection of attention. And events that are paradigmatic elements of the stream of
consciousness, such as episodic memories, can be sparked by externally perceived
stimuli, which trigger the memory in question. Moreover, the distinction is not
always manifest to subjects themselves. A vivid hallucination, for example (which
is endogenously caused), might be indistinguishable from the real (externally
caused) thing from the point of view of the person who experiences it.
1.3. Reﬂection revisited
With these points of clariﬁcation behind us, let us return to consider the nature
of reﬂection. Plainly it is largely an endogenous, rather than an exogenously
caused, process. And we have already noted that reﬂection can seemingly
include propositional-attitude events such as judgments and decisions, as well
as processes like reasoning, and considering possible options when decision
making. But is day-dreaming also a form of reﬂection? When one drifts in a
fantasy with one’s stream of consciousness populated by images of palm trees,
blue skies, cold beers, and golden beaches, is one engaging in reﬂection? My
own intuition is to say “No.” I think the term “reﬂection” would normally be
reserved for forms of thinking that are in some more obvious sense purposeful,
directed toward solving a problem of some sort, arriving at a judgment, or at
reaching a decision.
Conversely one can ask: do processes of reﬂection always fall within the stream
of consciousness? Plainly reﬂection is often a conscious process. But is it always?
My own intuition is to say “Yes.” While one might allow that there are uncon-
scious reasoning and decision-making processes of various sorts, one should
decline to call these forms of reﬂection. The upshot is then that reﬂection is a
proper subset of the stream of consciousness. While reﬂection is always con-
scious, not everything that can be found in one’s stream of consciousness
constitutes a form of reﬂection. Again, this is how I propose to understand
these notions for present purposes. Although reﬂection can include sensory-
like events of imagining as well as propositional attitude events of judging and
deciding, only those sequences of conscious event that seem to their subjects to be
purposeful in nature will qualify as forms of reﬂection.
1. on reﬂection
3

Philosophers, too, often make a distinction between active and passive forms
of endogenously caused mental activity (Peacocke, 2008; O’Brien & Soteriou,
2009), and one might wonder whether this coincides with the distinction we have
drawn between reﬂection and the other events that constitute the stream of
consciousness. It is natural to think that reasoning, judging, imagining, and
deciding are mental actions: they are things that one does, and does for reasons.
In contrast, the thoughts that appear in one’s mind unbidden, the snatches of song
that reverberate in one’s head, and the images that occur to one while one drifts in
reverie, are all passive in nature: they are things that happen to one, not things that
one does. It seems that this latter class of passive mental events consists of things
that disrupt reﬂection, or replace reﬂection, rather than being constitutive of it. So it
may well be that the distinction between reﬂection, on the one hand, and the
remainder of the stream of consciousness, on the other, is grounded in the same
intuitive active–passive distinction that is emphasized by philosophers.
1.4. Summary and goals
Let me summarize the three main points that have emerged from our discussion
so far:
(1) Among conscious mental events one can distinguish between those that
are exogenously caused and those that are endogenously caused; I propose to
reserve the term “stream of consciousness” for the latter.
The main goal of this book is to develop an empirically grounded theory of the
contents and causes of the stream of consciousness.
(2) Intuitively, the stream of consciousness contains both amodal attitude
events of supposing, judging, deciding, and so on, as well as sensory-like events
of imagined seeing, imagined hearing, and so forth.
I will argue that our best theory of the stream of consciousness challenges the
correctness of this intuition. On the contrary, the stream of consciousness is
entirely sensory based.
(3) Intuitively, the stream of consciousness includes both purposeful (or
active) and purposeless (or passive) forms of mental activity, with many
amodal attitude events falling into the former category; I propose to use the
term “reﬂection” to refer to this sort of apparently purposeful conscious
mental activity.
I will argue that our best theory of the stream of consciousness challenges the
correctness of the intuitive distinction between active and passive forms of
4
1. introduction

conscious mentality. On the contrary, all components of the stream of conscious-
ness are actively produced.
My main goal, then, is to develop an empirically grounded theory of the stream
of consciousness. More speciﬁcally, I will attempt to answer the following ques-
tions: (a) How are stream-of-consciousness events endogenously caused? (b) What
explains how they become conscious (that is, globally available)? And (c) does
the stream of consciousness contain amodal attitude events as well as sensory-like
ones? There is a great deal of data in cognitive science relevant to answering
these questions, spread out over a number of different disciplines. But no one has
succeeded in weaving it all together into a uniﬁed account. (Or rather, no one has
woven it into a story that satisﬁes all of the constraints that I will argue should be
satisﬁed, in this domain.) Much of our focus, however, will be on the processes that
constitute reﬂection more narrowly. For it is here that the account that I provide
has especially revisionary implications. In effect, providing an adequate account
of the processes that create the stream of consciousness will lead me to deny the
reality of the intuitive claims made in points (2) and (3) above, as I now explain.
1.5. Amodal attitudes in reﬂection?
Suppose one believes (as I will argue in Chapter 2 that one should) that there are
propositional attitudes that are amodal, or non-sensory, in character. And
suppose one thinks that such attitudes include events of supposing something
to be the case, judging that something is the case, and deciding to do something.
Then one will naturally think that reﬂection is, at least partly, constituted by
amodal attitudes. For recall the belief that when one reﬂects, among the contents
of reﬂection are that one supposes things, reasons about things, and arrives at
judgments and decisions. If these attitudes are amodal ones, then one must
believe that such attitudes are capable of being conscious, and of ﬁguring in the
stream of consciousness.
Consider how one might describe to someone a sequence of reﬂection in
which one has just engaged: “I was wondering what to do on Saturday.
I thought I might either go to the art museum or go hiking. I remembered
that the forecast was good, which made the hike seem attractive. And then
I recalled that there would be delays on the metro red-line downtown. So that
settled it: I decided to go hiking.” Here a reﬂective process is described as
consisting in a series of attitude events: an initial event of wondering (implicit
in the description of which is the goal of doing something interesting on
Saturday); then a “thinking I might,” which should probably be classiﬁed as
a type of supposition; then an activated memory, which results in an affective
(emotional) response; then another activated memory, followed by a decision.
1. on reﬂection
5

If asked to detail everything that the process of reﬂection had consisted in, one
would list these events together with some others (such as the occurrence of
visual imagery of portions of the hike, as well as the goal of doing something
interesting on Saturday).
This example could be supplemented by many others in which attitudes of
other types would ﬁgure: hoping, pretending, and intending; emotional events of
anger, disgust, and fear; as well as desires, goals, and more. Hence we seem to
assume that attitudes of all different types can be activated and conscious within a
process of reﬂection. Now, some propositional attitudes are no doubt partly
sensory-like in character. This is true of episodic memories, for example, which
can include visual, auditory, or olfactory imagery. It is also true of many affective
attitudes, which will include distinctive states of bodily arousal. But many
attitudes, it seems, are not at all sensory-like. Judging that 17 is a prime number,
for example, seems to be entirely amodal, both in its content and the attitude that
one takes toward that content. Likewise, I would say, for a decision to go hiking
and for recalling the goal of losing weight. Hence we seem committed to thinking
that reﬂection is partly constituted by amodal attitude events.
If one believes that reﬂection can contain both amodal attitude events and
sensory-like feelings and images, then one can ask how the two sorts of compo-
nent are related to one another. One possibility is that they are caused independ-
ently of one another. But this seems highly implausible. Recalling that the
forecast is good, for example (which seems like a good candidate for an amodal
attitude event), might be accompanied by a visual image of sunshine and blue
skies. The correspondence in content between one’s thoughts and one’s imagery
is often too close to be coincidental. Another possibility is that the relationship is
associative. Perhaps one’s thoughts associatively evoke related images of various
kinds. This idea is plausible, in many cases. But it runs into trouble with reﬂective
uses of inner speech. If one expresses a decision to oneself in words (“So, I’ll go
hiking then”), the connection between the sensory-like features of the sounds that
one thereby imagines and the thought that one thinks seems much too close to be
merely associative. A third possibility is that while sensory-like events can occur
passively in the stream of consciousness (caused by who-knows-what), when one
reﬂects the reﬂective process itself actively recruits sensory-like representations as
an aid to its own operations. (Think how repeating a series of numerals to oneself
in inner speech can help one remember the corresponding number.)
1.6. The sensory-based nature of reﬂection
The possibilities canvassed in the previous paragraph will be examined in due
course (in Chapters 4 and 5). I will show that they confront considerable
6
1. introduction

obstacles. At the same time I will be amassing evidence that events that are
among the contents of reﬂection (and the stream of consciousness more gener-
ally) always constitutively involve, while being causally dependent on, sensory-
like components. (I will hereafter express this idea by saying that reﬂection and
the stream of consciousness are “sensory based.” The phrase is awkward but
concise.) For example, consider an episodic memory of a dinner one once ate at a
Moroccan restaurant in the French city of Avignon. Besides conceptual infor-
mation about the location and type of food, it includes distinctive images of
sights, sounds, smells, and tastes. These sensory-like elements are constitutive
parts of the memory, and don’t merely serve to evoke it. Moreover (I will argue),
any conceptual components of the episodic memory in question are causally
dependent on these sensory-like ones. For if the latter are removed or cease to be
attended to, then the conceptual components of the memory will likewise cease to
be conscious.
If all reﬂection is sensory based, then it will follow that amodal (non-sensory)
attitudes are incapable of ﬁguring in reﬂection. Rather, according to the theory
I develop, they do their work unconsciously, operating behind the scenes to
determine the sensory-based contents that do ﬁgure in reﬂection. I will try to
show how reﬂection utilizes the much-studied working-memory system to sus-
tain, rehearse, and manipulate sensory-based representations in visual, proprio-
ceptive, or auditory imagery (including inner speech). Since the contents of
working memory are always sensory based, there is no place among them for
amodal attitudes. Nor is there any other manner in which such attitudes can be
activated and interact in ways that would render them conscious and widely
accessible within the mind. So the reﬂective mind will turn out to be quite other
than many of us are apt to think.
I should emphasize that the position I defend is that reﬂection is always
sensory based, not that it is purely sensory in character. The latter is the view
of Jackendoff (2007, 2012), who claims that only sensory representations are ever
conscious. So when we hear speech, for example, we experience the sounds, and
we have the impression that they are meaningful, but we do not experience the
meaning. My view is different. I will argue (in Chapter 3) that amodal conceptual
representations are often bound into the contents of sensory experience. This
happens when we see something as a dog, for example, or when we hear someone
as asking for directions to the metro station. And something similar is true in
connection with endogenously produced imagery, as when one imagines a dog.
So I allow that certain kinds of propositional attitude can ﬁgure consciously in
reﬂection. These are ones that have a mixed sensory–conceptual character, such
as episodic memories and judgments that are embedded in sensory-like states.
1. on reﬂection
7

What I will deny is that purely amodal attitudes (such as decisions, goals, and
intentions, as well as non-perceptual judgments or beliefs) can ever ﬁgure
consciously in reﬂection. Such attitudes are real, and can function as parts of
the executive component underlying working-memory activity, but they cannot
ﬁgure among the contents of working memory. This is because those contents are
always sensory based.
In effect, then, I will be suggesting that our best empirically grounded theory
of the stream of consciousness should lead us to deny that streams of con-
sciousness ever contain amodal events of supposing, judging, deciding, and so
on. On the contrary, I will argue that amodal attitudes are never conscious.
Instead, the contents of the stream of consciousness are exclusively sensory
based. Thus the stream of consciousness consists entirely of sensory-like events
of imagined seeing, imagined hearing, and so on.
1.7. Passive imagining?
I will also argue that our best theory of the stream of consciousness should lead us
to deny the claim made as point (3) in Section 1.4 above, namely that the stream
includes both purposeful (or active) and purposeless (or passive) forms of mental
activity. It is certainly intuitive that the contents of the stream are sometimes
under our control. When one works toward the solution of a problem, or reasons
about what to do on Saturday, it seems that one’s reﬂections are actively under-
taken in pursuit of the goals in question. But it is equally intuitive that the stream
of consciousness can consist in mere happenings, neither undertaken in pursuit
of a goal nor comprising any mental actions. When one cannot get a snatch of
song out of one’s head, for example, it seems as if one is the victim of one’s
imagination, rather than the agent. Likewise when ideas—sometimes creative
ones—emerge unheralded in consciousness: one feels that one is not the producer
of those ideas, but the recipient.
I will suggest in Chapter 6, however, that this distinction is merely epistemic.
Rather, all contents in the stream of consciousness are equally active, involving
either mental rehearsals of bodily action or decisions to redirect attention toward
a novel mental representation (or both). But in some cases we think we know why
those contents are produced, and hence we deem these cases to be active, whereas
in others we don’t, and so classify them as passive.
1.8. Sources of error
In effect, I will be developing an error-theory of reﬂection and the stream of
consciousness: their nature is other than we are intuitively inclined to think.
I have already suggested that the active–passive distinction could arise from
8
1. introduction

differences in our epistemic access to the underlying causes. But where does the
temptation to think that attitudes of all kinds can ﬁgure consciously in reﬂection
come from? Why is it so easy for us to believe it? At least part of the answer is that
this is the way in which our experience presents itself to us when we reﬂect. When
we reﬂectively generate and manipulate visual imagery (perhaps imagining the
negative outcome of some action that is open to us), or when we engage in inner
speech, we experience ourselves as supposing, deciding, judging, or whatever.
This is (I claim) because the sensory-based contents that ﬁgure in working
memory when we reﬂect are available as input to the mindreading faculty,
which automatically interprets them (when it has sufﬁcient cues to do so) as
expressions of suitable propositional attitudes. Moreover, the same faculty makes
a tacit assumption that our minds are transparently available to us. So we take
ourselves to be experiencing our attitude events themselves, which ﬁgure con-
sciously as parts of the process of reﬂection (rather than as underlying causal
determinants of it, as I will argue).
For a full defense of the claims involved in this explanation the reader is
directed to Carruthers (2011a), where it is also argued that the transparency-
assumption is universal to all historical eras and human cultures. The simplest
and most plausible explanation of this ﬁnding is that a tacit assumption that
people’s thoughts are transparently available to them (and thereby access-
conscious) is innately channeled in development. Moreover, reverse-engineering
considerations applied to a well-designed mindreading faculty predict that it
should contain just such an assumption (perhaps embodied as a rule of process-
ing rather than an explicit belief). This would greatly simplify the task of
interpreting other people’s behavior, especially their verbal behavior when they
report their own mental states. In addition, it would do so without any loss of
reliability, and perhaps with some gains. The same mindreading faculty, then,
when directed toward the self and when ascribing attitudes to the self on the basis
of visual imagery, inner speech, and other sensory cues, will issue in the impres-
sion that one is directly introspecting those attitudes. So it will seem to us that our
attitudes ﬁgure in our reﬂections in ways that are both conscious and mutually
accessible.
2. The Importance of the Issues
Why do these questions matter? First and foremost, because what is at stake is the
very nature of human thought processes, as well as the cognitive mechanisms that
underlie and shape the stream of consciousness. Assuming that there are such
things as amodal propositional attitudes, are any of them ever conscious? When
2. the importance of the issues
9

we reﬂect and reason about things consciously, are those conscious thought
processes constituted, in part, by amodal attitude events, such as goals, decisions,
and non-sensory judgments? Or do such events operate beneath the surface of
our reﬂections, selecting, maintaining, and transforming sensory-based repre-
sentations within a sort of “global workspace” (working memory), thereby
making the contents of those representations widely available for processing by
different subsystems of the mind? More fundamentally, how are the events that
ﬁgure in the stream of consciousness selected, and how do they get to be globally
broadcast?
There is a wealth of ﬁndings in cognitive science that bears on these questions.
Some derive from the study of conscious perception and the attentional mech-
anisms that underlie the global broadcast of sensory representations. Some derive
from the study of working memory, which increasingly seems to share many of
the same mechanisms as perception. There are also numerous studies of the
importance of working memory for human ﬂuid general intelligence, or ﬂuid g.
And then there is a large body of literature on human reasoning and decision-
making abilities, and their relationship to working memory. Although the con-
nections among some of these literatures are often noted, no one has, to the best
of my knowledge, attempted to weave them all together into a single integrated
account of human conscious thought processes (the stream of consciousness).
Doing so is the primary goal of the present book.
These issues also have a bearing on the account one might give of the
differences between human minds and the minds of nonhuman animals. For
many philosophers have thought that what is distinctive of human propositional
attitudes is their “inferential promiscuity” (Evans, 1982; Brewer, 1999; Hurley,
2006). Philosophers have believed that all types of attitude can ﬁgure consciously
in our reﬂections, where both the attitudes and the reasoning processes into
which they enter fall under our rational control. This is held to underlie the
distinctively open-ended and ﬂexible character of human thought and behavior.
Indeed, many philosophers insist that only concepts and attitudes that are, as
one might say, “reﬂection sensitive” can genuinely count as such. Thus both
McDowell (1994) and Brandom (1994, 2000) think that human thought is
distinguished by its spontaneity, distinctively taking place in a “space of
reasons.”2 And Korsgaard (1996, 2009) maintains that only beliefs and decisions
2 It might be objected against this reading of McDowell (1994) that he thinks the human capacity
for spontaneity is language-dependent. And if the form of reﬂection that takes place in “the space of
reasons” is linguistically constituted, then it would seem that it is not our attitudes, as such, that
ﬁgure in reﬂection, but rather visual imagery, episodes of sensory-based inner speech, and so on,
much as I claim in this book. However, the dependence in question is intended to be developmental
10
1. introduction

that result from processes of conscious deliberation are ones for which we have
reasons. Having reasons for our beliefs and actions is said to depend on the
existence of a certain sort of “reﬂective distance” between the potential grounds
for belief or action and those beliefs and actions themselves. On this kind of
account our minds (unlike the minds of nonhuman animals, it is said) do not
remain passive with respect to our circumstances and experiences. Rather, we are
capable of actively weighing reasons for belief and for action, and any thought of
ours can spark an open-ended process of reﬂection and inference in which
attitudes of all kinds can actively ﬁgure.
Not surprisingly in the light of such beliefs, when philosophers have turned
their attention to the minds of nonhuman animals many have denied that the
latter are capable of thought at all, in the full sense of the term. Rather, at best
animals have proto-thoughts composed of proto-concepts (Dummett, 1991;
Brandom, 1994; McDowell, 1994; Bermúdez, 2003; Hurley, 2006). It is undeni-
able, of course, that human reasoning and decision-making processes vastly
outstrip the powers of nonhuman animals in ﬂexibility and sophistication. But
what is at stake is whether the difference in question has an architectural basis
(with humans alone possessing a central workspace in which conscious reﬂection
takes place and where amodal attitudes of all kinds can be activated in a
controlled manner), or whether the difference is only one of degree. I will
argue, in Chapter 8, for the latter view. The evidence suggests that all mammals
and birds share essentially the same sensory-based working-memory system in
which representations can be consciously activated, sustained, and manipulated.
Humans are distinctive only in the kinds of use that they can make of that system.
The idea that propositional attitudes of all kinds can be entertained con-
sciously, in ways that can be both reﬂected on and actively controlled by their
subjects, is deeply embedded in a good deal of philosophical theorizing. Arguably
it lies at the heart of the conception of human rational agency sketched above
(McDowell, 1994; Korsgaard, 1996, 2009). And it is taken for granted in a
number of other philosophical projects. Burge (1996), for example, just assumes
without argument that our attitudes can occur consciously, available to be
rationally reﬂected on and controlled, as part of his analysis of our entitlement
to claim self-knowledge of them. Many philosophical debates and theories might
rather than constitutive. McDowell says (quite plausibly) that it is by being inducted into a
community of language users that we acquire the capacity to consider reasons and to reﬂect on
the evidence for our beliefs and the reasons for our decisions. But thought and reﬂection are not
themselves supposed to be linguistic in nature, according to McDowell, even if they are often
linguistically expressed.
2. the importance of the issues
11

therefore need to be revisited if the thesis of this book is correct, and amodal
attitudes are incapable of being conscious. Some further remarks along these lines
will be made in the concluding chapter.
3. Working Memory
One thesis defended in this book is that working memory is the system within
which reﬂective thinking takes place, and in which the stream of consciousness
occurs more generally. So understanding the nature of working memory is the
key to understanding the nature of both reﬂection and the stream of conscious-
ness. The present section will therefore provide a brief introduction to the
scientiﬁc conception of working memory.
Working memory is generally thought to be a central domain-general resource
that enables representations to be actively sustained, rehearsed, and manipulated
for purposes of reasoning and problem solving. (Examples would include: sus-
taining a representation of an object that has disappeared behind a screen so that
one knows what to expect when the screen is removed; rehearsing a phone
number that one has just been given, while hunting for a pad and pencil with
which to write it down; imagining some different ways in which a set of boxes
might be packed into the trunk of a car; and adding or subtracting numbers
in one’s head.) The contents of working memory are widely thought to be
conscious.
Working memory should not be confused with long-term memory. The latter
consists of stored representations that are no longer in an activated state.
Working memory, in contrast, consists of representations that are actively
sustained by the subject. Moreover, the contents of working memory are always
conscious, as we will see, whereas the contents of long-term memory only become
conscious when recalled into working memory. Empirically, working memory
can be distinguished from all forms of long-term memory through its sensitivity
to attentional interference. Information sustained in working memory will be
lost if subjects are distracted and turn their attention fully to other matters.
Long-term memories, in contrast, will merely decay at the normal rate in such
circumstances.
Working memory should also be distinguished from sensory short-term
memory. The latter can retain information in sensory cortices for around two
seconds in the absence of attention, provided that the representations aren’t
overwritten by subsequent stimuli. Such representations can give rise to priming
effects without ever being conscious (Dehaene et al., 2006). They can become
conscious, however, if attention is directed toward them before they expire
12
1. introduction

(Sergent et al., 2013).3 They can also be used for online guidance of action in the
absence of attention (Milner & Goodale, 1995). The contents of working mem-
ory, in contrast, are attention-dependent and conscious. Moreover, they can be
held in an activated state for as long as attention is directed at them, and can be
retained despite the impact of subsequent stimuli that overwrite the representa-
tions in sensory short-term memory.4
For purposes of illustration, and to emphasize the ubiquity of working mem-
ory in our mental lives, it is worth mentioning some of the kinds of task that can
be used to investigate its nature, as well as some of the mental activities that
utilize it. Researchers often require participants to engage in mental arithmetic,
where the result of one component of a calculation needs to be held in mind while
another is executed. Also heavily used are so-called “n-back” tasks, in which a
series of numbers, letters, shapes, or sounds is presented, and participants are
required to judge whether the currently presented item is the same as the one
presented n items back in the series (three, say). To do this, people need to
remember the most recent few items and their position in the sequence, while
resisting potential interference from their memories of the n+1 and n–1 items, in
order to make the required judgment. Somewhat similar are complex memory-
span tasks, in which people are required to remember, in sequence, a serially
presented list of words or other items while conducting a demanding secondary
activity. For example, while each target word is presented one is required to judge
the truth or falsity of an arithmetic equation. Here, too, people need to remember
the target items and their position in the sequence while resisting interference
from the parallel distractor task.
The everyday mental activities that utilize working memory should certainly
include discursive thinking conducted in so-called “inner speech.” As with outer
speech, one needs to keep in mind what was said recently in order to construct
and entertain a suitable sequel. Also included would be episodic remembering,
where one activates and sustains an experience-like representation of some past
event. And equally important (if not more so) would be prospective reasoning,
where one evaluates potential future scenarios. Here one has to construct and
sustain in working memory a representation of a target future action or event,
elaborating it to consider likely consequences, and responding affectively to the
result. As should be clear from these examples, use of working memory is well-
3 Consider the famous example of only noticing the clock strike at the third chime, while at the
same time recalling the previous two strokes.
4 Note, however, that attention is quite sensitive to interference. So sustaining a representation in
working memory for an extended period of time is by no means easy.
3. working memory
13

neigh ubiquitous in our mental lives. What I will suggest is that understanding its
nature is the key to understanding the nature of reﬂection and the stream of
consciousness. And that nature turns out to be sensory based.
4. The Sensory-Based Account
Some aspects of the sensory-based model of reﬂection have already been outlined
brieﬂy above. The salient points are summarized here. Further elucidation,
together with both experimental and theoretical support, will be provided in
later chapters.
According to the sensory-based account, conscious reﬂection is grounded in
the use of working memory, which in turn depends on attentional signals
directed at midlevel sensory areas of the brain.5 The latter results in the global
broadcast of the attended-to sensory-based representations, which are thereby
made available to a wide range of systems set up to consume globally broadcast
perceptual representations generally. These consumer systems draw inferences
from the input and give rise to new memories, as well as evaluating and
producing affective responses to the represented objects or events. Some of
these changes may result in shifts of attention, involving representations that
are activated from long-term memory or generated through active rehearsal
processes. When attended to, these enter working memory in turn, replacing or
modifying the previous ones. The upshot is a kind of “virtual global workspace”
in which representations that are grounded in any sensory modality can be
activated and manipulated.
While the contents of working memory are sensory based, they often contain
abstract, amodal, conceptual information bound into them. It should be stressed
that these amodal representations are not merely associated with or causally
linked to the sensory ones, but are bound into them as a result of the same
kind of interactive processing that takes place in perception. As a result, not only
5 Midlevel visual areas receive input from V1 and process the motion, color, and form of a
stimulus, but without yet conceptualizing or categorizing it (which is regarded as high-level vision).
Similar distinctions are applicable in respect of other sensory modalities. There is some dispute
about whether attentional signals directly impact primary sensory areas, such as V1 in the case of
vision (Posner & Gilbert, 1999; Kastner & Pinsk, 2004; Pinsk et al., 2004). I suggest that the impact of
attention on V1 is largely indirect, mediated by back-and-forth processing with midlevel sensory
areas that are the primary direct targets of attentional signals (Prinz, 2012). At any rate, we know
that attentionally modulated V1 activity is not necessary for global broadcasting of visual represen-
tations to occur, since people with complete destruction of V1 can nevertheless have intact visual
imagery (Goldenberg et al., 1995; Bridge et al., 2012). Moreover, we know that deﬁcits in visual
imagery are caused by cortical damage further along in the visual processing stream (Moro et al.,
2008).
14
1. introduction

can one see something as a dog in a single integrated percept, but one can likewise
sustain such a representation in working memory, thereby imagining or remem-
bering a dog. And not only can one hear someone as asking the way to the metro
station, with the content of the request integrated with one’s perception of the
sounds, but one can likewise hear oneself as wondering about the location of the
metro station, in so-called inner speech. Moreover, I will argue that the only way
in which one can think consciously about dogs or metro stations is by tokening
some suitable imagistic representation in working memory, into which the
relevant concepts can be bound.
Since working memory is sensory based, purely amodal attitudes are incapable
of ﬁguring among its contents. So activated beliefs that are entirely amodal in
content, as well as goals, judgments, decisions, and intentions, are incapable of
ﬁguring directly in our conscious reﬂections. Such attitudes operate instead
within the executive component of working memory, causing and directing the
shifts of attention and the mental rehearsals of action that sustain or issue in
changes in the contents of working memory. Hence our amodal attitudes inﬂu-
ence our reﬂections without ever ﬁguring among the contents of reﬂection. It
should be clear that this model is in direct conﬂict with some of the intuitive
views outlined in Section 1, and with the views of many philosophers. Speciﬁcally,
the model denies that all types of propositional attitude are capable of being
conscious, or of ﬁguring in reﬂection.
5. The Road Ahead
The overall form of the argument of this book is an inference to the best
explanation of the preponderance of scientiﬁc data. Many of the individual
chapters, likewise, are constructed around an inference to the best explanation
of the data in a particular domain.
Chapter 2 is about the nature of propositional attitudes. After discussing some
distinctions among kinds of attitude, it reasons by inference to the best explan-
ation to the existence of a set of amodal attitudes. These attitudes possess internal
structure, and are built out of component amodal concepts. The chapter rejects
the view that human thought is entirely sensorimotor in nature, and argues in
favor of a weak form of the language of thought hypothesis (Fodor, 1975). It also
uncovers a puzzling implication of the intuitive view that some amodal attitudes
not only ﬁgure in reﬂection but are under the active control of the agent. This is
that these kinds of attitude must admit of two fundamentally different types:
those that are actions, which are under the control of other attitudes, and those
that are passive, which do the controlling.
5. the road ahead
15

Chapter 3 considers the cognitive and neural mechanisms involved in the
global broadcasting of conscious experience. It argues that attentional signals
directed at midlevel sensory areas of cortex are a necessary condition for global
broadcasting to occur. (Since it will be suggested in Chapter 4 that the same
attentional mechanisms are responsible for maintaining contents in working
memory, this will then provide some reason for believing that working memory
is sensory based.) The chapter also argues (again by inference to the best
explanation) that amodal concepts are often bound into the contents of percep-
tion in the course of normal processing. In consequence, the contents of percep-
tual experience (and of working memory) are generally mixed sensory–amodal
representations, as when we see a colored moving object as a car, or hear the
sounds someone is making as a request for information.
Chapter 4 builds on the foundation of Chapter 3 to argue that the contents of
working memory are always conscious, and that they result from the same
attentional mechanisms that are responsible for conscious forms of perception.
The chapter also considers the relationship between imagery and perception,
arguing that concepts are bound into the contents of working memory images
using the same sorts of interactive processing that occur in perception. The
chapter then argues by inference to the best explanation that the contents of
working memory are always sensory based (and hence cannot contain any
amodal propositional attitudes), while responding to some initial objections.
Chapter 5 takes up a challenge to the argument of Chapter 4. This is that the
data are consistent with the following suggestion: there might be two forms of
global workspace, one amodal and one sensory dependent. Speciﬁcally, it might
be claimed that there is a distinct or partly distinct conscious system in which
amodal attitudes can ﬁgure, which makes strategic use of the sensory-based
working-memory system to support its own operations. (This would then explain
why content-related sensory activity should always be found, even in abstract
reasoning tasks.) But if such a system exists, then one would expect that variance
in its properties across individuals should be responsible for much of the variance
in people’s ﬂuid general intelligence. It is argued, however, that the latter variance
is best explained by properties of the sensory-based working-memory system
(and especially by people’s differential capacities for attentional control), together
with other low-level factors, such as speed of neural processing.
Chapter 6 continues and extends the positive task of using the sensory-based
framework to explain some of the properties of the stream of consciousness.
Speciﬁcally, it argues that all working-memory contents are actively produced,
either through motivated shifts of attention or mental rehearsals of bodily action.
The intuitive distinction between active and passive contents of working memory
16
1. introduction

is illusory. Rather, contents that we intuit as active in nature are ones that occur
while we take ourselves to know why we entertain them, whereas contents
intuited to be passive occur in the absence of any such understanding. In reality,
however, both kinds are just as much under intentional control. These ideas are
then built on to provide an explanation (at least in outline) of the intentional
nature of creativity and mind wandering. The conclusion is that the stream of
consciousness is well explained by the sensory-based framework.
Chapter 7 discusses the empirical literature on human reasoning, and specif-
ically the distinction often drawn between System 1 (intuitive) and System 2
(reﬂective) forms of reasoning. One would think that if evidence of amodal
attitudes ﬁguring in conscious forms of reﬂection existed anywhere, it should
be found here. For reasoning is one of the central uses of reﬂection. In fact,
however, the chapter suggests that System 2 reasoning is best explained as
making use of the sensory-based working-memory system, relying on a general
disposition to engage that system when confronted with problems, together with
explicit beliefs about the appropriate norms to employ when reasoning. Since
working memory is an active system, and is under intentional control, people are
capable of constraining the contents that ﬁgure within it to accord with the
norms they believe they should employ.6
Chapter 8 takes up what may be the central challenge to the sensory-based
account, which is to explain why reﬂection should be sensory based. The chal-
lenge arises because much of the time, when we reﬂect, our thoughts concern
abstract non-sensory properties, such as kinship and friendship relations,
hidden essences, and the mental states of other people. Artiﬁcial intelligence
researchers who have created reasoning systems for dealing with such matters
have not thought to build them in ways that are sensory based. So why should
evolution have done so? In reply I suggest that this fundamental feature of
human cognitive architecture results from constraints provided by ancestral
designs. We could not have evolved an amodal reasoning system for much the
same reason that we could not have evolved a third arm. In support of this
suggestion the chapter reviews what is known about attention and working
memory in mammals and birds, suggesting that the sensory-based system is of
quite ancient provenance. Some potential differences between the human
working-memory system and those possessed by nonhuman animals are also
discussed.
6 This is one of the ways in which human minds can come to differ so dramatically from the
minds of animals, since culturally formulated norms of reasoning can be learned and actively
implemented, with transformative results.
5. the road ahead
17

Chapter 9 pulls together the threads of the argument of the book and provides
a summary of the main points at stake. It concludes with a brief discussion of
some potential philosophical implications and notes some questions for future
research.
6. Conclusion
The goal of this book is to provide an empirically grounded theory of the ways in
which the stream of consciousness is endogenously produced, while arguing that
the stream is always sensory based (as is reﬂection). The book will argue that
although there are, indeed, amodal (non-sensory) propositional attitudes, such
attitudes are never conscious. Rather, in addition to their other roles they are
active in the background of the stream of consciousness, causing and controlling
the latter’s contents.
18
1. introduction

2
Propositional Attitudes
This chapter discusses a number of questions that are, in one way or another,
important for what follows. This is because the topics addressed in this book turn
crucially on the properties that propositional attitudes possess. Sections 1 and 2
characterize and draw distinctions among beliefs, desires, goals, decisions, and
intentions, describing the functional roles of these states in ways that will prove
important for some of the later arguments (especially in Chapters 3, 6, and 7).
Section 3 raises a problem for the intuitively plausible view that some propos-
itional attitudes are both conscious and active in nature, and replies to an
argument intended to provide support for such a thesis. Then Sections 4 and 5
lay out the case for believing in the existence of a set of compositionally
structured, amodal (non-sensory), propositional attitudes. With this thesis in
place we can then begin to ask whether such attitudes are ever conscious.
1. Beliefs and Desires
It is often said that common-sense psychology is founded on the twin pillars of
belief and desire. Indeed, some philosophers have thought that all other attitudes
can be reduced to these two, while others have conﬁned themselves to arguing
that we need to recognize a distinct category of intention (Bratman, 1987, 1999).
The present section will discuss how these two key kinds of state should be
distinguished and individuated, while showing that each fragments into a num-
ber of distinct types.
1.1. Functional role versus direction of ﬁt
Searle (1983) argues that we can use the concept of direction of ﬁt to characterize
attitudes as either belief-like or desire-like (or some combination of the two).
Beliefs have a mind-to-world direction of ﬁt. They are supposed to match the
world, and if there is a mismatch, it is the belief that has gone wrong (is false),
rather than the world. Desires, in contrast, have a world-to-mind direction of ﬁt.
They are (from the perspective of the agent) supposed to get the world to match

them, and if there is a mismatch, it is the world that has gone wrong. If the world
fails to match the mind, then that is because the desire has (as yet) failed to bring
about the relevant change in the world.
These ideas have been built upon by others to argue that propositional
attitudes are essentially normative in nature (Brandom, 1994; Boghossian,
2003). It is said to be essential to beliefs, in particular, that they are supposed to
be true or that they aim at the truth. But such views are by no means mandatory
(Glüer & Wikforss, 2009). Instead, the attitudes can be characterized by their
distinctive functional roles. Beliefs guide actions, whereas desires motivate them.
Roughly speaking, desires get us to move, and beliefs tell us how to move. In fact
both kinds of attitude can be partly characterized through their respective roles in
the so-called “practical reasoning syllogism” (Lewis, 1970): If someone desires
that P, and believes that if Q then P, then that person will (other things being
equal) act so as to bring it about that Q.
Beliefs are true or false, of course. But this need not be construed normatively.
If we take for granted the representational content of belief, then we can say that a
true belief that P is a belief that P when P; and a false belief that P is a belief that
P when not-P. Of course this leaves open the question of how the notion of
content should be characterized in turn. This has been much debated in the
philosophical literature, and a variety of different proposals have been made
(Field, 1977; Loar, 1981; McGinn, 1982; Millikan, 1984; Block, 1986; Papineau,
1987; Dretske, 1988; Fodor, 1990; Botterill & Carruthers, 1999). Discussion of
them would take us too far aﬁeld. For present purposes I propose to treat the
notion of representational content as a conceptual primitive (just as much work
in cognitive science does).
1.2. Kinds of belief
Many people with some knowledge of cognitive science will now accept that the
common-sense category of belief really fractionates into a number of distinct
kinds of state. For among information-bearing propositional states, we know
that episodic memory is different in kind from semantic memory. Knowing
(in the sense of episodically remembering) what took place on one’s last
birthday is very different from knowing (based on the reports of one’s parents)
what happened on one’s ﬁrst birthday. The two forms of knowledge are at least
partly dissociable, since it is possible to lose episodic memory while one’s
semantic memory is largely intact, and only episodic memory depends specif-
ically on the hippocampus (which is an ancient structure shaped like a seahorse
buried beneath the inside of the temporal lobe; see Vargha-Khadem et al., 1997;
Tulving & Markowitsch, 1998).
20
2. propositional attitudes

Moreover, we know that recognition is distinct from recollection. Knowing
which items were presented as part of a previous list, for example, admits of two
different forms. It is generally much easier to recognize items from the list than it
is to recall or generate the items in the list when asked to do so. In addition, each
of these kinds of belief is distinct from what might be called “rote belief,” such as
one’s knowledge of one’s phone number or of the multiplication tables. For this is
really a form of motor memory, stored in the form of abstract motor schemata.
Rote memory can be left undamaged even in cases of severe retrograde amnesia.
Furthermore, all of these sorts of state are different from the commitments that
one has to the truth of various propositions (Frankish, 2004). Someone who
decides, after reﬂection, that the Democrats are best qualiﬁed to govern probably
lacks any semantic memory to that effect (and may soon lose any episodic recall
of the process of reﬂection itself). Rather, what she has is a commitment to think
and act on the assumption that the Democrats are best qualiﬁed. Such states will
be discussed in Chapter 7, where we will consider whether they have the right sort
of functional proﬁle to qualify as a kind of belief (arguing that they do not).
We should also distinguish between two different kinds of judgment-like
event. One comprises activations of existing belief (of any of the various sorts
noted above). The activation of a belief is an event that makes the content of the
belief available to play a role in various forms of reasoning and decision making,
whereas its merely stored, dormant counterpart is causally inert. In addition,
however, there are judgments properly so-called, which are events that tend to
give rise to new beliefs. Judgments can play a role just like that of activated beliefs,
in that they are available to enter into inferences of various sorts and to guide
decision making, but their etiology is different. They are caused not by activating
an existing memory, but rather by accepting what one is told, accepting the
correctness of what one sees or infers, and so forth. They are also apt to give rise
to new standing-state (stored) beliefs of the appropriate sort, and when they do,
they do so immediately, without any need for further reasoning or decision
making.
Finally, we should note the distinction between implicit and explicit beliefs,
which has attracted a good deal of attention recently (Greenwald et al., 2002).
People can harbor an unconscious bias against members of other races, for
example, which can have signiﬁcant effects on their behavior, but which they
consciously (and sincerely) disavow. In this connection it is important to distin-
guish between implicit values and implicit stereotypes, however, since only the
latter are a kind of belief. These dissociate from one another, and issue in distinct
forms of behavior (Amodio & Devine, 2006). Associating black faces with bad
things, and white faces with good things, is different from associating black
1. beliefs and desires
21

people with stereotypical properties. For stereotypes can include features that are
evaluated as good (including athletic), as well as those (such as criminal) that are
experienced as bad. Since implicit stereotypes can generally be recognized at a
conscious level, however (even if they would not be consciously endorsed), it is
unclear that they constitute a distinct kind of belief. Rather, it may be that one
and the same stored structure underlies recognition when the stereotype is
explicitly considered, but can also be activated unconsciously, with subsequent
effects on thought and behavior.
1.3. Kinds of desire
The common-sense category of desire likewise fractionates into distinct kinds.
Among activated (as opposed to standing-state or dormant) desire-like states one
can distinguish a number of different sorts. One is an affective state of positive or
negative valence that inﬂuences choice and decision making. (This manifests itself
as a form of felt desire in cases where it is conscious.) Another is a form of core
unconscious motivation that is apt to issue in action directly unless inhibited by
top-down signals. In addition, both are distinct from active goals that likewise
work unconsciously, especially to sustain activity on a task, to direct attention,
and to inﬂuence the contents of working memory. (Moreover, there is also a
desire-like form of commitment, as we will see in Chapter 7.) The differences
among the ﬁrst two of these kinds of desire will be elaborated here. Discussion of
goals will be held over to Section 2, given their similarity to intentions.
The kind of activated desire that is most familiar to common-sense psychology
is a form of experienced affective state. It is the pleasure that we feel when we
entertain the thought of getting what we want, and the displeasure that we feel
when the thing seems out of reach. It is also the pleasure that we feel when we
consume, or bask in the achievement of, what we want. As with all other affective
states, it has two primary dimensions (Russell, 1980; Barrett, 1998). One is a
bodily and arousal dimension, which can manifest itself in different forms in
different cases (awareness of one’s mouth beginning to ﬂood with saliva as one
looks at a slice of chocolate cake, or awareness of one’s heart beginning to pound
when one approaches a desired partner at a dance). The other is a valence
dimension, which can be either positive or negative. This is at the core of the
motivational and decision-making role of the affective form of desire, and is best
thought of as a nonconceptual representation of the goodness or badness of
whatever one is attending to at the time (Carruthers, 2011a).
It is the affective form of desire (and especially, in my view, its valence
dimension) that plays a critical role in conscious forms of prospective thinking
and reasoning (Gilbert & Wilson, 2007). When one faces a decision (and often
22
2. propositional attitudes

when one does not, but is engaged in prospective mind wandering, ruminating
over possible future options), one imagines the actions or outcomes at stake, and
responds affectively to them. To the extent that they seem good or bad (have
positive or negative valence), they seem attractive or repulsive, and one decides
accordingly. The arousal component of the affective states that one experiences in
prospection may also play a role, of course (Damasio, 1994). If one’s heart begins
to pound while imagining one’s spouse ﬁnding out about a potential inﬁdelity,
one may take this as a signal that such an outcome would be especially bad. But
for the most part it is the seeming badness of that outcome (its overall negative
valence) that is apt to inﬂuence one’s decision.
Note that prospective reasoning of this sort crucially implicates the resources
of working memory. When examining an option for action one mentally
rehearses it or constructs a representation of the action using components
drawn from episodic memory (or, more commonly, both). As we will see,
attending to the sensory aspects of these representations causes those represen-
tations to be globally broadcast. This leads them to interact with the mechanisms
that process reward and punishment, which are for the most part buried deep in
subcortical parts of the brain in the basal ganglia (see Figure 3), including the
amygdala, nucleus accumbens, and ventral pallidum. The latter set in train bodily
changes appropriate for the kinds of value they compute (this is the arousal
component of affect). If attended to, some of these changes, too, can be globally
broadcast. But the reward mechanisms also project signals of positive or negative
value (that is, valence) to multiple cortical sites, but including orbitofrontal cortex
where they become a component of the conscious experience of whatever is at the
focus of one’s attention at the time (see Figure 3).
While valence plays a critical role in conscious forms of prospective reasoning,
we also know that representations of value have an unconscious impact at many
different levels of cognition. During the course of visual processing of a stimulus
or scene, for example, valence is simultaneously computed and inﬂuences the
extent and manner of processing at quite early stages, as well as at later ones
(Barrett & Bar, 2009; Pessoa, 2013). For example, it is possible to discern the
effects of the learned values of various stimuli as early as primary visual cortex
(Shuler & Bear, 2006; Thompson-Schill, 2013), presumably resulting from the
fact that stimuli of known positive or negative value are processed more deeply
than those that are evaluatively neutral.
The reward and punishment systems that create affect also often activate
motor representations of various sorts, which may need to be suppressed if
the action is not to be performed. This is most obvious in connection with
emotional forms of affective state, where different basic emotions tend to cause
1. beliefs and desires
23

emotion-speciﬁc behavioral reactions (smiling, in the case of happiness; frown-
ing, in the case of anger; withdrawing, in the case of fear; and so on). But positive
and negative affective desires, too, are accompanied by a disposition to approach
or retreat from the object of desire (Centerbar & Clore, 2006). There is evidence
that this behavior-causing role of the reward and punishment systems can come
apart from the affect-causing one (Berridge & Kringelbach, 2008). Thus certain
sorts of direct stimulation of those systems can produce urges to act in the absence
of pleasure or any anticipation of pleasure. And the same is true of some addictions
and various kinds of compulsive behavior. Hence we should probably regard affect,
on the one hand, and direct behavioral motivation, on the other, as distinct forms
of activated desire (albeit caused by the same underlying evaluative mechanisms).
What matters more for our purposes, however, is that there is a third kind of
desire-like state that is distinct from either of the other two. These are goals,
which are formed as a result of evaluative and decision-making processes, both
conscious and unconscious. For example, when a participant in an experiment is
asked to write a persuasive essay on a counter-attitudinal topic, this request is
evaluated in the light of various background values (to be cooperative, to do what
one has already agreed to, to avoid confrontation, and so on). As a result, the
person forms the goal of writing such an essay. This remains activated and
operative throughout the experiment, continuing to exist despite distraction or
interruption, motivating choices and actions in pursuit of the goal. Moreover, it
does so without the need for further evaluative or affective processing. As we will
see, it is goals, especially, that control and direct the attentional processes that
keep one focused on a task in the face of distractions. Whereas affective forms of
desire involve orbitofrontal cortex as well as other regions down the midline of
the brain, goals depend on activity in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, especially
those regions that routinely show up in working-memory tasks. (See Figure 2.)
Many of the various distinctions drawn here in Section 1 will be relied on at
later stages in the book. But one point that is especially important concerns the
functional role of novel judgments. This is that such judgments normally give rise
to standing beliefs (long-term memories) immediately, without any need for
further inferences or decision making of any sort. This point will prove important
when discussing what I call “sensorily embedded judgments” in Chapters 3 and 4,
and again when discussing so-called “System 2 judgments” in Chapter 7.
2. Goals, Decisions, and Intentions
While goals are like desires in some respects, they also share much of the
functional proﬁle of intentions. For the latter, too, motivate action without any
24
2. propositional attitudes

need for evaluative or affective processing (Bratman, 1987, 1999). Indeed, goals
could plausibly be thought of as a kind of intention. But they can be much more
abstract and indeterminate than intentions generally are. One can have the goal
of succeeding, for example, or of being creative, without there being any action or
task in particular that is targeted for success or creativity. I will discuss intentions
ﬁrst, before returning to consider the nature of goals.
2.1. On intention
Intentions are the immediate products of decisions (although I will argue that
some intentions cause decisions in turn). First we reason about what to do, then
we decide. For example, having thought about what to do on Saturday, one takes
a decision to go hiking. The decision itself is a momentary event. Yet it gives rise
to a standing intention to go hiking on Saturday. This motivates the correspond-
ing action, but it can also motivate further reasoning about the best way to
implement the intention. (Where to go? When to set out? And so forth.) As
Bratman (1987) argues, however, the intention can issue in hiking-behavior
without any further evaluative or affective reasoning needing to take place (if,
for example, the time and place for one’s hikes is habitual).
One should distinguish between decisions (and the corresponding intentions)
for the here-and-now and decisions (and intentions) for the future. Suppose the
room is hot, and one decides to open a window. The decision will normally give
rise to an intention that issues in action immediately. But the intention (unlike
the decision) continues to exist throughout the process of acting, ﬂexibly guiding
its implementation as one walks toward the window, avoiding obstacles along the
way, and grasps the handles in some appropriate way. Here the intention should
probably be thought of as an abstract motor plan of some sort, which is both
created and activated by the decision in question.1
Intentions for the future work somewhat differently. Suppose one reasons that
the house will get too hot if the windows remain open throughout the day, and
one decides to close them later in the morning. Here again the decision creates an
intention (probably in the form of an abstract motor plan), but this time the
intention is stored in memory. As is familiar to all of us, it is easy for such
intentions to be forgotten, and so never implemented. Moreover, even when
something jogs one’s memory and the intention becomes activated, initiation of
action is by no means automatic. This is because the conditions for the execution
of the intention have been left vague or unspeciﬁed. As a result, one ﬁrst needs to
1 This point about decisions for the here-and-now will prove important in Chapter 7, when we
discuss so-called “System 2 decisions.”
2. goals, decisions, and intentions
25

reason that the time for doing what one intends is now, issuing in a decision to
do it now. This is, of course, the root of the familiar problem of procrastination:
one fully intends to do something, but whenever one recalls the intention one
judges that the time for acting is not now (generally because of countervailing
motivations, such as that the action in question requires effort). Notice, how-
ever, that one’s reasoning in such cases doesn’t generally challenge the original
decision. That, and the corresponding intention, can remain untouched. What
one reasons about is only whether or not to do what one intends now, or in
these circumstances.2
It is possible, however, to form intentions for the future that are fully speciﬁc
about the time or circumstances for action. One might, for example, decide that
one will close the windows when one hears the clock strike twelve, or immedi-
ately before one sits down to lunch. In the empirical literature these are referred
to as “implementation intentions” (Gollwitzer & Sheeran, 2006). Forming inten-
tions of this sort makes it much more likely that one will act in the way that one
has decided. This is because if the intention becomes activated by a recognition
that the implementing condition now obtains (for example, one hears the clock
strike twelve), it thereby becomes transformed into an intention for the here-and-
now. In consequence, the resulting intention will generally lead to action auto-
matically, unless something happens to make one reconsider one’s original
decision. (For example, one sees that the day has clouded over and the weather
remains cool.)
2.2. Goals
In much of the scientiﬁc literature the language of “goal” and “intention” is used
inter-changeably. (In cases where the distinction isn’t relevant, I will do the
same.) Thus one could be said to have the goal of opening the window as well
as the intention of opening the window. But among the class of states that are
created by decisions and that motivate action independently of further affective
or evaluative reasoning, it is possible to distinguish between those whose contents
specify an action of some sort, and those that specify objects or states of affairs. It
can sound strange to say that someone has the intention of being wealthy, or the
intention of being a property-owner. For being wealthy or owning a house are not
things that one does. One can, however, have the goal of being wealthy, or the goal
of being a home-owner. Such states operate at a more abstract level than normal
intentions. Although they do not motivate any speciﬁc form of action, they can
motivate reasoning and decision making designed to achieve the goal. Given the
2 This point, too, will prove important in Chapter 7.
26
2. propositional attitudes

goal of being a home-owner, for example, one might decide to open a savings
account to accumulate the necessary deposit, or decide to check on one’s credit
rating.
In this respect goals are desire-like. Just as one can have the goal of being a
home-owner, so one can want to be a home-owner. Moreover, unlike intentions,
goals are not stored and activated in the form of abstract motor plans. But unlike
desires, they generally result from prior decisions. Moreover, even when activated
they need not involve affective states of any sort, unlike paradigmatic cases of
activated desire. In these respects goals are more intention-like. Often, however,
goals can be deeply embedded among one’s values and evaluative dispositions, in
such a way that any perceived threat to one’s goals will issue in an affective
reaction. If one is told that one’s credit rating is too poor for one to qualify for a
mortgage, for example, the threat to one’s goal of being a home-owner is likely to
result in one experiencing disappointment. In this respect goals are like desires
(obviously), but are also similar to intentions. For if one learns that the park
where one had intended to go hiking is closed because of wildﬁres then this, too,
will be apt to cause one some distress.
With these distinctions now behind us, we will turn, in Section 3, to consider
another contrast among kinds of propositional attitude. This is the distinction
between active and passive components of the stream of consciousness, which is
often made by philosophers when analyzing our common-sense view of con-
scious reﬂection. Before doing so, however, it is worth emphasizing that nothing
in our characterization of the various types of propositional attitude discussed in
Sections 1 and 2 requires that instances of those types be conscious. Indeed, most
people will now accept that there can be unconscious beliefs, desires, decisions,
goals, and intentions. In fact, given our earlier characterizations, it can be an open
question whether propositional attitudes are ever conscious. I propose to argue
that (in the case of amodal attitudes) they are not.3
3. Active versus Passive: A Problem
Intuitively, reﬂection seems to contain both active and passive attitude events. It
seems that judging and deciding are things that we do in reﬂection, whereas we
are passive in the face of the memory of a popular jingle that keeps interrupting
our thoughts. The present section will outline some difﬁculties with this idea,
3 Notice that if one were to insist that amodal propositional attitudes like decisions are necessarily
conscious, then my conclusion would need to become more radical. It would have to be that there
are no such things as amodal attitudes, so understood.
3. active versus passive: a problem
27

before criticizing an argument that might be supposed to support it. Chapter 6
will argue, in contrast, that all forms of reﬂection are active in nature. Yet all of
the events that occur in the stream of consciousness are sensory based. And while
some of our propositional attitudes can be inﬂuenced or caused by the activity of
reﬂection, they are not themselves active in nature. Put differently: I will argue
that any control that we exert over our attitudes is indirect and mediated by other
mental events. In fact the sensory-based mental actions that constitute reﬂection
stand to our attitudes, at best, somewhat like the action of strangling someone
stands to his death. Although the strangling is an action (and although the entire
sequence can be described as an action of killing), the person’s death is not an
action; it is not something we do, but is the result of what we do.
3.1. Two kinds of amodal attitude
People committed to some version of the idea of an amodal (non-sensory) central
workspace in which attitudes of all sorts can be activated will generally endorse
the common-sense distinction between active and passive forms of reﬂection, as
do McDowell (1994) and Peacocke (2008).4 While sometimes the stream of
consciousness seems to us to be active and under our control, at other times
contents enter our minds unbidden, and our thoughts can meander aimlessly.
But both sets of attitudes are conscious, however, ﬁguring in the stream of
consciousness. It is important to see that anyone endorsing this distinction will
also need to postulate a set of attitudes that are both passive and unconscious. For
by being committed to a set of reﬂective attitudes that are active in nature, one
must also think that there is a second set of attitudes that exists in the back-
ground, outside of reﬂection, while serving to control and motivate the active
attitudes. On pain of vicious regress, if some reﬂective attitudes are under one’s
intentional control, then there must also be attitudes (namely, the ones that exert
that control) that are not themselves controlled (Arpaly & Schroeder, 2012;
Kornblith, 2012).
The intuitive account of the stream of consciousness thus requires three types
of amodal attitude: (1) those that are active in nature and conscious; (2) those
that are passive and conscious; and (3) those that are passive and unconscious
(needed to explain the active status of those in the ﬁrst group). The distinction
between types (2) and (3) is easy enough to explain, at least in outline. These can
4 Note that there are two distinct contrasts in play here. For an attitude to be activated means that
it is now playing a causal role of some sort in ongoing cognitive processes (in contrast with standing
attitudes, or stored attitudes, which are not). For an attitude to be an active one, on the other hand,
means that it is an action of some sort. It is a product of practical reasoning and results from a
decision (in contrast with attitudes that are passive, which are not so caused).
28
2. propositional attitudes

be the very same kinds of attitude, distinguished only by their relationship to
whatever is required by one’s favored theory of access-consciousness. The dis-
tinction between type (1) and the others is much more problematic, however. For
it needs to be explained how the same kinds of propositional attitude (judgments,
say, or decisions) can admit of both active and passive varieties. The problem is
that the causal etiology of those attitudes in the two cases will be quite different.
Why, then, should we regard them as being of the same kind? For attitudes are
generally thought to be distinguished from one another (at least in part) by their
functional roles.
Consider what happens when one judges (passively) the truth of a new
proposition and forms a new belief in consequence. Various kinds of information
are integrated, and the proposition in question may be checked for consistency
with the most relevant among one’s existing beliefs, before it is accepted and
stored in long-term memory. For example, suppose that one reads in a newspaper
article that the pace of global temperature rise has slowed over the last decade.
Given one’s tacit belief in the authority of the source and the fact that no
conﬂicting beliefs are activated as one reads, one unreﬂectively accepts what
one has read, and thereafter believes that global warming is slowing. The event
in question (judging the truth of a proposition) has a distinctive functional role.
Its causal etiology includes information from the world (and from memory,
where relevant). And its normal causal consequence is storage in long-term
memory, as well as availability of the proposition in question to guide action
(such as answering a question about the pace of global warming).
Now consider what supposedly happens when one makes the same judgment
actively and reﬂectively, on the assumption that the event in question is an
amodal one. If the judgment is an action, then it must result from a process of
practical reasoning (presumably unconscious). This will involve interactions
among incoming information, existing beliefs, and desires or goals. Reading the
newspaper article must unconsciously activate a motivating state of some sort,
such as the goal of believing only what is true. This interacts unconsciously with
the belief that the writer is a trustworthy source to issue in an unconscious
decision to believe that the pace of global warming has slowed. This decision, in
turn, issues in a conscious action of judging the proposition to be true, which is
apt to cause it to be stored in long-term memory and become available to inform
future action.5 (Note that all that need happen at a conscious level in a case of this
5 It is controversial whether or not one can believe at will (in the absence of evidence, or contrary
to the evidence), and some have argued that this is impossible (Williams, 1973). It is much less
controversial that one can decide to believe something based on one’s evaluation of the evidence.
3. active versus passive: a problem
29

sort is that one thinks to oneself, “Hmm . . . should I believe this?” and then
judges—apparently actively—that one should. The underlying reasoning that is
necessary to secure the active status of the concluding judgment remains
unconscious.)
Notice that the causal etiology of what are (allegedly) two types of judgment
are quite different in these two cases. In the passive case, information from the
world that meets some set of standards issues in belief directly. In the active case
it only does so indirectly, interacting with some or other motivational state and
entering into a process of practical reasoning, before issuing in a decision to
undertake the act of judging. Given these differences, there is a strong case for
thinking that we are dealing here with two different types of attitude, rather than
with passive and active varieties of the same attitude.
It might be replied that despite the differences in etiology, it is sufﬁcient for the
two states to count as kinds of judgment that they both issue in long-term
memories and in the availability of the information in question for future
planning. In fact, however, it is quite unclear why one should prioritize the effects
of a state over its causes when individuating functional kinds, especially if one is
asked to ignore differences in causes altogether. But in any case the ways in which
the two states issue in long-term storage are also different. It is surely one thing
for information to be received and stored (the passive case). And it is quite
another thing for an action to issue in the same result. The processes in question
must be distinct, even if the upshot is the same.
There are two separable problems for the standard account of reﬂection that
arise out of these points. One is conceptual. It is a challenge to justify classifying
both passive and active attitudes as belonging to the same kinds, despite their
differences in functional role. The other is more empirical. It is that we are
required to postulate two quite different sets of processes involving amodal
attitudes, underlain, presumably, by distinct mechanisms. The sensory-based
account of reﬂection to be developed in this book, in contrast, will treat all of
the sensory-based contents of reﬂection as equally under active control, created
by motivated shifts of attention or mental rehearsals of action. The attitudes that
do the controlling, on the other hand, are all equally passive in nature. This point
will be developed at length in Chapter 6.
3.2. Knowledge of active attitudes
It is sometimes thought that by accepting that some or all of the amodal attitudes
that ﬁgure in reﬂection are active in nature, we can at the same time explain how
such attitudes can be known. For philosophers often suppose that we have direct
non-inferential knowledge of our own actions (Anscombe, 1957). If amodal
30
2. propositional attitudes

attitudes are actions, then it can be argued that the beneﬁt will be a unifying
account of self-knowledge that embraces both. And this might then be a reason
for believing in the active status of the amodal attitudes that ﬁgure in reﬂection,
invoking an inference to the best explanation.
Notice, ﬁrst, that there will be no particular gain, here, if one also accepts that
some of the attitudes that ﬁgure in the stream of consciousness can be passive in
nature. For that would still leave us needing to appeal to two distinct mechanisms
of self-knowledge—one for actions, and one for passive attitudes. But let us set
this point to one side. For it would always be possible for someone to claim that
the passive events that ﬁgure in the stream of consciousness (such as ideas that
seemingly appear out of nowhere, or thoughts that seem to force themselves on
us unwillingly) are not really attitudes, but mere sensory-based phenomena of
one sort or another (visual and auditory imagery, and so on).
Peacocke (2008) mounts just such an argument for the active status of amodal
attitudes. He argues, ﬁrst, that we do have direct non-inferential knowledge of
our bodily actions. And he argues, second, that we have knowledge of our active
attitudes in the same way, via the “corollary discharge” that all actions produce.
Carruthers (2009a, 2011a) provides an extended critique of both claims. The
evidence Peacocke adduces for thinking that we have direct knowledge of our
own actions does not really support this view. Rather, it can equally well be
explained in terms of the afferent feedback produced by our actions together with
the motor images (sensory “forward models”) that our motor instructions create.
Moreover, the claim that we are aware of our active attitudes via their corollary
discharge makes little sense. For the latter is a copy of the motor instructions sent
to the muscles to initiate movement. And whatever else might be true of events of
judging or deciding, they surely involve no such thing.
For arguments in defense of these claims, readers are directed to Carruthers
(2009a, 2011a). Here I want only to emphasize the conclusion they support:
namely, that there is no sound argument for believing in the active nature of
(some or all) amodal attitudes from the beneﬁts thereby provided for a theory of
self-knowledge.
4. The Case for Amodal Attitudes
It is implicit in the discussion of this chapter so far that most attitudes are not,
themselves, sensory or sensory-involving states or events. If this is true, and yet it
is also true that reﬂection is sensory based (as this book will argue), then the idea
that all kinds of attitude can ﬁgure in reﬂection will have been decisively
undermined. The present section will elaborate and defend the assumption that
4. the case for amodal attitudes
31

most attitudes are amodal, drawing on the relevant empirical literature. It will at
the same time argue against so-called “sensorimotor” accounts of cognition,
which maintain that all representation in the brain is modality speciﬁc
(Barsalou, 1999; Prinz, 2002).
It is certainly intuitive that many types of attitude are amodal, without sensory
components.6 We think that suppositions, semantic memories, judgments, goals,
hopes, decisions, and intentions are amodal attitude events. Each might some-
times be accompanied by sensory activity of one sort or another, such as visual
imagery or inner speech. But we think that this activity is either associated with or
expresses the attitude events that accompany them. Even when a decision-like
sentence such as, “I’ll leave for the bus now” is tokened in inner speech, this is
experienced as expressing a decision that is distinct from the speech event itself. It
is not experienced as constituting, or even partially constituting, such an event.
We no more think (nor should we think) that the words that ﬁgure in inner
speech are constitutive of judging, deciding, and the rest, than we think such
words spoken aloud (by oneself or by another person) constitute such attitudes.
These intuitive views are correct, in my view. I will argue that concepts and
most of the attitudes they compose are amodal representational states that can be
in one way or another associated with sensory activity without being even
partially constituted by such activity. Indeed, I will argue that amodal forms of
representation are a long-standing evolutionary adaptation, widespread in the
animal kingdom, which may have evolved initially to facilitate cross-modal forms
of learning and ﬂexible types of inference.
4.1. Sensorimotor concepts?
It might seem that the hardest cases for sensorimotor theories to explain are
abstract concepts like justice, democracy, and so on; and no doubt many philo-
sophers dismiss such accounts on this basis. But these are uniquely human
concepts. So it is open to sensorimotor theorists to claim that they are constituted
by links among linguistic words (which are themselves sensorimotor representa-
tions, on this view). Hence the word “democracy” is linked to “vote,” which in
turn might evoke sensorimotor images of voting or of a polling booth, and so on.
Accordingly, I will focus on concepts that humans share with other animals.7
6 Exceptions would include episodic memories, which are generally partly sensory in nature, and
felt desires and emotions, which have an experiential component. Moreover, one can distinguish two
different varieties of the attitude of imagining, one of which is propositional, but the other of which
is sensory, involving visual or other forms of imagery.
7 Some philosophers will object that animals lack concepts altogether, on the grounds that their
representations fail to satisfy the “generality constraint” (Dummett, 1991; Brandom, 1994;
32
2. propositional attitudes

Consider concepts that designate individual agents. Humans and many other
social animals (including all other species of primate) can recognize familiar
individuals through more than one sense modality. We might recognize someone
visually from her facial appearance or distinctive gait; or we might recognize her
voice or the sound of her steps. (Occasionally we might recognize someone by
smell; this will be much more common among other animals, whose sense of
smell is by no means as weak as ours.) And of course, information about an
individual acquired through one sense modality is immediately available when
the person is identiﬁed through the other. If someone describes to me over the
phone where she lives (auditory presentation), then I will not be surprised to see
her face when I knock on the door of that house some days later (visual
presentation). It is natural to model this in terms of individual folders or ﬁles
of information, headed by an amodal ﬁle-locator. That is, one has an amodal
concept containing links to all the information we possess about the person. This
concept can be activated by either visual or auditory representations of the
individual, and can be retrieved from memory for purposes of inference.
It might be replied that an amodal concept of the individual isn’t necessary.
Rather, information acquired about a person when visually presented will be
stored linked to that visual representation, and information acquired when the
person is identiﬁed through hearing will be stored linked to the sound of her
voice. But because the visual and auditory representations of her are linked to one
another, stored information that is attached to the one can be activated by
activation of the other, by means of a sort of transitive inference (Barsalou,
1999). Note that on this account there is no single representation of an individual.
Rather, the individual is represented by the entire network of sensorimotor
information about her.8
McDowell, 1994; Bermúdez, 2003; Hurley, 2006; Beck, 2012). This maintains that genuine concept-
users should be capable of understanding all possible combinations of the concepts they possess
(Evans, 1982). I have argued elsewhere that this constraint is ill-conceived (Carruthers, 2009b). All
that really matters is that concepts should be capable of combining with some others in compos-
itionally structured thoughts. But even if one were to insist that representations meeting only this
weaker constraint are mere proto-concepts, rather than concepts proper, the strategy of the present
section need not be affected. Whether the representations in question are concepts or proto-
concepts, what matters for our purposes is that many of them are amodal in nature.
8 Notice that one could express this view by saying that one’s concept of the individual is a multi-
modal one (rather than either modal or amodal), with that concept being realized in a distributed
manner across a number of different modality-speciﬁc representations together with the causal links
between them. An amodal concept of the individual, in contrast, will be a unitary representation,
which may have causal links to modality-speciﬁc representations and processes without being
constituted by such links.
4. the case for amodal attitudes
33

But now the account faces the problem that this entire network needs to be
activated every time one entertains a thought about that individual. Not only
would a cognitive system that operated in this way be extraordinarily inefﬁcient,
but it is quite hard to see how an entire active network of this sort could enter into
inferences. This is a problem that Prinz (2002) recognizes. In response, he
proposes that on each occasion when one thinks about someone, one employs
a sensory proxy for the entire network of information that represents her. On one
occasion, for example, it might be a memory image of the sound of her voice, on
another occasion a visual image of her house, and on yet another a visual image of
her dog. But now this suggestion faces problems of its own: what makes a sensory
proxy a representation of the person, rather than simply an image of her voice, or
house, or dog? Indeed, most of the information contained in the network that
represents a given individual will also ﬁgure in other networks. The person’s
house, for example, may be linked not just to other information about that
person, but might also be a useful landmark on one’s way to a rarely used bus
stop. If one entertains an image of that house, then what determines that one is
thinking of the person rather than thinking of the bus stop?
This is, in fact, a long-standing problem for concept-empiricists who try to
account for concepts in terms of sensorimotor images. Thus Berkeley (1710)
famously noted the problem of using an image to think about triangles in general,
given that any image one might form would be an image of a particular type of
triangle. Berkeley’s own solution was that one is thinking about triangles in
general if one uses the image of a particular triangle in the right way, so that
nothing in the inferences one draws from it depends upon its speciﬁc properties,
but only on the fact that it is a triangle. But of course this could only work if the
inferential mechanisms involved could somehow “know” that the image in
question was supposed to be an image of triangles in general rather than an
image of (say) an isosceles triangle. Seen from the perspective of contemporary
cognitive science, this looks very much like an appeal to magic.
Moreover, Mahon & Caramazza (2008) review the empirical evidence that is
thought to support sensorimotor accounts of concepts, and conclude that it can
equally well be explained by supposing that concepts have a central amodal
representation, but that activation ﬂows associatively between amodal concepts
and linked sensory and motor representations. (Note that something like this is
what one might predict from the “object ﬁle” account of concepts sketched
above.) They also point out that the neuropsychological evidence supports the
latter view. For there are patients with apraxia who are impaired in their use of
common tools like a hammer, which cannot be explained in terms of any general
motor impairment, but who are nevertheless normal in recognizing and
34
2. propositional attitudes

describing the function of those tools, as well as in recognizing their pantomimed
use. There are also patients with the reverse impairment: who can pantomime the
use of a hammer, but who cannot recognize one. Intuitively, both sets of patients
still retain the concept HAMMER,9 in which case that concept cannot be constituted
by sensorimotor links.
4.2. Social concepts
Additional limitations of the sensorimotor account of concepts emerge when we
consider cases where inferences are drawn about an individual. For many of the
inferences that humans and other primates make concern abstract relationships
that would be hard to represent and reason about in sensory terms. I will
illustrate the point using inferences about dominance hierarchies in baboons.
Cheney & Seyfarth (2007) show that baboons have rich social knowledge of the
individuals in their group and the relationships among them. In particular, they
know the dominance hierarchy of all the female members of the group, which is
organized by matrilines. All the females in family A (mother, daughters, and
sometimes granddaughters) will be ranked relative to one another, and all are
ranked above the females in family B, who in turn rank above the females in
family C, and so on. These rankings are generally quite stable, but occasionally
reversals of rank occur. When they do, all members of a family shift up or down
together (maintaining their relative rank), even if the reversal initially only
concerned one individual from each family. For example, if female number 3
from family B defeats female number 5 from family A, thereafter all the members
of group B will rank above all the members of group A. We know experimentally,
using spliced-together auditory recordings of the members of the troop, that if a
baboon overhears such a reversal (for example, a threat-scream from a member
of group B followed by a submissive shriek from a member of group A), then she
will expect a female from A to give way to a baboon from B when she next
encounters any members of groups A and B together.
It is quite hard to see how baboons could make these inferences if they had
access only to modality-speciﬁc representations. For then each individual’s
knowledge of the social structure would consist in a complex web of sensory
memories and expectations, linking all the females in the troop on a pair-wise
basis in visual, auditory, and olfactory modalities. Yet the observed reversal of
rank would somehow have to bring about a systematic shift in these expectations.
Hearing female 3 from family B defeat female 5 from family A, she would then
9 Throughout I use small capitals when designating mental representations that are the primary
bearers of content, and italic to designate those contents themselves.
4. the case for amodal attitudes
35

need to erase her previous expectation that if female 2 from family A issues a
threat-grunt, female 4 from family B will move aside, replacing it with an
expectation (represented separately in all three modalities) of the reverse. It is
puzzling what principles of inference could lead to such a change, and even more
puzzling how a great many pair-wise sensory-based expectations could alter
likewise, and following just a single exposure.
Cheney & Seyfarth (2007) argue for a much more plausible view. They suggest
that each baboon’s knowledge of social relationships is stored in the form of an
amodal hierarchically organized tree-structure, which on one level represents the
dominance rank of each individual in the troupe, but on another level represents
the dominance rank of each family. Then when a female from a lower-ranking
group defeats one from a higher-ranking one, the nodes representing those two
families are reversed, with the resulting change in the dominance rank of each
individual following automatically from that shift. Here we see displayed one of
the major advantages of abstract, amodal, representations: they simplify and
facilitate inference.
Note that a dominance hierarchy is not itself directly observable. One would
also expect to ﬁnd amodal representations in any other domain that deals with
unobservables. Consider the mindreading capacities of human one-year-old
infants, for example. There is now robust evidence that infants represent the
goals, beliefs, and intentions of other agents, and form expectations about the
behavior of other people accordingly (Carruthers, 2013a). Some theorists have
tried to argue that they might instead be relying on a distributed multimodal
system linking visual, auditory, and other sensory representations of the behavior
and circumstances of other agents with sensory representations of expected
outcomes (Povinelli & Vonk, 2004; Perner, 2010). But on closer examination it
is quite implausible that such a system could achieve the ﬂexibility that we
already observe in human infants (Carruthers, 2013a). Rather, the evidence
suggests that humans possess amodal representations of the mental states of
other agents, which are computed on the basis of observations of behavior and
circumstances. Moreover, these representations serve as the basis for generating
novel predictions, as we will see in Section 5. Furthermore, the evidence suggests
that a simpler version of such a system, at least, is likewise present in other species
of primate (Fletcher & Carruthers, 2013).
4.3. Number concepts
Perhaps the clearest, and most heavily studied, domain of amodal representation
concerns number (Dehaene, 1997). We now know that there are representations
of approximate numerosity in human adults, infants, and many other species of
36
2. propositional attitudes

animal. For example, Jordan et al. (2008) show that monkeys can match the
numerosity of sets across modalities, judging that an array of squares contains
approximately the same number of items as a previously presented sequence of
tones, for instance. This suggests quite strongly that monkeys have amodal
representations of numerosity onto which are mapped representations received
from the various sense modalities. Izard et al. (2009) demonstrate essentially the
same result with newborn human infants. Similarly, Barth et al. (2003) show that
human adults are no slower, and no less accurate, when comparing the numer-
osity of large swiftly presented sets across stimulus modalities than they are when
judging numerosity within a single sense modality. Again this suggests that
numerical stimuli in different sense modalities are mapped to amodal repre-
sentations of number for judgment and comparison, rather than compared in
modality-speciﬁc format.
As before, the beneﬁts of amodal representations of numerosity can be seen
most clearly when they are employed in inference. We know experimentally that
many species can add and subtract approximate numbers, for example (Jordan
et al., 2008). And although we don’t yet have the same sort of controlled experi-
mental data to demonstrate multiplication and division, the evidence suggests
quite strongly that many species are capable of these manipulations also. We
know that rats and other animals, for instance, are excellent at judging rates of
return from differing food sources (Gallistel et al., 2001), and a rate is quantity
per unit of time—that is to say, total quantity received divided by time elapsed.
Moreover, we also know that mice are excellent at judging risk (Balci et al., 2009),
and one might think that the natural way to estimate risk in an ongoing sequence
of events would be to periodically divide the total number of negative outcomes
in an interval of time by the total number of trials. It is quite hard to imagine
how any of these calculations could be effected using modality-speciﬁc
representations.
4.4. Action concepts
Thus far the empirical case in support of amodal concepts and attitudes has been
mostly presumptive. It has taken the form: how else could humans and other
animals do what they are manifestly capable of doing? But there is also direct
evidence against sensorimotor views, drawn especially from the domain of action
concepts. In fact, even action concepts seem to be realized abstractly outside of
sensorimotor cortices, despite the fact that they would be ideal for sensorimotor
representation (or so one might think).
Bedny & Caramazza (2011) review the evidence of sensorimotor involvement
in action-verb understanding and ﬁnd little that is convincing. They note that
4. the case for amodal attitudes
37

some studies have seemed to show activity in motion-processing visual area MT
when people comprehend motion verbs, suggesting that visual representations
are constitutive of our understanding of motion concepts. However, later, more
ﬁne-grained investigations have shown that it is actually a region just anterior to
MT called the medial temporal gyrus that is activated. In fact primary visual
motion areas like MT and the superior temporal sulcus fail to respond speciﬁcally
to action verbs (compared with nouns). And likewise, neither premotor nor
primary motor cortex seems to play any role in action-verb understanding.10
Indeed, the one region of cortex that does seem to be speciﬁcally involved in
action-verb understanding is an amodal area, rather than a sensory or motor one,
which is equally strongly activated by amodal action verbs like “think” or
“decide.” This is the left medial temporal gyrus.
Moreover, sensorimotor accounts of concepts (including action concepts)
make a clear prediction with respect to people who are congenitally blind.
Since such people lack visual access to actions, their action concepts should be
differently represented in the brain. And one would expect, too, that there should
be differences in the semantic properties of their concepts. But neither prediction
turns out to be correct (Bedny et al., 2012). The semantic judgments of blind
people are indistinguishable from those of sighted people (even with respect to
their understanding of visual verbs like “glance,” “peer,” “ﬂash,” “glow,” and so
on). And the left medial temporal gyrus responds in just the same way to action
verbs in both sighted and congenitally blind people, whether those verbs are high
in motion properties (like “jump”) or low in such properties (like “think”).
Overall, the evidence suggests that action concepts are abstract amodal repre-
sentations that lack either sensory or motor components.
4.5. The extent of amodal representation
How widespread are amodal forms of representation in the animal kingdom?
One might expect to ﬁnd them wherever animals need to learn about the same
phenomena through two or more sense modalities. This is because of the way
in which amodal representations can facilitate the inferences that need to be
drawn from the acquired information. Bees, for example, need to learn the
locations of various items and substances in their environment, doing so both
from their own calculations of distance and direction when in ﬂight (using the
10 Admittedly, some regions of premotor cortex seem to respond to sentence-length descriptions
of actions. But Bedny & Caramazza (2011) argue that this is best understood in terms of those
regions’ contribution to the construction of motor imagery that accompanies understanding without
constituting it.
38
2. propositional attitudes

visual modality) and from observations of the dances of other bees (using their
tactile and proprioceptive modalities while on the inner walls of the hive in the
dark). Recent experimental work shows that from these sources bees build a
map-like representation of the relative locations of places around the hive, and
that they are able to calculate novel vectors when navigating, integrating
information learned through one sense modality with information acquired
from another (Menzel et al., 2005, 2011; Menzel and Giurfa, 2006).
Indeed, it seems that bees, and perhaps many other organisms, often encode
information at the most abstract level of representation available to them,
presumably to facilitate generalization across different sensory modes of presen-
tation. Thus bees who are trained to turn right at the second gateway of a maze if
it displays the same color as was displayed at the ﬁrst gate (turning left if the
colors displayed are different) will spontaneously generalize so as to turn right at
the second gateway if it is marked with the same odor that also marked the ﬁrst
(Giurfa et al., 2001). They therefore seem to have encoded the initial learning
trials in terms of the amodal concepts SAME and DIFFERENT. (See Wallis et al., 2001,
for similar ﬁndings with monkeys.)
I conclude, then, that one aspect of our intuitive beliefs about the nature of
thought is correct. Many attitudes are amodal events, constructed out of amodal
concepts. Hence if reﬂection turns out to be sensory dependent, as the present
book will argue, it will follow that the attitudes in question cannot, themselves,
ﬁgure among the contents of reﬂection (nor in the stream of consciousness more
generally).
5. The Case for Structured Attitudes
Sensorimotor theorists do not deny that propositional attitudes exist; they just
maintain that they are structured out of sensorimotor components. Some theor-
ists have denied, however, that propositional attitudes exist at all, on the grounds
that the brain does not contain any states with the right kinds of structure to
qualify as propositional attitudes (Churchland, 1979, 1993). This view will be
addressed brieﬂy here.
This section builds on the arguments of Section 4 to defend the view that the
mind contains structured entities composed of component amodal concepts.
Intuitively, a decision to leave for the bus involves the concept LEAVE and
the concept BUS, as well as the concept MOVING TOWARD, which distinguishes a
decision to leave for the bus from a decision to leave the bus behind. Attitudes
with differing contents will either be composed of distinct concepts, or else
constructed of the same concepts differently combined (as in the difference
5. the case for structured attitudes
39

between JOHN LOVES MARY and MARY LOVES JOHN). Indeed, consideration of
the requirements for ﬂexible forms of learning and inference led Fodor
(1975) to postulate a language of thought. This is supposed to be an amodal
representational system in which inferences can be conducted. The system need
not, of course, be similar to a natural language, especially in using representations
that are (like speech) linearly ordered. But it would be compositionally struc-
tured, with thoughts being built in systematic ways from component concepts.11
5.1. Distributed need not mean unstructured
There have, of course, been challenges to the idea of a language of thought, most
notably from those espousing radical forms of connectionism (Rumelhart &
McClelland, 1986; Smolensky, 1991, 1995). Those defending the idea of a lan-
guage of thought have replied that while connectionist architectures can imple-
ment symbolic, rule-based forms of cognition, they cannot replace them
altogether (Fodor & Pylyshyn, 1988; Fodor & McLaughlin, 1990; Marcus,
2001). As a result, there have been signiﬁcant concessions from connectionists,
with many now allowing that activation vectors in connectionist networks have
the compositional properties of a language (Smolensky & Legendre, 2006). But
some remain recalcitrant. Here I will brieﬂy discuss the recent work of
Churchland (2012), since he has long been at the forefront of opposition to the
idea of a language of thought (Churchland, 1979). As a result, he denies that
propositional attitudes exist at all.
Churchland (2012) argues that the mechanism of neural Hebbian plasticity
(“neurons that ﬁre together wire together”) results in a large set of neural
populations, each of which has been sculpted into a high-dimensional feature-
map of some domain. In the case of face-recognition, for example, the neural
population in question will represent the various dimensions along which faces
can differ from one another. Recognition of a particular face will then result from
heightened activity in a speciﬁc region of this state-space, which lies at the
intersection of activation-levels along each of the dimensions of the space that
are reliably evoked by the face in question.12
11 Note that we have already seen an example of what compositionally structured non-linguistic
thought might be like when we discussed baboons’ beliefs about dominance hierarchies in
Section 4.2. It seems that the information is stored in a form that is more diagram-like than
sentence-like (Camp, 2009), using tree-structures to order the various matrilines as well as the
individuals within them. Presumably when an animal needs to draw an inference about just two
individuals, it can then activate only the relevant components of the entire structure, forming
expectations accordingly.
12 While Churchland (2012) maintains that all neural networks are sculpted slowly by learning,
in fact we know that many are innate (unlearned). For example, we know that both human and
40
2. propositional attitudes

The state-space theory of the most basic level of representation in the brain is
by no means implausible. Indeed, the idea of distributed-representation neural
networks is quite widely accepted in cognitive science. But there is nothing in
such an approach itself to rule out the existence of structured representations.
Indeed, Churchland’s own account needs to be heavily supplemented to explain
the full range of human and animal cognition, and the most obvious supplemen-
tation available would appeal to compositionally structured representations. For
he contrasts the conceptual frameworks that result slowly from learning, and
reﬂect the ﬁxed causal structure of the environment, with ephemeral activations
within those networks that locate the organism in the here-and-now, enabling it
to know what to expect next or how to effect changes in that environment. But
there is a huge space of forms of representation of the environment that is
missing from this dichotomy, including both semantic and episodic forms of
memory.
The state-space structures that Churchland claims are built slowly by Hebbian
learning correspond most closely to what would normally be described as implicit
forms of knowledge. Our knowledge of the ways in which faces vary from one
another is mostly implicit and inarticulable, for example. And then online activity
of speciﬁc regions in these state-spaces represent the here-and-now, such as the
face of a speciﬁc individual person whom one is now seeing. Yet humans and
other animals possess many forms of knowledge that fall into neither of these
categories, since they require interactions between neural maps. Indeed, most
theories of human memory now maintain that memories bind together neural
populations across a number of distinct regions of cortex, each of which repre-
sents a speciﬁc property or set of properties.
Consider episodic memory, for example. Such memories are not regions in any
one state-space. Rather, they seem to involve the creation of long-term linkages
between regions of many different state-spaces, corresponding to the various
sensory components of the original experience, in such a way that activation of
any one of these is likely to cause activation of the others. If one recalls an episode
of half-a-dozen brown eggs falling on one’s kitchen ﬂoor and smashing, for
example, then this would seem to require a long-term link between the region
of color state-space that represents brown and the region of food-type state-space
that represents eggs, together with the region representing a numerosity of six
monkey infants have the capacity to distinguish between faces and non-faces (such as scrambled
facial components) at birth (Farroni et al., 2005). Moreover, monkeys who have never had any
exposure to faces at all (who were raised by humans wearing opaque gauze masks over their heads)
nevertheless show capacities for ﬁne-grained discrimination among both human and monkey faces
that are close to normal (Sugita, 2008).
5. the case for structured attitudes
41

and the region of location-space that corresponds to one’s kitchen. Indeed, it is in
just such terms that the formation of episodic memory is characterized by many
cognitive scientists (Tulving, 2002). It is thought that the hippocampus, in
particular, plays a special role in building event-ﬁles, using neurally coded spatial
and temporal coordinates to bind together the properties of the event that are
represented in other cortical state-spaces. But notice that the resulting structure is
discrete and distinct from most other episodic memories. It is also composition-
ally structured out of the state-space regions that represent the various compo-
nent properties of the original event.
Something similar will surely be true of many forms of semantic (or “factual”)
memory. Consider what happens when one unexpectedly encounters a colleague
while out walking the dog, and she points out the house where she lives nearby.
The resulting knowledge is not comfortably assimilated to knowledge of the
enduring causal structure of the world represented by state-spaces themselves.
(Nor, seemingly, is the knowledge in question natural-language based.) Rather, it
would appear to require building a link from the regions of various state-spaces
(e.g. of the face-recognition system) that represent one’s colleague to the region of
spatial state-space that corresponds to the location of her home. And this, too, will
be a compositionally structured discrete representation: a sentence in the language
of thought, no less! I conclude, therefore, that the idea of distributed neural
representation is fully consistent with the claim that many of our beliefs and
other attitudes are compositionally structured out of component representations.
5.2. A case study: infant mindreading
The strongest case for a language of thought has always derived from the systema-
ticity of the inferences into which our attitudes can enter (Fodor, 1975; Davies,
1991, 1998). Two baboons observing the very same rank-reversal, for example, and
updating their beliefs accordingly, might draw opposite practical conclusions,
given their own respective positions in the rank. One of them might now approach
and displace an animal who had previously ranked higher than her, thereby
gaining access to a valued food resource. The other might move off to avoid
confrontation with the same displaced animal, although previously she would
have stood her ground. Here I will brieﬂy develop another example, drawing on
the extensive recent literature on the mindreading abilities of human infants.
The evidence comes out of many different labs and employs a number of
different dependent measures (Onishi & Baillargeon, 2005; Southgate et al., 2007,
2010; Surian et al., 2007; Song & Baillargeon, 2008; Song et al., 2008; Buttelmann
et al., 2009; Poulin-Dubois & Chow, 2009; Scott & Baillargeon, 2009; Kovács
et al., 2010; Scott et al., 2010; Träuble et al., 2010; Luo, 2011; Knudsen &
42
2. propositional attitudes

Liszkowski, 2012; Yott & Poulin-Dubois, 2012; Baillargeon et al., 2014; Southgate
& Vernetti, 2014). Most people in the ﬁeld now accept that the data show that
infants between the ages of six and eighteen months are capable of tracking the
goals, perceptual access, and beliefs of other agents, and of drawing inferences
accordingly. While it is still disputed whether the infants are representing other
people’s false beliefs as such (Carruthers, 2013a; Butterﬁll & Apperly, 2013), few
now deny that the infants employ structured representations that enable them to
track both the attitude types and conceptual components of other people’s
mental states.
Consider, for example, the inferences that an infant needs to make in the true-
belief condition of the active helping studies employed by Buttelmann et al.
(2009). The infant watches as an experimenter plays with a toy, before placing
it in one of two boxes. The toy is then moved from that box to the other while the
experimenter remains present, and both boxes are then locked while the experi-
menter is absent. The experimenter then returns and attempts (without success)
to open the other box (not containing the toy). The dependent measure is
whether or not the infants help to open that box. In order to succeed in this
task, it seems the infant needs to reason as follows:
• [from the experimenter’s perceptual access]: She thinks the bunny is in the
green box.
• [the bunny is moved while the experimenter is present: belief attributions are
updated]: The bunny is in the red box and she thinks the bunny is in the red box.
• [the boxes are locked, the experimenter returns and attempts to open the
green box]: She thinks the bunny is in the red box; she is searching in the
green box; people search where they think they can get what they want; so
she wants something in the green box; I want to help her get what she wants;
so I’ll open the green box.
Note that the infant here relies upon the experimenter’s belief in order to ﬁgure
out what she wants. Now consider how the infant must reason in the false-belief
condition, where the bunny is moved to the other box while the experimenter is
not present:
• [from the experimenter’s perceptual access]: She thinks the bunny is in the
green box.
• [the bunny is moved while the experimenter is absent: no updating]: The
bunny is in the red box and she thinks the bunny is in the green box.
• [the experimenter returns and attempts to open the green box]: She thinks
the bunny is in the green box; she is searching in the green box; people
5. the case for structured attitudes
43

search where they think they can get what they want; so she wants the
bunny; the bunny is actually in the red box; I want to help her get what she
wants; so I’ll open the red box.
Here again the infant must use information about the experimenter’s (false)
belief in order to ﬁgure out her goal. Notice that both sets of inferences
depend crucially not just on the types of attitude ascribed to the experimenter,
but also on the internal structure of those attitudes: that they are about the
bunny being in the red box in the one case, and about the bunny being in the
green box in the other. And these contents then have to interact with the
infant’s own beliefs about the location of the desired toy in order to issue in
the conclusion.
It seems likely that infants’ (and adults’) representations of the attitudes of
others are distributed ones. That is, some sort of AGENT X THINKS . . . operator is
used to bind together the infant’s own representations of the relevant situation,
much as an episodic memory will use spatial and temporal representations to
bind together other features of the observed event, distributed over various
regions of cortex. This suggestion is consistent with the ﬁnding that contents
attributed to other agents can prime or interfere with one’s own actions, almost as
if they were one’s own beliefs (Kovács et al., 2010; van der Wel et al., 2014). This
could happen in a way that is quite similar to the interference-effects that
episodic memories with similar contents can exert on one another, despite the
fact that they are bound together by different spatial and/or temporal locations.
It remains as an unsolved challenge for anyone who thinks that humans do not
employ structured amodal representations in the contents of their attitudes to
explain in some other terms how infants can succeed so ﬂexibly in such tasks. Of
course explaining any one task would be easy enough: one could train up a
network for the purpose, or propose an associationist rule linking low-level
features of the experimental setup. The challenge is rather to construct a single
non-representational framework that can explain the totality of the data, in all its
varied detail. Until this challenge has been met, it is reasonable to believe that the
contents of our attitudes are compositionally structured out of conceptual
components.
6. Conclusion
This chapter has drawn distinctions among a number of types of propositional
attitude, arguing that they are best individuated by their functional roles. It has
also uncovered a problem for those who think that amodal attitudes can ﬁgure
44
2. propositional attitudes

consciously in reﬂection under the active control of the agent. But most import-
antly for our purposes, the chapter has argued for the existence of a set of amodal
compositionally structured attitudes. Given that such attitudes exist, one can then
ask whether or not they are ever conscious, and whether or not they ever ﬁgure
among the contents of our reﬂections. This is one of the main tasks of the
remainder of the book.
6. conclusion
45

3
Perception, Attention,
and Consciousness
This chapter argues, ﬁrst, that the “global broadcasting” of perceptual contents in
the brain is what causes those contents to become conscious. It then argues by
inference to the best explanation that attentional signals directed toward midlevel
sensory areas of the brain are necessary and (with other factors) sufﬁcient for
global broadcasting to occur. This conclusion is important because Chapter 4 will
argue that it is these same attentional mechanisms that sustain representations in
working memory, leading us to conclude (again by inference to the best explan-
ation) that working memory is sensory based. It will then follow either that
amodal attitudes are never conscious, or that there is some other global work-
space in which such attitudes can interact and do their work. (This suggestion
will then be addressed in Chapter 5, before my own positive account is developed
in more detail in Chapter 6.) The present chapter also argues, however, that
amodal concepts can nevertheless be bound into the content of perception and
globally broadcast along with it. Since the same is true of endogenously generated
imagistic states (as we will see in Chapter 4), it will follow that amodal content can
ﬁgure in the stream of consciousness even though (most)1 amodal attitudes
cannot.
1. Kinds of Consciousness
The present section will rehearse some familiar distinctions, separating out the
questions and theories that are relevant to our concerns.
1 As we will see in Section 5, sensorily embedded amodal concepts can constitute an attitude of
judging that something is the case. When we hear someone as saying that there are delays on the
metro, this can be thought of as containing a sensory-based judgment with the content, he is saying
that there are delays on the metro.

1.1. Creature versus state
We can begin with the distinction between creature consciousness and state
consciousness. One can say of an animal or person that she is conscious, or
one can say of someone’s mental state (a perception of movement, say, or an
experience of color) that it is conscious. Moreover, creature consciousness can be
either intransitive or transitive. One can say that someone is conscious simpliciter
(that she has just woken from a nap, for example, or that she has emerged from a
general anesthetic). This is intransitive creature consciousness. Alternatively, one
can say that she is conscious of some object or event. This is transitive creature
consciousness.
Transitive creature consciousness seems to entail state consciousness. If Mary
is conscious of something moving across a screen, then her perception of
movement across the screen is a conscious mental event. Indeed, some have
suggested that state consciousness can be reduced to transitive creature con-
sciousness (Dretske, 1995). But this may go too far, and risks begging important
questions related to our topic. For propositional attitudes are often described as
(state-) conscious, yet in such cases it can be hard to ﬁnd any equivalent creature-
conscious locution. If one says that Mary’s hope for recovery is conscious, or that
she is consciously wondering what the doctor will recommend, then what is it
that she is conscious of? She is not conscious of recovering, or of the doctor’s
recommendation. It may be that she is conscious of hoping, or of wondering. But
if this were built into the analysis, it would commit us to a form of higher-order
account of consciousness (see Section 1.2). In fact the creature-consciousness
locution is most naturally restricted to instances of perception.
1.2. Phenomenal versus access
It seems, then, that we should focus on the broader notion of mental-state
consciousness. Here it is common to distinguish between phenomenal conscious-
ness and various forms of access-consciousness (Block, 1995).2 The former is the
subjective, felt aspect of our conscious mental events; it is the “what-it-is-like-
ness” of those events. The latter, in contrast, consists in the availability of the
event to other (speciﬁed) states or systems. It is phenomenal consciousness that is
claimed to give rise to the “hard problem” of consciousness, and which is said to
be difﬁcult to reconcile with a physicalist world-view (Chalmers, 1996). While
2 In the ﬁrst instance the distinction is a conceptual one, representing two different ways of
thinking of conscious states, and suggesting distinct explanatory projects. It is another matter
whether the distinction corresponds to any real difference among the states represented. The latter
question will not be addressed here.
1. kinds of consciousness
47

I have well-developed views on this question, this is not the place to review them
(Carruthers, 2000, 2005). What is relevant for our purposes (as we will see
shortly) is not whether phenomenal consciousness can be reductively explained
in terms acceptable to a physicalist about the mind, but rather the nature of the
mental architecture that at least correlates with, or co-occurs with, phenomenally
conscious experience (at least in humans).
Access-consciousness, on the other hand, is a functionally deﬁned notion (or
notions). As such, there is general agreement that it is not deeply problematic,
and raises no threat to physicalism. Some have claimed that access-conscious
states are those that are available for verbal report (Dennett, 1978; Kurzban,
2011). Epistemically, this is broadly correct, for we can often only know what
conscious states people are undergoing by asking them. But as a constitutive
account of the nature of consciousness (or even an invariable correlate of
consciousness) it is plainly problematic. It entails, for example, that those suffer-
ing from severe aphasia are no longer capable of conscious states, since they are
unable to report them. Other theorists have said that conscious states are those
that are available to higher-order thought, in such a way that subjects are aware of
those states, or know of themselves that they have them (Rosenthal, 2005). This
view, too, has implications that are unacceptable to many. For it entails that
creatures incapable of higher-order thought (which presumably includes most
species of animal) are incapable of undergoing conscious states.
1.3. Global broadcasting
The most widely endorsed notion of access-consciousness, by far, asserts that
conscious states are ones that are generally, or globally, accessible to an extensive
set of other cognitive systems, including those for forming memories, issuing in
affective reactions, as well as a variety of systems for inference and decision
making (Baars, 1988; Tye, 1995; Block, 1995; Dennett, 2001). It is this notion that
will form the main focus of our attention here. This is partly because of its
widespread acceptance among cognitive scientists. But it is also because it
incorporates within itself, as a special case, each of the alternative notions of
access-consciousness. For states that are globally accessible will of course be
available for verbal report in beings capable of making such reports; and they
will likewise be available to higher-order thought in creatures capable of such
thoughts. This means that proponents of these alternative views can concede that
conscious states are those that correlate with, or co-occur with, global broadcast-
ing in the relevant populations. At any rate, this is so provided there is no direct
channel of access between conscious states and the language system, or between
conscious states and the faculty of higher-order thought, which could enable
48
3. perception, attention, and consciousness

states to be conscious in the absence of global broadcasting. While some have
made claims of this sort, postulating a faculty of “inner sense” that enables direct
knowledge of our own mental states, for example (Nichols & Stich, 2003), such
views are deeply problematic. Indeed, when all the evidence is considered, they
can be decisively rejected (Carruthers, 2011a). As a result, nothing will be lost if
we focus exclusively on a notion of access-consciousness that deﬁnes it in terms
of global availability.
Moreover, there is an important point to note in the context of our current
consideration of the nature of human thought processes. This is that theories
accounting for the conscious status of thoughts in terms of their availability to
higher-order thought will be of little help to those wishing to argue that amodal
thoughts can ﬁgure consciously in reﬂection, unless this is also tied to claims
about global availability. For the ordinary idea of reﬂection includes much more
than that the thoughts that ﬁgure within it are ones that one has knowledge of, as
we noted in Chapter 1. Rather, we intuitively think that those thoughts can give
rise to explicit memories, evoke affective reactions, and enter with others into a
wide range of different forms of inference and decision making. This is tanta-
mount to believing that reﬂective thoughts are globally accessible, and not just
available to higher-order thought.3 So even if there were such a thing as a faculty
of inner sense targeted at one’s own thoughts and giving us knowledge of them,
this would provide little support for the ordinary conception of reﬂection unless
those thoughts were also globally available.
Not only is a global broadcasting account of access-consciousness widely
accepted, but it is also widely accepted that phenomenal consciousness correlates
with, or is co-extensive with, global broadcasting (at least among humans). Many
accept that phenomenally conscious states are all and only those that are globally
broadcast to a wide range of systems in the brain. This is agreed even by those
who think that phenomenal consciousness cannot be physically explained at all,
let alone explained in terms of global broadcast (Chalmers, 1996, 1997). One
exception to these generalizations is Block (1995, 2002), who thinks that there
can be phenomenally conscious states that aren’t access-conscious. This view,
too, can be left to one side, since it has little bearing on the question of the mental
architecture subserving working memory. For even if there are mental states that
are phenomenally conscious without being globally accessible, these states don’t
3 Likewise, philosophers who emphasize the inferential promiscuity of human thoughts and
attitudes (Hurley, 2006) seem committed to something like the global accessibility of conscious
thoughts.
1. kinds of consciousness
49

belong among the contents of working memory (as Block himself concedes). So it
can be widely agreed that the contents of working memory are globally broadcast
(and hence access-conscious), even if there are some phenomenally conscious
states that are not access-conscious.
Access-consciousness is often operationalized in terms of availability to verbal
report (Dehaene et al., 2006). A mental state is regarded as conscious just in case
the person can report its occurrence. This is comparatively harmless where the
states in question are sensory or sensory-based ones (perceptual experiences,
visual images, episodic memories, and so forth). For we know that such states
undergo global broadcasting, and are thus directly available to one’s language-
production system among many others. In connection with amodal attitudes,
however, we know that access-consciousness and availability to verbal report can
pull apart. Indeed, on a view such as my own, according to which amodal
attitudes are never globally broadcast, it follows that such attitudes are never
access-conscious. They can nevertheless be reported. For people are capable of
attributing such thoughts to themselves on the basis of a variety of indirect cues
(Carruthers, 2011a). In the present context it is therefore question-begging to
infer from the fact that someone can report the occurrence of some amodal
attitude state that the state in question is an access-conscious one.
1.4. Cognitive phenomenology
There is one other debate about the nature of consciousness that should be
mentioned here. This concerns the question of cognitive phenomenology
(Bayne & Montague, 2011). Some philosophers claim that thoughts, as well as
experiences, can be phenomenally conscious (Strawson, 1994; Siewert, 1998; Pitt,
2004). On this view some of our attitude states, together with their component
concepts, are phenomenally conscious. Others maintain that phenomenal con-
sciousness is restricted to states with ﬁne-grained nonconceptual content, such as
perceptual experiences, affective states, and visual and other forms of imagery
(Tye, 1995, 2000). Everyone allows, of course, that our attitudes can make a
causal contribution to phenomenology (issuing in an affective reaction, say, or
evoking associated imagery). What is at stake in this debate is whether concepts
make a constitutive contribution to phenomenology, and are thus phenomenally
conscious in their own right (Veillet & Carruthers, 2011).4
4 Note that this debate by no means disappears even if one insists, as does McDowell (1994), that
perceptual experience is itself constituted by myriad ﬁne-grained indexical concepts, like that shade
of color. For the claim can then be that only ﬁne-grained concepts make a constitutive contribution
to the phenomenology of experience.
50
3. perception, attention, and consciousness

If the views defended in this book are correct, then it follows that none of our
amodal attitudes are constitutively phenomenally conscious (at least, provided
that phenomenal consciousness coincides with global broadcasting). For such
attitudes are never, themselves, globally broadcast, and cannot ﬁgure among the
contents of working memory. There are, however, a variety of sensory-involving
attitudes, as we will see. These include episodic memories, affective states, and
sensory-embedded judgments (seeing as, hearing as, and so on). These attitudes
are, at least partly, phenomenally conscious. However, my own view is that the
conceptual components of such attitudes fail to make a constitutive contribution
to their phenomenally conscious properties. Rather, such properties are
exhausted by the nonconceptual, ﬁne-grained contents of sensory and sensory-
involving experience (Veillet & Carruthers, 2011). This is because it is only
nonconceptual content that seems ineffable (try to say what Colombian coffee
smells like!), and it is this sort of ﬁne-grained content that gives rise to the other
puzzling features of phenomenal consciousness (the conceivability of zombies
and so forth; see Chalmers, 1996). These are not views that need to be defended
here, however. For our focus will be on the question whether attitudes of all types
can ﬁgure in the stream of consciousness and among the contents of working
memory.
This section has argued that access-consciousness (understood to involve global
broadcasting) is the relevant notion of consciousness for our purposes. In asking
whether amodal attitudes can ﬁgure consciously in reﬂection, what we need to
consider is whether such attitudes are ever globally available to a range of systems
for forming memories, creating affective reactions, and for reasoning and deci-
sion making.
2. Global Broadcasting
This section will sketch some of the evidence supporting a global broadcasting
account of the correlates of consciousness. Then Section 3 will argue that
attention is a necessary condition for global broadcasting to occur. These topics
are important because Chapter 4 will argue that working memory relies on the
same attentional mechanisms targeted at midlevel sensory areas to create the
stream of consciousness. This will serve to ground our initial argument that
conscious reﬂection is sensory based.
2.1. The theory
Baars (1988) was the ﬁrst to develop in detail a global broadcasting account of the
brain-correlates of consciousness. He argued that the difference between
2. global broadcasting
51

conscious mental states and their unconscious counterparts is that the former are
made widely available to different mechanisms in the brain, including those for
forming memories, for forming new values, for creating affective states, and for
reasoning and decision making (the latter systems being located especially in the
frontal lobes). Unconscious mental states, in contrast, have more limited effects.
They might prime a choice, for example, making selection of that item more
likely, but they don’t give rise to most of the other effects mentioned.
Baars’ global broadcasting theory coheres quite well with proposals made by a
number of philosophers. Tye (1995), for example, argues that conscious states are
those that are poised to have an impact on inferential and decision-making
systems, and Block’s (1995) account of access-consciousness makes essentially
the same claim. Moreover, although Dennett (1978, 1991) had initially developed
two different accounts in earlier publications (that differed not only from each
other but also from the global broadcasting idea), he subsequently came to argue
that consciousness should be understood in terms of “fame in the brain” (2001).
This is, in effect, the global broadcasting account, except that it suggests that
conscious status might be incremental, or a matter of degree. Baars, in contrast,
postulates a kind of sharp “state change” once a certain level of activation is
reached, an idea that has since received signiﬁcant experimental support (Sergent
& Dehaene, 2004; Del Cul et al., 2007).
Global broadcasting accounts have been elaborated and conﬁrmed by other
cognitive scientists in addition to Baars (Sergent et al., 2005; Dehaene et al., 2006;
Bekinschtein et al., 2009; Dehaene & Changeux, 2011). They also seem to converge
with a number of other recent suggestions made by neuroscientists, although the
language used often differs. For example, although Crick & Koch (1990) initially
proposed an account in terms of synchronous neural oscillations in the 40–70 Hz
range, even then this was presented as a theory of how the contents of working
memory are determined. In more recent work, Crick & Koch (2003) emphasize the
role of brain-wide coalitions of activated neurons, while also saying that conscious-
ness can be characterized very roughly in terms of the front of the brain “looking
at” activity in the back. Both accounts seem quite close to the idea of global
broadcasting. Likewise Lamme (2003) emphasizes the role of recurrent processing
in conscious experience, in which a forward sweep of neural activation in sensory
areas becomes linked to activity in more frontal regions of the brain. Similar ideas
have been proposed by Edelman (2003) and by Tononi (2008).
2.2. Evidence
There is now extensive evidence supporting the global broadcasting account.
Much of this looks at differences in brain activity between cases of conscious and
52
3. perception, attention, and consciousness

unconscious experience, using either fMRI or EEG (Dehaene et al., 2006;
Dehaene & Changeux, 2011). Many contrasts have been studied, including
contra-lateral neglect (and its absence), binocular rivalry, change blindness,
inattentional blindness, and responses to masked versus unmasked stimuli.5
But perhaps the strongest paradigm involves the so-called “attentional blink,”
because the stimulus conditions and task demands can be matched exactly
between conscious and unconscious trials (Sergent et al., 2005). Participants see
a swiftly masked pair of successive stimuli, and their task is to say whether a third
stimulus that follows them matches the ﬁrst. But on some trials they are also
asked to report whether they saw the second stimulus. With attention thus
directed toward the ﬁrst stimulus, the second often goes completely unseen.
Indeed, if the timing and intensity of the stimuli are set correctly, participants
will fail to see the second stimulus on about 50 percent of the trials, despite the
fact that everything in the experimental setup remains the same throughout.
What such studies show is that in cases of unconscious perception there is a
forward sweep of activity through visual cortex and some local reverberation in
regions of the temporal lobes. Although participants say they see nothing, and
their performance is no better than chance when they are asked to select the
stimulus that had been presented to them, there is nevertheless often robust
priming, not just of low-level sensory properties, but also of a semantic sort. In
cases of conscious perception, in contrast, the forward sweep of activity through
visual cortex is rapidly followed by reverberating activity in frontal, temporal, and
parietal cortices. It appears that when activity in visual cortex is targeted by
attention (at least, under the right conditions), the information encoded by that
neural activity is made widely available to many different brain regions, and
especially to frontal cortex, where it can inform reporting, planning, and decision
making.
We also know that the brain has a long-distance architecture of the sort
predicted by a global broadcasting account of perceptual consciousness. In
particular, it has a “small world” architecture consisting of densely locally
connected sensory, motor, and association areas linked via midline hubs and
long-distance white-matter neural pathways (Sporns, 2011). When these long-
distance pathways are differentially damaged, as they are in people suffering from
the early stages of multiple sclerosis, conscious perception is correspondingly
impacted, while priming effects are left unchanged (Reuter et al., 2007, 2009). In
particular, such patients require a longer interval than normal between stimulus
5 Masking can be thought of as a sort of “overwriting” of the sensory activity caused by one
stimulus with activations caused by a swiftly succeeding one, which can render the former invisible.
2. global broadcasting
53

and subsequent mask for the former to be consciously perceived, with the extent
of the increased interval correlating with the extent of their white-matter damage.
This is just what one would predict if consciousness co-occurs with global
broadcasting. For it will require a stronger and/or longer stimulus to insure
that the signals are globally transmitted.
Much of the evidence supporting a global broadcasting account of the neural
correlates of consciousness derives from the study of vision, which is, by far, the
most heavily studied sensory system. But there are similar ﬁndings for conscious
versus unconscious tactile perception (Boly et al., 2007; Jones et al., 2007). And in
the auditory domain, too, conscious and unconscious stimuli differ in the wave of
global activity that accompanies only the former (Bekinschtein et al., 2009;
Diekhof et al., 2009; Sadaghiani et al., 2009). So it is reasonable to believe that
global broadcasting accompanies conscious forms of perception quite generally.
3. Consciousness and Attention
This section will consider the relationships between global broadcasting and
attention. It argues that attention to a stimulus is necessary for perception of
that stimulus to become conscious. (It also argues brieﬂy that attention is not, in
contrast, a sufﬁcient condition for consciousness to occur.) This point is import-
ant because Chapter 4 will argue that working memory is likewise attention
based, while making endogenous use of some of the same sensory mechanisms
that are responsible for conscious perception. This will give rise to an argument
that working memory is sensory dependent.
3.1. Attention is necessary for consciousness
There is a good deal of evidence to suggest that global broadcasting (and hence
consciousness) depends upon attention. Consider inattentional blindness, for
example (Mack & Rock, 1998). When attention is occupied elsewhere, even
highly salient stimuli can remain unseen, and can do so even when occupying
foveal vision for a signiﬁcant period of time. Such results are widely interpreted as
showing that attention to a stimulus is necessary for it to become conscious.
It might be objected that the effect of distracted attention in inattentional
blindness is not to disrupt conscious perception of the target, as such, but rather
to interfere with memory formation. Perhaps stimuli that go unreported are
consciously perceived at the time, but fail to be remembered. Perhaps the
direction of attention elsewhere means that no memories are formed, even
though the perceptions in question are momentarily conscious. Although pos-
sible, this interpretation is quite implausible. For in many such experiments the
54
3. perception, attention, and consciousness

“unseen” event is both unusual and striking (such as a man in a gorilla suit
appearing in the middle of basketball practice). It is hard to believe that, if seen, it
would not have been remembered.
The attempt to explain inattentional-blindness data by appealing to failures of
memory becomes even less likely when other forms of evidence are also con-
sidered. For example, instances of change blindness are not accompanied by
globally broadcast brain activity (Pessoa & Ungerleider, 2004). When subjects
successfully detect a change in the stimulus following an interval there is exten-
sive activation in frontal, parietal, and temporal regions of cortex. When subjects
fail to detect the change, in contrast, very little differential activity is found. So in
this paradigm, at least, there is reason to think that conscious perception of the
change does not occur, even momentarily. Moreover, in the attentional blink
paradigm, questions about visibility are asked just moments following the stimu-
lus presentation. This makes it hard to believe that people’s reports of failure to
see the target could result from failures of memory. In addition, of course, among
people suffering from neglect, stimuli go unreported even when concurrent. This
point is worth elaborating.
It has long been known that neglect is an attentional deﬁcit, rather than a
purely visual one (Mesulam, 1999). For one thing, all sensory modalities on the
left side of the body, and not just vision, are often implicated following damage to
regions of the right hemisphere.6 Moreover, unconscious forms of perception
remain intact. For example, a neglect patient asked to copy a drawing of a house
whose left side is on ﬁre will draw only the right side of the house, but will say that
there is something dangerous about the house, and that he would not want to live
in it. We also know that neglect is a deﬁcit especially of bottom-up forms of
attention (Bartolomeo & Chokron, 2002; Todd et al., 2005), and that attentional
training can reduce the severity of unilateral neglect (Robertson et al., 1995). So it
appears that the left side of space fails to issue in conscious perceptions in neglect
patients because it fails to attract attention.
In addition (and just as one might predict if attention to a stimulus were
necessary for global broadcasting to occur), transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS) applied over regions of parietal cortex that are known to be parts of the
attentional network can make stimuli fade or disappear (Meister et al., 2006; Kanai
et al., 2008). And in a separate experiment, TMS applied over right parietal cortex
during a change detection task resulted in greater latencies to detect the change and
6 These regions include especially right ventral parietal cortex near the temporo-parietal junction
and right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, which are now known to be parts of the “bottom-up”
attentional system (Corbetta & Shulman, 2002). See Figure 2.
3. consciousness and attention
55

a greater rate of change blindness, suggesting that disruption of the attentional
mechanism was rendering the changes invisible (Beck et al., 2006). So these
ﬁndings, too, support the view that attention is necessary for global broadcasting.
Everyone in the ﬁeld now grants that attention can be an important determin-
ant of conscious experience. But some have denied that it is strictly necessary
(Koch & Tsuchiya, 2007; Tononi & Koch, 2008). This is because of data suggest-
ing that background scene perception is independent of attention. For example,
Mack & Rock (1998) failed to show inattentional blindness for scenes, and others
have shown that in change-blindness experiments people instantly notice if the
“gist” of a scene is altered, whereas they fail to notice many other sorts of change
(Rensink et al., 1997; Simons & Levin, 1997). However, Cohen et al. (2011)
hypothesize that this is because background scene information can be processed
with very little attention, rather than without attention at all. They suggest that
previous studies may have placed insufﬁcient demands on attention, leaving
enough remaining for the gist of a scene to be consciously perceived. They
were able to test this in a pair of studies. In the ﬁrst, they found that when people
are given a highly demanding attentional task they do fail to notice dramatic
changes in background scenes. In the second, they used a dual-task method to
show that as the difﬁculty of the primary object-tracking task increases, so
participants make many more errors in classifying background scenes, suggesting
that both tasks are drawing on a common resource (namely, attention).
Block (2013), too, argues that attention isn’t strictly necessary for conscious
perception. But what he actually shows is something much weaker, namely that
there can be conscious perception of individual objects in the absence of object-
based attention. He does not argue that perception of individuals can occur without
attention at all. On the contrary, in the examples he discusses it is feature-based
attention that enables the individual objects to stand out from one another in a
crowded display, even though attention doesn’t have the ﬁneness of grain required
to latch onto each of those individuals independently of their features.
If one were to assume that attention is fundamentally object based or event
based, then it might indeed follow that consciousness can occur without atten-
tion. And it may be that some such view is adopted (albeit tacitly) in parts of the
literature. For it is common to describe the limits on working memory in terms of
the number of individuals or events that one can keep in mind at once, and the
limits on working memory derive from limited powers of attention, as we will see
in Chapter 4. So people might assume that all attention is object based. However,
the existence of feature-based attention is also widely accepted (Bisley, 2011).
Moreover, recent models suggest that the limits on attention and working
memory are informational rather than “slot based,” resulting from competition
56
3. perception, attention, and consciousness

for information-representation among cortical maps (Franconeri et al., 2013). If
this is right, then the fact that people can consciously perceive individuals that
they cannot pick out in attention doesn’t count against the view that attention is
necessary for consciousness.
Taken altogether, then, the best explanation of the evidence is that attention is
necessary for global broadcasting to occur and that, when certain other conditions
are satisﬁed, it is attention to a stimulus that produces conscious experience of it.
3.2. Is attention sufﬁcient for consciousness?
Prinz (2012), however, goes beyond the ideas defended in Section 3.1. He argues
that attention is not only necessary, but strictly sufﬁcient, for conscious experi-
ence. He claims that in cases where it might seem that we have attention to a
stimulus without consciousness, the neural activity caused by the stimulus does
not last long enough for attention to have its normal impact. Consider visual
masking, for example. Although subjects are trying to attend to the masked
stimulus (in order to report it), the neural activity is over-written by the mask
too swiftly for attention to have any effect.
Prinz’s claim is thus that attention, when timed in such a way as to interact
with a representation of a stimulus, is always sufﬁcient for consciousness to
occur. This can successfully explain away some of the results in the literature
that might seem to support the insufﬁciency of attention for consciousness. For
example, McCormick (1997) claims to show that attention can be captured by a
brieﬂy presented cue (to the left or right of ﬁxation) that makes participants
respond more quickly and accurately when a target appears in the same location,
even when the cue is never consciously perceived. Prinz can plausibly reply,
however, that in these experiments attention was attracted to the location of the
cue, and so was already targeted at the correct location when the stimulus
appeared, but without ever having interacted with a representation of the cue.
So this is not a case where attention and perceptual activity interact without being
sufﬁcient for consciousness.
There are other results, however, that appear to refute Prinz’s (2012) claim
that attention is sufﬁcient for consciousness (van Boxtel et al., 2010; De Brigard,
2012). For example, Kentridge et al. (2008) use metacontrast masking to dem-
onstrate that attention modulates the processing of an unperceived target, while
also reviewing a number of other results that support the same conclusion.7
7 Metacontrast masking occurs when a target such as a colored disk is swiftly replaced with a ring
that precisely encloses the space previously occupied by the disc. In these conditions the disk itself
can remain invisible.
3. consciousness and attention
57

Participants were ﬁrst presented with a spatial cue, pointing to one side or the
other of their ﬁxation point. Then two differently colored disks were brieﬂy
presented (one on each side), followed by two colored rings enclosing the
spaces previously occupied by the discs. The participants’ task was simply to
indicate the color of the rings. The result was that they were swifter to do so
when they were cued to a disc that was congruent in color with the subsequent
rings, suggesting that the color of the disc had been processed more deeply as a
result of the shift in attention caused by the cue. Yet the disc itself remained
invisible.
Bressan & Pizzighello (2008) also present ﬁndings that challenge the sufﬁ-
ciency of attention for consciousness, using an inattentional blindness experi-
ment. Participants were required to count the number of times that some
randomly moving black-and-white shapes touched the sides of the screen. At
some point during the trial a colored cross moved across the screen, which was
noticed on only about half the trials. The ﬁnding was that participants performed
worse in cases where the cross remained unseen than when it was noticed. This
suggests that the cross had attracted (and hence divided) the participants’
attention in the unseen condition, leading to poorer performance in the primary
task. Yet attention was still insufﬁcient to issue in conscious perception of the
cross. In cases where the cross was noticed, however (and even though this might
have resulted from a larger initial shift of attention), subjects could recognize that
the movement of the cross was irrelevant to their task, to which their attention
could then be fully returned.
I conclude, then, that not only are conscious perceptual states those that are
globally broadcast to a wide range of states and systems in the brain, but in
addition, attention is necessary for global broadcasting to occur. Moreover, it
seems that attention is sufﬁcient for global broadcasting in cases where enough
attention is devoted to a stimulus that is sufﬁciently intense and long-lasting.
4. The Nature of Attention
This section will distinguish a number of different forms of attention, and will
outline the brain mechanisms that are thought to underlie them. Some
understanding of these mechanisms will be important for the argument of
Chapter 4, where it will emerge that it is the very same mechanisms operating
in the same way that are required for contents to enter working memory and
the stream of consciousness. The best explanation of this and related ﬁndings
will then be that only sensory-involving representations are capable of being
conscious.
58
3. perception, attention, and consciousness

4.1. Overt versus covert attention
It is often noted that attention can be either overt or covert. Consider the former
ﬁrst. In the case of vision, one can attend to something by shifting one’s gaze and
focusing one’s eyes on it (thereby enabling maximum information from the
object to be processed by the densely packed neurons in the fovea of the retina).
In the case of audition, one can attend by shifting the position of one’s head
relative to the direction of the sound, or by cupping one’s hands behind one’s
ears. With smell, one can attend to the smell of something by snifﬁng it, and with
taste, one can attend by manipulating the substance into closer contact with one’s
tongue. In the case of touch, one can attend by shifting one’s hands to bring the
thing into contact with the movements of one’s ﬁngertips (where touch sensitiv-
ity is greatest).
Not all sensory systems permit overt forms of attention, however. In the case of
interoception there is nothing overt one can do to attend to a pain, a contraction
of the gut, or one’s own heartbeat. Nor, in the case of proprioception, is there
anything overt one can do to attend non-visually to one’s own bodily position or
movements. Moreover, it can be argued that cases of overt attention without
covert attention are not properly deserving of the name. As inattentional blind-
ness demonstrates, one can have one’s eyes focused on an object or event—
thereby overtly “attending” to it—without seeing it at all. And one can, likewise,
sniff an object or roll a substance over one’s tongue with one’s (covert) attention
wholly occupied elsewhere, hence neither smelling nor tasting anything in the
circumstances. Similar things can happen with touch and sound.
It seems, then, that it is the covert form of attention—hereafter, “attention”—
that carries most of the explanatory load, and which should form the target of
scientiﬁc inquiry (as indeed it does). While attention is often supported by various
forms of overt activity (shifting one’s eyes, turning one’s head, moving one’s
hands, and so on), it is fully capable of operating without such activity. Thus one
can attend visually to one thing while having one’s eyes focused on another, or
one can attend to one of two nearby conversations at a party without altering the
orientation of one’s head, and so on. Attention is, fundamentally, a cognitive
process, enabling the extraction of information about one aspect of the environ-
ment or body to the exclusion of others. Indeed, this seems to be its function. The
amount of information impacting all of our senses at any given moment is
overwhelming. Since much of this is irrelevant to current needs or concerns, it
would be hugely wasteful (and probably impossible) to attempt to process it all.
In short, attention is what enables the mind to focus its resources on information
that is relevant.
4. the nature of attention
59

4.2. Top–down versus bottom–up attention
It is now known that there are two largely distinct but interacting cortical
networks involved in the control of attention (Corbetta & Shulman, 2002;
Corbetta et al., 2008). One links together dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, the
frontal eye-ﬁelds in dorsal motor and premotor cortex (which are also involved
in controlling movements of the eyes), and the intraparietal sulcus bilaterally,
which is arranged vertically down the center of parietal cortex in each hemi-
sphere. This is the network that controls top-down attention (see Figure 2). It is
thought that dorsolateral prefrontal cortex maintains current goals, interacting
with the frontal eye-ﬁelds to transmit attentional signals to the intraparietal
sulcus, which in turn focuses both boosting and suppressing signals on relevant
midlevel regions of visual (and other sensory) cortex. The result is that some
perceptual representations are globally broadcast whereas others are not.
The second cortical attentional network is located most strongly in the right
hemisphere. It links a region of right ventral parietal cortex near the temporo-
parietal junction (this is the corner where temporal and parietal cortices join)
with right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and right medial frontal gyrus (see
Figures 2 and 3).8 This is the network responsible for some kinds of bottom-
up attention. It is thought that right ventral parietal cortex continually moni-
tors unattended sensory representations (such as surrounding conversations at
a party), interacting with ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and subcortical value
systems to determine the relevance of those representations to both current
goals and standing values. When relevant signals are detected (such as the
sound of one’s own name), the ventral network interacts with the dorsal
attentional system via the medial frontal gyrus and the anterior cingulate
(see Figure 3). The result is either that the previous focus of attention is
maintained in the face of a potential distracter, or the dorsal network shifts
its focus to the novel stimulus, which is then consciously experienced as a
result.
In addition to these two cortical networks there are a variety of subcortical
systems in the basal ganglia (see Figure 3), involving portions of the amygdala,
thalamus, superior colliculus, and other structures, which can be involved in
bottom-up forms of attention (Vuilleumier, 2005). The superior colliculus, in
particular, constructs a salience map of visual and auditory space, modulated in
part by top-down signals from the two cortical systems (Knudsen, 2011; Mysore
8 Right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex seems also to play a crucial role in a variety of forms of self-
control (Aron et al., 2004; Cohen & Lieberman, 2010).
60
3. perception, attention, and consciousness

& Knudsen, 2013). These subcortical mechanisms can interrupt the processing of
each of the cortical networks (seizing control of the dorsal attentional system in
particular), responding to loud noises, bright ﬂashes, and other high-intensity
stimuli, as well as to stimuli of innate or learned emotional signiﬁcance (a snake
in the grass; bared teeth; an angry face; the face of a loved one; and so on).
The result is that the dorsal system shifts its focus to the novel stimulus, at least
temporarily until further appraisal can assess the latter’s real signiﬁcance
(for example, on closer examination the snake-like shape turns out to be a
piece of rope).
It seems likely that these attentional systems are an amodal, domain-general
resource. At any rate, there is direct evidence that the systems described
above underlie both visual and auditory forms of attention. This provides some
reason to think that the ﬁnding might generalize to all sensory systems.9 Thus
Schönwiesner et al. (2007) map a cortical network for bottom-up forms of
auditory attention that is remarkably close, at any rate, to the system described
above for vision. Moreover, the same dorsal network that controls top-down
attention to visual stimuli is also what controls endogenous attention in the
auditory domain (Shomstein & Yantis, 2006; Wu et al., 2007; Cowan et al.,
2011; Li et al., 2014). In addition, just as this account would predict, Saults &
Cowan (2007) show that visual and auditory forms of working memory share the
same attentional resources, with the maximum number of items that can be
retained in each sensory domain being the same, while also matching what can
be retained in cross-modal tasks.
4.3. How attention works
Attention is thought to operate by biasing sensory processing, enhancing the
sensitivity of selected groups of neurons and suppressing the activity of others,
seemingly by increasing or decreasing the extent to which those neurons ﬁre in
phase with one another (Jensen et al., 2007). Thus Gazzaley et al. (2005) show
that when people are directed to remember faces in a mixed presentation of faces
and scenes, activity in the fusiform face area is enhanced relative to baseline,
while activity in the parahippocampal place area is correspondingly suppressed.
The reverse occurs when people are directed to remember the scenes and ignore
the faces.10 Moreover, the primary locus of inﬂuence is on midlevel sensory areas.
9 In addition, the executive component of working memory is a domain-general resource that is
common to working memory in all sensory domains, as we will see in Chapter 4.
10 In addition, these regions are faster to respond when attended. See also Carrasco & McElree
(2001) for evidence that attention speeds up perceptual processing.
4. the nature of attention
61

For example, spatial attention enhances the activity of speciﬁc groups of neurons
in area V4 (which processes both color and form information), and attention to
motion alters the activity of groups of neurons in area MT (Treue & Maunsell,
1996; Reynolds & Chelazzi, 2004). When attention is directed at a location that
falls within the receptive ﬁeld of a neuron in V4, the latter’s sensitivity is
enhanced, enabling it to respond to stimuli that would otherwise be too faint to
elicit a response.
Moreover, attention alone, in the absence of sensory input, causes activity in
the relevant regions of sensory cortex, presumably because baseline levels of
neural activity have been increased. For example, Voisin et al. (2006) show in a
dichotic listening task that when people are expecting a sound to be heard in just
one ear there is enhanced activity in primary auditory cortex and surrounding
areas on the contralateral side. They argue that this is unlikely to result from
auditory imagery, since the sounds are never repeated, and participants have no
idea of what sort of sound they might hear in a given trial. Rather, it appears that
attention alone increases baseline neural activity in sensory areas, thereby pre-
paring for the global broadcast of any stimulus-caused representation when it
occurs.
It should also be stressed that attention doesn’t merely boost overall levels of
activity in selected visual areas while repressing others. Rather, it also enhances
contrasts within attended items, with consequent effects on visual phenomen-
ology (Störmer et al., 2009). This was elegantly demonstrated by Carrasco et al.
(2004). They presented participants with pairs of Gabor patches (which are low-
contrast objects, vaguely striped and bordered) at varying orientations. Partici-
pants were asked to judge the orientation of the higher-contrast patch. On trials
when subjects had their attention drawn to a particular patch by a brieﬂy
presented spatial cue, they perceived its contrast to be higher (even though it
wasn’t), and judged accordingly. Attention also has a variety of other neural
effects in the regions targeted (Bisley, 2011).
4.4. Is attention a natural kind?
Some have argued that attention is not a natural kind, but rather a heterogeneous
collection of processes and behaviors (Mole, 2010; Wu, 2011). What is certainly
true is that the term “attention” in ordinary speech does not pick out a natural
kind. For we have already noted in Section 4.1 that both overt and covert
processes are described as forms of attention, whereas from a scientiﬁc perspec-
tive only the latter should qualify. Moreover, the bottom-up and top-down
systems described in Section 4.2 have distinct neural realizations and perform
different functions. Chun et al. (2011) suggest that there are many distinct forms
62
3. perception, attention, and consciousness

of attentional mechanism, which are differentiated from one another by the
content-domains with which they deal. They propose a main overarching div-
ision between external (perceptual) and internal (mnemonic) forms of attention.
Nevertheless, Chun et al. think that these mechanisms can all be uniﬁed at a
functional–computational level, since all have the functions of selecting some
things (whether items of information or different forms of behavior) while
ﬁltering out or suppressing others, and while modulating (generally by enhancing)
the selected items.
Mechanisms that select, ﬁlter, and modulate are probably ubiquitous in cog-
nition. Indeed, as a number of authors have pointed out (Chun et al., 2011; Wu,
2011), they are also involved in action-selection, where competition among the
multiple things one could do or say at any one time is resolved by selecting and
modulating one while suppressing the others. But the causal roles of the action-
selection mechanism are very different from those of the attentional mechanisms
involved in perception. In particular, action-schemata, once selected, are imple-
mented, not globally broadcast. (On the contrary, they remain unconscious;
Jeannerod, 2006.) Indeed, when seen from this perspective, it is probably a
mistake to regard the bottom-up attentional system as genuinely attentional,
too. For it, too, is not charged with causing the global broadcast of attended
representations. Rather, it sifts among incoming representations for relevance to
current goals and values, and competes for control of the top-down system. Only
the latter results in the global broadcasting of the representations at which it is
directed.
But what of the contrast between internal and external forms of attention? We
will see in Chapter 6 that it is actually the same top-down attentional system
centered on the intraparietal sulcus (which is involved in conscious perception)
that is also implicated in the retrieval of episodic memories (resulting in the
global broadcast of sensory-involving memory representations). Distinct ancil-
lary processes are involved in each, of course. In particular, memory search uses
conceptual and other cues to activate stored representations that are processed
and evaluated for relevance through the bottom-up system. But top-down atten-
tion is employed in each case to render the selected representations conscious
(De Brigard, 2012). There is a case for saying, then, that there is a single natural
kind at the heart of the phenomena that are often described as involving
attention. This is the top-down attentional network involving especially the
frontal eye-ﬁelds and intraparietal sulcus.11
11 I will continue to use the phrase “bottom-up attention,” however (largely because it is so
entrenched in the literature), even if, as I have suggested, it is not strictly a form of attention at all.
4. the nature of attention
63

Overall, then, one can say that the mechanisms underlying attention, together
with the roles that attention plays in causing global broadcasting of perceptual
representations, are increasingly well understood. We will see in Chapter 4 that it
is these same mechanisms that are responsible for maintaining representations of
previously perceived stimuli in working memory, and also for the global broad-
casting of visual, auditory, and other images, thereby contributing to the contents
of working memory. This will give rise to an argument that the stream of
consciousness is intrinsically sensory based, which implies (if true) that amodal
attitudes are incapable of being conscious.
5. Amodal Content in Perception
The present section will argue that concepts and other amodal representations
(such as scalar representations of numerosity) are bound into the content of
perceptual experience, and are globally broadcast along with the latter. This
will set the stage for an explanation in Chapter 4 of how a working-memory
system that is sensory based can at the same time trafﬁc in amodal, conceptual
representations. We will also see in the present section how the application of
concepts to experience can change the character of the latter. This might help
us to understand how thoughts and attention can work together to generate
sensory-based contents for working memory, as we will see in Chapter 6.
5.1. Phenomenological considerations
Philosophers sometimes suggest that there is a sharp divide between perception
and cognition (Dretske, 1979; Fodor, 1983; Tye, 1995). The idea is that perceptual
systems do their work independently of conceptual ones, in such a way that the
former are encapsulated from the latter. First there is seeing and then there is
believing, and what one believes doesn’t inﬂuence what one sees. But such views
seem belied by the phenomenology of perception. When one looks out on a scene
one does not ﬁrst see uncategorized patterns, colors, and shapes, thereafter
coming to believe that there is a red car going past, a person walking, and so
on. Rather, it seems that one sees the ﬁrst moving object as a red car and the other
as a person walking. It seems that conceptual contents such as car and person are
right there in the content of conscious perception, not added later in thought.
Admittedly, there are cases that ﬁt the latter description. When one views an
ambiguous ﬁgure one might ﬁrst see it just as surfaces and shapes, only later
realizing that it is an old lady seen in proﬁle, or a Dalmatian dog in dappled light.
But this is by no means the normal case.
64
3. perception, attention, and consciousness

There are also cases, of course, where one withholds assent from what one sees,
or only comes to believe what one sees after further reﬂection. Although one sees
a performer in a magic show as plucking a coin out of a volunteer’s ear, one might
decline to believe that he really did so. And although it looks just as if he has
pulled a real rabbit out of a tiny box, one might doubt that it is a live animal until
one sees the rabbit begin to wriggle and squirm. Nevertheless, we believe what
we see by default. What we see things as will (if salient enough) automatically give
rise to an episodic memory, and will be reported as fact. Moreover,
after observing just a single episode of a cat scratching someone, one will be
apt, thereafter, to believe the generic cats scratch (Leslie et al., 2011). For these
reasons, episodes of seeing-as can be thought of as forms of perceptually embed-
ded judgment, since they have much of the distinctive functional role of judg-
ment. (See Chapter 1.1.) Cases where one doesn’t believe what one sees are best
thought of as involving a clash of judgments, one of which is perceptually
embedded and the other of which is formed by inference from background
knowledge.
Of course one can, if one prefers, insist on reserving the term “judgment” for
episodes of reﬂective belief formation. This would preserve a sharp distinction
between perception and judgment. But it would leave untouched the claim that
in episodes of seeing-as concepts are bound into the contents of vision. And it
would also leave intact the claim that there is no sharp divide between
perception and cognition generally. Moreover, it would remain true that in
many respects episodes of seeing-as are judgment-like, since by default they
issue in new beliefs and are immediately available to inform our decisions.
In what follows, therefore, I will continue to describe these as perceptually
embedded judgments.
Similar points can be made in connection with perceptions of sound, especially
heard speech. One does not ﬁrst hear patterns of phonemes, thereafter coming to
believe that the speaker is saying that a line of storms is approaching. Rather, one
hears her as saying that a line of storms is approaching. It seems that the content
of a speech act (as well as the intent behind the act—assertion, question,
command, and so on) is right there in the experience of speech itself, not
added later. Within the auditory–linguistic system itself, of course, there may
well be a stage at which phonemes are represented in the absence of conceptual
content. (Although in fact the evidence suggests that speech processing proceeds
in parallel throughout, with phonology, syntax, and semantics all being processed
at the same time in an interactive way; Hickok & Poeppel, 2007.) But by the time
the attended products of the system are globally broadcast, it seems that concepts
are thoroughly embedded in one’s conscious experience of speech.
5. amodal content in perception
65

5.2. The case from cognitive science
Introspective appearances can be deceiving, of course (Carruthers, 2011a). It
might be said that our impression of undergoing hybrid sensory–conceptual
states results merely from the regular coincidence in time between two separate
conscious events: a sensory experience and an indexical belief grounded in the
content of that experience. When one sees someone walking past in the street, for
example, it may be that two distinct mental states are globally broadcast. One is a
nonconceptual sensory experience of moving colors and shapes, and the other is
a belief with the content, That is a person walking (where the indexical that refers
to the moving colored thing represented in the perceptual state).
In this instance, however, cognitive science and introspection are largely in
agreement. Building on more than twenty years of detailed research conducted in
multiple labs, Kosslyn (1994) develops a model of high-level visual processing
that involves continual back-and-forth questioning between midlevel visual areas
and regions of association cortex (especially in the temporal lobes) that store
conceptual information about objects and events. (See Vetter & Newen, 2014, for
a recent review along the same lines.) Information from conceptual regions is
projected back to earlier stages of processing, inﬂuencing the latter, and becom-
ing a component in the perceptual state that follows visual recognition. It seems
that a conscious percept is a hybrid conceptual–nonconceptual representation,
just as our introspective access to states of seeing as and hearing as suggests.
Moreover, notice that the attempt to keep cognition separate from perception
sketched above makes use of indexicals to link the two together. But in fact such
indexicals are needed in midlevel vision as well, to enable the binding of percep-
tual properties that are processed in separate parts of the visual system. Numer-
ous vision researchers make use of the idea of object ﬁles, in particular, which can
be thought of as location-based indexicals that latch on to particular entities
(Kahneman & Triesman, 1984; Kahneman et al., 1992; Pylyshyn, 2003). But as
the name suggests, these indexicals come with folders attached, into which are
placed various forms of property-information about the individual. Using bold-
face type to indicate that a representation is a nonconceptual one (and small
capitals, as usual, to represent concepts), an object ﬁle produced by perception of
a falling tomato might have the content: THAT: red, round, smooth, moving
down. Then given that indexicals need to be employed anyway to anchor visual
percepts themselves, it seems otiose to postulate yet another set of indexicals to
anchor the perceptually based thoughts that are (it is said) globally broadcast
alongside perception. And indeed, object ﬁles are generally understood by vision
scientists to include conceptual as well as nonconceptual representations of an
66
3. perception, attention, and consciousness

object’s properties. So the full conceptual–nonconceptual content of the above
perceptual state might be: THAT: red, RED, round, ROUND, smooth, SMOOTH,
moving down, FALLING, TOMATO.12 One sees the thing as a falling tomato, in
addition to seeing its ﬁne-grained properties.
It should be stressed that in order to see something as an instance of a kind it is
not enough that one be entertaining a thought (even a thought that is seemingly
conscious) of the kind while perceiving the thing in question. Rather, the two
components need to be bound together in a single integrated representation,
resulting from the back-and-forth processing that underlies object recognition.
Turn back to examine Figure 4, in the knowledge that the picture contains,
somehow, a representation of a Dalmatian dog. If you have not seen this picture
before, it is likely that it will take you a little while to see a subset of the patterns of
dark splotches as a Dalmatian. In the intervening time you were consciously
experiencing the dots, of course, while also entertaining the concept DALMATIAN.
But it is only when recognition occurs that a subset of the dots conﬁgures into a
familiar Dalmatian shape. A plausible interpretation is that binding the concept
DALMATIAN into your perception of the dots is necessary for you to see them as
parts of a Dalmatian.
Similar considerations apply in the auditory domain. One can know what
someone is saying, and hear the sounds that they are making, without hearing the
person as saying that. For example, you are traveling with a guide in a country
where you don’t know the language, and are about to stop at a small country inn.
Your guide tells you that the ﬁrst thing your host will say to you is that you are
very welcome in his home. When your host opens the door he does, indeed, say
that. Although you know that he is saying that you are welcome, and although
you hear him quite clearly, you don’t hear him as saying that you are welcome in
his home. This is because (since you don’t know the language) the back-and-forth
interpretive process that is a necessary condition for meaning-recognition fails to
issue in a single integrated event-ﬁle into which both the sounds and their
intended meaning are bound. On the contrary, although the two components
are both present, they remain separate.
Notice, too, that in both of these examples one might be entertaining a thought
that is linked indexically to the content of one’s experience, prior to or in the
absence of recognition. While listening to one’s host speak, for instance, one
12 Note that on this account event-ﬁles are implicitly conjunctive in nature, listing a conjunction
of properties of the event. It may well be that event-ﬁles possess additional internal structure, with
slots for agent and patient roles, for example. This idea is consistent with the work of Pietroski
(2010), who suggests that conjunctive event-representations are the fundamental form of the
semantic representations that underlie linguistic meaning.
5. amodal content in perception
67

might have a thought with the content, That is him saying that I am very welcome
in his home. Yet one still does not hear him as saying that. This is because the
conceptual content isn’t linked to the sounds at the level of detail required for
hearing as, where one experiences certain aspects of the sound-sequence as
expressing speciﬁc aspects of the meaning. Something similar is true in the example
of the hidden Dalmatian. When one eventually sees some of the splotches as a
Dalmatian, one sees a subset of them as the head, others as the back left leg, and so
on. In short, when one experiences something under a concept, the conceptual and
sensory forms of information are integrated into a single sensory–conceptual
conscious event.
Another consideration in favor of the construal of perceptual content being
outlined here is its economy. Relying on only a single set of attentional mechan-
isms targeted at midlevel perceptual regions, together with mechanisms for
interactively identifying and classifying the objects of perception, the brain can
insure the global broadcast of a wide range of both conceptual and nonconcep-
tual information. As a result, stored semantic knowledge or episodic memories
can be evoked by either form of information, affective responses can be caused,
and so forth. One can then understand how a cascade of cognitive and affective
reactions can issue from a single conscious perceptual state (Barrett, 2005). If
cognition and perception are kept separate, in contrast, then one will need to
postulate a second set of mechanisms for making perceptually grounded thoughts
globally accessible, as well as a second set of indexical mechanisms to link
thoughts to perception (in addition to the object-ﬁle mechanisms already present
in the latter).
5.3. Jackendoff
A prominent dissenting voice in cognitive science to the picture sketched here is
that of Jackendoff (2007, 2012). He claims that only the midlevel, nonconceptual
contents of vision and hearing are conscious.13 When we hear people speak, for
example, we are conscious of the phonological properties of their utterances, and
we are conscious of a feeling of meaningfulness that accompanies meaningful
speech; but we are not conscious of the meaning itself. Unfortunately, however,
Jackendoff persistently conﬂates together access-consciousness and phenomenal
13 Prinz (2012) makes a very similar claim when defending his AIR theory of consciousness,
while citing Jackendoff ’s work. (“AIR” stands for “Attended Intermediate-level Representations.”)
But Prinz is more clear-headed, I think, in offering a theory of phenomenal consciousness. He does
not deny that concepts can ﬁgure in the globally broadcast contents of working memory. (Note,
however, that he is an empiricist about concepts, denying that any are genuinely amodal in
character.)
68
3. perception, attention, and consciousness

consciousness. Construed as a theory of the latter, I can (and do) agree with him.
But there are also passages where he plainly intends to be offering a theory of the
former. Yet he provides no evidence for the claim that meanings are never access-
conscious, whereas there is ample reason to think that this claim is false. Let me
elaborate.
It seems that Jackendoff’s primary intention is to provide a theory of phe-
nomenal consciousness. So construed, his “intermediate-level theory” amounts to
the claim that it is the ﬁne-grained, nonconceptual contents of one’s experiences
that constitute the latter’s phenomenal properties. This is a thesis that I agree
with (Carruthers, 2000; Veillet & Carruthers, 2011). But notice that this view is
entirely consistent with the claim that amodal conceptual representations are
bound into the contents of one’s perceptual experiences at higher levels of
processing and globally broadcast along with them. (It is also entirely consistent
with claiming that the concepts that one deploys in the course of one’s experience
can make a signiﬁcant causal difference to the phenomenal properties of that
experience, as we will see in some detail in Section 5.4.) From the fact that only
nonconceptual content is phenomenally conscious it does not begin to follow
that only nonconceptual content is access-conscious. Yet this is an inference that
Jackendoff (2007, 2012) persistently slips into making.
In fact, Jackendoff frequently uses language characteristic of access-conscious-
ness when characterizing his “unconscious meaning hypothesis.” He says that we
do not perceive the meaning of someone’s utterances, that we are not aware of the
meaning of those utterances, that meanings are “hidden from awareness,” and so
on. In support of such claims he points out that we cannot be aware of meanings
on their own. This, too, is something I agree with. Indeed, it is one of the theses
defended at length in Carruthers (2011a). But it doesn’t follow that one cannot be
aware of meanings at all (as Jackendoff seems to think). On the contrary, one
might be aware of them when bound into the content of a globally broadcast
sensory-based representation. This is the view that I have been defending here.
The claim that meanings cannot be access-conscious is obviously false,
I suggest. Indeed, in normal circumstances the heard meaning of people’s
utterances meet all of the criteria for access-consciousness. One can report
what they have said (and not just the sounds that they used to say it). One can
generally later recall at least the gist of what they said. One can respond
emotionally to the content of what was said. One can plan an appropriate
response to the content of what was said. And so on. The interpreted meaning
of the utterance is, plainly, just as globally accessible as are the sounds of the
utterance. So the meaning is access-conscious. The only real question is whether
the meaning is a constitutive part of a single auditory experience that also
5. amodal content in perception
69

represents the phonological properties of the utterance, or whether it is globally
broadcast separately as a bare amodal belief. I have been arguing that the former
of these two options is correct. The claim that meanings and concepts are not
access-conscious at all is, quite simply, a non-starter.
5.4. How concepts and perception interact online
We now know that concepts interact with visual processing at early (pre-attentive)
stages to alter the resulting perceptual contents and perceptual phenomenology.
It has long been known that concept-learning has an impact on perception
(Goldstone, 1994; Goldstone et al., 2001). Acquiring concepts that classify a set
of arbitrary similar-seeming shapes into two distinct categories, for example,
transforms the perceived similarity spaces among the shapes. Those that seemed
similar before now seem distinctively different as a result of category acquisition.
Until recently, however, it was unclear to what extent these effects reﬂect a late
decision-like stage in processing, or whether sensory experience is altered by
concepts in an online manner. But there is now ample evidence of the latter.
Thierry et al. (2009), for example, tested speakers of English and Greek on a
simple task in which they had to detect the presence of a different shape (a
square) in a sequence of brieﬂy presented colored circles. Greek differs from
English in having two distinct terms for blue: “ghalazio” for light blue and “ble”
for dark blue. All participants watched a series of blue circles (in the experi-
mental condition) on the lookout for an occasional blue square, or watched a
series of green circles (in the control condition) on the lookout for a green
square. The blue circles were either mostly light blue, with an occasional dark-
blue one inserted into the sequence, or were mostly dark blue with an occa-
sional light-blue circle. The experimenters recorded the participants’ brain
waves throughout. What they measured was the pulse of so-called “visual
mismatch negativity” over visual cortex that occurs about 200 milliseconds
following presentation of an oddball stimulus (e.g. a square following a series of
circles). This is thought to reﬂect a preattentive and unconscious stage of visual
processing, which occurs when an unexpected difference is detected in the
course of one’s experience.
All participants in this experiment showed a mismatch negativity response for
all color contrasts. Among the English speakers there was no difference between
their response to a light-green/dark-green contrast and their response to a light-
blue/dark-blue contrast. Among Greek speakers, on the other hand, the negativ-
ity response to the latter contrast was signiﬁcantly larger. This suggests that the
two blues were seen as more unlike one another than the two greens. It seems that
because Greek speakers have distinct concepts for light blue and dark blue, they
70
3. perception, attention, and consciousness

see the two colors as more unlike one another. And they do so from quite early
stages in visual processing, prior to the impact of attention or judgment.
Mo et al. (2011), too, looked at the visual mismatch negativity response (this
time among native speakers of Mandarin). As in the experiment described above,
the changes in color were irrelevant to the participants’ task. Subjects were
required to ﬁxate on a central cross ﬂanked by two colored squares, and were
asked to respond as swiftly as possible whenever the cross changed to a circle. The
squares were positioned so that the one on the left would be represented initially
in the right hemisphere whereas the one on the right would be represented
initially in the left (linguistic) hemisphere. As expected, both hemispheres
showed a mismatch negativity response to changes in the presented color. But
in the right hemisphere there was no difference in the amplitude of the response
to changes of color within a category (one shade of green changed to another
shade of green) versus across categories (a shade of green changed to a shade of
blue). However, in the left (linguistic/conceptual) hemisphere there was a sig-
niﬁcant difference, with a much larger effect for cross-category changes. Again
the early (150-millisecond) nature of these effects suggests an inﬂuence of
concepts at quite an early stage of visual processing.
One possible explanation of such results is that concept acquisition perman-
ently “warps” the processing that takes place in midlevel visual areas. This would
be consistent with maintaining that in online tasks a sharp division is maintained
between perception and cognition. However, Lupyan (2012) reviews a number of
studies suggesting that the inﬂuence of cognition on perception is an online one,
and can be eliminated in individual trials through simple manipulations. Con-
sistent with the views of Kosslyn (1994), he argues that concepts and noncon-
ceptual feature-representations interact in an online manner at early stages of
visual processing, with the former exerting a causal inﬂuence on the latter.
For example, Winawer et al. (2007) tested both English and Russian speakers
in an experiment that required participants to judge, on each trial, whether the
top color presented exactly matched the shade of one or other of the two colors
presented simultaneously below it. All the colors were shades of blue. Russian
(like Greek) has two different names for light blue and dark blue. On some trials
the two comparator shades belonged to the same Russian category, whereas on
others they belonged to different categories. There was no difference in reaction
times among English speakers in these circumstances. But Russian speakers were
signiﬁcantly faster in the cross-category trials. However, this effect was easily
reversed. Under conditions of verbal interference the effect went away, suggesting
that it depends on an online interaction between concepts and the visual system,
rather than a permanent language-caused reconﬁguration of the latter.
5. amodal content in perception
71

Consistent with this view, Lupyan and Spivey (2010a) show that a verbal cue
that is completely redundant in the circumstances (but which would nevertheless
activate the corresponding concept) assists participants in a visual discrimination
task. Throughout the forty-ﬁve-minute experiment people had to attend to arrays
of intermixed “2”s and “5”s, pressing a button as swiftly as possible if a ring
appeared around one of the “5”s. In randomly intermixed trials in which
participants heard the word “ﬁve” just before they were presented with the
stimulus array, they responded more quickly and accurately; and they did so
even for stimulus presentations as brief as 100 milliseconds. The authors suggest
that activations of the concept FIVE send anticipatory signals to visual cortex,
temporarily pulling the features distinctive of “2”s and “5”s further apart from
one another, while rendering the “5”s more perceptually similar (and therefore
easier to attend to).
In the same spirit, Lupyan and Spivey (2010b) show that an auditory cue can
render brieﬂy presented masked stimuli visible that would otherwise remain
invisible. On each trial a letter was presented on the screen for just 53 millisec-
onds, followed immediately by a 700-millisecond masking pattern. Participants
had to respond “seen” or “unseen” to each trial. Under these conditions the letters
often remained invisible. But in conditions where they heard the name of the to-
be-presented letter just prior to the stimulus presentation, discrimination
improved signiﬁcantly. It seems that activation of the relevant concept feeds
back into visual cortex, boosting baseline neural activity related to features of the
corresponding letter, thereby rendering the appearance of that letter more visible.
Of course it would be possible to maintain, in the face of all these data, that
although concepts interact with visual processing at quite early stages, visual and
conceptual contents are nevertheless globally broadcast independently of one
another. Although the data force us to relinquish any claimed independence of
perception and cognition at the level of online perceptual processing, such
independence can still be insisted on at the level of output. But such a view
now seems quite unmotivated. Given that conceptual and nonconceptual repre-
sentations interact so deeply and pervasively in perceptual processing, it makes
more sense that both should be integrated into the results of that processing,
and bound into object-ﬁles and event-ﬁles that incorporate both forms of
representation.
5.5. Two caveats
Before concluding this section, let me stress that in arguing that concepts are
bound into the contents of globally broadcast perceptual states I should not be
taken as committing myself to the idea that concepts make a constitutive
72
3. perception, attention, and consciousness

contribution to the phenomenal properties of those perceptual states. That they
make an important causal contribution to phenomenology should be obvious
from the data reviewed in Section 5.4. Deploying one or another (or no) concept
can make a large difference to the way an object seems to us, or to the way it is
phenomenally experienced. But it does not follow that concepts themselves make
a constitutive contribution to the resulting phenomenal experience. Concepts can
be constitutive components of globally broadcast perceptual states while making
only a causal contribution to the phenomenal properties of those states. (See
Veillet & Carruthers, 2011, for a defense of this combination of views.)
Let me also stress before concluding that concepts are not the only amodal
representations that can be bound into the contents of perception. On the
contrary, when one looks at a large group of objects, or listens to a swift series
of taps, a nonconceptual, amodal representation of numerosity will be bound into
the content of what one sees or hears. One thus has an impression of a number of
some approximate quantity without employing any numerical concept. Similarly,
in my view, when one looks at or imagines something attractive, a nonconcep-
tual, amodal representation of value will form part of the content of the state (this
is the valence component of one’s affective response to the thing), resulting in a
degree of seeming goodness or seeming badness attributed to the object in question
(Jackendoff, 2007; Carruthers, 2011a). It may be, too, that the spatial represen-
tations that are added to the content of what one sees (or hears or feels) are
intrinsically amodal in nature, albeit bound into the output of a particular sense
modality.
When I suggest in Chapter 4 that working memory and the stream of conscious-
ness are sensory based, then, this should certainly not be construed as claiming that
the contents of working memory are always and exclusively modality speciﬁc.
Rather, the claim will be that working-memory contents generally involve a
mixture of amodal and modality-speciﬁc representations, with the presence of
the former depending causally on the effects of attention directed toward the latter.
6. Conclusion
This chapter has reviewed some of the extensive evidence supporting a global
broadcasting account of the neural correlates of conscious experience, as well as
evidence demonstrating that global broadcasting depends on attentional signals
directed toward activity in midlevel sensory areas of the brain. This chapter has
also argued that globally broadcast perceptual representations are generally
integrated conceptual–nonconceptual hybrids, and that episodes of seeing as,
hearing as, and so on should be thought of as forms of perceptually embedded
6. conclusion
73

judgment. These claims will form an important part of the foundation for the
account of working memory to be presented in Chapter 4. For working memory
uses the same attentional apparatus to generate and sustain globally broadcast
sensory-based representations in the absence of a stimulus. The result is the
creation of a “global workspace” within which partly conceptual sensorily embed-
ded representations can be entertained and manipulated in an ofﬂine manner,
thereby creating the stream of consciousness.
74
3. perception, attention, and consciousness

4
The Nature of Working Memory
This chapter builds on the conclusions of Chapter 3. It reviews what is known
about the nature of working memory, and argues that the contents of working
memory are not only conscious but always sensory based (while also generally
including amodal conceptual information). Note that there is widespread agree-
ment that working memory provides a conscious workspace in which informa-
tion can be sustained, rehearsed, and manipulated for purposes of reasoning and
decision making. That is to say, it is a system in which conscious reﬂection can
happen. Indeed, many hold, more generally, that working memory is the system
within which the stream of consciousness plays out. Understanding its nature
may then provide the key to understanding the nature of the stream of con-
sciousness in general, and conscious reﬂection in particular.
The upshot of the argument of this chapter is to set a dilemma for traditional
accounts of reﬂective thinking: either those accounts are mistaken, and attitudes
that are wholly amodal never ﬁgure in the stream of consciousness; or there is
some other global workspace in which conscious reﬂection can take place, in
addition to the working-memory system that has been studied by cognitive
scientists hitherto. The latter idea will then be examined (under a number of
separate guises) in Chapters 5 and 7.
1. Working Memory, Imagery, and Perception
Working memory has been studied by psychologists since at least the early 1970s
(Baddeley & Hitch, 1974). Early models of working memory suggested that it
consisted of a number of subsystems, comprising a central executive and two
distinct “slave systems.” One of these latter systems was called the “phonological
loop” and was thought to be the resource underlying rehearsal of verbal infor-
mation, such as occurs when one repeats a phone number to oneself while
searching for a notepad to write it down. The other was called the “visuo-spatial
sketchpad” and was thought to underlie one’s capacity to manipulate visually

based information, such as might occur when one’s normal route home is
blocked by an accident and one needs to plan out a novel alternative in one’s
head. These two subsystems are known to be independent of one another, since
interfering with the activities of either one can leave untouched working-memory
tasks that involve the other. We will begin by discussing how these subsystems
are realized in the human brain.
1.1. Locating the systems
The executive component of working memory controls and directs the others,
and has long been known to be situated in the frontal lobes (Baddeley, 1986). The
two slave subsystems were also thought initially to be frontally based. But this
turns out to be an error. It is now known that working memory utilizes the
resources of perceptual systems, and does so in all different sense modalities, not
just two (Postle, 2006). Thus, in addition to visual and auditory forms of working
memory, there are also forms of working memory for smell, touch, propriocep-
tion, and affect, all of which implicate the resources of the relevant sensory areas
of the brain (Dade et al., 2001; Harris et al., 2002; Jeannerod, 2006; Mikels et al.,
2008). We can conclude that working memory (or at any rate the forms of
working memory that are involved in the kinds of tasks employed by psycholo-
gists) is sensory involving, at least. Indeed, whenever brain imaging has been used
to investigate the networks involved in working-memory tasks, activity in some
or other sensory area has been found that is distinctive of the involvement of
working memory, appropriate for the task demands (Postle, 2006; D’Esposito,
2007; Jonides et al., 2008; Serences et al., 2009; Sreenivasan et al., 2011).
A similar conclusion can also be reached indirectly, arising from what is
known about the nature of visual (and presumably other forms of) imagery
(Kosslyn, 1994; Pylyshyn, 2003; Kosslyn et al., 2006). Relying on an extensive
range of experimental, neuropsychological, and imaging data, Kosslyn (1994)
argues that visual imagery co-opts and utilizes the processing resources of the
visual system itself. The same top-down mechanisms that are used during online
processing of visual input to categorize and conceptualize a stimulus (described
in Chapter 3.5) are used ofﬂine to create neural activity in midlevel visual areas
similar to what would occur if an object of the appropriate kind were being
perceived. Indeed, the same category-speciﬁc patterns of activity occur in both
midlevel and higher-level areas of the temporal-cortex visual-processing stream,
no matter whether instances of those categories are perceived or imagined
(Reddy et al., 2010; Vetter et al., 2014). These patterns of activity (when attended)
are globally broadcast in the same manner as perception, entering consciousness
in the usual way (Mechelli et al., 2004). Since visual images can be equated with
76
4. the nature of working memory

the contents of the visuo-spatial sketchpad of the working-memory system, we
can conclude that the visually based component of working memory depends
upon the activity of midlevel sensory mechanisms.
It is important to realize that these claims about visual imagery are independ-
ent of the debate between Kosslyn (1994) and Pylyshyn (2003) about the imagis-
tic, pictorial nature of imagery. For both authors accept that vision and visual
imagery share mechanisms. This is all that matters for our purposes. But Kosslyn
goes on to argue, in addition, that the representational vehicles of visual imagery
(and of visual perception) are image-like, in the sense that they represent space by
using spatial relations among the representations themselves (somewhat as a
picture does). This claim is premised on the well-known ﬁnding that neurons in
visual cortex are laid out spatially across the back of the brain in a retinotopic
map, in such a way that neurons that are close to one another in the cortex receive
their input from similarly related regions of the retina and distal scene. Pylyshyn,
in contrast, thinks that this ﬁnding is irrelevant to the question of how space
is represented in the visual system, which he maintains is fully symbolic (or
language-like). In Pylyshyn’s view, the retinotopic organization of visual cortex
plays no role in explaining its representational properties.
In this debate I am inclined to side with Kosslyn. The map-like organization of
the visual system is by no means unique. As is well known, the same is true of the
organization of somatosensory cortex, the spatial arrangement of which maps a
little “homunculus” across the top of the brain. And it has been suggested that
map-like cortical systems are a central organizing principle of representation in
the brain (Riquimaroux et al., 1991; Churchland, 1993; Kaas, 1997). If so, it
makes sense that this principle should automatically be “known” by down-stream
consumer systems, in such a way that activity deriving from one portion of the
map is interpreted as deriving from the corresponding region of the world,
without this needing to be learned or explicitly signaled. However, I don’t need
to take a stand on this issue here. All that matters for our purposes is that the
same sensory mechanisms are employed in both perception and imagery.
Whether visual representation is map-like or purely symbolic, mental images
still possess their representational properties in the same way, using top-down
activation of the very same mechanisms.
1.2. Working memory and episodic memory
A line of converging argument can be gleaned from the literature on episodic
memory. This is the sort of memory that involves “re-living” an event from one’s
past. Such memories have a signiﬁcant sensory component. When remembering
an event, one re-experiences (images of) the sights, sounds, smells, and emotional
1. working memory, imagery, and perception
77

feelings involved. These images are globally broadcast and hence conscious, and
they can be sustained in working memory to be contemplated or elaborated if one
so wishes. It is widely agreed that the hippocampus plays a key role in the storage
and activation of episodic memories. In particular, it is thought to store the
spatial and temporal coordinates of the event, binding them together with
sensory (and conceptual) representations involved in the experience of the
event, located especially in midlevel regions of the various sensory cortices
(Eichenbaum et al., 2012). Indeed, a widely accepted generalization in cognitive
neuroscience is that memories are stored where they are processed, within the
same systems that gave rise to the information in the ﬁrst place (Mayes &
Roberts, 2002). Hence the experiential components of episodic memory are
stored in the relevant sensory cortices, and activating and sustaining this episodic
information within working memory will depend on the same sensory regions.
It may be worth noting that the present perspective (which unites together into
a single framework of working memory, episodic memory, and the global
broadcast of attended sensory representations) has the resources to explain one
of the most well-established ﬁndings about episodic memory. This is its con-
structive nature (Cowan, 1995; Schacter, 2001). Such memories tend to get
elaborated each time they are activated, relying on tacit inferences to embellish
the memory with extra properties and components (which sometimes really did
ﬁgure in the original event, but often did not). These are then stored as part of the
episodic memory and re-activated with it on the next occasion the memory is
recalled. Why this should happen is easy to understand if we accept that episodic
memories are globally broadcast in the same manner as perception. For they will
then be accessed by all of the conceptual and inferential systems that normally
form expectations in an online manner from perceptual input. So whatever these
systems produce as output when receiving an activated episodic memory as input
will tend to get linked to the latter, and stored with it thereafter.
There is another beneﬁt of understanding the working-memory system as
involving the same mechanisms as are used in episodic remembering and in
the global broadcast of attended sensory representations. This is that it enables us
to provide a unifying account of the mechanisms that sustain a representation in
working memory and (one of) the mechanisms that generates content for work-
ing memory. (The role of mental rehearsals of action in creating content will be
discussed in Section 4.) From this perspective, when one is required to keep in
mind one or more perceptually presented items, one uses a combination of
conceptual and contextual cues to identify those items and to guide the focus
of attention onto them, thereby keeping active (and globally broadcasting) the
neural patterns that represent them. The same thing happens when one activates
78
4. the nature of working memory

a long-term memory into working memory: contextually relevant cues are used
to activate a set of representations in long-term memory, which are then targeted
by attention and become globally accessible. Likewise, too, when one needs to
create content for working memory de novo (as when one is asked to imagine
some unusual things one could do with a brick): weakly associatively linked
conceptual cues are used to activate representations of actions or events involving
bricks, which are targeted by attention and globally broadcast for consideration.
These ideas will be elaborated in Chapter 6.
1.3. Conceptual involvement in working memory
It is important to stress that although the contents of working memory are
sensory based (or at least sensory involving—the stronger conclusion will be
defended in due course) they generally also have conceptual information
bound into them. I will emphasize this point in connection with inner speech
(the “phonological loop”) in Section 4. Here I will focus on visual imagery (the
“visuo-spatial sketchpad”).
We described in Chapter 3.5 how conceptual representations are generally
bound into the contents of perception, resulting from the back-and-forth pro-
cessing between conceptual and midlevel sensory areas that issues in perceptual
identiﬁcation and categorization. The same is true of visual imagery, just as one
might predict from the fact that perception and imagery share mechanisms. The
difference is just that activated concepts are often the top-down causes of the
sensory components of imagery. Cued to recall an image of one’s mother’s face,
for example, it will be the concept of one’s mother that guides the search for
stored visual representations, and which helps to target attention onto them
when found. The resulting globally broadcast representation will then have the
concept MOTHER bound into it. Likewise when cued to recall one’s college gradu-
ation, conceptual information will be used to target a search for episodic mem-
ories that are then activated, sustained, and elaborated in working memory. The
resulting images will be experienced as being about one’s graduation, generally
with a good deal of additional conceptual information (relating to people, places,
and times) bound into them.
There is every reason to think, however, that in order for amodal conceptual
information to be globally broadcast along with a visual image it needs to be
bound into the content of that image, using the same kind of back-and-forth
processing that binds concepts into the content of perception. Recall that it is not
sufﬁcient for one to see the pattern represented in Figure 4 as a Dalmatian that
one should have the concept DALMATIAN activated while perceiving the ﬁgure. It is
only when the process of visual search is resolved and the concept is matched or
1. working memory, imagery, and perception
79

ﬁtted with the stimulus that one sees the ﬁgure as a Dalmatian, and the concept
DALMATIAN then becomes bound into the globally broadcast object-ﬁle. The same
holds for visual imagery. Entertaining the concept DALMATIAN while imagining
some black-and-white splotches is by no means sufﬁcient for one to have a
conscious image of a Dalmatian dog. This point is familiar from failures of visual
memory search. When trying to recall what Mary looks like one generates a
variety of face-like or face-involving images. So one’s concept MARY will be
activated while one entertains various facial images. But it is only when one
retrieves an image of a face that is sufﬁciently Mary-like to ground recognition
that one experiences the result as an image of Mary’s face.
A converging body of evidence demonstrates, then, that working memory (at
least frequently, or in the kinds of task standardly employed by psychologists) is
sensory involving. The contents of working memory always or often include
sensory images as well as conceptual information, where the former can be
drawn from any sensory modality. These images are caused by attentional signals
directed at content-appropriate neural activity in midlevel sensory areas, much as
if an object or event of the relevant kind were being perceived. In due course we
will consider whether such sensory images are a mere by-product of the normal
operation of working memory, or whether they are integral to its functioning.
1.4. Attitudes in working memory
Chapter 3.5 argued that perception can contain a limited class of sensorily
embedded attitudes, especially sensorily embedded judgments and desires. To
what extent is the same true of working memory? I will continue to focus here on
the visual domain, holding back any discussion of inner speech to Section 4.
Since concepts can be bound into the contents of visual imagery, it is plain that
such imagery can embed attitudes of propositional imagining. If one forms a
visual image of a tropical beach, including images of golden sand, blue sea, and
palm trees, then one is at the same time imagining that there is a beach of golden
sand containing palm trees next to a blue sea. The image itself contains both
conceptual and nonconceptual representations, just as does one’s perception of a
tropical beach. And here, too, the conceptual components can be thought of as
amounting to a sensorily embedded propositional attitude—in this case the
attitude of imagining.
Visual imagination of a tropical beach, when attended to and globally broad-
cast, will be received as input by one’s valuation systems, often giving rise to an
affective reaction of some sort. This, too, can become a component of one’s
conscious experience, leading one to see the imagined beach as good, for example.
(Recall that this is the valence dimension of affect.) The resulting state can be
80
4. the nature of working memory

thought of as a kind of sensorily embedded propositional desire. (In Carruthers,
2011a, I characterize such states as momentary felt desires.) For we know from the
literature on prospective reasoning that such states are intrinsically motivating
(Gilbert & Wilson, 2007), and they can be thought of as directed toward the
conceptual content of the image.
Episodic memories, too, when activated into working memory, can embed the
propositional attitude of remembering the conceptual contents of the memory.
An episodic memory of one’s college graduation, for example, might contain a
range of nonconceptual details relating to the event, such as the distinctive accent
of the main speaker. But it will also generally embed quite a bit of conceptual
information. It seems likely that such states will automatically, by default, assume
the causal roles of memory—guiding inference and planning on the assumption
of truth—without needing to be interpreted and classiﬁed as such. Although one
might create the very same set of images as part of a fantasy of some sort, the
swiftness and effortlessness with which episodic memories are generally evoked is
probably a cue that leads them to be relied on as true by default.
What of semantic memories? Can they, too, enter the stream of consciousness
by being embedded in the content of a visual image? It certainly seems plausible
that semantic information that is stored in visual or spatial format can do so. For
example, one might recall that New York City is north-east of Washington by
calling to mind an image of a map of the United States, on which distinct
locations are seen as New York and Washington respectively. In such cases,
however, I am much less conﬁdent that the images can acquire the causal roles of
memory without being interpreted and classiﬁed as such. This is because visual
imagery is a ubiquitous component of many people’s stream of consciousness
(Heavey & Hurlburt, 2008). How, then, are the consumer systems that feed off
globally broadcast working-memory contents to know which ones should be
treated as fact, and which as fantasy? (In the case of episodic memory, in contrast,
the effortlessness of image formation combined with approximate past-tense
content might provide sufﬁcient cues to trigger a default setting of treat-as-true.)
It seems very likely that representations of attitudes of many different kinds
can be bound into the content of visual imagery as a result of the interpretive
work of the mindreading faculty, using the same back-and-forth processing that
is responsible for other forms of sensorily embedded conceptual content. When
entertaining an image of a Caribbean beach, for example, one might experience
oneself as wondering whether to go there on vacation. The resulting state would
comprise mixed sensory–conceptual representations somewhat as follows: THAT:
golden, BEACH WITH PALM TREES, THIS IS A WONDERING WHETHER [GO THERE]. Likewise
if the image is followed by a visual image of one’s nearby airport, one might
1. working memory, imagery, and perception
81

interpret oneself as deciding to ﬂy to the Caribbean, and experience the episode
accordingly. Notice, though, that the states in question are sensorily embedded
(higher-order) judgments, rather than events of the represented kinds.1 (In the
ﬁrst case the embedded judgment is that one is wondering, in the second case the
judgment is that one is deciding.) As we remarked in Chapter 1.1, this might
explain why we so naturally take our reﬂections to include attitude events of all
kinds within them (including attitudes that are amodal in nature). The explan-
ation is that this is how our stream of consciousness often presents itself to us.
I conclude that only a limited range of propositional attitudes can be embed-
ded in the content of visual working memory. Attitudes of imagining, wanting,
and remembering can do so, as can sensorily embedded higher-order judgments
about the presence of any of a much larger range of attitudes. But it seems
unlikely that goals, decisions, or intentions (among others) can ever ﬁgure in
the contents of working memory. For these events are purely amodal.
2. Working Memory and Consciousness
This section will consider the relationship between working memory and con-
sciousness. It will argue that the contents of working memory are always conscious,
just as might be predicted if working memory relies on the same attentional
mechanisms as does conscious perception. (It will also consider whether the
contents of working memory exhaust the contents of consciousness.) The section
will thus establish that working memory is a sort of global workspace, enabling us to
identify it as the system (or at least a system) that realizes the stream of conscious-
ness. Understanding how the contents of working memory are determined (to be
discussed later in this and subsequent chapters) will then enable us to understand
the stream of consciousness and the nature of conscious reﬂection (or at least
important aspects thereof).
2.1. Are conscious states always contained in working memory?
Baars (1988) suggests that conscious states are a subset of the contents of working
memory. Mental states are conscious, he thinks, only when they are in the
spotlight of attention, and thus when they are currently being globally broadcast.
But working memory can apparently include a good deal more than this. In
1 As we will see in Chapter 7, sensorily embedded attitude representations can assume causal
roles a bit like those of the represented attitudes. Interpreting oneself as having decided, one then
might regard oneself as obliged to do what one takes oneself to have decided to do, and therefore
does it (even if no decision has ever really been made). I will argue in Chapter 7, however, that the
causal roles of such events are too different for them to qualify as attitudes of the relevant kinds.
82
4. the nature of working memory

conversation, or when reading text, for example, one needs to keep in mind what
was recently said (or written) in order to understand and interpret what is
currently being said, or what is currently being read. While this information is
not conscious at that moment, it remains readily accessible to consciousness, and
thus belongs among the contents of working memory, in Baars’ view.
The basic ﬁnding appealed to here—the ready accessibility of memories of
recently experienced items—is correct. It is well established that language com-
prehension depends fundamentally on the comparative accessibility of various
sorts of representation—syntactic, semantic, pragmatic, and so forth (Sperber &
Wilson, 1995). But it is doubtful whether it is the working-memory system that is
involved. For if it were, the result would far exceed the limit of around four
chunks of information that is characteristic of working memory (Cowan, 2001).
Some use the term “long-term working memory” in this connection, suggesting
that it is a separate system (Ericsson & Kintsch, 1995). But it is more likely that
what is involved is just regular long-term memory, subject to the fast initial decay
rates that characterize such memory in the absence of special emotional signiﬁ-
cance, on the one hand, or rehearsal and consolidation, on the other (Schacter,
2001). A great deal can be recalled from the long-term memory system over the
time-frames that govern a normal conversation, but most of this will be lost
thereafter. Hence long-term working memory is really just activated (or recently
activated) long-term memory (Cowan, 1988).
It is important to realize that although they are intimately related, working
memory and global availability are conceptually distinct. For working memory
involves globally broadcast sensory-involving representations that are not just
experienced but sustained. That then leaves open the possibility that some of
what is globally broadcast never enters working memory because it is never held
in place by top-down attention. Put differently: since working memory is a form
of actively sustained memory, much of what is consciously experienced may
never enter working memory because no steps are taken to keep it actively in
mind. Such experiences are, rather, purely ephemeral, decaying swiftly in the
absence of sustained attention. This is, I think, the position of Prinz (2012):
conscious states are ones that are available to working memory rather than in
working memory. This is because conscious states are those that are globally
broadcast as a result of initial attention, but may or may not be sustained in place
thereafter, which is what is required for them to belong among the contents of
working memory. Anything globally broadcast is available to be kept active in
working memory, but much may not be.
If Prinz (2012) is correct, then all working-memory contents are thereby
conscious, but much may be conscious without ever being sustained in working
2. working memory and consciousness
83

memory. Note that the asymmetry envisaged here is diachronic. The amount that
can be conscious over a given period of time may far exceed what enters working
memory over the same period. Consistently with this, one might nevertheless
claim that the amount of information that can be globally broadcast at any one
time is no more or less than can be held in memory at that time. Since both
depend on the limited resources of top-down attention (as we will see in
Section 3), such a claim might make sense. But equally, since the role of attention
is to boost neural activity in midlevel sensory areas beyond a threshold for global
broadcast (as we saw in Chapter 3.4), it may be that the amount of perceptual
information that can be broadcast exceeds what can be sustained in working
memory. This is because neural activity in the former case will already be high,
driven by external stimuli in a bottom-up manner. Fewer attentional resources
should therefore be required for global broadcasting to occur.
A famous experiment by Sperling (1960) is often thought to support the latter
position. If a random array of letters and shapes is ﬂashed brieﬂy in a three-by-
four grid, and thereafter backward-masked, subjects will report that they saw all
twelve items clearly; but when asked to report the nature of those items (which
letters? which numbers?) they can describe only about four. From these data
alone one might conclude that the extent of conscious experience is quite limited,
with people’s own claims about the richness of their initial experience dismissed
as a pervasive error. However, what Sperling found was that if subjects are cued,
post-presentation, to report just one line in the grid, then they can report all four
items. This suggests that people did, indeed, experience all twelve items in
enough detail to identify them, with their later failures to report many of those
items resulting from the limits in their capacity to sustain representations in
working memory for long enough to formulate a report.
These early ﬁndings have since been consolidated and extended. Using a
change-blindness paradigm, Landman et al. (2003) show that recall is near ceiling
for an eight-item display of patterned shapes across a 1500-millisecond interval
when the location of the item to be recalled is cued during the interval. This, too,
suggests that the contents of conscious experience are richer than those that can
be retained in working memory, since the limit on the latter is known to be about
four items (Cowan, 2001). Moreover, in an experiment in which changes in the
size and orientation of the items are randomly mixed, a post-presentation cue still
proves effective (Landman et al., 2003), suggesting that size and orientation
properties had already been bound together across all items in the array. Similar
results are reported by Sligte et al. (2008), also using change-blindness. When
cued post-presentation to the location of an item in a thirty-two-item or sixteen-
item display, people can then determine whether change has taken place in that
84
4. the nature of working memory

item in the display presented shortly thereafter. While performance is by no
means at ceiling for this number of items, across a variety of control conditions it
remains at least twice as good as the four-item limit in equivalent working-
memory tasks.
While it is natural to interpret such results as supporting people’s subjective
sense that they are conscious of more than they can subsequently report, other
possibilities remain. One is that the richer body of information reverberates in
some sort of visual short-term memory store without yet being globally broad-
cast, only becoming so when attention is drawn to particular items by the post-
presentation cue. It is possible that only the gist of a complex scene is initially
conscious, with conscious awareness thereafter being subject to the same atten-
tional limits as those that constrain working memory. So it has not yet been
established that the richness and detail contained in experience at any one time
can outstrip the amount of information that can be sustained in working memory
at that time.
This debate is somewhat peripheral to the main topic of this book, however.
What matters for our purposes is that the contents of working memory depend
on the same attentional and global broadcasting mechanisms as do conscious
forms of perception, not whether the contents of the latter can outstrip the
former. So the important claim, here, is just that the contents of working memory
are always conscious (that is, globally broadcast or globally available). While this
claim is widely accepted by cognitive scientists, it has been denied by some. We
will consider their arguments next.2
2.2. Unconscious working memory?
We turn now to the question whether the contents of working memory are
always conscious. Hassin et al. (2009) develop a novel experimental paradigm
intended to test for the presence of unconscious working memory. Circles are
presented sequentially at the intersections of the lines in a large rectangular grid.
2 It is worth noting that the richness attributed to conscious experience, in comparison to the
paucity of working memory, would only be modest, even if we took the results of the studies
considered above at face value. They certainly should not lead us to endorse the common-sense view
that one’s entire visual ﬁeld is experienced in rich detail at every moment. On the contrary, such
strong claims are known to be false, as demonstrated by a raft of inattentional blindness and change-
blindness experiments, as well as the known paucity of discrimination in the periphery of the visual
ﬁeld. What is consciously experienced depends on the direction of attention, and attention is a
limited resource. The claim considered above is only that this resource can generate a richer set of
globally broadcast representations when it impacts neural activity that is externally caused, in
perception, than when attention is used endogenously to sustain the broadcast of such representa-
tions in working memory.
2. working memory and consciousness
85

Circles are either ﬁlled or empty, and the participants’ task is simply to press a
button as swiftly and accurately as possible to indicate which. Each trial consists
of a sequence of ﬁve presented circles. In one sort of condition the sequence
forms a simple spatial pattern (such as a zigzag), with the ﬁnal instance in the
sequence conforming to the pattern. In another condition the ﬁrst four instances
in the sequence conform to a pattern but the ﬁfth deviates from it. (There is also a
control condition in which there is no pattern.) People are signiﬁcantly faster to
judge the ﬁfth item in the series in the predictable condition than in the counter-
prediction one. But they are generally unaware of the pattern itself, whether
measured by verbal report, or recognition immediately afterward. Moreover,
there is no improvement in performance when people are made aware of the
existence of the patterns and asked to look for them.
In order to explain these differences in performance we need to suppose that
some sort of memory of the position of each circle in the sequence is retained
long enough for the pattern to be computed, thereby generating an expectation
regarding the location of the ﬁfth circle in the series. But it is far from clear that
this is a form of working memory, with the representations in question sustained
through some kind of executive control. Sensory short-term memory may be
sufﬁcient to explain the effect. For people’s reaction times in this experiment are,
on average, around half a second, and the interval between each response and the
presentation of the next item is only 150 milliseconds. So the ﬁrst four items
within each series will have been responded to in less than two and a half seconds,
with the ﬁrst three items completed in less than two seconds. (Recall from
Chapter 1.3 that the limit of sensory short-term memory is thought to be about
two seconds.) And just as with priming effects generally, it is possible that the
mechanisms that extract patterns from sequential data operate automatically,
outside of executive control.
Moreover, even if records of the initial items in the sequence are sustained in
working memory by top-down attention, it still does not follow from these data
that there is such a thing as unconscious working memory. All that follows is that
the computed pattern, and the expectation that results from it regarding the
position of the ﬁfth item in the series, are not among the contents of working
memory. But this should not be surprising. In general, multiple inferences will be
drawn from any given set of globally broadcast representations, generated by
numerous different consumer systems. The results of these computations will
need to compete with one another, and with ongoing input from perception, to
gain entry into working memory, thereby becoming globally accessible in their
own right. Yet even when they are unsuccessful, they may still exert an inﬂuence
on subsequent cognition and behavior.
86
4. the nature of working memory

Soto et al. (2011) also claim to show the existence of unconscious working
memory. People are brieﬂy presented with Gabor patches of one orientation or
another, which are then masked and often remain invisible. But they are told to
attempt to identify the orientation of the patches (whether seen or not), and their
task is to judge whether a consciously perceived patch presented shortly there-
after is rotated clockwise or counterclockwise relative to the initial stimulus. Since
people perform signiﬁcantly better than they would by chance in trials in which
the initial patch remains completely invisible, the experimenters argue that
people must be able to sustain an unconscious working-memory representation
of the unseen stimulus to guide their explicit response. Indeed, people are also
above chance even when an intervening (and consciously perceived) distractor
pattern is presented between the initial stimulus and the required judgment,
which should overwrite any sensory short-term memory that remains.
This last ﬁnding suggests that people’s performance in the experiment depends
on attention directed at the unseen stimulus, but does not demonstrate it. And
unfortunately, the experiment failed to include an unattended control condition
to demonstrate that the effect goes away if people fail to attend. However, even if
we grant the point, these data do nothing to challenge the basic picture of
working memory as dependent on attention directed at midlevel sensory areas,
which then issues in the global broadcast of the attended representations. For we
have already allowed in Chapter 3.3 that attention can boost the processing of a
stimulus without rendering it conscious. There we reviewed the results of
Kentridge et al. (2008), which show that attention can modulate the processing
of an unconsciously perceived target. Hence attention directed at an unseen
stimulus might have an effect on later choice-behavior without a representation
of the stimulus ever becoming globally broadcast or entering working memory.
Consistent with this interpretation, it should be noted that people’s gains in
performance in the experiments conducted by Soto et al. (2011) were quite
minor. On average, people correctly guessed the orientation of the unseen patch
on around 56 percent of trials, only slightly (albeit signiﬁcantly) better than chance.
It might be replied that even a small effect of attention in sustaining a
representation in the face of distraction should count as a kind of working
memory. I won’t quibble over the label. But the main function of working
memory appears to lie in its capacity to globally broadcast representations to
many different regions of the brain, thereby providing a central workspace that
can coordinate the activities of different components. That is missing here. And
in any case there is nothing in the data to challenge the idea that the contents of
working memory are always sensory dependent, which is the main conclusion
toward which this chapter is working.
2. working memory and consciousness
87

Finally, Hassin (2013) reviews the results of a number of experiments while
arguing for fully unconscious forms of working memory. But in addition to data
like those reviewed above, all of his points concern unconscious inferences and
unconscious kinds of executive function or decision making. But these should not
be in dispute. It is the contents of working memory that are globally broadcast
and conscious, not the executive processes that direct attention and issue in
mental rehearsals of action. (For more on the latter, see Section 4.) Moreover,
many of the inferences that are drawn from globally broadcast contents take
place unconsciously, and their results are often themselves not globally broadcast.
Hassin (2013) cites a study by Lau & Passingham (2007), for example, as
showing that control mechanisms can operate unconsciously. Participants
switched back and forth between two simple tasks, with the task that they should
perform on a given trial being signaled by a consciously accessible cue. On some
trials participants also received a subliminal cue, which could either be congruent
or incongruent with the explicit one. The behavioral results (conﬁrmed by fMRI
data) showed that task-setting control mechanisms were activated by the sub-
liminal cues: when the two forms of cue were incongruent, people were slower
and less accurate in their responses. Such data are entirely in line with the
perspective being developed in this book: control processes take place outside
of awareness, helping to determine the contents of working memory without ever
ﬁguring among those contents themselves. There is nothing here to challenge the
claim that the contents of working memory are always conscious.
3. Working Memory and Attention
This section will argue that the contents of working memory depend on the
operation of the very same attentional mechanisms that determine the content of
conscious perception. This will be an important step toward the conclusion that
working memory is not just sensory involving but sensory dependent. We will
also point out that there is no evidence that attentional signals can be directed
toward brain regions outside of sensory processing areas.
3.1. Evidence that working memory depends on attention
The groundwork for our discussion has already been laid in Chapter 3.3, where
it was argued that conscious experience is dependent upon attention, and in
Chapter 3.4, where the nature of the attentional mechanisms in the brain was
discussed. We have already noted, in Section 2, that there is widespread agreement
that the contents of working memory are conscious, and also that the few counter-
arguments against this claim are unsound. This suggests that the contents of
88
4. the nature of working memory

working memory may be attention dependent. And indeed, there is now wide-
spread agreement that this is so (Awh & Jonides, 2001; Engle, 2002; Cowan et al.,
2005; Lepsien & Nobre, 2006; Knudsen, 2007; Mayer et al., 2007; Unsworth &
Engle, 2007; Berryhill et al., 2011; Lepsien et al., 2011; Zanto et al., 2011; Gazzaley &
Nobre, 2012; Rottschy et al., 2012). At the very least it can be said that working
memory is attention involving, since the same brain regions that are involved in the
control of top-down attention (speciﬁcally dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, the
frontal eye-ﬁelds, and the intraparietal sulcus; see Figure 2) seem always to be
differentially active in working-memory tasks.
One reason for thinking that working memory is attention dependent, and not
just attention involving, is that the limits on working-memory capacity appear to
be closely tied to the limits of attentional capacity. One strand of evidence that
this is so comes from studies showing that activity in the intraparietal sulcus (and
only the intraparietal sulcus) increases as the number of items to be remembered
also increases, but then levels off at the working-memory limit of about four
items (Todd & Marois, 2004; Ikkai et al., 2010). A natural construal of this ﬁnding
is that more attention is required as additional items need to be held active in
memory, but that attention is a limited resource whose limits are the cause of
working-memory limits. Another strand of evidence is that people’s working-
memory abilities correlate well with measures of attentional capacity (Cowan
et al., 2005). For example, individual working-memory span correlates with
success in an antisaccade task, in which people are required to look in the
opposite direction to a cue (Kane et al., 2001), and also with performance in a
variety of other attention-requiring tasks (Engle, 2002; Unsworth & Spillers,
2010; Shipstead et al., 2012).
Additional evidence that working memory is attention dependent comes
from lesion studies conducted with both humans and monkeys (Curtis, 2006).
In particular, lesions in either the frontal eye-ﬁelds or around the intraparietal
sulcus produce impaired performance in working-memory tasks. (Note that
these are crucial components of the top-down attentional network.) In humans,
however, it may be preferable to rely on evidence from transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS), because of its greater site-speciﬁcity. (Brain lesions caused by
injury, as opposed to the targeted surgery employed with monkeys, will generally
also impact a range of nearby areas.) TMS is known to disrupt neural activity in
brain regions to which it is applied, thereby adding noise to whatever processing
is being conducted in those regions, in effect inducing a temporary lesion. Hence
impairments in working memory induced by TMS applied to elements of the
attention network provide strong evidence that attention is necessary for normal
working-memory operation.
3. working memory and attention
89

Numerous TMS studies have demonstrated the importance of dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex for working memory, and especially for the latter’s executive
component (Mottaghy, 2006). As we noted in Chapter 3.4, this is also the main
executive region for top-down forms of attention. Other TMS studies have
demonstrated an important role for regions around the intraparietal sulcus
(Koch et al., 2005), including one showing that disruptions to this region interfere
with tasks involving verbal working memory (Mottaghy et al., 2002). This is
consistent with the evidence reviewed in Chapter 3.4 that the intraparietal sulcus
is part of a multimodal attentional system, and is not just restricted to vision.3
If working memory is dependent on the same attentional network that under-
lies conscious perception, then one would predict that improvements in working-
memory capacity, resulting from intensive working-memory training, should
result in improvements in attentional tasks. (A number of recent studies have
demonstrated that working-memory abilities can be improved by training. See
Jaeggi et al., 2008, 2011; Chein & Morrison, 2010; Brehmer et al., 2012.) This
prediction is conﬁrmed by Kundu et al. (2013). They used intensive training on
an n-back task (which has been found to cause improvements in working-
memory abilities generally, as we will see in Chapter 5), combined with measures
of functional connectivity among the regions of the fronto-parietal-visual atten-
tional network, as well as a behavioral measure of visual attention ability. They
found that working-memory training induced improved functional connectivity
in all regions of the network, combined with improved visual retention and visual
search abilities.
3.2. Dissociating working memory and attention?
In contrast with the evidence reviewed above that working memory depends on
attentional mechanisms, Lewis-Peacock et al. (2012) claim to ﬁnd a dissociation
between working memory and attention. Their work builds on the ﬁnding that
different brain regions are used to process faces, natural scenes, and everyday
objects respectively. They combined this with multivariate pattern analysis of
fMRI data to determine, for each person, the extent to which the relevant brain
region is active. In their ﬁrst experiment participants initially learned a set of
paired associates from these three categories, such as a face paired with a scene, or
a scene paired with a household item. (Their second experiment was designed to
3 A further study used TMS to show that distinct regions of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex are
involved in working-memory retention (keeping in mind a list of words) and in working-memory
manipulation (alphabetizing a recalled list of words) respectively, but failed to ﬁnd such a dissoci-
ation (while continuing to ﬁnd disruption of working memory) from TMS applied to the intrapar-
ietal sulcus (Postle et al., 2006).
90
4. the nature of working memory

control for alternative explanations of the data obtained from the ﬁrst, and used
words, pronounceable pseudo-words, and line drawings, with similar results.)
Participants were then placed in the scanner and presented (for one second) with
an item from each learned pair. After a delay of eleven seconds they were then
presented with a putative paired associate for the initial item, and required to
judge whether it was, indeed, the appropriate member of the pair. The crucial
feature of the experiment, which enabled the effects of attention to be pulled
apart from working memory, was that on some trials four distractor items drawn
from the third irrelevant category were swiftly presented over a two-second
period (for half a second each) during the retention interval. By assumption,
this would draw attention away from the task-relevant item that was being
retained in working memory.
Lewis-Peacock et al. (2012) were able to construct a continuous mapping of
activity in the three content-related brain areas during the retention interval.
What they observed was sustained activity in the relevant area while an item was
in the focus of attention. However, activity dropped to baseline when attention
was withdrawn; yet this had no effect on working-memory performance. Hence
(the experimenters reason) items can remain in working memory to guide
successful performance even when they are not in the focus of attention. In
which case working memory is not entirely attention dependent.
This conclusion is by no means forced on us, however. For we noted in
Section 2 that some scientists have introduced a concept of long-term working
memory, precisely to cover cases where information is no longer maintained in an
active state, but where it nevertheless remains readily accessible (Ericsson &
Kintsch, 1995). Indeed, Lewis-Peacock et al. (2012) themselves indicate that the
mechanisms involved in the two cases are likely to be quite different. In one
(working memory properly so-called), neural activity corresponding to the target
item is sustained through top-down attention. In the other, temporary synaptic
bindings have been created (presumably as a result of prior attention), in such a
way that contextual cues can easily re-activate just such a pattern. Since they are
so different, it would only invite confusion to describe these both as forms of
working memory. Hence there is nothing here to challenge the claim that
working memory, properly so-called, depends upon the same attentional mech-
anisms that issue in conscious forms of perception.
3.3. Attention outside of sensory areas?
In Chapter 3.4 we noted that attentional signals appear to be directed especially at
midlevel sensory areas. It is important to stress that there is no evidence that they
can be directed toward association areas of temporal and parietal cortex, or
3. working memory and attention
91

toward prefrontal cortex. While the intraparietal sulcus, in particular, has recip-
rocal functional connections with many of these areas, there is no evidence to
suggest that these enable a corresponding direction of attention (Uddin et al.,
2010; Bisley, 2011). Such connections may serve to carry signals from frontal and
temporal cortex to guide the direction of attention (as well as signaling back that
such direction is taking place). But it appears that attention itself has an exclu-
sively sensory focus.
To illustrate, Cristescu et al. (2006) devised an experiment in which partici-
pants were either cued to the spatial location of an upcoming target word (which
would need to be sustained in working memory until the word arrived), or they
were cued to the semantic category (tools versus animals) of an upcoming word.
As one might predict, people were faster at identifying real words versus pro-
nounceable pseudo-words when given a valid advance cue (whether spatial or
semantic). Using fMRI, regions of frontal and temporal cortex in the left hemi-
sphere that are associated with semantic analysis of words were found to be
differentially active in the semantic-cue condition. But the important point for
our purposes is that both conditions activated the same fronto-parietal network
centered on the frontal eye-ﬁelds and intraparietal sulcus, together with midlevel
regions of visual cortex. Taken together with the other ﬁndings reviewed earlier,
the most plausible interpretation of these data is that while regions of cortex
associated with semantic processing were activated by the semantic cues, those
regions were used to inform and direct the sensory-based attentional system,
rather than being a target of attention in their own right.
The overall conclusion of this section, then, is that the contents of working
memory depend upon the same attentional mechanisms that issue in the global
broadcast of perceptual information. This provides important support for the
view being proposed here, that working memory is sensory dependent.
4. Mental Rehearsal
Our focus so far in this chapter has been on the role of attention in activating and
sustaining sensory-involving representations (especially visual ones) in working
memory, thereby rendering them conscious. But the functions of working mem-
ory are said to include not only capacities to activate and sustain, but also to
rehearse and manipulate mental representations. Only the sustaining function is
strictly a form of memory. But we noted in Section 1 that the same mechanisms
that are used to sustain an already-existing globally broadcast representation can
also be used to activate such representations in the ﬁrst place, thereby creating,
and not just sustaining, contents for working memory. Rehearsal is the other
92
4. the nature of working memory

main mechanism that can generate content for working memory (as well as
refreshing it thereafter, successively re-activating the representations involved
and thereby approximating or simulating the role of memory). Rehearsal will
form the topic of the present section. Manipulation, on the other hand, refers to
capacities to transform and sequence working-memory representations (gener-
ally in the service of some goal or goals). This will be discussed in Chapter 6.
4.1. Mental rehearsal and motor imagery
Mental rehearsal can be equated with the processes that generate motor imagery,
including, but by no means restricted to, the contents of the phonological loop.4
Motor imagery has been much studied in recent decades, and its nature is now
well understood, at least in outline (Jeannerod, 2006). Interestingly, the core
architecture underlying it probably evolved initially for other purposes, speciﬁc-
ally for the control and swift online correction of overt actions. That story needs
to be told ﬁrst.
People with some knowledge of vision science will be familiar with the concept
of corollary discharge or efference copy (Palmer, 1999). Each time one moves one’s
eyes a copy of the motor instruction involved is sent to visual centers of the brain
to correct for the resulting movement of stimuli across the retina. When the two
sources of information are integrated, one can see the world as remaining still
despite a sideways shift of its representation on the retina, and one can see
moving objects as moving more slowly (or faster, given an eye movement in
the same direction) than the movement of their images across the retina would
otherwise suggest. It turns out, however, that similar phenomena are by no means
restricted to vision, and that efference copies are in fact employed, not just in
sensory processing, but in the control of action.
Whenever actions are initiated, efference copies of the motor instructions
involved are sent to one or more emulator systems containing an implicit
model of the kinematics of the body. There they are used to generate so-called
“forward models” of the expected sensory consequences of the movement. These
models, in turn, are received by one or more comparator systems, where they are
matched against the afferent sensory feedback resulting from the movement as it
unfolds (Wolpert & Kawato, 1998; Wolpert & Ghahramani, 2000; Grush, 2004;
Jeannerod, 2006). Adjustments in the movement can thus be made as the action
4 The term “motor image” is something of a misnomer, however, as we will see. Motor images are
images that are caused by ofﬂine motor instructions, but they are nevertheless in sensory format.
Understood narrowly, motor images are restricted to proprioceptive representations. But under-
stood more broadly, they can include motor-caused visual and auditory images.
4. mental rehearsal
93

proceeds, for example when a grasped object turns out to be heavier or lighter
than expected. Note that these forward models, although caused by sets of motor
instructions, are in sensory format for comparison with the afferent feedback.
The format can be auditory (especially in the case of speech), visual, tactile, or
proprioceptive. For the most part forward models remain unconscious, and they
do their work unconsciously (Jeannerod, 2006).
Motor images result when motor instructions are activated in an off-line
fashion, with output to the muscles suppressed. The efference copies of those
instructions are still generated and transformed into sensory forward models.
(Note that only proprioceptive forward models are generally referred to as “motor
images,” although visual and auditory images can be produced in the very same
way.) When attended, these images can become conscious. Moreover, proprio-
ceptive imagery appears to be realized in somatosensory cortex (Pfurtscheller &
Neuper, 1997; Stippich et al., 2002; Szameitat et al., 2007), although forward
models may initially be produced in the cerebellum (Blakemore et al., 2001;
Kawato et al., 2003). Interestingly, proprioceptive imagery has been shown to
assist in the acquisition and maintenance of bodily skills (Jeannerod, 2006). For
example, people wanting to improve at weightlifting can signiﬁcantly increase
how much weight they can bench-press merely by repeatedly imagining the
movements involved; and skiers who have broken a leg can preserve much
more of their skill during their forced inactivity in similar fashion.
Motor-produced imagery in other sensory formats is mostly used for other
purposes. Visual images produced in this way are especially important for
prospective reasoning. When one is unsure which of a number of potential future
actions one should perform, people often mentally rehearse those actions, issuing
in conscious visual imagery of each action together with its likely consequences.
These representations are received by one’s affective and evaluative systems
among others, which respond by generating positive or negative affective
responses. These can become conscious in turn, and can be monitored to guide
one’s selection (Damasio, 1994; Gilbert & Wilson, 2007). Note that motor-
produced visual imagery—for example, of rotations of pictures of hands and
tools—involves activity in midlevel visual areas of cortex, just as one might
predict (Vingerhoets et al., 2002).
Auditory imagery that is produced by mental rehearsal can play a variety of
roles. A composer might rehearse the actions necessary to produce a series of
notes (either singing, or on the piano, say), thereby “hearing” in his or her head
what such a tune might sound like. And of course one can (in imagination) repeat
a word to oneself while trying to learn it, or repeat the digits in a phone number
while searching for a piece of paper to write it down. Note also that one can
94
4. the nature of working memory

continue to repeat such rehearsed actions in a cycle, thereby continually refresh-
ing the resulting auditory representations in working memory, and thus consti-
tuting the “phonological loop” of classical models (Baddeley, 1986). In doing so,
one in effect uses (unconscious) motor memory of the actions in the sequence to
issue in repeated conscious awareness of the corresponding sounds, thereby
approximating to a form of auditory memory. Consistent with this account, we
know that transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) applied to left premotor
cortex signiﬁcantly disrupts verbal working memory (Herwig et al., 2003).
4.2. Mental rehearsal and inner speech
Mental rehearsal of speech actions plays an especially important role in many
people’s lives, occupying at least some of the resources of their working memory
for much of the waking day (Heavey & Hurlburt, 2008). By rehearsing the motor
instructions for a given spoken sentence, with output to the articulatory systems
suppressed, one creates from the efference copy of those instructions a forward
model of the intended sounds, thereby “hearing” the sentence in question in
auditory imagination (Tian & Poeppel, 2012; Scott et al., 2013). As a result, one
can argue with oneself, exhort oneself, try out and evaluate hypotheses, and so on,
all without engaging in any relevant overt behavior, as we will see in more detail
in Chapters 6 and 7. Additional support of this account of inner speech comes
from the ﬁnding that both speech-production and speech-comprehension areas
of the brain are active during inner speech (Paulesu et al., 1993; Shergill et al.,
2001). Moreover, Wilson & Fox (2007) show that working memory for language
depends on a general capacity for mental rehearsal of actions, rather than being
speciﬁc to language.
It is important to note that efference copies are generally agreed to be low-level,
nonconceptual representations of sets of motor instructions (Jeannerod, 2006).
In effect, all records of the concept-involving intentions that issued in those
instructions are left behind, and the resulting forward models are (initially)
purely sensory in character. Indeed, this makes possible one of the functions of
the system in the online control of action, which is to enable a comparison of the
forward model with one’s prior intention, making corrections in one’s motor
plan even as overt movements are just being initiated (at which point there is, as
yet, no sensory afferent feedback). For if the forward model somehow had the
content of the original intention already embedded within it, then no meaningful
comparison would be possible. In fact, models of motor control generally include
at least two comparator systems (see Figure 5). One of these compares the
forward model with the afferent sensory feedback, and one compares it with
the content of the originating intention (Frith et al., 2000). In the case of speech,
4. mental rehearsal
95

for example, it would completely subvert early forms of semantic monitoring,
correction, and repair if the intended content of the speech act could somehow be
preserved intact into the forward model (Levelt, 1983, 1989). For that would
mean that there would be an automatic match between one’s intention and the
predicted result, leaving no possibility for early detection of errors.
We emphasized in Section 1 that visually based contents in working memory
generally have conceptual representations bound into them. A similar point
needs to be made here. For in the case of motor-produced imagery, in particular,
once sensory forward models are attended to they will be globally broadcast, and
they will be processed and become conceptualized in the normal way. As a result,
one imaginatively sees oneself, not just as making a certain physical movement
with a rigid object in one’s hand, but as signing a check with a pen, and so forth.
And one imaginatively hears oneself, not just as entertaining certain speech
sounds, but as saying to oneself that it is time to prepare dinner, for example.
Hence motor-produced images can be concept involving, even if the efference
copies that cause them are not. Notice, however, that since the relevant concepts
will have been active in the content of one’s intention just moments before, it is
especially likely that they will thereafter become bound into the content of the
resulting image, resulting from their ready accessibility.
In the case of inner speech these points pan out as follows. First there is a
concept-involving intention to generate a sentence with a certain content. This
is used to create an appropriate set of motor instructions, which in turn issues in
an efference copy while output to the musculature is blocked. The efference
copy is transformed by the speech emulator system to create a sensory forward
model of the expected sounds (Scott et al., 2013), proceeding via an intermediate
proprioceptive representation (Tian & Poeppel, 2012). At this point in the
process the forward model is purely nonconceptual, but when attended to it
is both globally broadcast and processed by the language comprehension system
in something resembling the normal way. The language system attaches both
a syntactic structure and a semantic interpretation to the “heard” sentence,
utilizing normal interpretive principles. But because the latter relies heavily on
the comparative accessibility of concepts (Sperber & Wilson, 1995), in the
absence of articulatory errors it is very likely that the output of the interpret-
ation process will match the original semantic intention (even setting aside the
normal contextual cues that will generally be available). For all of the relevant
concepts will have been active just moments before, and will thus be especially
readily accessible. The account of inner speech sketched here will prove espe-
cially important in Chapters 6 and 7.
96
4. the nature of working memory

Notice that motor plans can be more or less abstract or concrete. Indeed, most
models of motor cognition assume that the production process involves an
implementational cascade from an abstract motor intention (PICK UP THAT CUP
WITH THIS HAND) through progressively more ﬁne-grained motor instructions
(specifying the speed and trajectory of the reach, the precise manner and strength
of grip, and so forth), all the way down to patterns of activation and innervation
of speciﬁc muscle groups (Rosenbaum, 2010). One might thus predict that
forward models would be generated at multiple levels in this hierarchy, thereby
providing for smooth online correction at all different levels of implementation
as well. It is therefore to be expected that motor-produced imagery can be more
or less concrete, depending on the level at which efference copies are generated
(or put differently: the level beyond which further motor instructions are sup-
pressed). This is consistent with the ﬁnding that inner speech can vary in its
abstractness, either being conﬁned to phonological representations of sound, or
also including phonetic (articulatory) detail (Oppenheim & Dell, 2010).
Our discussion of the mental rehearsal function of working memory has
further conﬁrmed the main ﬁnding of earlier sections of this chapter: the contents
of working memory are always at least sensory involving, and there is good reason
to think that they are sensory dependent. Indeed, in connection with mental
rehearsal the case for the sensory-dependent character of working memory is
especially powerful, as we will see in Section 5.
4.3. Attitudes in inner speech
Can propositional attitudes be bound into the contents of inner speech, and if
so, which ones? Most obviously, inner speech, like outer speech, can embed
judgments of meaning and intending. Just as one can hear someone as saying
that a line of storms is approaching, or as asking the way to the church, so can
one hear one’s own inner speech as embedding the corresponding attitudes.
Indeed, there seems no limit to the range of attitudes that one can hear oneself
as having. Under interpretation, an episode of inner speech might be heard as
wondering whether something is the case, as wanting something to be the case,
as hoping for something, as deciding on something, and so on. But let me stress
that these are sensorily embedded second-order judgments about the relevant
attitudes, not embeddings of the attitudes themselves. When combined with an
implicit model of the mind as transparent to itself, however, the result will be the
familiar intuition that attitudes of all kinds themselves ﬁgure in our reﬂections
(Carruthers, 2011a).
Imagine a case where one unconsciously takes a decision to leave for the bus
(without involving working memory). And suppose that this decision causes one
4. mental rehearsal
97

(when combined with other factors) to rehearse in inner speech the sentence, “I’ll
leave for the bus now.”5 This is globally broadcast and received as input by
language-comprehension and mindreading systems, leading it to be heard as a
decision to leave for the bus now. Does this mean that the original decision has
somehow become bound into the content of a sentence in inner speech, thereby
insuring its own conscious status? It does not, for at least two reasons. The ﬁrst
is that hearing the sentence as a decision means that it actually embeds, not a
decision, but a higher-order judgment to the effect that one is taking a decision.
Indeed, it is unclear what it would even mean for an utterance in (inner or
outer) speech to be a decision. (Some possible suggestions will be considered
and rejected in Chapter 7.)
The second reason why the originating decision in the above scenario remains
unconscious emerges when we focus just on the content of the decision. For it
is not the very same (token) propositional content of the decision that is globally
broadcast, but another token of the same type. Hence the originating event
(a decision with a speciﬁc type of content) does not itself ﬁgure in working
memory. Let me explain.
Deciding to leave for the bus initiates a sequence of verbal action planning.
Words and syntactic structures are selected, and used to create a set of motor
instructions for generating a speciﬁc English utterance. Note that by this point
the content of the original decision has been left behind. The only content
possessed by the resulting representations concerns movements of the mouth
and larynx. These instructions are activated, but before being implemented the
instructions to the muscles are suppressed. Nevertheless, an efference copy of the
motor instructions has been generated, and is used to create a sensory forward
model of the expected speech utterance. When attended to, this is globally
broadcast and received as input by the language-comprehension and mindread-
ing systems, which set to work interpreting the sensory input received, attaching
semantic and pragmatic properties to it. As a result, the representation LEAVE FOR
THE BUS NOW may get bound into the representation of the sounds and globally
broadcast along with them, thereby entering working memory. Notice, however,
that it cannot be the same token representations that ﬁgured in the original
decision that are now active in working memory. For those were left behind at
the point where the decision was used to construct a motor plan. Rather, they are
5 Note that I am discussing here a best-case scenario, in which the underlying attitude and the
attitude expressed in speech coincide. In fact the social science literature is rife with cases where
there is a mismatch between one’s true attitudes and the attitudes one expresses verbally. See
Carruthers (2011a) for extended discussion.
98
4. the nature of working memory

tokens of the same type, constructed via the process of interpretation. So it is not
the very same (token) content from the original decision that ﬁgures in the
content of inner speech, but only a token of the same type. In which case the
original decision (which was, notice, an individual token event) is not itself made
globally available.
Can any other attitudes besides sensorily embedded judgments ﬁgure in
working memory through our use of inner speech? One obvious candidate
would be rote memories of the sort mentioned in Chapter 2.1. When children
learn their multiplication tables the corresponding numerical information
becomes stored in the form of well-rehearsed motor plans. One’s belief that
77 = 49, for example, is stored as a motor plan for generating the spoken
utterance, “Seven sevens are forty-nine.” When one tokens that sentence in
inner speech in the course of solving some problem, the result is that the belief
itself has been tokened in working memory. Or so one might think. But even here
there is a distinction between the stored belief itself (which is a motor plan,
representing a set of movements) and the sentence in inner speech, which is a
representation of the utterance that normally results from the execution of that
plan.
Similar points can be made in connection with most other forms of memory. If
one’s belief that New York is north-east of Washington is used as the basis for
tokening in inner speech the sentence, “New York is north-east of Washington,”
for example, this only insures that information with the same type of content is
globally broadcast following interpretation, rather than the token belief itself. The
one exception would be episodic memories of one’s own or someone else’s
utterances. For these can be evoked and added to the contents of working
memory without needing to proceed through speech motor processes (assuming
that they are stored in auditory rather than motor form). When one recalls the
last words one’s father uttered on his death-bed, for example, then it is that
episodic memory itself that is made globally available.
The only other kinds of attitude that can enter working memory through inner
speech are felt desires. For of course speech, like other forms of experience, can
evoke affective responses. What someone says can make one angry or sad, for
example. The same will hold for inner speech, since the representations in
question will be made available to evaluative mechanisms through global broad-
casting. Recalling one’s father’s last words, for instance, may evoke feelings of
grief, or shame, or admiration.
This section has shown how mentally rehearsed actions result in working-
memory contents, generally involving visual, auditory, or proprioceptive
imagery. As with imagery generally, amodal concepts can be bound into the
4. mental rehearsal
99

contents of the resulting images and globally broadcast along with them. As a
result, when the contents of working memory include inner speech we often hear
ourselves as entertaining attitudes of various kinds, with speciﬁc propositional
contents. But the “distance” between the attitudes that cause the rehearsed action
and the subsequent contents of the resulting images means that there are fewer
kinds of sensorily embedded attitude in this domain than are found in the case of
visual imagery.
5. The Sensory Basis of Working Memory
The present section will pull together the strands of our discussion so far and will
defend the claim that working memory is always sensory based, and not just
sensory involving. A number of competing suggestions will be considered and
excluded. One is that the data seemingly supporting a sensory-based view are
merely an experimental artifact, resulting from cognitive scientists’ exclusive
focus on sensory tasks. Another is that the sensory activity produced during
working-memory tasks results from activation that spreads associatively from an
amodal, attitude-involving, working-memory system (where it is the latter that
does the real work). A third idea is that our amodal attitudes strategically activate
sensory representations to insure their own conscious status. With these three
alternatives shown to be highly implausible, that will leave in play a ﬁnal
possibility. This is that sensory activation is often or always used strategically as
a supporting aid to an amodal working-memory system that is already conscious
in some other way. This alternative will be evaluated in Chapter 5.
5.1. Drawing conclusions
Over the course of this chapter we have seen that imagery of all kinds (including
the contents of the phonological loop and visuo-spatial sketchpad) share mech-
anisms with perception, and that sensory activity of an appropriate sort is always
present during the performance of working-memory tasks. We have seen, too,
that the contents of working memory are always conscious, being widely access-
ible to many different subsystems in the brain. Moreover, working memory tasks
utilize the same attentional mechanisms that are responsible for the global
broadcast of sensory representations in general, and working memory itself is
attention dependent, with performance collapsing if attention is withdrawn. The
best explanation of this set of ﬁndings is that working memory is sensory
dependent. That is to say, global broadcasting of sensory representations, result-
ing from attentional signals directed at midlevel sensory areas, is a necessary
condition for contents to enter working memory. Nevertheless, we have also seen
100
4. the nature of working memory

how amodal conceptual representations can be bound into these sensory repre-
sentations, and how a limited range of sensorily embedded propositional atti-
tudes can ﬁgure in the contents of working memory (and be conscious) as a
result. If working memory is the system that makes possible the stream of
consciousness, however, then it must follow that amodal attitudes are incapable
of being conscious, and hence that they are incapable of ﬁguring in our conscious
reﬂections.
Some challenges to this line of argument will be considered shortly. But one
obvious question concerns the scope of working memory. Granting that working
memory itself is sensory dependent, it does not follow that there is no other global
workspace in which amodal attitudes can be activated and can ﬁgure consciously
in reﬂection. Such an amodal workspace might either make use of the same
attentional mechanisms that are employed in working memory, or it might rely
on some other mechanism to insure that the attitudes in question are made
globally available. This suggestion will be evaluated at length in Chapter 5. But
notice that we have already argued, in Section 3.3, that there is no evidence that
attentional signals can be directed toward regions of the brain that realize our
amodal attitudes. Nor is there evidence of any other mechanism that can issue in
the global broadcasting of amodal information.
Absence of evidence is not the same thing as evidence of absence, of course.
That we lack any evidence of mechanisms that could insure the global availability
of our amodal attitudes is not, itself, direct evidence that we lack such mechan-
isms. Notice, however, that when it comes to choosing among competing theor-
ies, a theory that provides some explanation always trumps one that gives no
explanation. And our goal is to explain how the stream of consciousness is
generated. Since we know nothing about the supposed mechanisms that might
undergird an amodal workspace, we cannot yet explain how this (alleged) aspect
of the stream of consciousness is created and sustained. In contrast, if the stream
of consciousness is identiﬁed with the sensory-based contents of working mem-
ory, as I suggest, then we have in hand a full explanation of how it works (at least
in outline). Other things being equal, therefore, the latter theory is the better of
the two.
If this argument is to be convincing, then it needs to be shown that a sensory-
based working-memory system can do all of the things that we know reﬂection
can do. In particular, we need to show how it can make possible forms of
inference and decision making that are indeﬁnitely ﬂexible and creative. This
positive task will be begun in Chapter 5 and will continue through the chapters
that follow. At this point we will conﬁne ourselves to considering some challenges
to the argument for the sensory-based character of working memory.
5. the sensory basis of working memory
101

5.2. An experimental artifact?
One way in which traditional models of reﬂection could be defended against the
argument of this chapter would be to claim that sensory involvement in working-
memory tasks is merely an artifact of task design. If participants are asked to
remember sensory properties, then of course one might expect sensory areas of
the brain to remain active, and to do so as a result of attention directed toward the
relevant midlevel sensory regions. But this would not show that working-mem-
ory deployment of conceptual and amodal information requires activity in
sensory regions. Hence it might be claimed that cognitive scientists have been
misled into thinking that working memory is sensory based because of their
exclusive focus on sensory tasks.
There is a small grain of truth underlying this challenge. This is that some of
the working-memory tasks employed by researchers have been exclusively sen-
sory in character. Sometimes n-back working-memory tasks might require
people to recall arbitrary shapes or patterns, for instance, for which the partici-
pants lack any concept. Or people might be asked to recall ﬁne-grained colors or
textures, for which they likewise lack concepts. There would be no way of
succeeding in such a task except by using top-down attention to keep active the
original sensory representations of the properties in question, even if people did
possess a distinct amodal working-memory system.
It is simply false that all, or even most, working-memory tasks have this sort
of sensory character, however. For it will often sufﬁce to recall the category to
which presented instances belong (dog, cat, or whatever). This could be done
amodally and purely conceptually, if such a thing were really possible. More-
over, one sort of frequently used working-memory task involves temporary
recall of words (either in an n-back experiment, say, or in a complex memory-
span task). Although words are presented in sensory format (normally either
visual or auditory), linguists regard words as amodal entities onto which these
alternative sensory representations are mapped. So if there were such a thing as
an amodal working-memory system there would be nothing to prevent it being
employed in such tasks, keeping a representation of the presented word active
while allowing the initial representation of its sensory properties to decay.
(Indeed, since it is rare for language-involving working-memory tasks to
employ distractor synonyms, participants could just recall the associated
concepts, and drop the linguistic presentation of those concepts altogether.)
Notice, too, that it is generally made quite clear to participants that it is the
word they are required to recall, rather than the sensory properties involved in
its presentation.
102
4. the nature of working memory

Other frequently employed working-memory tasks involve numbers. These
might need to be recalled in a memory-span task, for example, or they might
need to be manipulated in a task requiring mental arithmetic. And of course
concepts of number are the very archetype of abstract, amodal entities. So if
purely amodal thinking and reasoning of a reﬂective sort were really possible,
one might expect it to be employed for explicit numerical tasks of these sorts. Yet
sensory activity seems always to accompany both the recall and manipulation
components of numerical working-memory tasks. It seems that people always
rehearse and manipulate sensory representations of numerals, rather than operat-
ing directly with amodal representations of number. This would be quite puzzling
if there were really such a thing as an amodal workspace in which one could engage
in non-sensory reﬂective reasoning about numbers.
5.3. Spreading association?
There are other ways in which someone might attempt to defend the traditional
account of reﬂection in the face of the evidence that working memory is sensory
dependent. One would be to claim that the ﬁndings result merely from associa-
tively spreading activation of related sensory representations, caused by the
activation in working memory of amodal concepts and attitudes. It would be
the latter that carry the real functional burden in working-memory tasks, and
which can, in principle at least, operate in the absence of relevant sensory activity.
But this view, too, is highly implausible in light of everything we know about
working memory.
One problem for the spreading-activation account of sensory involvement in
working memory is that a variety of kinds of evidence suggest that damage or
disruption to midlevel sensory areas has a corresponding impact on working-
memory function (Pasternak & Greenlee, 2005). For example, brain damage to
these areas impairs working-memory abilities in the corresponding domain
(Levine et al., 1985; Gathercole, 1994; Müller & Knight, 2006). Moreover, tran-
scranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) applied to midlevel sensory areas disrupts
working-memory tasks that would normally involve imagery of the relevant sort.
Thus TMS applied to the lower regions of parietal cortex during the retention
interval disrupts working memory for spatial layouts (Oliveri et al., 2001),
whereas TMS applied to area V5/MT disrupts working memory for direction
of motion (Campana et al., 2002). In addition, presentation of distracter stimuli
during the retention interval in working-memory tasks only has a disruptive
effect on those tasks if the stimuli are perceptually similar to the target. For
example, location distracters interfere with memory for location but not color,
5. the sensory basis of working memory
103

whereas color distracters interfere with working memory for color but not
location (Vuontela et al., 1999).
It might be objected that such results are not really surprising, given that the
working-memory tasks in question themselves involve sensory properties. Hence
it would be consistent with such results that working memory of a semantic sort,
or involving abstract properties, should not depend on the activity of midlevel
sensory areas. But this objection seems not to be sustainable. For notice that
many of the results reported above involve spatial working memory (e.g. con-
cerning direction or position). Yet space is an abstract property that can be
represented in many different sense modalities. So if working memory were
ever able to operate in the absence of related sensory activity, one would expect
that spatial working memory would be a good candidate. But as we have seen, the
experimental data seem to rule this out.
It might be possible to explain at least some of the results mentioned above
from the perspective of a spreading-activation account of sensory-area involve-
ment in working memory. For if activation can spread associatively in one
direction, it can presumably also spread in the other. Hence the noise introduced
by applying TMS to sensory areas may spread upwards to interfere with the
maintenance of more abstract information, and likewise content-relevant sensory
distractor stimuli may more readily introduce interference at a conceptual level.
There are other powerful reasons to reject a spreading-activation account,
however. Recall that working memory uses the same top-down attentional
mechanisms directed at midlevel sensory areas that are implicated in conscious
forms of perception. These mechanisms are executively controlled in light of
one’s currently active goals and values, so their operations are certainly not
associative. And recall, too, that working memory is attention dependent.
Under conditions of distraction, working-memory performance collapses. This
enables us to conclude that the sensory-area activity in working-memory tasks
both depends on attention and plays an important role, at least, in working-
memory performance. It is almost certainly not a mere side-effect resulting from
associative spreading of neural activation.
The spreading-activation idea is even less plausible in connection with forms
of working memory that involve mental rehearsal. For the sensory activity that
populates working memory in such cases is two steps removed from the amodal
concepts and attitudes that allegedly form the essential core of the working-
memory system. The latter would have to select and activate some suitable set of
motor instructions while suppressing any output to the motor system, and it
would also have to direct attention to the sensory forward models of the actions
that would otherwise have resulted. It is barely conceivable that all this complex
104
4. the nature of working memory

and executively directed activity could result from mere spreading activation
caused in an associative way by the amodal thoughts in question.
5.4. Co-opting sensory resources?
Someone might concede that working memory is sensory dependent while
insisting that amodal attitudes can nevertheless ﬁgure among its contents. For
perhaps such attitudes strategically evoke content-relevant sensory activity that
becomes a target of attention, thereby insuring those attitudes themselves are
made globally accessible as well. In effect, the idea is that our amodal attitudes can
co-opt the resources of the sensory-based working-memory system in order to
render themselves conscious.
This suggestion is mysterious, however. We have been given no indication as
to how the proposal might work. We know how sensory representations get
globally broadcast through the direction of attention, and there is good reason to
think that amodal conceptual information can likewise be globally broadcast
when bound into the content of the sensory representations in question. And on
this basis we have seen how the stream of consciousness can contain a number of
different kinds of sensorily embedded propositional attitudes that are created in
this manner. But it is quite another matter to claim that already-existing amodal
attitudes can likewise be globally broadcast. Indeed, nothing in the data suggests
that it is possible.
In fact there is direct evidence against this proposal. For we have already seen
that the mere fact that an amodal concept is activated and co-occurs with
content-relevant sensory activity is not sufﬁcient for that concept to become
conscious. Merely thinking of a Dalmatian while consciously experiencing the
pattern of splotches represented in Figure 4 is not sufﬁcient for seeing those
splotches as a Dalmatian. It is only when recognition occurs as a result of
back-and-forth perceptual processing, and the concept gets bound into one’s
representation of the image, that one becomes conscious of the presence of a
Dalmatian. It seems that only sensorily embedded amodal concepts can become
conscious by utilizing the global-broadcasting properties of sensory attentional
networks.
Quite a different version of the “co-opting sensory resources” idea is also
available, however. One might claim, in particular, that there is an amodal global
workspace whose contents are made conscious in some other unknown manner.
But in order to explain why attention-dependent sensory activity is always
present in working-memory tasks, and why performance in such tasks should
be quite poor in the absence of attention, it might be proposed that content-
relevant sensory activation is a strategy that people adopt to help them keep
5. the sensory basis of working memory
105

amodal information actively in mind. On one level this is correct, of course.
Given that amodal conceptual information is bound into the sensory contents of
working memory (as we have seen), and is often the intended target of recall or
manipulation, then that is what the sensory activity is for. The difference on this
view, however, would be the claim that amodal concepts and attitudes can be
globally accessible in the absence of such activity. Sensory activity gets strategic-
ally added as an aid to working memory, rather than forming its basis. This idea
will be evaluated in some detail in Chapter 5.
5.5. An ambiguity?
A ﬁnal concern is that there is a fallacy of ambiguity in the argument for the
sensory-based character of working memory. For the conclusion is supposed to
be that the stream of consciousness is always grounded in modality-speciﬁc
experiences of one sort or another, including conscious visual imagery, conscious
auditory representations in inner speech, and so on. But much of the evidence has
had to do with the distinctive presence of activity in sensory regions of the brain
in working memory tasks. These are surely not the same thing.
Indeed, they are not. But they can be connected through an inference to the best
explanation. For we have reviewed evidence that working memory is attention
dependent. And we have seen that the best explanation for the activity observed in
sensory regions during working-memory tasks is that it is caused by attentional
signals being directed at those regions. We have also seen that the effect of
sustained attention targeted at speciﬁc sensory regions when guided by contextual
cues or conceptual templates is to issue in the global broadcasting of the relevant
sensory representations, thus resulting in a conscious experience. So there is good
reason to think that the dependence of working memory on both attention and
activity in sensory regions of the brain results in working memory being dependent
on sensory experience. Moreover, it is the conscious status of those experiences that
enables working memory to perform the functions of a global workspace.
We can draw a number of conclusions from the arguments of Section 5. One is
that the sensory-area activity that is distinctive of working-memory tasks is not
merely an experimental artifact. Another is that such activity is executively
caused and controlled, and thus doesn’t involve activation that spreads associa-
tively from the workings of an amodal workspace. A third is that amodal attitudes
do not themselves become conscious through association with conscious sensory
activity. For the present, therefore (pending further consideration in Chapter 5),
it remains the case that an inference to the best explanation supports the sensory-
dependent nature of working memory, and hence the sensory-dependent char-
acter of the stream of consciousness.
106
4. the nature of working memory

6. Conclusion
This chapter has reviewed some of what is currently known about the nature of
working memory. There is widespread agreement that the sustaining function of
working memory co-opts the resources of sensory regions of the brain. It is also
known that it employs the same top-down attentional mechanisms that are
responsible for the global broadcasting of perceptual representations, thereby
insuring that the contents of working memory are always conscious. Mental
rehearsal, in contrast, uses the forward-modeling functions of the systems that
control and correct our motor actions to create, ofﬂine, sensory forward models
of potential actions. When these are attended to they, too, are globally accessible
and conscious. All of this adds up to a powerful case in support of the sensory-
dependent nature of working memory. Additional arguments for this conclusion
will be presented in Chapter 5.
If working memory is sensory dependent, then it must follow that it is not a
system in which amodal, non-sensory attitudes can be active and do their work. If
traditional ideas about reﬂection are to be defended, then it must be claimed that
there is an additional central workspace in which reﬂection takes place. Perhaps
this system strategically recruits the resources of the sensory-dependent working-
memory system. But it might be said that the latter is not strictly necessary for
conscious forms of reﬂection to take place. This remaining possibility will be
evaluated in Chapter 5.
6. conclusion
107

5
The Unity of Working Memory
This chapter will evaluate the suggestion raised at the end of Chapter 4. This is
that conscious reﬂection can take place in an amodal system that operates
alongside, and often or always co-opts the resources of, the sensory-based
working-memory system. Given the strength of the evidence that working
memory itself is sensory based (discussed in Chapter 4), this appears to be the
only way in which traditional accounts of reﬂection can be defended. It will be
shown, however, that the proposal faces a number of important difﬁculties. This
chapter will also embark on the positive task of showing that a sensory-based
working-memory system can explain known properties of human problem-
solving abilities. Here our focus will be on the question whether variations
in sensory-based working-memory abilities can explain all of the variance in
people’s ﬂuid general intelligence.
1. An Amodal Workspace?
The present section will outline and explore the idea that there is an amodal
global workspace in which propositional attitudes of all sorts can be activated.
It will also present some initial reasons to be skeptical of such a suggestion.
1.1. The multiple-modes model
One can envisage two possible variants of the idea of an amodal workspace,
depending on whether or not it is the same attentional mechanisms that result in
the global availability of both sensory-based representations and amodal atti-
tudes. Let us ﬁrst consider the suggestion that the mechanisms are the same. We
can refer to this as the “multiple-modes model” of working memory. The idea
would be that working memory is a single system that can operate in a number of
different modes. It contains an executive system that can employ attentional
resources in a ﬂexible manner. The latter can be directed at sensory-based
representations alone, or (perhaps rarely) amodal propositional attitude repre-
sentations alone, or (most commonly) attention can be divided in such a way that

suitable sensory-based contents for working memory are used strategically to
support amodal functions of remembering, thinking, and reasoning.
The multiple-modes model can explain one of the ﬁndings of Chapter 4. This
is that performance in working-memory tasks seems always to depend on
sensory activity of a content-relevant sort. At least, it can do so provided one
assumes that the strategy of seeking sensory support is almost always in effect.
(Why this should be so is perhaps puzzling, as we will see shortly.) The model can
also explain why working memory should display the same signature limits, no
matter whether the materials to be retained are abstract, sensory, or a combin-
ation of the two (such as words and shades of color). This is because the account
postulates a single resource—attention—that is employed in all three modes.
It can be supposed (consistent with the beliefs of most cognitive scientists) that
it is this resource that is responsible for those limits.
The multiple-modes account also faces a number of difﬁculties, however. One
is that there is no evidence that attention can be directed outside of midlevel
sensory areas. As we noted in Chapter 4.3, the top-down attentional system
appears to comprise regions of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, the frontal eye-
ﬁelds, and the intraparietal sulcus, with the latter constituting the “business end”
of the system. It is signals emanating from the intraparietal sulcus that are
responsible for the sustaining and repressing functions of attention when dir-
ected at populations of neurons in sensory cortices. Yet there is no evidence that
signals from the intraparietal sulcus directed toward temporal or prefrontal
cortex can play such a role. This objection is not necessarily devastating, of
course. For it can be maintained that the relevant evidence has not yet been
found. As we noted in Chapter 4.5, however, this does mean that the multiple-
modes model of working memory cannot (at present) explain how the stream of
consciousness is endogenously generated, since it cannot specify the mechanisms
involved.
There is an additional problem for the multiple-modes account. This is that
it becomes difﬁcult to understand why the strategy of employing sensory
support for abstract working-memory tasks should be so strongly entrenched.
(Recall that such a claim is necessary to explain why content-relevant sensory
activation should always be found in working-memory tasks.) For notice that
the account postulates a single attentional resource that needs to be divided to
secure such support. So it is quite unclear why there should always be a gain in
working-memory capacity or efﬁciency from activating sensory-based repre-
sentations as well as amodal ones. Why would this be a sensible strategy to
adopt? Given that there is a single attentional resource to be deployed, why
would it always be beneﬁcial to direct it toward both sensory and amodal
1. an amodal workspace?
109

representations, rather than devoting it entirely to the latter whenever the task
itself is an amodal one?
Additional ad hoc assumptions will need to be added to the multiple-modes
account at this point, thereby signiﬁcantly weakening the appeal of the view.
For example, it might be claimed that there is a “multiplier effect” of dividing
attention between amodal and modal representations, in such a way that the
capacity of the divided system is somehow greater than its purely modal or
amodal uses alone. However, we already know that the capacity of the divided
system is not greater that its purely sensory use. For the same signature limits are
found in both concept-involving and purely sensory tasks. (The latter might
involve complex shapes for which one lacks any concepts, for example.) At least,
this is true provided that care is taken to avoid conceptual “chunking” of stimuli
in the concept-involving tasks (Cowan, 2001). So if there is a multiplier effect, for
some reason it only improves the recall of purely amodal contents by combining
them with sensory ones, rather than vice versa. It is hard to imagine what this
reason might be.1
1.2. The two-systems model
We can now consider the possibility that the mechanisms underlying global
broadcasting are not the same in the amodal case. Suppose that the central
attitude workspace relies on some resource other than attention in order to
insure the global availability of the attitudes that are activated within it. This
would be tantamount to claiming that there are two distinct working-memory
systems, one sensory based and the other amodal. So let us refer to it as the “two-
systems model” of working memory. On this account it is immediately clear why
people should almost always employ the strategy of activating the sensory-based
system, even when engaged in abstract tasks. This is because one can thereby
increase the total resources devoted to the undertaking.
The two-systems model faces a corresponding problem, however: how is it to
explain why the same signature working-memory limit should obtain whether
one is engaged in a sensory task, a purely abstract one, or a mixture of the two?
One might expect that when the two systems are both engaged (that is, in a mixed
case), working-memory capacity would be roughly twice what it is when either is
used alone. This puzzle can be answered in the case of abstract tasks, provided
1 In addition, the phenomenon of masked semantic priming provides some evidence that
attentional signals cannot render an amodal representation conscious in the absence of conscious
sensory experience (Dehaene et al., 1998). For the semantic effects of an unconscious visual stimulus
themselves also remain unconscious. It would be puzzling why this should be so, if the multiple-
modes model of working memory were correct.
110
5. the unity of working memory

that people always adopt the strategy of activating the sensory-based system in
support of the amodal one. But it remains puzzling why working-memory
capacity should not be signiﬁcantly lower in tasks that are purely sensory. Since
there is nothing that the amodal system can do to assist in recalling shapes or
patterns for which one possesses no concepts, one would expect that such tasks
would exhibit a more stringent working-memory limit. But the evidence suggests
that they do not (Cowan, 2001).
This argument moves a little too swiftly, perhaps. For we know that working
memory beneﬁts from chunking. Whenever some (but not all) of the items to be
remembered fall under a single category, some of those items can then be recalled
as a single unit, and working-memory limits are thereby increased. But this does
not yet support the idea of an amodal (conceptual) working-memory system in
addition to a sensory-based one. For there is good reason to think that concepts
can be bound into the contents of perceptual and imagistic representations, as we
saw in Chapter 3.5. Rather, the idea would have to be that the amodal and
sensory-based systems can support one another by deploying concepts twice
over: once in the amodal system and again in the sensory-based one. And the
problem still remains that one would expect that retaining sensory items in
working memory for which one lacks any concepts should be signiﬁcantly harder
than concept-involving tasks where chunking strategies are carefully excluded.
But this seems not to be the case.
Someone might attempt to reply to this objection by claiming that the limits on
working memory derive, not from limits on attention, but rather from the limits
of the executive systems that direct attention. Since these can be assumed to be
held in common to both the amodal and sensory-based working-memory sys-
tems, we can now explain why the same signature limits should obtain across all
combinations of task. There is direct evidence against this suggestion, however.
For recall that activity in the intraparietal sulcus increases linearly with increasing
memory load, leveling off when working-memory limits are reached. In contrast,
activity in the frontal lobes (the presumed seat of executive functions) continues
to increase beyond those limits (Todd & Marois, 2004; Ikkai et al., 2010). This
suggests quite strongly that it is the attentional system that is responsible for the
limits on working-memory capacity, rather than the executive. (See also Berryhill
et al., 2011, for additional evidence for the same conclusion.)
Moreover, recall from Chapter 4.3 that people’s working-memory capacities
correlate quite well with measures of attentional capacity (Cowan et al., 2005).
This, too, suggests that the putative amodal working-memory system utilizes the
resources of attention in some way. Indeed, the two-systems model appears not
to be consistent with one of the claims defended in Chapter 4.3, that working
1. an amodal workspace?
111

memory is attention dependent. For this latter claim would not be true if there
were an amodal working-memory system that doesn’t require attention to insure
the global availability (and hence conscious status) of its contents.
1.3. An empirical prediction
Both the multiple-modes and two-systems views face signiﬁcant problems, then.
It should also be noted that each appears to make the same empirical prediction.
This is that working memory should admit of three discrete levels of performance
whenever the target to be recalled is something amodal, like a sequence of
numbers. There should be a baseline level (in cases of full distraction, or where
no attempt is made to keep the target information active) where unaided long-
term memory will be the only contributor to performance. There should then be
an improved level of performance when people attempt to remember the con-
ceptual information involved but without adopting the strategy of seeking add-
itional sensory support, or when that strategy is disrupted. And then the best
performance should result when people attend both to the conceptual informa-
tion (the sequence of numbers) and employ a sensory-involving strategy (such as
repeating the sequence of numerals to oneself in inner speech). Articulatory
interference combined with sensory masking of stimuli, for example, should
undermine the third level of performance while leaving the second intact. In
such circumstances we should see levels of recall signiﬁcantly higher than when
people are completely distracted after presentation of the numbers, and are thus
unable to make any attempt to remember them. I am aware of no evidence of any
such distinction in the empirical literature, however. (But again, note that
absence of evidence is not evidence of absence.)
Both versions of the amodal workspace idea face initial problems, then. The
remainder of this chapter will develop a number of further difﬁculties that apply
equally to each.
2. The Problem of Self-Knowledge
This section will explore another prediction made by both versions of the amodal
workspace account. This is that people’s knowledge of their own propositional
attitudes that are currently activated in the workspace should be direct and
immediate (albeit not infallible). The section will then argue that this prediction
is false, drawing on points developed at length in Carruthers (2011a).2
2 Note that my earlier book likewise rejects the idea of an amodal workspace. So there might seem
to be a vicious circularity in appealing to the conclusions of that work in support of the present
112
5. the unity of working memory

2.1. Self-knowledge of the amodal workspace
Recall from Chapter 3.2 what global broadcasting is: it is a mechanism that makes
attended perceptual contents widely available to many different systems in the
brain, for forming memories, issuing in affective reactions, engaging in infer-
ences, and informing decisions. If there is an amodal workspace that likewise
makes activated propositional attitudes globally accessible, then those attitudes
should be available as input to a wide variety of different systems. Among the
latter would presumably be whatever system is responsible for knowledge of our
own current thoughts. This will be true whether that system is some sort of
introspective self-attribution mechanism (Nichols & Stich, 2003; Goldman,
2006), or the same mindreading mechanism that is responsible for attributing
mental states to other people (Carruthers, 2011a). Attributing current thoughts to
oneself should therefore be trivially easy (especially in respect of the contents of
those thoughts). Receiving as input an activated goal or decision, say, the system
would just need to identify the features of the state that confer on it its distinctive
causal role (goal-like or decision-like) and then embed the content of the state
into the content of an appropriate higher-order judgment (I HAVE JUST DECIDED: I
WILL SET OUT FOR HOME, for instance). Self-knowledge should not need to be
interpretive, on this account (certainly not in respect of the content of the
state), and it should not depend on the same sorts of cues that one relies on
when attributing thoughts to other people.
As Carruthers (2011a) demonstrates at length, however, there is voluminous
evidence that these predictions are false, much of it collected by social psycholo-
gists over many decades. On the contrary, there are many circumstances in which
people will confabulate about their current thoughts, and their self-attributions
seem to be guided by just the sorts of contextual and behavioral cues that
inﬂuence their attributions of thoughts to others. These data could be explained,
of course, if the mindreading system were unusual among conceptual systems in
lacking access to the contents of the global attitudinal workspace. But such a
suggestion seems quite ad hoc. Indeed worse, if it were true, then it would be hard
to see how the mindreading system could contribute to reﬂective reasoning about
the mental states of others, of the sort that manifestly occurs quite often. For this
would seem to require the system to have access to the contents of those
reﬂections.
argument against such a workspace. But what will actually be relied upon here are just those portions
of the earlier book that present evidence against direct and immediate knowledge of our own
currently active attitudes. So there is no circularity involved.
2. the problem of self-knowledge
113

Nichols & Stich (2003) attempt to accommodate the evidence of confabula-
tion, while maintaining that self-attribution can be direct and immediate, by
drawing a distinction between explaining and merely reporting. They suggest that
requests for explanations of one’s behavior will cue the third-person mindreading
system into operation (often issuing in confabulation). And they note that many
of the results in the social-psychology literature derive from experiments in
which people are asked to explain their choices, not just to report their thoughts.
Moreover, even when people are asked merely to report a mental state, often
those states are some seconds or minutes in the past. If we suppose (quite
plausibly) that no records of the contents of the amodal workspace are generally
kept, then people will have no alternative but to engage in self-interpretation in
such cases. Nichols & Stich (2003) suggest that whenever people are asked just to
report on their current (or very recently past) mental states, on the other hand,
their knowledge is direct and immediate.
This position is untenable, however. For there are numerous experiments in
which people confabulate when asked to make reports about their current or
recent thoughts, and they do so in circumstances where one might expect the
thoughts in question to be active in the amodal global workspace, if such a thing
really existed. I will sketch just two examples. For further instances, and for more
extensive discussion, see Carruthers (2011a).
2.2. Two data-points
Wegner & Wheatley (1999) asked participants to jointly control a large com-
puter mouse with another person (who was actually a confederate of the
experimenters). Participants were told that the experiment was to test how
feelings of control over an outcome can come and go. Both people wore
headphones (so that the participant could hear a “distractor word” in some
conditions, and so that the confederate could receive instructions from the
experimenters). Participants were told to move the cursor around the screen
jointly with the other person for about thirty seconds, and then to bring it to a
stop at a point of their choosing thereafter. They were then immediately to
record their sense of control over the stop on a scale ranging from zero (“I
allowed the stop to happen”) to 100 (“I intended to make the stop”). Note that
they were asked just to report their intention, and that the reports were given
within moments of it being active. Note, too, that since the whole point of the
experiment was to get people to track their own intentions, and since they knew
from the outset that they would be required to make a report on each trial, one
would expect the relevant intention to be not only activated but attended to
within the amodal workspace.
114
5. the unity of working memory

The results of this experiment belie such predictions, however. In some
conditions participants actually had complete control over the cursor and its
stopping-point. (Here the confederate was told just to rest her hands passively on
the mouse, and to take no part in moving it.) Yet participants scored their sense
of having intended the stop at just 56, only marginally above the mid-point. It
seems that they assumed from the experimental instructions that control would
be shared, and so anchored on the mid-point of the scale, only adjusting their
score upwards slightly in conditions where they actually had full control. (Pre-
sumably in these conditions they were somewhat sensitive to the lack of resist-
ance on the mouse, and to the smoothness of its movements.) In other
conditions, in contrast, it was the confederate who actually had full control
over the stop. (She was guided throughout by instructions from the experi-
menter.) Yet participants scored their sense of having intended the stop only
slightly lower than the mid-point, at 45. (Presumably in these circumstances they
were somewhat sensitive to the resistance they experienced to their own intended
movements.) Yet in the same conditions, if participants heard over their head-
phones the name of the object pictured among many on the screen (such as an
umbrella) that the confederate brought the cursor to a halt over, their sense of
intention was scored much higher, above 60. It seems that they interpreted
themselves thus: “I was thinking about an umbrella, so I must have (partly)
intended to stop on the umbrella.”
These results suggest quite strongly that there is no global workspace in which
activated intentions can ﬁgure. Admittedly, they derive from just a single
experiment. My other example, however, has to do with confabulations of
current belief in the so-called “dissonance” paradigm (Festinger, 1957), where
one can draw on converging results from hundreds of experiments. The basic
ﬁnding is that if people are induced to write an essay arguing for the contrary of
what they believe, while nevertheless having the sense that they did so freely,
they will thereafter shift their reported belief on the topic very signiﬁcantly. But
they have not really changed that belief (or at least, not prior to the moment of
report). For we know that the action of writing the essay makes people feel bad,
presumably because they have the sense that they are responsible for doing
something bad (Elliot & Devine, 1994). And we know that they feel better as
soon as they have had the chance to express a shifted attitude thereafter.
Moreover, we know that they will take whatever opportunity is offered to
them ﬁrst to present their own action in a better light, such as denying
responsibility for it, or denying the importance of the issue, as well as expressing
a congruent belief, with whatever attitudes are queried next being expressed
unchanged (Simon et al., 1995). It seems that participants are using their
2. the problem of self-knowledge
115

expressions of belief strategically, making themselves feel better about what they
have done by presenting it to themselves in a better light.
For a full discussion of these experiments readers are directed to Carruthers
(2011a). But notice that the participants are asked a direct question about
what they believe. (For example: “How bad do you think it would be if tuition
were raised by $1000 next semester?”) One would expect that this would
activate the belief that we know they possess (from answers to the same
question on a supposedly unrelated questionnaire completed some weeks
before, say). So if there were a global attitudinal workspace, one would expect
the participants’ beliefs to be activated within it. One would also expect that a
direct question about their beliefs should lead them to attend to the contents
of the attitudinal workspace. But instead of reporting the belief that they ﬁnd
there, they say that a rise in tuition would be neutral or mildly positive. Yet
participants surely cannot both be aware of their belief and be using their
answers to manage their own negative feelings. For they would then be aware
that they are lying, and that should make them feel worse, not better.
These and other data make a powerful case against the view that people
ever have direct, non-interpretive access to their own amodal attitudes
(Carruthers, 2011a). And by the same token they provide strong reasons to
reject the proposed amodal global workspace, in either of its two guises. An
opponent might suggest that one can accommodate the data, however, by
claiming that people rely both on the contents of the amodal workspace and
on behavioral, contextual, and other sensorily accessible cues when attributing
thoughts to themselves. It might be said that in most cases where confabula-
tion occurs, it is the sensory cues that have dominated; but in other cases
people may enjoy direct non-interpretive knowledge of the contents of the
workspace (Rey, 2013). Notice, however, that accommodating the data is not
the same as explaining it. For the latter, one would need to be able to predict
when confabulation will occur. But a mixed-methods view makes no such
predictions. Rather, it seems to be merely an ad hoc maneuver designed to
preserve the standard philosophical model of reﬂection in the face of contrary
evidence.
Notice, moreover, that even this sort of mixed view cannot really accom-
modate the dissonance data. For in these cases confabulation results not from
interpretation of sensory cues, but rather from unconsciously undertaken
emotional self-manipulation. So not only is the suggestion ad hoc and non-
explanatory, but it cannot even accommodate a large swath of the relevant
data.
116
5. the unity of working memory

2.3. Evidence of introspection of attitudes?
There is only one body of data that lends some indirect support for the idea of an
amodal attitudinal workspace.3 This is the ﬁnding that some people (but note:
only some people) participating in introspection-sampling studies will sometimes
report experiencing amodal, purely propositional thoughts at the moment when
cued by the beep (Heavey & Hurlburt, 2008; Hurlburt & Akhter, 2008). More-
over, in a subset of these cases there seem to be no contextual or other sensorily
available cues that might provide a basis for ascribing such a thought to oneself
through self-interpretation. If these reports are taken at face value, then they can
be appealed to in support of an amodal attitudinal workspace (at least when
combined with other assumptions, such as a critique of the inner-sense idea).
There are a number of ways in which these data can be alternatively explained,
however. (These are discussed in some detail in Carruthers, 2011a.) Perhaps the
simplest is to postulate that there were sufﬁcient sensory cues available, either
at or shortly before the moment of the beep. But these were forgotten when
participants complied with the requirements of the introspection-sampling
protocol and recorded only what was at the focus of their attention at the moment
of the beep. (This suggestion is tentatively endorsed by Hurlburt himself. See
Hurlburt, 2009.) Moreover, the data are, in any case, just as problematic as
supportive for the idea of a central attitudinal workspace. For recall that only
some people report entertaining amodal thoughts. This would be quite puzzling if
such a workspace existed, since it would presumably be present in all normal
humans. Are we to suppose that a large portion of the population possess an
amodal workspace that they never use? This seems about as plausible as the
suggestion that many people could have a capacity for episodic memory without
ever actually employing it.
In response to this challenge, amodal-workspace theorists might appeal to
the same idea utilized by their opponents. That is, it might be suggested that all
memory of the contents of the amodal workspace is wiped out in such people
following the moment of the beep. This could be because it is the sensory
accompaniments to those thoughts that are at the center of the person’s
attention at the time. This explanation might be testable if one could develop
an independent measure of people’s overall focus along the cognitive–sensory
dimension. If those who regularly pay more attention to sensory experience
3 The support is indirect because the data are equally consistent with other theories that make no
commitment to an amodal attitude workspace, such as that we possess an “inner sense” for detecting
our own propositional attitudes (Goldman, 2006). For the introspectability of attitudes provides no
guarantee of their global availability.
2. the problem of self-knowledge
117

never report amodal thoughts, while those who have a more cognitive focus do,
then this would render the divergence in introspective reports consistent with
the amodal workspace idea, in either of the two guises discussed in Section 1.
But at present such evidence is lacking. And in any case, those using this
strategy effectively concede that failures to report items in working memory
can result merely from the fact that those items aren’t currently at the focus of
attention. This admission also undercuts the introspective evidence of purely
amodal thought, as we have seen.
Overall, it seems that the extensive data collected by cognitive scientists
concerning people’s knowledge (and lack thereof) of their own current thoughts
counts strongly against the suggestion that there is an amodal global workspace
in which activated attitudes can be entertained, inferences drawn, and decisions
made. Nor are there any data that unequivocally support the existence of such a
workspace.
3. The Importance of Working Memory
The present section will emphasize how fundamental working memory is for
many aspects of our lives. This will serve two purposes. One is to build a
foundation for another argument against the amodal workspace idea, to be
presented in Section 4. The other is to demonstrate that working memory is
not merely an arcane scientiﬁc construct but a vital component of human
intellectual functioning. Indeed, as we will see, many have suggested that it is
the primary resource underlying ﬂuid general intelligence, or g. This is fully
consistent with one of the main theses of this book, that working memory
provides the workspace in which reﬂective forms of thinking, reasoning, and
decision making take place.
3.1. Working memory and reasoning
Consider, ﬁrst, the relationship between working memory and reasoning. Using
very large samples in a number of different experiments (over 400 participants in
each), Kyllonen & Christal (1990) used a battery of tests of reasoning ability, as
well as a variety of tests of working-memory capacity. They found quite high
correlations between the two, of between 0.8 and 0.9. Likewise, Capon et al.
(2003) found moderate to strong correlations (varying from 0.3 to 0.6) between
a number of different measures of working-memory capacity and both spatial
and syllogistic reasoning ability; and Süß et al. (2002) found that measures of
both working-memory storage and processing correlated with reasoning ability
to a degree of 0.7. Moreover, Prabhakaran et al. (1997) showed using fMRI that
118
5. the unity of working memory

brain regions associated with working memory are differentially active when
people solve reasoning problems. In particular, regions associated with the
phonological loop are active during analytic reasoning tasks, whereas those
linked to the visuo-spatial sketchpad are active during spatial reasoning tasks.
Although correlations can’t demonstrate causation, these ﬁndings suggest
quite strongly that reasoning abilities rely heavily on the use of the working-
memory system.4 Moreover, just as might be predicted if successful reasoning
performance depends on the resources of working memory, dual-task studies,
which require people to reason under working-memory load, show that reason-
ing capacities are directly impacted by load (De Neys, 2006a). Similarly, De Neys
(2006b) shows that reasoning tasks that require people to reﬂect before generat-
ing a correct response are interfered with by secondary tasks placing demands on
working memory, whereas reasoning tasks that can be answered more intuitively
are not. This is consistent with the dual-systems account of human reasoning
capacities, which will form a major topic of discussion in Chapter 7. For it is
common for those working in this framework to argue that so-called “System 2”
(the reﬂective system) depends distinctively on the resources of working
memory.
Note that many reasoning tasks are entirely abstract, such as evaluating the
logical relationship between premises and conclusion. The ﬁnding that perform-
ance in such tasks depends heavily on working-memory capacities (which are in
turn measured using tasks that regularly demonstrate sensory involvement) is
nevertheless consistent with the claim outlined in Section 1, that there is, in
addition, an amodal global workspace that strategically recruits the sensory-
based working-memory system. It is deeply problematic for an idea mooted in
Chapter 4.5, however, that sensory involvement in working-memory tasks is
merely an artifact of the use of sensory-based experiments. For it seems plain
that whatever is measured in such experiments is doing important cognitive
work, and is doing it in abstract tasks as well.
Mathematics is also highly abstract, of course. Raghubar et al. (2010) review a
wide range of studies of the relationship between working-memory capacity and
mathematical abilities. Although the account they present is nuanced, with
different forms of working memory being implicated in distinct mathematical
tasks, in general they conclude that working memory has an important role to
play in mathematical thinking and reasoning. For example, dual-task studies that
4 In any case it is unclear what it would mean for there to be a causal relation in the reverse
direction. How could working memory depend upon reasoning? It is likewise unclear what third
factor could underlie both.
3. the importance of working memory
119

place a simultaneous load on the working-memory system have been used in
conjunction with mathematical tasks, and they demonstrate that the latter
depend signiﬁcantly on the resources of working memory. Moreover, differences
in working-memory ability predict a signiﬁcant portion of the variance in
children’s mathematical skills, even when controlling for age, intelligence, lan-
guage ability, and other cognitive factors. Interestingly, however, mathematics
does have an important domain-speciﬁc component. Halberda et al. (2008) show
that children’s approximate number acuity (measured by requiring them to make
swift comparative judgments of more or less when presented with large numbers
of dots) predicts mathematical ability even when controlling for multiple
domain-general factors (including working memory). Similarly, Kroesbergen
et al. (2009) show that both working memory and approximate number acuity
make signiﬁcant and independent contributions to mathematical ability, con-
trolling for language and intelligence.
The kinds of ﬁnding reviewed above for reasoning and mathematical ability are
just the tip of a rather large iceberg. For there have been, in addition, studies
demonstrating that working-memory capacity overlaps signiﬁcantly with people’s
abilities for reading comprehension (Daneman & Carpenter, 1980, 1983), for
language comprehension (King & Just, 1991; MacDonald et al., 1992), for learning
to spell (Ormrod & Cochran, 1988), for following directions (Engle et al., 1991), for
vocabulary learning (Daneman & Green, 1986), for note-taking (Kiewra & Benton,
1988), and for writing (Benton et al., 1984), among others. What has attracted most
attention recently, however, have been a series of studies suggesting that working-
memory capacity constitutes much of the basis of ﬂuid general intelligence, or ﬂuid
g. Some of this work will be discussed next.
3.2. Working memory and ﬂuid general intelligence
General intelligence has been heavily investigated for more than a century. It is
not itself a cognitive system, but is rather an inferred common factor (or “latent
variable”) extracted by statistical factor-analysis from people’s performance on a
great many cognitive and real-life tasks. It is generally now divided into two
components. One is crystalized intelligence, which roughly corresponds to meas-
ures of general knowledge. The other is ﬂuid intelligence, which corresponds to
what one might think of as mental quickness, or being smart. (Indeed, measures
of ﬂuid g correlate quite well with people’s intuitive judgments of how smart
someone is.) Fluid g turns out to be a good predictor of many real-life outcomes,
including educational attainment and lifetime earnings. For example, when
measures of ﬂuid g are taken within single families (to control for socioeconomic
and parenting differences), it turns out that siblings with high ﬂuid g earn three
120
5. the unity of working memory

times as much as those with low g (Nisbett, 2009). Small wonder, then, that
psychologists have wanted to discover the mechanisms that underlie differences
in general intelligence.
There is a growing consensus that differences in working-memory capacity
account for at least a large portion of people’s variance in ﬂuid g (Conway et al.,
2003; Cowan et al., 2005; Colom et al., 2004, 2008; Kane et al., 2005; Unsworth &
Spillers, 2010; Redick et al., 2012b; Shipstead et al., 2014). Engle et al. (1999), for
example, found that individual abilities in complex-span tasks (such as retaining
a list of words while also judging the truth of arithmetic statements) correlate
with g fairly highly, at 0.6. Correlations at least this strong have been obtained in
numerous studies since then. Indeed, in a large study conducted with nearly 600
participants, Colom et al. (2004) were able to obtain a near-perfect correlation
between the two. And in a series of tests using running-memory tasks, Broadway
& Engle (2010) found correlations with ﬂuid g of 0.8.5 Moreover, brain imaging
studies suggest that there is heavy overlap between the attentional network
employed in working-memory tasks and the brain regions whose activity tracks
differences in general intelligence (Gray & Thompson, 2004; Jung & Haier, 2007;
Deary et al., 2010; Tang et al., 2010).
It is less clear what aspects or components of working memory are most
relevant for explaining differences in ﬂuid g. Some have said that it is the capacity
to sustain information in the face of interference that is especially important.
Thus Engle et al. (1999) found that measures of simple retention (such as
remembering a list of words or numbers) fail to correlate signiﬁcantly with g at
all, while also ﬁnding that complex-span tasks (which place a premium on
capacities to resist attentional interference) correlate strongly with g. In contrast,
Colom et al. (2008) found that simple memory-span abilities account for most of
the variance in ﬂuid g, while differences in performance using complex working-
memory tasks explain somewhat less.
While the literature on this topic is still somewhat tangled, two recent studies
have been especially illuminating. Following Unsworth & Engle (2007), Unsworth
& Spillers (2010) suggest that within working memory one can differentiate
between the use of attention to sustain a representation (often in the face of
interference) and the use of attentional strategies to activate task-relevant repre-
sentations from long-term memory. They devised separate batteries of tests for
5 In such tasks participants are presented serially with a number of items, knowing that they need
to recall the ﬁnal n items presented, but without knowing the length of the total list.
3. the importance of working memory
121

each. They used tests like the Stroop6 and the anti-saccade task (in which one has to
look away from a sudden cue, rather than toward it) to measure simple attentional
control; they used a variety of tests of long-term memory ability, such as delayed
free recall of a list of items; and they used a variety of complex-span tasks to
measure working memory itself. In addition, they administered three separate tests
of ﬂuid g. They found that attentional control and memory abilities each contrib-
uted independently to working-memory capacity, while also making independent
contributions to g.
Likewise, Shipstead et al. (2012) set out to disentangle the contributions made
to general intelligence by simple working-memory retention, on the one hand,
and attentional control (operationalized using complex-span tasks), on the other.
They were able to show that these are separate components of working memory,
and that each makes a signiﬁcant contribution to ﬂuid g. However, they also used
structural equation modeling to show that the contribution made by simple
working-memory retention to ﬂuid g is mostly explained by processes closely
related to the controlled use of attention. It seems that attention and attentional
control lie at the heart of working-memory capacities (just as we argued in
Chapter 4.3), and are also what explain much of people’s variance in ﬂuid general
intelligence.
Now recall that ﬂuid g is a statistical construction arrived at by factor analysis
across a varied battery of cognitive tasks. If working memory is the cognitive
system that constitutes that common factor, then one would predict that
improvements in working-memory ability should cause improvements in general
intelligence. There have now been a ﬂurry of studies designed to test this
prediction. Some have returned negative results, as did Colom et al. (2010) and
Redick et al. (2012a). But these ﬁndings may have been caused by the experi-
menters’ failure to examine those who beneﬁted from working-memory training
separately from those who showed little or no improvement in working memory.
In contrast, Jaeggi et al. (2008) used extensive training with an n-back task (which
puts a premium on capacities to control working-memory interference), and
were able to demonstrate transfer to measures of ﬂuid g. Moreover, the extent of
the beneﬁt in the latter was found to correlate with the length of the training
period. These results were replicated and extended by Jaeggi et al. (2010). Then
Jaeggi et al. (2011) extended their previous ﬁndings to children. They used a
video game-like n-back working-memory task to engage the children’s interest,
6 In the Stroop test one has to name the color of typeface in which words are printed as swiftly as
possible. Some of these words are themselves names of colors, however. Reaction times are slower
when the colors and semantic properties of the words are inconsistent (such as the word “red”
printed in green, to which the correct response is “green”).
122
5. the unity of working memory

and carefully titrated the difﬁculty of the task so that children remained chal-
lenged but not overwhelmed. Among children who showed signiﬁcant improve-
ments in the task, there was transfer to measures of ﬂuid g. Moreover, these
children continued to show the beneﬁts of working-memory training on general
intelligence three months later. These ﬁndings are also consistent with those
reported by Klingberg (2010).
There have been methodological criticisms of some of these studies using
working-memory training (Shipstead et al., 2010). Speciﬁcally, the need for an
active control group has been emphasized (who are trained on some set of tasks
unrelated to working memory), as has the need for multiple measures of general
intelligence. These challenges are taken up by Jaušovec & Jaušovec (2012), who
ﬁnd improvements in all of a number of measures of ﬂuid g following thirty
hours of training on working-memory tasks, while a control group (who under-
went thirty hours of communication training) showed no improvement. In
addition, the authors found changes in brain activity, suggesting that working-
memory training had effects on both attentional (parietal) and executive (frontal)
regions of the brain. The methodological challenges are also taken up by Jaeggi
et al. (2014), who ﬁnd improvements in a composite measure of ﬂuid g using two
sorts of working-memory training. They also uncover a number of individual
differences contributing to training success that might explain why some
researchers have failed to ﬁnd transfer-effects.
3.3. Working memory and temporal discounting
While the ﬁeld is still subject to controversy then, there is reason to think that
working memory is, indeed, the mechanism responsible for at least a large
portion of people’s variance in ﬂuid general intelligence. This conclusion can
be further supported by considering the relationships among intelligence, work-
ing memory, and temporal discounting. The latter consists in the ability to resist
current rewards in order to achieve larger future ones. Low temporal discounting
scores (like high intelligence) predict a great many types of real-world success
(Tangney et al., 2004). Moreover, there is also a moderate negative correlation (of
around –0.25) between temporal discounting and intelligence (Shamosh & Gray,
2008). It is natural to wonder, then, whether the correlation between the two
might be mediated by working-memory capacity, and whether working-memory
training might lead to improvements in temporal discounting rates.
Shamosh et al. (2009) conducted a study that related performance in working-
memory tasks, in temporal discounting, and in measures of general intelligence.
They found a strong correlation between working memory and intelligence (of
about 0.6), as well as a moderately large negative correlation between intelligence
3. the importance of working memory
123

and temporal discounting (of –0.4). They also found a moderate negative correl-
ation between working memory and temporal discounting (of around –0.25).
Statistical analysis suggested that the contribution of working memory to tem-
poral discounting was the same as whatever mediates the connection between
working memory and intelligence. Moreover, the causal nature of the relation-
ship is conﬁrmed by Bickel et al. (2011), who show that working-memory train-
ing using n-back tasks reduces temporal discounting in addicts. They also suggest
that the reason for the relationship may be that those with strong working-
memory abilities are better able to envisage the beneﬁts of waiting for future
rewards, as well as to direct attention away from current temptations.
These ﬁndings of a connection between working-memory abilities and cap-
acities to delay gratiﬁcation are consistent with a robust body of work suggesting
that one important determinant of self-control is a capacity to deploy one’s
attentional resources intelligently. In a groundbreaking series of studies con-
ducted with children in the 1970s, Mischel & Mischel (1983) tested children’s
ability to resist the temptation of one marshmallow now in order to get two
marshmallows a few minutes later. They found that differences in this ability
predicted many positive outcomes through the school years and beyond into
adulthood, including school grades, truancy (or its lack), college graduation, rates
of divorce, and much more. But they also found that the proximate cause of the
children’s success or failure lay mostly in how they directed their attention.
Successful children turned their back on the marshmallow, looked at the ceiling,
sang songs to themselves, and so forth (Metcalfe & Mischel, 1999). Unsuccessful
children looked longingly at the marshmallow itself. And attentional control, of
course, lies at the heart of people’s working-memory abilities, as we saw in
Chapter 4.3.7
Overall, then, we can conclude that working memory is a vital component of
many important human capacities. This is fully consistent with the suggestion
that working memory is the system in which conscious forms of reﬂective
reasoning and decision making take place.
4. The Case of the Missing Variance
This section will build on the ﬁndings of Section 3 to argue against the amodal-
workspace idea sketched in Section 1 (in either of its two variants). Speciﬁcally, it
will argue that such a workspace should, if it existed, contribute an independent
7 Note that the studies described here involve the intelligent use of overt, as opposed to covert,
attention. But as we will see in Chapter 6, the same executive and control mechanisms govern both.
124
5. the unity of working memory

source of variance to people’s reasoning and decision-making abilities, as well as
to their ﬂuid general intelligence. Evidence will then be reviewed that there is no
such variance remaining, at least once other factors are accounted for. So a
central prediction made by the amodal-workspace idea fails to hold up.
4.1. Predictions of the amodal-workspace theory
Recall from Section 1 that there is seemingly only one way for traditional models
of reﬂection to be defended against the evidence of the sensory-based nature of
working memory discussed in Chapter 4. This is to claim that there is an
additional amodal global workspace that operates alongside, and generally
recruits the resources of, the sensory-based working-memory system. In one
version, it could be claimed that the amodal workspace relies on some of the
same attentional resources as working memory, only directed toward amodal
activated attitudes. In another version, it could be claimed that there is some
other mechanism that can make activated attitudes globally available, thereby
constituting an amodal workspace. But on either account, use of the amodal
workspace should be something that people can be better or worse at independ-
ently of their other abilities, and speciﬁcally, independently of their sensory-
based working-memory abilities.
This point is easiest to see on a two-systems account, where the amodal
workspace is thought to depend on some resource other than attention. For
whatever that resource is, people should vary in how much they have of it, just as
they vary in almost every other measurable property. Just as some people have
hands that are bigger than others, or legs that are longer than those of others, or a
greater facility to pick up new languages, so we should predict that people will
differ in their abilities to activate, sustain, and deploy their attitudes in the amodal
global workspace. Moreover, everyone acknowledges that reﬂection is important
for many real-world activities and outcomes. So we should expect that if reﬂec-
tion is underpinned, even in part, by such an amodal workspace, then this should
show up as an independent source of variance in people’s performance of those
activities, as well as in their relative achievement of those outcomes. Indeed, given
the importance traditionally attached to amodal forms of reﬂection and reﬂective
reasoning, we should expect that the amodal workspace’s contribution to per-
formance (especially in abstract domains) would be quite large.
It might be replied that the contributions made by the amodal and sensory-
based workspaces cannot be wholly independent, given the hypothesis that the
amodal system strategically recruits the resources of the sensory-based one on
a regular basis. This might lead one to expect that a better sensory-based
system would correlate with better use of the amodal one, and that a weak
4. the case of the missing variance
125

sensory-based system would correlate with weaker performance in amodal
thinking and reasoning. The point is correct so far as it goes. But since the
attentional and sensory resources that underlie working-memory capacity fall
outside of the amodal system (on a two-systems account), there should still be
signiﬁcant independent variance in the contributions of the two systems to
people’s performance.
The same case is still valid, but a little more complex to make, if a multiple-
modes model is assumed, and the amodal workspace shares the same attentional
resources as the sensory-based working-memory system. Recall that on this
account there is only one system involved, but with two modes of activity.
Given this, it might be thought that the system would show up as just a single
source of variance in people’s performance in the sorts of tasks that require
reﬂection. This is a mistake, however. For even if we allow that reﬂection is
underpinned by a single system, its distinct modes depend on the engagement of
different component parts. Hence even if attentional mechanisms are engaged in
both modes (perhaps centered on the intraparietal sulcus in each case), the two
would surely involve distinct neural pathways. In sensory-based mode these will
focus attentional signals on regions of sensory cortices, whereas in amodal mode
a distinct set of ﬁbers would focus such signals on regions of prefrontal and
temporal cortex, where amodal attitudes are realized. These two sets of neural
pathways can of course differ in the thickness of the ﬁber bundles involved, as
well as in the depth of myelination of the neuronal axons, each of which is known
to have an impact on processing speed and efﬁciency. Moreover, the principles
according to which the amodal workspace operates would surely be different.
And one might also expect that people would differ in their habits of use of the
two modes, with some relying more on one mode and others more on the other.
Over time this, too, would be expected to generate differences in the capacities
of the two.
Notice that analyses of variance across tasks enable the working-memory
system to be fractionated into components, with the various parts contributing
differentially to different sorts of tasks or in different contexts. Thus Kane et al.
(2004) administered a range of both simple and complex working-memory tasks
to people, as well as tests of reasoning and general intelligence. Factor analysis
then enabled them to test different models of the contributors to performance,
with the result comprising an executive that was implicated to some degree in all
tasks (especially in complex memory-span tasks), together with two modality-
speciﬁc components (one for vision, one for verbal material) which were partly
independent of one another and of the central executive. Similar analyses should
126
5. the unity of working memory

then be capable of differentiating the amodal from sensory-based uses of the
global workspace, if they both exist.
Someone might suggest that the known component structure of working
memory itself can be mapped onto the distinction between an amodal and a
sensory-based workspace, with the executive component comprising the former
and the attentional and sensory components constituting the latter. It should be
granted that the frontal executive is amodal in nature, of course. But it is a far cry
from this to claiming that the frontal lobes realize a globally accessible amodal
workspace in which reﬂection can take place, and in which it can do so inde-
pendently of sensory-based working memory (at least in principle, absent a
strong tendency to make strategic use of the resources of the latter). If this
were true, then it should be possible for factor analysis to isolate two components
of the executive: one that directs attention and resists interference while control-
ling the sensory-based system, and another that makes amodal attitudes (which
are realized in the frontal and temporal lobes) globally accessible throughout
the brain.
While many component-factor analyses of executive function have been
conducted, and while the ﬁeld is still somewhat murky, no one has proposed
any such distinction. For example, Miyake et al. (2000) used a battery of executive
function tasks to demonstrate the partial separation between functions of mental-
set shifting, information updating and monitoring, and inhibition of prepotent
responses. In contrast, Nee et al. (2013) argue that much of the work purporting
to distinguish functional components of the executive is subject to experimental
confounds of various sorts. Rather, they defend a version of the content-based
division initially proposed by Levy & Goldman-Rakic (2000) on the basis of
neurophysiological evidence. Their meta-analysis shows a division in the frontal
lobes between spatial content and object-based content, with the regions involved
forming the terminus of the “where” and “what” visual streams established by
Ungerleider & Mishkin (1982). (For convergent ﬁndings, see the meta-analysis by
Rottschy et al., 2012.) But I have been able to ﬁnd nothing in the ﬁeld to support
the claim that one component of executive function amounts to an amodal global
workspace.
We can conclude that if there were an amodal global workspace for reﬂection
in addition to a sensory-based working-memory system, then this should show
up as an independent source of variance in people’s intellectual performance.
The question, now, is how this prediction stacks up against the empirical
evidence. There are two extensive literatures that bear on the issue. One
concerns reasoning performance, and the other ﬂuid general intelligence. We
will consider the latter ﬁrst.
4. the case of the missing variance
127

4.2. Explaining variance in ﬂuid g
We have already noted in Section 3 that variance in working-memory explains
a large portion of people’s variations in ﬂuid general intelligence. Note,
however, that even if working memory were the cognitive system or capacity
underlying the range of abilities we identify as general intelligence, we should
not expect measures of the two to be perfectly correlated. For there will be
factors that inﬂuence performance in speciﬁc working-memory tests that have
less inﬂuence on the outcome of intelligence tests, and vice versa. In particular,
content-relevant knowledge and skills will vary in the subject population in
ways that impact some tests but not others. In a group of participants drawn
from among undergraduates, for example, some might have strong mathem-
atical skills whereas others are much weaker. One would expect that a complex
span-task requiring participants to judge the truth of an arithmetic proposition
while recalling a list of words would be much less demanding of the attentional
resources of the former group than the latter. Given the inevitability of this
sort of noise in the data, a correlation of 0.8 or 0.9 (together with evidence
of tight causal relatedness) might be considered close enough to amount to an
identity.
In any case, however, we know that there are additional sources of variance in
ﬂuid g that are at least partly independent of working memory, but which provide
no support for an amodal global workspace. One is speed of processing. This is
likely to reﬂect low-level brain-wiring efﬁciency and the extent of neural mye-
lination, and is generally measured using tasks that require speed of perceptual
discrimination. Speed of processing is known to increase through childhood and
adolescence, and declines in older age. One can then examine how changes in
speed relate to changes in working memory and ﬂuid g. Clay et al. (2009) show,
for example, that most of the decline in working memory and ﬂuid g with age can
be attributed to a decline in speed of processing, together with sensory decline
more generally. However, they also note that working memory and speed of
processing are partly independent of one another. This suggests that speed of
processing may be another factor alongside working-memory ability that
explains some of the variance in ﬂuid g.
Similarly, Schretlen et al. (2000) examined the causes of normal age-related
decline in ﬂuid g. They administered tests of speed of processing (using speed of
perceptual matching), working memory, and executive function, while also
obtaining measures of frontal-lobe volume. The important ﬁnding for our pur-
poses is that 97 percent of age-related declines in g were accounted for by changes
in simple comparison speed and working memory, which were at least partly
128
5. the unity of working memory

independent of one another. However, the contribution of working memory to
the decline in g was wholly explained by the decline in executive function and
frontal lobe volume.8
Others have investigated the relationship between speed of processing, work-
ing memory, and g in development and among young adults (Coyle et al., 2011;
Redick et al., 2012b). For example, Demetriou et al. (2013) conducted three
longitudinal studies with children and adolescents to examine the relations
between speed of processing, working memory, and ﬂuid g (as well as correl-
ations between each and age). They found that speed of processing co-varied
strongly with age (with correlations of between 0.6 and 0.7) up to age thirteen,
declining rapidly thereafter (to about 0.2). Working memory was moderately
related to speed throughout the entire span of ages. But by adolescence, with
speed and age controlled for, working memory overlapped almost fully with
ﬂuid g (at around 0.9).
In addition to speed of processing and working memory (where the latter
includes an executive function component, of course), are there any other factors
that are known to contribute to ﬂuid general intelligence? Until recently there
were none that were well established. However, Kaufman et al. (2009) investi-
gated whether associative learning might also be important for general intelli-
gence. (This is learning of the sort that might occur when one sees two words
paired together for a brief time, later using the one as a cue to recall the other.)
They found that working memory and associative learning are weakly related, but
that all three of working memory, associative learning, and processing speed
make statistically independent contributions to ﬂuid g. Yet there is nothing about
associative learning ability, of course, to suggest the existence of an amodal
workspace in which propositional attitudes of all sorts can be activated and
globally accessible.
We can conclude that ﬂuid general intelligence is best explained by some
combination of working memory capacity, speed of processing, and perhaps
associative learning ability. In most studies working memory overlaps quite
strongly with ﬂuid g, generally explaining between 0.6 and 0.9 of people’s
variance in the latter.
8 Executive function was measured using the Wisconsin Card Sorting Task. This is generally
thought to test hypothesis formation and outcome monitoring, perhaps suggesting that an amodal
attitude system might be involved. But in fact there is evidence that the processes that mediate
performance on the Wisconsin Card Sorting Task are sensory based, and make heavy use of the
same attentional resources that underlie working memory (Monchi et al., 2001; Buchsbaum et al.,
2005).
4. the case of the missing variance
129

4.3. Sensory attention and ﬂuid g
It doesn’t follow from these ﬁndings that there is no amodal workspace in which
propositional attitudes can be activated and conscious, of course. For some of the
variance in people’s working memory capacities may be due to the properties of
just such a workspace. However, we have already noted that there is no hint in the
literature of a partition within working memory between modal and amodal
content, which is what the existence of an amodal workspace should predict. And
we have also noted that low-level attentional capacities of the kind that are
measured using anti-saccade tasks and ﬂanker tasks correlate quite strongly
with ﬂuid g in their own right (Unsworth & Spillers, 2010; Shipstead et al.,
2014). So we can at least conclude that the sensory-based working-memory
system is responsible for a signiﬁcant portion of people’s variance in ﬂuid general
intelligence.
The most direct test of the involvement of an amodal global workspace in ﬂuid
g would be to administer a series of well-validated measures of working-memory
ability that vary in the extent to which they involve amodal content (such as tasks
involving words or numbers) in addition to nonconceptual sensory information
(such as patterns and shapes for which we possess no concepts). If such a
workspace exists, then one would expect to ﬁnd decreasing overlap between
working memory and ﬂuid g when one moves from tasks that are more abstract
in nature to those that are purely sensory. Put differently, if the hypothesis of an
amodal workspace is correct, then one would expect to ﬁnd stronger correlations
with ﬂuid g using abstract measures of working memory, since these will beneﬁt
from both modal and amodal involvement. To the best of my knowledge, no one
has conducted such a test. But one can look across studies in which both
conceptual and nonconceptual measures of working memory are employed and
correlated with ﬂuid g on an individual basis. Initial indications are that the
prediction does not pan out.
To test the prediction, I searched for papers correlating working memory with
ﬂuid g, looking especially for those that utilize both concept-involving and
nonconceptual tests of working memory, and which also provide details of
correlations among individual tests. This search turned up ﬁve recent papers:
Unsworth & Spillers (2010), Burgess et al. (2011), Redick et al. (2012b), Shipstead
et al. (2012), and Shipstead et al. (2014). All ﬁve employed two types of working-
memory test that should unambiguously beneﬁt from the involvement of an
amodal workspace, if such a thing exists. Thus all used operation-span tests,
which require one to recall lists of words, letters, or numbers while undertaking a
secondary mathematical task. Four also used reading-span tests, which have the
130
5. the unity of working memory

same format except that the secondary task involves responding to sentences. The
ﬁfth instead used two running-memory tests (Shipstead et al., 2014), which
require one to keep in mind serial lists of letters or numbers without any
secondary task. All ﬁve studies also used a type of test that seems to be largely
nonconceptual in nature. These are symmetry-span tests, which require one to
keep a running memory of illuminated positions in a 4  4 grid interleaved with
judgments of the symmetry of unnameable geometric ﬁgures.9 Moreover, all ﬁve
used a number of different tests of ﬂuid general intelligence. Averaging across
these ﬁve studies, the correlation between the concept-involving measures of
working memory and the tests of ﬂuid g is 0.35, whereas the correlation between
the nonconceptual measure and the tests of ﬂuid g is 0.40, somewhat higher,
not lower.10
This ﬁnding is problematic for the idea of an amodal global workspace. For if
such a thing existed, then it would surely make some contribution to individual
differences in ﬂuid general intelligence. The putatively distinct sensory-based
system surely could not account for all variance in ﬂuid g on its own. We
therefore ought to see lower correlations with ﬂuid g using working-memory
tasks that are purely sensory in nature than are found using tasks of a mixed
modal–amodal sort. But this seems not to be the case. Of course, the studies in
question all happened to employ the same nonconceptual measure of working
memory, which might turn out to be anomalous in some way. Nor were those
studies speciﬁcally designed to test the prediction under consideration here. So
the present argument cannot be regarded as deﬁnitive.
In addition, however, there is direct evidence that low-level sensory and
attentional factors correlate with ﬂuid intelligence about as closely as working
memory itself does, thus providing further support for the claim that the latter is
entirely sensory-based. Melnick et al. (2013), in particular, used a test that
combined speed of sensory processing with automatic sensory suppression of
large (as opposed to small) moving stimuli.11 They found high correlations (of
0.65 and 0.71 in two experiments) between their low-level sensory measures and
9 Even if symmetry-span tests are not fully nonconceptual, they are certainly less conceptual in
nature than the operation-span, reading-span, and memory-span tests, which use words, letters, or
numbers. This is enough for our purposes. If there is a separate amodal working-memory system,
the latter tests should correlate with ﬂuid g more strongly than does the symmetry-span test.
10 Note that these are correlations between tests of working memory and tests of ﬂuid g, not ﬂuid
g itself (which is the underlying common factor extracted from a number of such tests). This might
explain why the correlations reported here are lower than those generally found between working-
memory capacity and g.
11 The suppression effect is thought to be an innate bias in the mechanisms that guide attention
to ignore and suppress stimuli that are generally less likely to be relevant.
4. the case of the missing variance
131

a variety of different measures of ﬂuid general intelligence. Since we know that
executively controlled attention is also a vital component of working memory (as
well as for tasks that measure ﬂuid g), it appears from this study that there might
be no variance in the latter remaining to be explained by a postulated amodal
system.
Converging evidence is provided by a number of further studies, which have
examined the relationship between capacities for sensory discrimination and
ﬂuid general intelligence in both children and adults (Acton & Schroeder, 2001;
Deary et al., 2004; Meyer et al., 2010). The tests of sensory discrimination in
question require people to order a series of color-chips by shade of color, to order
a series of lines by length, to order a series of objects by weight, to order a series of
tones by pitch, and so on. The tests are not time-limited, so speed of processing is
unlikely to play much of a role. From these measures one can use statistical
analysis to extract an underlying common factor that is shared by them all (much
as one can extract g itself as a common factor underlying a number of measures of
intelligence). Variance in sensory acuity across sensory modalities is thus washed
out in this analysis. One can then examine the correlations between this common
factor and ﬂuid g. These range between 0.68 and 0.92 across studies—that is,
between very strong and almost identical.12
It is not yet clear what cognitive mechanisms constitute the common factor
involved in sensory-discrimination tasks. But it is plausible that attentional
control and sensory working memory are the main components. When one
makes a judgment of the comparative pitch of two tones, for example, one has
to hold in place a working-memory representation of the tone one has just heard,
comparing it for pitch against the current stimulus, while resisting interference
from memories of other recent tones. Even where one makes a simultaneous
judgment of color or comparative length one needs to look back and forth
between pairs for comparison, holding in working memory a representation of
the one that has just been examined and comparing it with the object of current
attention. What is surely quite clear, however, is that the underlying common
factor in sensory-discrimination tasks cannot have anything to do with the
properties of the postulated amodal global workspace.
Those seeking to defend the idea of an amodal workspace in which attitudes of
all types can be activated might respond that it hasn’t yet been demonstrated that
there is no variance remaining that is unaccounted for by low-level sensory
factors. So there is still a possibility that this additional variance is explained by
12 Note, too, that this is essentially the same range of correlations as is generally found between
working-memory capacities themselves and ﬂuid g, which tend to fall between 0.6 and 0.9.
132
5. the unity of working memory

properties of the amodal workspace. Such claims are hard to refute. But we can
say with some conﬁdence that there is no need to appeal to such a workspace in
order to explain variations in ﬂuid intelligence. Variance in the controlling
executive system combined with variations in attentional capacities, speed of
processing, and perhaps associative ability are fully sufﬁcient to explain the data.
Moreover, recall that ﬂuid g is highly predictive of success in the modern world,
which sets a premium on abstract and decontextualized forms of reasoning and
decision making. One might have expected, then, that variance in the properties
of the supposed amodal workspace (in which most of the real work of thinking
and reasoning takes place, according to adherents) should be responsible for a
large portion of people’s variance in ﬂuid g. But plainly it is not.
It is possible for the hypothesis of an amodal workspace to be saved, of course,
by postulating that there are no variations in its structure or properties across
individuals. For if that were so, then of course all of the variance in ﬂuid g would
need to be explained by other factors. But such a claim is entirely arbitrary, and
quite implausible. Since there is variance in virtually every other measurable
property of human beings, it would be extraordinary if none were found here. We
can conclude, therefore, that an inference to the best explanation strongly favors
the claim that there is just one working-memory system that is sensory based.
4.4. Explaining variance in reasoning
In addition to the work on ﬂuid g discussed above, there is also an extensive
literature on the factors that underlie variations in reasoning ability. Indeed,
human reasoning has been heavily researched over the last half century and
more. We know that people often fall prey to a variety of fallacies and biases, and
that they do so in predictable ways (Kahneman et al., 1982). But we also know
that it is possible for people to avoid such errors, and that there are large
individual differences in how reliably they do so (Stanovich, 1999). This literature
has given rise to “dual systems” models of human reasoning, which will be a
central focus of our discussion in Chapter 7. (At this point it is worth noting only
that so-called “System 2” is widely agreed to depend heavily on the resources of
working memory.) There is dispute about whether the reasoning methods that
people generally employ are really erroneous, however, or are rather “quick and
dirty” heuristics that are both computationally frugal and reliable enough to be
useful (Gigerenzer et al., 1999). While I am sympathetic toward the latter position,
it is undeniable that heuristic reasoning can often prove disastrous in our modern
world (which places a premium on abstract, de-contextualized, and exact reason-
ing and decision making). Moreover, capacities for valid non-heuristic reasoning
correlate well with many measures of real-world success (Stanovich, 2009).
4. the case of the missing variance
133

Our present interest is in the factors that explain individual variance in successful
reasoning of this sort.
Stanovich (2009) reviews much of the existing literature, and argues that there
are just three components underlying successful performance in reasoning tasks.
One is ﬂuid general intelligence. Smarter people are more likely to spot the
tempting but fallacious option, and to see their way to a correct solution. But
we have already concluded that ﬂuid g is largely constituted by strong sensory-
based working-memory abilities, supported by speed of processing and perhaps
associative learning. The second component underlying successful reasoning is a
feature of personality. It is a disposition to be reﬂective, which is related to what
psychologists sometimes call “need for cognition.” While a reﬂective disposition
could be used to activate an amodal global workspace, if such a thing existed, it
provides no evidence for the existence of such a workspace. The ﬁnal component
in reasoning success is explicit knowledge of norms of reasoning, which
Stanovich (2009) refers to as “mindware.” Not surprisingly, people who have
beneﬁted from instruction in methods of reasoning tend to do better in reasoning
tasks (provided that they reﬂect long enough to deploy their knowledge). Again,
there is nothing here to suggest an amodal global workspace. In Chapter 7, in
contrast, we will show how the sensory-based account of reﬂection can explain
the key ﬁndings in this area.
We can conclude that the literature on individual differences in cognition
provides a powerful empirical case against traditional models of reﬂection. If an
amodal workspace existed in which propositional attitudes of all sorts could be
activated and globally available, then we would expect it to contribute a signiﬁ-
cant source of variance to people’s cognitive performance. But there is not even a
hint in the data that this is the case. Moreover, enough is known about the factors
that do underlie success to suggest quite strongly that it is not the case.
5. The Default Network
This section will consider a body of data deriving from brain-imaging studies of
the so-called “default network” in the human brain (Raichle et al., 2001; Mason
et al., 2007; Buckner et al., 2008). These might seem, on the face of it, to support
the existence of an amodal global workspace.
The default network is differentially active when people are not involved in any
speciﬁc task, but when they nevertheless report that they are engaged in con-
scious thought, with their minds wandering freely over matters not directly
related to the present. The regions involved include medial prefrontal cortex
and posterior cingulate cortex along the midline of the brain, together with
134
5. the unity of working memory

ventral parietal cortex (including the temporo-parietal junction), lateral temporal
cortex, and the hippocampus together with nearby structures in the medial
temporal lobe. (See Figures 1–3.) Importantly for our purposes, regions not
included in this network are midlevel sensory cortices together with the intrapar-
ietal sulcus and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, which form central components of
the working-memory system. (See Figure 2.) Since the default network is active
when people engage in conscious stimulus-independent thought, but without
apparently employing sensory-based forms of working memory, then this might
be taken to provide evidence of an amodal global workspace.
5.1. Subtraction methodology
There are numerous reasons why this conclusion should be resisted, however.
One is that there exist alternative explanations for why brain-imaging studies of
the default network should fail to show activity in the attentional system and
modality-speciﬁc sensory areas. In this connection it is an important point to
note that all regions of the brain are always active. Brain imaging produces
maps of differential activity by using a subtraction method: brain activations in
a control task of some sort are subtracted from activity that occurs during the
target experimental condition. So what one sees are the regions of the brain that
were more active in the target condition than in the control condition. When
maps of the default network are produced, the control condition is generally an
attention-demanding visual or auditory task of some sort. It is hardly surpris-
ing, then, that sensory regions should appear to be suppressed by comparison
in the target “mind wandering” condition. For in the latter condition there is
no bottom-up sensory stimulus to be attended to. Rather, any imagery pro-
duced during mind wandering will be caused and sustained by top-down
signals. Small wonder, then, that modality-speciﬁc sensory activity is lesser by
comparison.
Moreover, we know that mind wandering frequently involves episodic mem-
ories, which generally contain sensory-speciﬁc components (visual, auditory,
olfactory, and so on). And we know that regions of visual and auditory cortex
are differentially activated during retrieval of memories of pictures and sounds
respectively (Wheeler et al., 2000). Indeed, when visual and auditory imagery are
contrasted with one another, and with perception in the relevant sense modality,
not only is modality-speciﬁc activity in midlevel sensory areas found, but so also
is activity in core regions of the default network (Daselaar et al., 2010). These
include medial prefrontal cortex, posterior cingulate, and ventral parietal cortex.
Moreover, as well as modality-speciﬁc activity in midlevel sensory areas there is
modality-speciﬁc suppression in primary sensory cortices (Daselaar et al., 2010).
5. the default network
135

Similar considerations relating to the subtraction methodology can explain
why activity in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, the frontal eye-ﬁelds, and the
intraparietal sulcus (that is, the core regions of attentional and working-memory
systems) is not observed during periods of mind wandering. This is because mind
wandering involves a form of defocused attention (Smallwood et al., 2011),
whereas the comparison tasks that are used for purposes of subtraction will
generally involve an attentionally demanding assignment of some sort. That
there is lesser involvement of the top-down attentional network in the former
condition is exactly what one might expect. But it does not follow that top-down
attention is not involved at all.
5.2. The content of default-network activity
In addition, the involvement of most of the regions that make up the default
network is explicable in term of the normal contents of mind wandering and
stimulus-independent thought. The involvement of the hippocampus and nearby
regions of medial temporal cortex is easy to explain, for example. For these
structures are known to be critically involved in the storage and activation of
episodic memories (Tulving & Markowitsch, 1998). Moreover, evidence con-
tinues to accumulate that those same memory systems are heavily involved in
prospection, where one constructs, elaborates, and evaluates future events and
scenarios, often for purposes of decision making (Addis et al., 2007; Buckner
et al., 2008; Spreng et al., 2009). For we know that much of the time when people’s
minds are wandering they are reliving episodes from their past or imagining
potential future actions or events. In contrast, when engaged in the control tasks
used for subtraction, people will be focused on the here-and-now.
Similar content-related considerations can explain the involvement of medial
prefrontal cortex, posterior cingulate, and lateral temporal cortex. Consider the
latter ﬁrst. This is known to be one of the main brain regions involved in the
storage and activation of concepts (Binder et al., 2005; Martin, 2007). And mind
wandering will generally involve thoughts that are much more heavily and richly
conceptualized than are the thoughts evoked by the relatively simple sensory
decision-tasks that tend to be used for purposes of subtraction. Likewise, medial
prefrontal cortex and posterior cingulate are known to be among the main
regions underlying social cognition of all sorts (Frith & Frith, 2003; Saxe, 2009;
Saxe et al., 2009; Lieberman, 2013), and mind wandering will frequently involve
contents that are at least partly social in nature. For we spend much of our time
when not on task thinking about ourselves and our relationships with other
people, real or potential. The control tasks, in contrast, are hardly ever of this sort.
It is hardly surprising, then, that these regions should reliably show up as
136
5. the unity of working memory

belonging to the default network that is active when one engages in stimulus-
independent thought.13
What, then, explains the involvement of ventral parietal cortex in default-
network activity? It might be tempting to look for an explanation in terms of the
involvement of the bottom-up attentional system, given that this likewise impli-
cates ventral parietal cortex, as we saw in Chapter 3.4. But in fact the region of
ventral parietal cortex that forms part of the default network is anti-correlated
with what some have called the “salience network” (Menon, 2011; Yeo et al.,
2011). Rather, the region in question embraces the temporo-parietal junction,
which is known to be a critical component of the mentalizing system (Saxe,
2009). So once again the explanation is likely to be content based: when our
minds wander, much of the time we are thinking about and evaluating the mental
states of ourselves and others.
5.3. The involvement of working memory in default activity
The most important point for our purposes, however, is that there is no reason
to think that sensory-based working memory is not involved during mind
wandering and stimulus-independent thought. On the contrary, people’s intro-
spective reports of the kinds of thought in which they engage while the default
network is active routinely involve visual and auditory imagery, as well as richly
sensory episodic memories of the past together with imagery of potential future
events (Mazoyer et al., 2001; Buckner et al., 2008; Andrews-Hanna et al., 2014).
Thoughts of this sort are known to involve activations of midlevel regions
of the relevant sensory modalities, as does imagery generally, as we saw in
Chapter 3.1.
In addition, a number of carefully controlled studies have revealed activity in
sensory cortical areas under such conditions (Addis et al., 2007; Spreng et al.,
2009; Daselaar et al., 2010). Indeed, Hassabis et al. (2007) argue that the common
function supported by all forms of default-network activity is that of sensory-
based scene construction. Drawing, in part, on the well-known ﬁnding that
episodic memory is always partly constructive in nature (Schacter, 2001), they
argue that the core function that is common to both episodic remembering and
imagining of ﬁctitious or future scenes is the generation and maintenance of
complex visual representations, especially of the spatial context of objects and
13 Another hypothesis, however, is that medial prefrontal cortex and the posterior cingulate are
among the primary network hubs of the brain, causing it to show up more in conditions where
people engage in varied forms of stimulus-independent thought than in circumstances where they
are focused on a speciﬁc task (Sporns, 2011). We will return to this point in Chapter 8.
5. the default network
137

events. Summerﬁeld et al. (2010) then devised a task that enabled them to “slow
down” the construction process, observing which brain areas are especially active
at different stages of construction. These include many default-network regions,
but also dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and the intraparietal sulcus, which are core
components of the top-down attentional system that underlies sensory-based
working memory.
There is good reason to think, then, that the seeming absence of activity in
attentional and working-memory networks in many studies of mind wandering is
an artifact of the subtraction methodology employed. Moreover, since we know
that the thoughts that occupy people’s minds in such circumstances generally
have rich sensory-based imagistic contents, there is every reason to believe that
the working-memory system is involved. In addition, a number of studies suggest
directly that this is, indeed, the case.
6. Conclusion
This chapter has shown that there are a number of deep problems confronting
the idea of a central amodal workspace in which our propositional attitudes can
be activated and globally accessible. One is that if there were such a workspace,
then knowledge of our own current attitudes should often be direct and non-
interpretive. But it is not. Another is that if there were such a workspace, then one
would expect that variance in its properties should make a substantial contribu-
tion to variations among people in general intelligence and abstract reasoning
abilities. But it seems that such variation is adequately explained by variance in
sensory-based working-memory capacities combined with a number of low-level
factors such as speed of processing. Moreover, we have shown that there is no
reason to think that the default network is a viable candidate to realize an amodal
workspace. In contrast, the sensory-based account of reﬂection and the stream of
consciousness being developed in this book can explain all of the well-established
properties of the human mind that we have discussed so far.
138
5. the unity of working memory

6
Working Memory in Action
This chapter will describe in more detail the positive alternative to the amodal
model of reﬂection critiqued in previous chapters. (This work will continue
through Chapter 7.) On the proposed account, the contents of the stream of
consciousness in general (and reﬂection in particular) are constituted by the
sensory-based contents of working memory. Our amodal attitudes, in contrast,
operate unconsciously in the background, activating, sustaining, and manipulat-
ing the contents of working memory. One goal of the present chapter is to
provide a sketch of an empirically supported theory of how this system works.
Another is to vindicate our intuitive belief that reﬂective thinking is a form of
action (at least in the sense that it is under direct intentional control). The chapter
also argues, more controversially, that the seemingly passive nature of much of
the stream of consciousness is actually active in nature.
1. Unconscious Goal Pursuit
This section will consider some of the evidence suggesting that goals can be
activated, and can guide action, without being conscious. Thereafter the chapter
will show how unconscious goals control mental actions of attending and
rehearsing, thereby determining the contents of working memory and giving
rise to the stream of consciousness.
1.1. Some goals are unconscious
There is a burgeoning literature showing not only that goals can be created in
people without their awareness, but also that such goals can motivate action
outside of awareness (Dijksterhuis & Aarts, 2010). These ﬁndings are important
because they demonstrate the reality and efﬁcacy of unconscious goals. The latter
play a crucial role in the sensory-based model of reﬂection and the stream of
consciousness, as we will see. Moreover, it should be stressed that the experi-
mental studies in question work with the most demanding possible conception of
what it takes for goals to be unconscious; namely, that subjects should have no

knowledge of them. If we equate consciousness with the results of global broad-
casting, in contrast (as we have been assuming since Chapter 3), then there will be
many mental events that are not globally broadcast (and are hence unconscious)
although subjects know, by interpretation, that they occur. Put differently: from
the fact that one knows that one has a certain goal one cannot conclude that the
goal is a conscious one. For the knowledge in question might be grounded in
unconscious inferences from one’s own behavior or circumstances, or derived
indirectly from sensory-based cues of one sort or another (Carruthers, 2011a).
With the bar for unconscious goal pursuit set so high, it is not surprising that it
has required extensive experimentation to establish the reality of the phenom-
enon. But by the same token, once established, we can be conﬁdent that it is really
quite widespread.
It has been known for some time that unconscious priming can increase the
strength of a goal, thereby impacting how someone will act. For example,
Bargh et al. (2001) primed the goal of succeeding or doing well by having
people complete word puzzles in which terms like “success” ﬁgured, whereas a
control group completed puzzles in which these terms did not occur. The
people primed for success subsequently worked harder and longer at an
unrelated task. Likewise, people playing the role of a ﬁshing company who
were primed for cooperation did more to replenish the ﬁsh stocks than did
people who were not so primed. However, this research does not demonstrate
the existence of unconscious goals. It only shows that goals can be inﬂuenced
unconsciously. For people in the control groups, too, presumably had the goal
of succeeding at the task they had agreed to do, or of cooperating to some
degree, and there is no reason to think that these goals were unconscious. (Or
none that is provided in these experiments, at any rate. In fact it follows from
the sensory-based model of reﬂection that all goals are always unconscious, as
we will see.) Priming merely increased the strength of these goals outside of
people’s awareness.
There is now, however, an extensive body of evidence showing that goals can be
activated, and can inﬂuence behavior, outside of people’s awareness (Dijksterhuis
& Aarts, 2010; Huang & Bargh, 2014). For example, Lau & Passingham (2007)
were able to demonstrate that subliminal priming can activate goals that would
otherwise not be present. Participants engaged in a task where they either had
to make a semantic judgment (indicating whether a word was concrete or
abstract) or a phonological one (indicating whether the word was bisyllabic).
The judgment that they were to make on each trial was signaled by a prior
visible cue (a square or a diamond respectively). Shortly before presentation
of the cue, participants were presented with a smaller square or diamond
140
6. working memory in action

shape, in conditions where it was rendered either visible or invisible through
the timing of a backward mask. They were told to ignore these initial shapes,
which could be either congruent or incongruent with the target cues. What the
experiment found was that when the prime was both subliminal and incongru-
ent with the target cue, people made more errors and were slower to respond,
suggesting that the prime had activated the opposite goal, which then conﬂicted
with the cued goal. (There was no effect when the prime was visible.) Moreover,
brain imaging revealed increased activity in cortical areas associated with
semantic and phonological judgments respectively that was consistent with
the subliminal prime, as well as increased activity in dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex in cases where the subliminal prime and target cue were in conﬂict.
These ﬁndings strongly suggest that the goal of making a semantic judgment,
for example, was unconsciously activated by the subliminal prime and that
it interfered with the operation of the consciously caused goal of making a
phonological judgment.
Similarly, Marien et al. (2012) designed a number of experiments to investi-
gate the question whether subliminally primed goals would interfere with tasks
that require signiﬁcant executive-function resources. For unconscious goals, if
they exist, should compete for control of attentional resources in the service of
their own achievement, just as do consciously caused ones. This would then
reduce the resources available to serve other goals, such as the ones that
participants are pursuing consciously. In some of the experiments the partici-
pants’ primary task was, in effect, a working-memory one. They were shown a
display of four letters and then, after a delay of a few seconds, were presented
with a probe letter and required to judge whether or not it belonged to the
initial set. Tasks of this sort are known to require inhibition of memories
deriving from immediately preceding displays, which would otherwise interfere
with judgments relating to the target. In one experiment participants were
subliminally primed with the goal of socializing, whereas in another they
were primed with a goal known to be important to them individually from a
previous questionnaire. Reaction times in trials where the working-memory
task required inhibition of previous memories were signiﬁcantly slower among
subliminally primed participants than in controls, suggesting that their newly
active unconscious goal had hijacked some of the attentional resources required
for the task. Marien et al. were able to show, moreover, that this did not just
result from a decrease in motivation toward the primary task, since the effect
was not moderated when people were paid to succeed in that task. The ﬁnding
also generalized to other tasks requiring attentional control, such as detecting
errors in text.
1. unconscious goal pursuit
141

1.2. All goals are unconscious
These and voluminous other data demonstrate that goals can (and sometimes do)
operate unconsciously. This secures one of the main assumptions required for the
truth of the sensory-based accounts of reﬂection and the stream of consciousness
to be presented in this and the following chapter. But of course such data cannot
demonstrate that goals always operate unconsciously. Nevertheless, this stronger
conclusion is warranted, I suggest, by combining the claim that goals can operate
unconsciously with three additional assumptions. The ﬁrst is that goals them-
selves are amodal states, as discussed in Chapter 2.2. (Recall that goals are non-
affective intention-like states, which have propositional contents structured out
of amodal concepts.) The second assumption is the global broadcasting account
of consciousness, discussed in Chapter 3.2. (Recall that access-conscious states
are those that are made widely available to other states and faculties of the mind.
Moreover, since one can know through swift self-interpretation that a mental
state is occurring, it is not sufﬁcient for a state to be conscious that one should
know intuitively that it exists.) And the third assumption is the denial of an
amodal global workspace, defended in Chapters 4 and 5. (Recall that the evidence
suggests that amodal attitudes cannot be globally broadcast, and that amodal
concepts can only be conscious when bound into the contents of globally
broadcast sensory-like states.) When taken together, these claims entail that no
goals are ever conscious. Hence they can only operate unconsciously.
This argument is not conclusive, of course. In part this is because it depends on
a number of inferences to the best explanation. But it is also because we have yet
to consider the possibility that some kinds of conscious sensory-based event
(such as saying to oneself, in inner or outer speech, “I will be a home-owner one
day”) can be, or can constitute, a sort of goal-state. Some versions of this idea will
be considered in Chapter 7.
2. Attention as Action
Recall from Chapter 1.1 that conscious reﬂection is the subset of the stream of
consciousness that strikes people as being under their control. One can, to a
signiﬁcant degree, direct the course of one’s reﬂections in the service of one’s
goals. One can focus on thinking about the solution to a particular problem, or
one can choose to replay a familiar fantasy in order to relax before falling asleep. The
active nature of reﬂection is something that I endorse. But if reﬂection is sensory
based, as I suggest, and involves rehearsal and manipulation of sensory-based
information in working memory, then attention, too, must be under intentional
142
6. working memory in action

control. For as we have seen, attention is the primary cause of global broadcasting,
and is a major determinant of the contents of working memory. The present section
will elaborate and begin to defend this idea.
2.1. What are actions?
Before discussing the active nature of attention, a prior question to consider is
what actions, in general, are. From a common-sense perspective, the paradigm
case of an action is a bodily movement that is caused and controlled by an
immediately preceding decision to act. First we engage in practical reasoning in
light of our beliefs and desires; then we decide; and the decision (if the decision is
for the here-and-now) creates an intention that causes and controls the motor
processes that issue in the movements decided upon. But of course practical
reasoning often concerns what to do in the future, rather than the here-and-now.
In this case the result of a decision is the formation of a standing intention, or
intention for the future, which is later activated when the circumstances required
for the execution of the action obtain.
It seems plausible, however, that these two cases follow essentially the same
pattern. That is, in the second case the activated intention interacts with judg-
ments about the current circumstances to issue in a decision to act now (but
without any need for further practical reasoning about whether or not to act at all;
Bratman, 1987), which leads the intention to initiate and control the resulting
bodily movements. So the suggestion that actions are bodily movements caused
by immediately preceding decisions can be allowed to stand. If the idea of mental
action is to make any sense, then this analysis needs to be made more abstract, of
course. One could say, perhaps, that an action is any event (whether involving
bodily movements or not) that is directly caused and controlled by an immedi-
ately preceding decision.
Although intuitive, we now know that not all bodily actions ﬁt this pattern.
This is because many movements are caused and controlled directly by percep-
tions of affordances in the environment in the absence of a decision not to act.
Perceptions of familiar tools, for example, automatically activate the motor plans
for their use, which need to be inhibited by top-down executive signals if they are
not to be carried through to completion (Frith et al., 2000; Negri et al., 2007). As a
result, people with certain forms of frontal-lobe damage can suffer from utiliza-
tion syndrome, meaning that they cannot inhibit themselves from grasping and
using things in accordance with those things’ affordances (Lhermitte, 1983,
1986). For example, if a glass is placed on the desk, the patient will reach for it;
and if a pitcher of water is placed on the desk as well, he will pour water into the
glass and drink, irrespective of the context. Intuitively these are nevertheless
2. attention as action
143

forms of action. They are controlled and apparently goal-directed, and lack the
ballistic quality of obvious non-actions like the knee-jerk reﬂex.
One option would be to say that there are two distinct kinds of action. There
are movements that are caused and controlled by immediately prior decisions.
(These might be called “intentional actions.”) And there are movements that
are caused and controlled by motor plans in the absence of a decision not to
act. (These might be called “automatic actions.”) Another option, however,
would be to extract the common core from the two kinds, and say that an
action is a bodily movement that is caused and controlled by a motor plan.
For in the case of intentional actions, too, the result of a decision to act is
presumably the activation and execution of an appropriate set of motor sche-
mata. If this latter option were to be adopted, then that would probably restrict
the range of potential mental actions to the set of mental events (such as inner
speech) that are caused and controlled by mental rehearsals of action, which
likewise activate an appropriate set of motor schemata. Attentional processes
would thus likely be excluded.
It is unclear which of these alternatives better reﬂects the underlying reality of
the mind, or which will prove more theoretically fruitful for cognitive science. But
even if it should turn out that the motor-plan conception of action is more
scientiﬁcally robust, we can still say that mental events that are caused and
controlled by an immediately preceding decision are at least action like. That
will be sufﬁcient for our purposes.
2.2. The control of attention
Attention is a form of basic action (or is at least an action-like event), I suggest.
Attending is something one can “just do,” without knowing how one does it, just
as lifting one’s arm is something one can do without knowing how. Attention is
not, of course, a physical action. Rather, it is a mental action. What makes it
active is that it is (generally) caused by decisions to attend, where these decisions
are informed by knowledge of the context together with current goals and
standing values. This account will be supported in due course, in part through
its capacity to explain familiar features of conscious reﬂection and the stream of
consciousness more generally. (Sections 3 and 4 of this chapter will focus on
reﬂection, while Section 5 discusses mind wandering.) It is also supported by
recent models that see the role of anterior cingulate cortex as mediating between
bottom-up and top-down forms of attention, making cost–beneﬁt calculations
about the allocation of top-down executive resources (Shenhav et al., 2013). But
at least a limited version of the idea comports quite well with aspects of common-
sense belief. For we know that one can, at will, comply with a request to attend to
144
6. working memory in action

one thing rather than another (just as one can comply with a request to raise an
arm), and we know that one can try, but fail, to attend to something (just as one
can try, but fail, to raise an arm). In these respects, at least, attending seems
thoroughly action-like.
Often, of course, things just seem to grab one’s attention. In such cases
attending seems passive rather than active. It seems to be something that happens
to one rather than something that one does. But most instances of bottom-up
attentional capture are really active in nature. Or so I will initially suggest here,
and then defend more fully in Section 5. (Exceptions might include the impact of
highly salient stimuli like loud noises, bright ﬂashes, or sudden dramatic move-
ments, which can redirect attention without much involvement from frontal
decision-making systems.) As we noted in Chapter 3.4, the bottom-up cortical
attentional system continually monitors unattended aspects of the input, check-
ing those representations for relevance to ongoing goals and existing values, and
competing to redirect the top-down attentional system accordingly (Corbetta &
Shulman, 2002; Corbetta et al., 2008). When it succeeds, and attention is cap-
tured, this is best seen as resulting from a decision to attend to the novel stimulus
because of its apparent relevance. The difference is just that in such cases one is
generally unaware of the rationale underlying the decision. Hence such cases do
not strike one intuitively as agentive in nature, in contrast with cases where, for
example, one knows that one is actively complying with an experimenter’s
request to attend to one thing rather than another.
We noted in Chapter 2.1 that value-processing interacts with perceptual pro-
cesses at many different levels within perceptual networks (Barrett & Bar, 2009).
One way of understanding why this should be so is that it drives the competition
for attentional resources. One cannot attend to everything, of course. Indeed,
quite the contrary: attention is a highly limited resource (Cowan, 2001). Hence it
is important that it should be allocated wisely, directed toward those stimuli that
matter most. And just as one might then expect, the bottom-up attentional or
“salience” network is partly deﬁned through the involvement of sub-cortical
valuational systems (Menon, 2011; Yeo et al., 2011). Perceptual processing thus
involves a hierarchy of increasingly ﬁne-grained, context-sensitive value judg-
ments, with the eventual winners becoming the targets of the sort of top-down
attention that is needed for them to be globally broadcast, and thus to become
widely accessible to numerous systems throughout the brain. Just as actions are
generally initiated by decisions made in the light of value judgments together
with current circumstances, so, too, are allocations of top-down attention, I will
suggest.
2. attention as action
145

2.3. Unconscious decisions
Why should we regard the events that issue in the control and redirection of
attention as decisions, however? Primarily, this is because those events ﬁt much of
the functional proﬁle of decisions, and so are at least decision-like. We noted in
Chapter 2.2 that decisions are events that conclude an episode of practical
reasoning about what to do, immediately issuing in intentions that cause and
control the decided-upon actions. And it seems that attentional shifts, likewise,
are caused by events that conclude episodes of (unconscious) reasoning about
which of the representations competing for attentional resources are the most
relevant. If we assume that such shifts are themselves actions, then the event that
concludes the process of reasoning about what to attend to, which causes such a
shift, looks much like a decision. And indeed, it seems to be the very same sorts of
computation of the expected value of cognitive control, taking place in anterior
cingulate cortex (which also serves as the primary mediator between bottom-up
and top-down forms of attention), that issue not only in actions of a physical sort
but also in redirections of attention (Shenhav et al., 2013). So there are theoretical
gains to be had from treating both sorts of conﬂict-resolving event as kinds of
decision. We can thereby unify two sets of phenomena under the same explana-
tory umbrella, constituting a single natural kind.
It might be objected that the events that shift or maintain attention are not (or
not generally) personal-level decisions. It is not the person who decides to shift
attention to the sound of his own name, and away from a current conversation at
a party, thereby giving rise to the so-called “cocktail party effect.” Rather, it is a
subcomponent or module within the person that does so. Now, sometimes the
language of “personal” versus “subpersonal” is used just to mean “conscious”
versus “unconscious.” But in that case an argument exactly parallel to the one
presented in Section 1.2 for the case of goals will establish that there are no such
things as personal-level (conscious) decisions. At other times personal-level
mental events are understood to be those that the entire agent controls, or that
all (or most) of the mental states of the agent can contribute to. This idea can still
be made good sense of, as we will see in Chapter 9. But it does nothing to
challenge the claim that the events that determine shifts of attention are a species
of decision. Let me elaborate.
In denying that decisions themselves are ever conscious one need not deny that
any of the processes that issue in decisions are ever conscious, of course. Nor need
one deny that there are any personal-level decisions in the above whole-agent
sense. So consider a case where one reasons, consciously, about whether to shift
attention for a while to another conversation. When the sound of one’s own
146
6. working memory in action

name pops out, one might say to oneself in inner speech, “She is talking about me.
Should I listen in?” The resulting contents are globally broadcast to many
different regions of the mind, giving all of them a chance to contribute to the
decision-making process. (The process that shifted attention to the sound of
one’s own name in the ﬁrst place, in contrast, was a much more local affair.) But
any representations evoked by one’s conscious reﬂections will still need to com-
pete with one another to inﬂuence one’s attentional control processes. And it is still
likely to be cost–beneﬁt analyses conducted in anterior cingulate that determine
the result. I suggest, in fact, that both conscious and unconscious decision-making
processes issue in events of the same kind: unconscious decisions.
2.4. How remembering works
The idea that attending is action-like can be put to work in understanding how,
in outline at least, memory-search operates. (Recall from Chapter 4.1 that
episodic memory is heavily attention dependent.) And note that memory-
search, too, is intuitively active in nature, at least on many occasions. (Excep-
tions will include cases where memories seem to spring to mind unbidden,
perhaps evoked by a spoken phrase or a familiar scent. But again I will argue
that even these seemingly passive instances of remembering are really action-
like in nature.) One can try but fail to remember something. And one engages in
active, motivated, memory-search every time one tries to answer a question.
Moreover, remembering can unfold over time in accordance with one’s goals, as
one gradually builds and elaborates a memory of some important event. Yet we
know that conscious remembering results from targeted attention (De Brigard,
2012). So if remembering is active in nature, this reinforces the claim that
attending is too.
It has been known for some time that parietal cortex plays important roles in
episodic remembering (Wagner et al., 2005). Indeed, damage to ventral parietal
cortex causes a form of memory neglect (Berryhill, 2012). People with damage to
this region have trouble spontaneously activating relevant details into memory,
whereas they can still recover those details when directly questioned (Berryhill
et al., 2007). These ﬁndings make sense once we realize that episodic memory
involves both top-down and bottom-up attentional networks, which are centered
on the intraparietal sulcus and areas of ventral parietal cortex respectively
(Cabeza, 2008; Ciaramelli et al., 2008). When searching for a memory one uses
the cues provided to evoke activity in those sensory-involving regions where the
information is stored, utilizing the back-projecting conceptual-to-perceptual
networks discussed in Chapter 3.5, and using the top-down attentional system
to target and globally broadcast the results.
2. attention as action
147

A prediction of this account is that activity around the intraparietal sulcus
should be highest when memory-search is most effortful and attentionally
demanding, and thus when memory performance and memory conﬁdence are
both low. That is, indeed, what we ﬁnd (Kim & Cabeza, 2007). When memories
are evoked, in contrast, the bottom-up attentional system monitors the represen-
tations produced and evaluates their relevance to one another and to the probe,
attracting top-down attention when there is a good enough ﬁt. This predicts that
activity in ventral parietal cortex should be highest when memories are rich in
detail, and when both conﬁdence and accuracy are highest. This, too, is what we
ﬁnd (Kim & Cabeza, 2007).
This model of the involvement of the two attentional systems in episodic
memory is also consistent with the ﬁnding of strong neural connections between
ventral parietal cortex and the hippocampal formation, which is known to play a
vital role in memory storage and retrieval (Vincent et al., 2006). It makes sense
that evoked information should be received by ventral parietal cortex in the ﬁrst
instance (just as bottom-up perceptual contents are), so that they can be evalu-
ated for relevance, attracting top-down attention (and hence becoming globally
broadcast) if they should pass muster.
While evidence of the involvement of top-down attention in episodic remem-
bering is robust (Hutchinson et al., 2009; Cabeza et al., 2010; De Brigard, 2012),
there may be less overlap in the bottom-up saliency mechanisms involved in
perception and episodic memory respectively. Speciﬁcally, while the bottom-up
perceptual-attention system is largely lateralized to the right hemisphere, the
bottom-up memory system is mostly lateralized to the left (Ciaramelli et al., 2008;
Hutchinson et al., 2009). Moreover, the regions of ventral parietal cortex that are
involved are only partly overlapping, with the perceptual-saliency system being
located around and above the temporo-parietal junction, whereas the mnemonic-
saliency system is lower, overlapping parts of the temporal lobe (Sestieri et al.,
2010; Cabeza et al., 2012). It makes sense that the mechanisms that process the
relevance of perceptual and mnemonic representations should be to some degree
specialized, and also that they should be partly segregated so that both processes
can continue in parallel. For one needs to monitor the environment for relevance
while engaged in stimulus-independent thought, of course. And we have reason
to think that activated memories, too, are continually monitored while one
focuses on an external task, causing one’s mind to wander when some of those
memories are deemed to be sufﬁciently relevant.
On the account sketched here, evoked memories are likely to be just as active as
memories that are searched for, although they are less obviously so from the
perspective of the person doing the remembering. (In the former case a memory
148
6. working memory in action

just appears in consciousness, seemingly unbidden, whereas in the latter case the
memory will have been preceded by a question of some sort that one is aware of.)
Consider a case where a waft of cinnamon when passing a shop evokes a sudden
vivid memory of a dinner eaten in the Moroccan quarter of the French city of
Avignon some years before. The smell in question activates associated represen-
tations that are linked both to it and to one another as a result of the original
event. These are received in ventral parietal cortex where they are processed, and
from where messages are exchanged with ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and sub-
cortical value systems, assessing their relevance to one’s goals and values. Since
the Avignon dinner is linked to a number of important values (a shared experi-
ence with one’s spouse, love of all things French, and so on), it is found relevant
enough to enter into competition (via the anterior cingulate) with the goals
controlling the current focus of attention. By hypothesis, it wins this competition,
resulting in a decision to redirect top-down attention to the memory represen-
tations in question, rendering them conscious. The experience of the memory
thus results from an action or action-like event (a redirecting of attention),
although it doesn’t seem like that to the agent.
2.5. Memory-search and spatial search
Not only is attention action-like in the ways discussed above, but it also plausibly
evolved from related forms of physical action. Recall from Chapter 3.4 that the
frontal eye-ﬁelds are an important component of the top-down attentional
network. These regions of the dorsal prefrontal cortex are parts of premotor
and motor cortex, and play a central role in the control of eye movements (as
does the intraparietal sulcus). And we know that eye movements are generally
under intentional control, even in infancy (Kidd et al., 2012). Often, of course,
one’s eyes and one’s covert attention will shift together, and generally one attends
to what one is overtly looking at. But we know that this is not strictly necessary.
One can look in one direction while attending elsewhere. And many eye move-
ments are best thought of as exploring a single object of attention, without being
accompanied by any shifts in attention. Moreover, attention can zoom in or out
even when one’s eyes and one’s attention are both focused in the same direction
(Kosslyn, 1994). So the frontal eye-ﬁelds appear to form a common component
in two partially distinct controllers: one for overt eye movements and one for
covert attention.
As we will see in Chapter 8, attentional systems are highly conserved across
species. And we know that overt and covert visual attention can be deployed
separately in both birds and mammals (Mysore & Knudsen, 2013). Moreover, it
is plausible that capacities for covert attention evolved from earlier capacities for
2. attention as action
149

the control of eye movements. This would explain why they are subserved, in
part, by the same brain regions. But in any case what surely follows is that the
mechanisms that control top-down covert attention are ideally positioned to be
intentionally controlled by one’s goals and decisions. For eye movements, like
most other forms of movement, are under intentional control. So the neural
wiring necessary to exert that control would already have been in place when the
frontal eye-ﬁelds (or their evolutionary precursors) began also to direct covert
forms of attention.
Interestingly, a number of recent studies support both the active nature of
attending and the suggestion that covert attentional control may have evolved
from earlier mechanisms for controlling overt movement. These studies dem-
onstrate commonalities among spatial search, attentional search of the envi-
ronment, and attentional search of memory, together with evidence of a
phylogenetic progression from the former to the latter (Hills, 2006). Not only
is there evidence of common search strategies in the three domains, but also
evidence that the neural mechanisms underlying these strategies in all three
domains are similar, involving reward-processing doperminergic networks
(Hills & Dukas, 2012).1
All animals confront the problem of searching for valued resources, which
involves a trade-off between exploration and exploitation. Often such resources
are patchily distributed in the environment, and patches differ in their size and
value. The problem for any animal is then: when to stay and when to go? Time
spent exploring is time that is not spent exploiting whatever valuable resource is
at stake. But on the other hand, if one spends too long extracting value from any
given patch, one may lose out on more valuable patches nearby. In the context
of foraging, this problem has been extensively studied, and many of the search
heuristics employed by animals in different environments—most of which
approximate to an optimal foraging strategy—are known (Stephens & Krebs,
1987).
More recently, people have realized that cognitive search shares much of the
same structure. Not everything in one’s immediate environment is equally
interesting, and features of interest are often patchily distributed. The same
holds for regions of one’s visual ﬁeld. Both overt and covert attention thus face
the same exploration–exploitation trade-off (Hills & Dukas, 2012). Moreover,
1 Moreover—and highly relevant to the topic of the present book—variations in capacities for
dopermine synthesis in an important part of this network in humans—the ventral striatum—
correlate with individual differences in working-memory capacity (Cools et al., 2008). It makes
good sense that well-applied strategies for when and why to shift one’s attention should be an
important component of people’s working-memory abilities.
150
6. working memory in action

many forms of memory, too, are patchily distributed. Words are linked to one
another in clusters, for example, with names of common farm animals being
semantically linked to one another while only being distantly linked to names of
common African animals, which are in turn strongly linked to one another.
Experiments suggest that when people are asked to generate names of animals
they follow essentially the same strategy that creatures use when exploiting a
patchy environment: they stick with farm animals until names are no longer easy
to retrieve, then switch to African animals, and so on (Hills et al., 2012).
These commonalities among spatial search, attentional search, and memory-
search do not demonstrate that the same mechanisms are involved in each, of
course. But they do suggest that each is equally active in nature, at least to the
extent that each can be controlled by the same heuristics that control behavioral
search of the physical environment. And as we also noted, this conclusion is
further supported by the existence of shared decision-sensitive neural mechan-
isms (especially the frontal eye-ﬁelds).
2.6. Habits of attention and cross-cultural differences
If attention is a form of action, as I have been suggesting, then it should be
controllable in any of the ways that overt action can be controlled. My focus in
this section so far has been on intentional control, arguing that attention, too, is
controlled by (unconscious) decisions taken in the light of one’s goals and
standing values. But actions can also be habitual, of course. In such cases features
of the context will trigger a motor schema directly unless inhibited, without the
need for evaluation or decision making (Lisman & Sternberg, 2013).
It is certainly intuitive that patterns of attention can become habitual,
although I know of no direct scientiﬁc work on the topic. Someone might say,
for example, “Whenever I enter a new place, I ﬁnd myself scanning for the
exits.” Cases like this could just as well be explained in terms of intentional
attention-allocation, however, caused by persisting motivational states (in this
case, anxiety). More promising, perhaps, are cases of habitual thought, given that
these are caused by the way in which one directs one’s attention. Someone who
habitually calls up the same set of images when lying down to sleep at night
may well exhibit patterns of attention that are genuinely habitual and non-
intentional.
Indirect evidence of habitual use of attention can be gleaned from the literature
on cross-cultural differences in cognition, however, particularly the ﬁnding of
systematic use of “holistic” versus “analytical” processing styles in Eastern versus
Western cultures (Nisbett, 2003). Among these differences are variations in the
way that members of the two cultures attend to, and hence recall, visual scenes
2. attention as action
151

(Ji et al., 2000; Masuda & Nisbett, 2001). For example, when presented with a
picture of some ﬁsh swimming, Japanese people might pay as much attention to
the background of reeds and rocks as they do to the ﬁsh themselves. As a result,
when shown a picture of a lone ﬁsh and asked to recall whether it was in the
original picture, they are helped if contextual cues are provided. In contrast,
Americans shown the same picture will attend mostly to the focal ﬁsh, paying
little attention to the background. As a result, contextual details fail to aid them
when asked to recall an individual ﬁsh. Indeed, they are better able to recognize
an individual ﬁsh in the absence of any background.
How are these ﬁndings to be explained? We know that the differences don’t
result from long-term structural cognitive–perceptual differences between East-
erners and Westerners. In part this is because the effects are reversible using
simple forms of priming (Oyserman & Lee, 2008). A Westerner who is asked to
read a passage containing repeated use of the terms “we,” “us,” and “our”
(emphasizing collections of people) will thereafter perceive and recall the pictures
in a manner normal for an Easterner. Likewise, Japanese people who read the
same passage only with the words “I,” “me,” and “mine” substituted throughout
(emphasizing the individual) will thereafter perceive and recall the pictures in the
manner of a Westerner. It also seems unlikely that these patterns of attention are
motivated ones, with Easterners frequently taking (unconscious) decisions to
attend to the background while Westerners often decide to ignore the back-
ground. Rather, what seems most plausible is that while both patterns of attend-
ing remain easily available to members of both groups, differences in cultural
norms and expectations give rise to an habitual tendency on the part of Eastern-
ers to pay attention to contexts and situational factors, as well as to a corres-
ponding habitual tendency on the part of Westerners to direct attention toward
focal individuals. If this is true, then it provides an additional reason to think that
attending is genuinely action-like.
3. Mental Rehearsal and Mental Manipulation
Recall from Chapter 4.4 that the functions of working memory are normally
thought to include capacities to activate, sustain, rehearse, and manipulate
representations. The ﬁrst two functions depend directly on the allocation of
attention. Section 2 has argued that this is an active process, and is generally
directed by decisions taken in the light of one’s goals and values. The present
section will argue that rehearsal and manipulation are also forms of action. In
addition, it will begin to demonstrate how the present framework can explain
familiar features of reﬂection.
152
6. working memory in action

3.1. Mental rehearsal as off-line action
As we saw in Chapter 4.4, mental rehearsal is really just off-line action, with the
predicted sensory consequences of action attended to and globally broadcast
while movements of the muscles are suppressed (see Figure 5). So mental
rehearsal can be guided and inﬂuenced by anything that can guide and inﬂuence
action generally (with the exception of afferent sensory feedback from the body
or world, of course, since no movements are really made). In particular, like overt
action, mental rehearsal can be guided by current goals and values, as well as
other items of information that are active in one’s mind at the time. Our focus in
this section will be on rehearsal of non-speech actions, together with their role in
prospection and future decision making. Inner speech will form the topic of
Section 4.
Mentally rehearsed actions cannot be motivated in exactly the same way that
overt actions are, of course, if only because something must lead to the suppres-
sion of overt movement in the former cases. Indeed, part of what it means to be a
reﬂective (as opposed to an unreﬂective) person is that one frequently inhibits
one’s initial overt response to a situation or question and mentally rehearses it
instead, evaluating the imagined result. Such inhibition might be habitual, or it
might be motivated by chronic caution or some other goal or value. In effect, one
thinks, “I am tempted to say/do X. But is that really the best response?” In such
cases the goals and values that underlie the mental rehearsal can be just the same
as those that would motivate the overt action, but perhaps with the added goal of
not acting prematurely. (If the person’s reﬂectiveness is habitual, in contrast, then
the motivational factors involved can be exactly the same.) The result is that the
decision is a decision to activate-and-suppress (that is, mentally rehearse), rather
than to act.
Not all mental rehearsal is externally prompted, of course. Indeed, quite the
contrary. Since so-called “stimulus-independent thought” occupies much of our
waking lives, and since a good deal of this involves mental rehearsals of action of
one sort or another, much mental rehearsal must involve more than mere inhib-
ition of an externally prompted action. (This is a topic we will return to in
Section 5.) But one plausible possibility is that what it is to be engaged in, or to
switch into, stimulus-independent thought is that one has (or that one activates)
the standing goal of inhibiting the execution of any intentionally controlled action.2
2 Of course one can engage in stimulus-independent thought while walking or driving, say. But
these actions are very likely habitual ones, involving interactions between perception and the motor
system, without the intervention of goals or decisions.
3. mental rehearsal and mental manipulation
153

Consider, for simplicity, some cases where reﬂection is already ongoing.
Suppose a practiced skier is engaged in a fantasy ski-run down a mountain she
will visit that weekend. In the course of this she imagines a tree straight ahead
with some rocks to its left. (This might be thrown up by attention directed at
memories of the mountain, or by quasi-random activation and attention to
things that one might confront while skiing. See Section 5.) As a result, she
immediately activates the motor schemata for a right-hand turn, and her
imagined ski-run unfolds accordingly. Here the rehearsed action is likely to be
habitual, prompted by the imagined scene alone.
Alternatively, think of someone engaged in a fantasy about a Caribbean
holiday. He is sitting at a bar with a bottle of his favorite beer in front of him
and with the beach behind him. The beer is seen as positively valenced, which
activates the motor schemata for reaching out to grasp, lift, and drink it.
Accordingly, that is what he imagines himself doing. Here what motivates the
imagined action is just what might motivate the real action: the seeming-good-
ness of drinking the beer, combined with a perceptual representation of it as
being within reach.
No doubt there is much more that might be said. (And some of it will be said in
what follows.) But enough should have been done to support the thesis of this
subsection. This is that mentally rehearsed actions are actions in pretty much the
same sense as overt ones. They involve activations of motor schemata that are
either immediately prompted as part of a habit, or that result from the same sorts
of decision-making processes that issue in overt action.
3.2. Three kinds of dynamic imagery
The imagery that results from mental rehearsal of action is, of course, dynamic in
character. It will be imagery of perceived or felt movements, together with their
likely consequences. But there are other ways of generating dynamic imagery.
One is from memory of perceived movements. Creating an image of a horse
galloping across the landscape, for example, will require a guided search of
memory, using top-down projections of the concept HORSE GALLOPING in coord-
ination with targeted attention. It probably works somewhat as follows. Activa-
tion of the concept HORSE GALLOPING triggers associated representations stored in a
distributed manner across regions of visual cortex. Those that match the concept
sufﬁciently well become targets of attention, and the resulting dynamic image is
thereby made globally accessible.
A similar distinction can be made in connection with dynamic auditory
imagery. Imagery of musical melodies, for example, can be created through off-
line rehearsal of the actions that would issue in those melodies, by either singing
154
6. working memory in action

or playing a musical instrument. If the melody is a familiar one, it will be recalled
by activating a well-rehearsed sequence of motor schemata. In this case memory
for the sound-sequence is really a form of motor-memory, with mental rehearsal
of the actions that would produce that sequence being used to create appropriate
auditory images. If the melody is a novel one, it will be generated by constrained
quasi-random activations of a sequence of component motor schemata. (See
Section 5.) On the other hand, a melody can be imagined by directing attention
at a memory of the relevant sequence of sounds, perhaps using some sort of
conceptual trigger. (“The opening bars of Beethoven’s Ninth.”) And it may well
be possible to create a novel melody in imagination in similar fashion, by
targeting memories of short phrases or individual notes in a constrained but
quasi-random manner. (Again, see Section 5.) In the ﬁrst sort of case the active
nature of auditory imagery is obvious, since it results from mental rehearsals of
sound-producing actions. But even the second sort of case is no less active in
nature, given that directing and shifting attention qualify as forms of mental
action, as was suggested in Section 2.
There is, in addition, a third way in which dynamic imagery can be produced.
This is by directing rehearsed motor movements at an existing perceived object,
thereby transforming one’s image of the latter in the manner that might be
predicted if one were really acting in that way on the object represented. This
sort of mental manipulation of imagery has been extensively studied, especially
using mental rotation experiments. As a result, we know that activity in motor
and premotor cortex is reliably observed during mental rotation (Richter et al.,
2000; Vingerhoets et al., 2002). Moreover, mental rotation is impacted by con-
current movement. For example, if one moves one’s hands to rotate a real object
while mentally rotating an image in the same direction, then the latter is speeded
up, whereas overt rotation in the contrary direction slows it down (Wexler et al.,
1998). In addition, applying transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) to the hand
region of primary motor cortex interferes with mental rotation (Ganis et al.,
2000).3
In all of these cases it should be emphasized that dynamic imagery is import-
antly predictive in nature. For as representations of the target movements or
changes are globally broadcast, they activate both memories and predictive
3 There are other data that suggest, however, that mental rotation can be conducted by infants
who as yet lack the physical coordination to really rotate anything. Thus Moore & Johnson (2011)
found that three-month-old male—but not female—infants could recognize the completion of a
previously habituated partial rotation, in contrast with its mirror-image rotation. One possibility is
that there are innate linkages between structures in motor cortex and visual cortex, which mature in
males in advance of capacities for overt motor control.
3. mental rehearsal and mental manipulation
155

inference-mechanisms to create representations of the likely immediate conse-
quences of those movements or changes. If attended to these, too, will be globally
broadcast. Thus when one visually imagines a galloping horse one will be apt also
to hear the sound of its hoof-beats in auditory imagination. And when one
rehearses the action of throwing a stone at a window, one will likely form an
image of the trajectory of the stone and the subsequent shattered glass. As we will
see in due course, the predictive character of imagery is one of the things that
makes it useful, enabling us to discern and evaluate the likely consequences of our
actions in advance.
3.3. Mental manipulation
In the literature on working memory, “manipulation” has both a narrower and a
wider meaning. In the narrower sense it refers to the capacity to bring about
changes in one’s imagery by activating manual motor schemata, as in the mental
rotation experiments described above. But in the wider sense, it refers to the
capacity to construct ordered sequences of images in the service of one’s goals.
Examples would include mental arithmetic, spatial planning, and prospective
reasoning. (The latter will be discussed in Section 3.4.) In this wider sense mental
manipulation is a form of skillful, knowledgeable, intelligent action, and is
motivated accordingly. It is this that will be our focus here.
Consider someone tasked with subtracting 17 from 32 in her head, for
example. What ensues will be a controlled sequence of auditory imagery, visual
imagery, or both combined, implementing well-rehearsed procedures. She might
picture the two numerals one above the other, for instance, as if written on the
page, and then imagine removing a unit from the “3” and placing it in front of the
“2,” before saying to herself, “Seven from twelve is ﬁve,” thereafter mentally
inscribing “5” beneath the “7.” She then transfers her attention to focus on the left
column, which now contains a “2” inscribed above the “1.” This immediately
enables her to construct the answer: 15. This sequence is plainly active, involving
mental rehearsals of familiar actions and action-sequences, combined in a ﬂexible
way in response to the initial problem or goal.
Now consider someone driving home after work, who hears on the radio that
her normal route has been blocked by an accident. Supposing that an alternative
route does not immediately come to mind following a search of memory, she now
needs to engage in a sequence of spatial planning. She might call to mind a
memory of a road map of the area, for example, or some memory images of
major nearby landmarks or roads, which come already ﬂagged as “places I could
get to from here” (perhaps by swiftly entertained imagery of the intervening
route). She might then say to herself, “From Georgia I could go down Wayne,”
156
6. working memory in action

but this prompts a memory image of long queues at the trafﬁc lights at the
junction of Wayne and Flower. This motivates an additional search of memory.
Returning to the initial partial map of the nearby roads, for example, she might
imagine herself driving up New Hampshire Avenue. As the predicted sequence of
sights (drawn from memory) ﬂips by, she says to herself, “Then I could go up
Sligo.” The resulting image of the initial part of Sligo Parkway feels highly
familiar, or issues in a swift sequence of images that terminates at home. So she
turns toward a road she knows will lead her to New Hampshire Avenue.
Notice the close parallels between this sequence of working-memory contents
and what might happen in a case of real, overt, spatial exploration.4 The same
goal in each case motivates searches of memory, and selects and activates action
schemata guided by those memories. In a case of real travel, of course, a sequence
of perceptions is caused by one’s real movement through the world, whereas in
the case of spatial planning the images are called up predictively from memory
following each rehearsed action-schema. But both are equally active and inten-
tionally controlled.
Notice, too, how there is a place for something resembling real discovery in
cases where one manipulates working-memory contents for purposes of plan-
ning. Had our agent really driven up Georgia and down Wayne, she might really
have encountered a long line of trafﬁc as a result. This is a new (although perhaps
predictable) item of information about the world. When rehearsing the route, in
contrast, she cannot discover anything that she doesn’t already know (albeit
implicitly), of course. But what she can do is evoke knowledge that would
otherwise have remained inaccessible. It is only by imagining herself driving
toward the junction of Wayne and Flower that she activates the knowledge that
the approach roads are often snarled with trafﬁc. She thereby discovers (in the
sense of bringing to consciousness) that this is not a good route to take.
What we have found in these examples extends to mental manipulation of
contents in working memory quite generally. Goals motivate both searches of
memory and mental rehearsals of action. The resulting contents then evoke yet
other memories, or predictions grounded in existing knowledge or procedures.
And at each stage (if the account sketched in Section 2 is on the right lines) a
multitude of evoked contents will compete with one another through bottom-up
attentional networks to attract the spotlight of top-down attention and enter the
stream of consciousness. Generally the contents deemed to be most relevant to
4 The main difference is that had she really driven up Georgia and then down Wayne, only to ﬁnd
her route blocked, she would probably not have needed to return to her point of origin in order to
ﬁnd her way home.
3. mental rehearsal and mental manipulation
157

the overall goal or goals will win. The result is that not only are the individual
stages of the working-memory sequence active in nature, but so too is the
sequence as a whole.
3.4. Prospection
Prospective reasoning, in the most general sense, is reasoning about the future.
But in the recent literature it has come to acquire a narrower meaning, restricted
to cases where one imagines or envisages oneself performing one or more future
actions, generally for purposes of decision making (Gilbert & Wilson, 2007). It is
now widely accepted that capacities for prospection and episodic memory are
tightly linked (Schacter et al., 2007; Buckner, 2010). The hippocampus, in par-
ticular, is heavily implicated in both, and amnesic patients turn out to have
mirroring difﬁculties in envisaging their own futures. Moreover, some have
claimed that the resulting capacity for “mental time-travel” is uniquely
human—indeed, that it is perhaps the major cognitive factor that distinguishes
humans from other animals (Suddendorf & Corballis, 2007; Suddendorf et al.,
2009). These claims about human uniqueness will be examined—and critiqued—
in Chapter 8.
Episodes of prospective reasoning are often prompted by an externally pre-
sented question or choice, as when one is asked whether one would rather do
A or B, or when one receives a job offer and has to decide whether or not to
accept. But they are also frequently self-initiated during mind wandering. Some-
one entertaining a job offer, for example, will probably revisit the choice on a
number of occasions each day for multiple days or weeks before reaching a
decision, often breaking off from other attentionally demanding activities to do
so. Internally prompted forms of prospection will be considered in Section 5.
Here we can focus on cases where the initial stimulus comes from outside.
Sometimes prospective reasoning will start from mental rehearsals of the
actions being considered. In such cases the process is quite obviously active in
nature. If asked, “Would you rather climb that fence or walk around to the
gate?,” one may rehearse the two actions involved. In the one case this issues in
imagery of one approaching the fence, clambering up it and then down the
other side. As a result one experiences, predictively, some of the effort likely to
be involved, and one’s imagination may also become elaborated with likely side-
effects, such as a painful fall to the ground if one catches one’s leg on the top
rung. (Such elaboration is especially likely to occur if episodic memories of
oneself or others suffering similar falls are evoked.) In the other case mental
rehearsal will issue in imagery of walking some distance up the hill to the gate
that can be seen in the distance (or that is known to be there), again resulting in
158
6. working memory in action

a prediction of the effort involved. As we will see shortly, the decision that one
takes between the two options will often be grounded in one’s overall affective
reaction to each scenario.
On other occasions prospection can start from imagery of some of the
known consequences of the action being considered. Confronted with a job
offer that would require relocating to Chicago, for example, one may imagine
being in Chicago. This is likely to build from episodic memories of visits one
has made to the city (where available), or from images that one has of it from
movies or the TV news. One might imagine walking along the lake shore with
the city skyline alongside; or one might imagine taking a boat ride on one of the
canals. Or one might simply imagine oneself being in one of Chicago’s streets.
Again, what one imagines is likely to become predictively enriched as further
knowledge of the city or the job opportunity is evoked. One might imagine
oneself huddled in a winter coat against the bitter winter winds, with one’s face
going numb from the cold. Or one might imagine oneself working alongside
future colleagues whom one has already met at interview. The overall sequence
of reﬂection will result from a complex amalgam of mentally rehearsed actions
together with images called into working memory from searches of long-term
memory using targeted attention. In any case, here, too, the process is thor-
oughly action-like, with the overall sequence intentionally controlled by the
goal of reaching a decision.
When one engages in prospective forms of reﬂection, the images that one
entertains in working memory will be made available to affective and evaluative
networks, among others, as a result of being globally broadcast. These systems
respond with some degree of positive or negative affect. This might include some
of the bodily changes constitutive of the affective states in question (some
visceral, some motor), or swift “as-if ” predictions thereof, which can be moni-
tored and used as cues for decision making (Damasio, 1994). But much more
important, in my view, is the valence component of affect, which will lead the
represented scenarios to seem good or bad to one as one reﬂects (Carruthers,
2011a). The result is that one option will come to strike one as intuitively better
than the other, leading one to choose it.
Orbitofrontal cortex is known to be the main terminus of affective processing
in the brain, and damage to this region is known to result in greatly impoverished
decision making (Damasio, 1994; Rolls, 1999). Strikingly, patients with orbito-
frontal damage can still reason perfectly sensibly about the options open to them,
and can offer well-articulated reasons for and against each. Indeed, in many cases
their theoretical judgments of which option would be better are quite normal. But
their actual decisions fail to reﬂect those judgments. It seems that there is an
3. mental rehearsal and mental manipulation
159

immense difference between explicitly judging that an option is good and seeing it
as such. The latter is constituted by the valence component of affective process-
ing, and seems to depend especially on the normal functioning of orbitofrontal
cortex. It appears that valence is needed to provide the motivation for making
one decision rather than another.
We also know that when explicit forms of decision making, involving articu-
lated reasons, are pitted against the intuitive affective results of prospection, the
latter will often prove superior. This is especially likely where the good-making
features of a choice are not obvious, or not easy to articulate (Wilson et al., 1993),
or when multiple good-making features need to be combined to reach an overall
evaluation (Dijksterhuis et al., 2006). It seems that one of the adaptive (but also
potentially misleading) features of the affective system is that valence produced
by multiple properties of a situation or thing can be summed together into an
overall affective intuition, in ways that are hard to mimic through discursive
reasoning (Carruthers, 2011a). In such cases one will just see one option as better
than another while being unable to articulate why.5
Another adaptive feature of affect-based prospective decision making can be
inferred from the mechanisms governing entry into working memory, discussed
brieﬂy in Section 2. We noted that searches of memory (and probably also mental
rehearsals of action) issue in bottom-up forms of relevance-competition. Mul-
tiple representations will generally become active in response to any speciﬁc
memory cue (and multiple action schemata will likewise become active as one
searches for actions that might realize a goal). These will compete with one
another through the bottom-up attentional mechanism to attract the spotlight
of top-down attention and thus enter working memory. As we noted earlier,
these competitive processes will involve tacit judgments of value and of relevance
to current goals. The images that enter working memory when one engages
reﬂectively in prospection will thus already have been pre-selected as especially
relevant to the task or decision at hand.
The upshot of our discussion in this section is that the sensory-based model
of reﬂection has the resources to explain many familiar facts about the nature of
reﬂection, together with a number of less familiar ones as well. Moreover, all of the
processes we have considered turn out to be action-like in nature, resulting from
intentionally controlled forms of mental rehearsal and attention-allocation.
5 Or rather, one’s attempts at articulation will often fail to track the actual adaptive value of the
decision. One can always confabulate an answer, of course, and people in such circumstances
often do.
160
6. working memory in action

4. Generating Inner Speech
Much of the time, when we reﬂect, our reﬂections involve inner speech.6 The
active character of inner speech has already been discussed in Chapter 4.4. We
noted that it depends on the mental rehearsal of speech actions, issuing in
forward models of the likely sensory consequences of those actions (normally,
heard speech). When attended, these sensory predictions are globally broadcast
and processed by the language comprehension system. The result is that one
hears oneself as wondering or asserting some speciﬁc content in inner speech.
It seems plain, then, that this form of reﬂection is not only active in nature but
sensory based.
On the account of reﬂective thinking being defended in this book, the contents
of working memory (especially when stimulus-independent, as is inner speech)
are both controlled and motivated by one’s goals and values in the light of current
or recently salient information. To be plausible, this should come paired with a
mirroring account of the production of overt speech. For it seems quite unlikely
that inner speech should be controlled by unconscious forms of decision making
whereas overt speech is not. One aim of the present section is to determine
whether this commitment to parallelism between inner and outer speech is
plausible. Another is to provide a sketch of how covert uses of speech can
constitute familiar forms of reﬂection.
4.1. Speech as a form of unconscious goal pursuit
Standard models of speech production take their start from a communicative
intention, or a thought to be expressed (Levelt, 1989). But of course speech is
generally in the service of wider goals. One may be attempting to persuade
someone of something, attempting to establish a rapport with a potential busi-
ness collaborator, or attempting to impress a potential employer. So at the very
least, one’s communicative intention is always to express a given thought in
the service of some further goal or goals. Sometimes these goals are ones that the
speaker knows about, and could articulate if asked.7 But often they are not.
The literature in social psychology is rife with effects on people’s speech behavior
of goals that speakers are presumably unaware of at the time. These include self-
presentation effects, desires to fulﬁll (or frustrate) the goals that they tacitly
6 Note, however, that proportions of inner speech, visual imagery, and other forms of stimulus-
independent thought vary signiﬁcantly between people (Heavey & Hurlburt, 2008).
7 Let me stress again that this does not mean that those goals are conscious. For consciousness
requires global broadcasting, rather than knowledge grounded in inferences from ancillary cues.
4. generating inner speech
161

attribute to their interlocutor, and so on (Kunda, 1999; Moskowitz, 2005; Fiske &
Taylor, 2008). For example, people who expect to have their opinions on a topic
challenged will modify the views that they express in the direction of those of
their audience, presumably with the goal of avoiding confrontation (Cialdini &
Petty, 1981).
For a clear example of the effects of unconscious (and competing) goals on
speech behavior, we can return to the well-validated ﬁndings of the counter-
attitudinal essay paradigm, discussed in Chapter 5.2. Recall that after writing an
essay arguing for the contrary of what they really believe people will (if their
freedom of choice in writing the essay is made salient to them) thereafter express
a belief that is much closer to the view they have been defending. We know that
they do this in order to make themselves feel better about what they have done, or
to present their actions in a better light. Yet it is quite unlikely that this goal is a
conscious one. For if it were, and people were aware of saying something other
than they believe, then one would expect them to feel worse as a result, not better.
But notice that the goal of saying what is true (or saying what one believes) does
not cease to have any inﬂuence at all. If it did, then one would expect people to
report the opposite of what they believe (that is, the same as the belief they have
been arguing for). For that would present their behavior in the best light. Rather,
people’s expressed beliefs are generally somewhere around the middle of the scale
between what they really believe and the view they have just been defending. This
is best understood as resulting from an unconscious compromise between two
incompatible goals.
Items of information, too, can compete for expression outside of one’s aware-
ness. And sometimes distinct and incompatible items of information can be
expressed simultaneously (in different modalities) in the service of the very
same goal. This is nicely illustrated by the work of Goldin-Meadow (2005) on
gesture. Children who are trying to explain how to solve a math problem will
sometimes say that the numbers should be combined in a certain order (incor-
rectly) while at the same time their hand gestures reveal knowledge of the correct
groupings. This is especially likely to happen among children who are on the cusp
of being able to answer correctly. It seems that the goal of saying how the
numbers should be grouped can lead one to express incompatible beliefs in
different modalities simultaneously.
Speech is, of course, a form of action. And like other forms of action it can be
undertaken in the service of multiple goals inﬂuenced by multiple forms of
information, often outside of the awareness of the speaker. These points can
nevertheless be rendered consistent with the standard model (Levelt, 1989),
provided that all of this decision making takes place prior to the formation of a
162
6. working memory in action

communicative intention (that is, prior to selection of a thought to be expressed).
But it seems much more likely that speech production (like speech comprehen-
sion; Hickok & Poeppel, 2007) proceeds in parallel (or at least interactively;
Nozari et al., 2011) with decisions about what to say being taken while one is
in the process of saying it (Dennett, 1991; Lind et al., 2014).
This suggestion is consistent with the ﬁndings reported by Novick et al. (2010),
that patients with damage to Broca’s area (leading to a form of production
aphasia) also show much wider deﬁcits, especially in their capacity to inhibit
prepotent actions. (For example, they perform quite poorly in the Stroop test.)
For such people’s expressive difﬁculties emerge only in cases where there are
many competing things they could say. For example, when asked to generate
verbs associated with a given noun, patients with damage to Broca’s area may
become paralyzed when prompted with “ball,” since there are many related verbs
to choose from (“throw,” “kick,” “pass,” “catch,” and so on), while performing as
normal when prompted with “scissors,” which is associated with just a single
action (“cut”). Similarly, healthy people given the same test show increased
activity in Broca’s area when selecting a verb out of many alternatives, as well
as during conﬂicting-action trials of the Stroop test. At the very least these
ﬁndings establish that speech production involves competition among expressive
actions, as well as competition between thoughts to be expressed.
The competitive processes involved in speech production are generally uncon-
scious, of course. Indeed, just as value is processed unconsciously during bottom-
up perceptual processing, often issuing in decisions to shift attention from one
thing to another, so too is it processed in competition among motor schemata.
Decisions about what to say, what words to use, and so on are generally taken “on
the ﬂy,” resulting from swift evaluations of the competing alternatives. The same
is then presumably true in connection with inner speech, thus meshing quite
nicely with the account of reﬂective thinking being presented here.
4.2. Goals in inner speech
Sometimes the goals that guide and motivate inner speech are precisely those that
would guide and motivate overt speech (except that something must motivate
suppression of overt speech actions in the former case). For sometimes inner
speech takes the form of an imagined conversation, or at least speech directed
toward an imagined audience. Sometimes one rehearses (and thereby consciously
evaluates) what one could say, or should say, or could have said to someone.
These cases ﬁt the mold of mental rehearsals of action generally, especially as
used in prospection. And the same goals will then be in play as would ﬁgure in
overt actions of the same sort. It seems unlikely, however, that inner speech is
4. generating inner speech
163

always of this kind. In particular, what goals motivate one’s production of inner
speech in cases where there is no imagined audience?
Sometimes inner speech is directed toward the solution of some problem.
This is supported by the ﬁndings of so-called “think aloud” protocols, under-
taken while people attempt to solve problems that admit of systematic (uncrea-
tive) solutions. (In cases requiring a creative solution, thinking aloud seems
actually to impair performance; Schooler et al., 1993.) In these circumstances
speech productions turn out to mirror one or another of the objectively deter-
mined strategies toward a solution, and the time-course of the sequence maps
smoothly onto what happens when people are asked to solve the same problem
silently (Ericsson & Simon, 1993). It seems that in such cases one’s goal, in
producing any given sentence, is to state the next step toward a solution. This
issues in a speech act that is globally broadcast, interpreted, and evaluated for
relevance and likely success. So there need be no communicative intent, and no
goal of producing an effect in an audience. Here the function of inner speech
seems comparable to the function of writing that is undertaken for one’s own
beneﬁt, as when one writes solely to work out one’s thoughts. For by providing a
sentence that can be consciously perceived, one recruits all of the brain’s circuits
to evaluate it, and to compete with one another in offering suggestions about
what should come next.8
It seems that much inner speech meshes nicely with our model of the active,
sensory-based nature of reﬂective thinking. But some inner speech is not so
obviously purposeful. Sometimes, especially during episodes of mind wandering,
seemingly random sentences and phrases appear suddenly in consciousness,
apparently out of nowhere. Such cases will be discussed in Section 5. But it is
likely, I will argue, that they reﬂect unconscious evaluations of the relevance of
competing speech motor schemata under conditions of low cognitive control.
The result is a seemingly uncontrolled sequence of speech. But in reality, each
item is motivated by a momentary unconscious decision.
4.3. Pragmatics in inner speech?
If inner speech is like outer speech, only with the overt motor component
suppressed, then we should expect the meaning of utterances in inner speech
to have a rich pragmatic component, just as does outer speech. This is almost
certainly true of inner speech that occurs in the context of imagined conversa-
tions (although I know of no systematic studies of the question). Based on my
8 Whether people intend these effects when they engage in inner speech is another question,
however. Some considerations relevant to this question will be presented in Section 5.
164
6. working memory in action

own introspective evidence, at any rate, not only does one seem to take account of
earlier stages of the imagined conversation (when selecting pronouns and so
forth), but one’s inner speech can be rich in irony, sarcasm, and other prototyp-
ically pragmatic communicative devices.
In the case of purposeful, problem-directed speech, too, one would expect to
see pragmatic effects. For the processes that generate such speech should be
sensitive to the same contextual factors (the perceived layout of the environment,
memories of recent utterances, and so on) that operate when one speaks to
another person. Admittedly, when there is no audience (real or imagined) there
is no need to take into consideration the knowledge or ignorance of the other
person, and their differing perspective on the situation. Nor is there any need to
build a representation of “common ground” that one is said to draw on when
producing utterances for an audience (Stalnaker, 2002). But such representations
seem to play a much smaller role in language production than was once thought.
For speakers often default to their own perspective on the situation when
selecting utterances, needing to inhibit this tendency if they are to take account
of others’ differing perspectives (Horton & Keysar, 1996; Shintel & Keysar, 2009).
It is hard, of course, to undertake direct experimental studies of the role of
pragmatics in inner speech. But on the assumption that people engaged in think-
aloud protocols make utterances that faithfully reﬂect what they would have said
silently to themselves otherwise, one can study transcripts of what people say
aloud in such circumstances. And in fact such transcripts are rife with pragmatic
effects. Indeed, without knowledge of the exact circumstances, one can frequently
not understand what the speaker is referring to at all. Consider, for example, just
one episode selected from among the raw data of a think-aloud protocol used
while participants solved a set of Raven’s Matrices (kindly made available to me
by Mark Fox).9 One person said this: “Oh, um, for each there’s a diamond. Um, a
diamond. And one going the other way.”
Reading this, one has to ask: for each what? And one what going the other
way? Looking at the matrix that this person was solving (see Figure 6), one can
ﬁgure out that he means each line in the matrix contains a diamond. And what
“goes the other way” are a set of diagonal lines that bisect each ﬁgure on each line,
one upright, one slanted to the left, and one slanted to the right. Indeed, when
thus interpreted, the two statements strongly suggest a particular solution to the
problem. Since he did, indeed, get the answer right, it seems likely that the
9 Raven’s Matrices are often used in intelligence tests. They comprise sequences of geometric
ﬁgures, and the participants’ task is to select the next shape in the sequence from a number of
alternatives. See Figure 6.
4. generating inner speech
165

person’s speech played a role in enabling him to solve it. Indeed, the episode
strongly suggests that one of the functions of inner speech is to ﬁx in working
memory some of the components of the solution to a problem while one
continues to consider others.
If speakers lack introspective access to their communicative intentions while
speaking, as I have argued (Carruthers, 2011a), then how do participants who are
thinking aloud (or entertaining the same sentences in inner speech) know how to
interpret their own utterances? Many of the same contextual cues are available in
the ﬁrst-person as in the third, of course. And interpretation can also be guided
by knowledge of one’s own focus of attention. In the episode described above, for
example, the person was presumably attending to the rows while saying, “For
each there’s a diamond,” and was attending to the diagonal lines in the ﬁgures
while saying, “And one going the other way.” We, too, would have known how to
interpret these utterances had we been aware of what he was attending to at the
time.
Overall it appears that the sensory-based model of reﬂection has the resources
to explain some of the familiar properties of inner speech. And the close parallels
between inner and outer speech support the view that the former is active in
nature, and results from goals and values that do not themselves ﬁgure among the
contents of working memory.
5. Creativity and Mind Wandering
The topic of the present section is uses of working memory that do not seem,
introspectively, to be active in nature. Sometimes one’s thoughts change direction
for no apparent reason (especially when one’s mind is wandering). Sometimes
ideas seem to leap to mind unbidden (particularly when those ideas are novel or
creative). It seems to us in such cases that we are passive receivers of our own
thoughts, rather than agents who actively produce or control them. Indeed, it
seems to us that the stream of consciousness when we mind-wander ﬂows
according to some unknown set of forces and inﬂuences, rather than being
actively produced. I will argue that this impression is a mistake. I will also
consider what can be said about the nature of creativity, from this perspective,
as well as what can be said about why we engage in mind wandering at all.
5.1. The active nature of mind wandering
There are strong negative correlations between working-memory capacity and
the extent to which people mind-wander during attentionally demanding tasks.
This has been shown using introspection-sampling probes to establish the
166
6. working memory in action

presence of mind wandering, both during experimental tasks of varying demand-
ingness (Kane & Engle, 2003) and during everyday life (Kane et al., 2007).
Moreover, the capacity to sustain attention to a task seems to involve two distinct
components. One is the ability to maintain a goal in an activated state over
stretches of time when it does not need to be acted upon (such as watching out for
an “oddball” stimulus in long sequences of predictable stimuli), and the other is
the capacity to direct attention in the light of that goal while resisting interference
from other factors (McVay & Kane, 2009).
On the face of it, such ﬁndings might seem to undermine, rather than to
support, the claim that mind wandering is active in nature. For mind wandering
seems to occur when controlled attention to a task fails. In fact, however, there is
continual competition between the “task positive” (attention-controlled) and the
“task negative” (default) networks (Kelly et al., 2008) mediated by the bottom-up
attentional system (Yeo et al., 2011). While the latter is probably always active,
monitoring both peripheral stimuli and partially activated endogenous represen-
tations for relevance to one’s values and current goals, its inﬂuence is especially
noticeable during mind wandering. I suggest that during such episodes the
bottom-up system is winning the competition for top-down attentional resources,
wresting control of that system away from the current task-dependent goal (if
there is such a goal).
Consistent with this suggestion, the region of medial prefrontal cortex that
constitutes part of the default network is anterior cingulate (Buckner et al., 2008),
which is known to play a crucial role in conﬂict monitoring (Botvinick et al.,
2004; Kerns et al., 2004). Indeed, the most recent model of the function of
anterior cingulate is that it makes decisions about the allocation of top-down
control based on cost–beneﬁt analyses of the conﬂicting alternatives (Shenhav
et al., 2013). Also consistent with the proposed active nature of mind wandering,
the executive components of top-down attentional systems are also active during
mind wandering (Christoff et al., 2009; Smallwood et al., 2011; Christoff, 2012),
especially those located in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex.
We can hypothesize, then, that during mind wandering there is no single
goal controlling the direction of top-down attention in a sustained way. Rather,
contents that have been partly activated through associative and other uncon-
trolled processes are evaluated by the bottom-up attentional system, competing
with one another (and with the task goal, if there is one) for control of the top-
down attentional system and subsequent entry into the global workspace.
Sometimes one of these contents wins the competition and is judged most
relevant to one’s values or goals, issuing in a decision to redirect top-down
attention accordingly. But in the absence of a strong enough sustained goal, that
5. creativity and mind wandering
167

conscious content or series of contents is likely soon to be supplanted by
another. As a result, one’s thoughts when mind wandering may ﬂit from
topic to topic. But each individual content or short sequence of contents
nevertheless results from a momentary decision to redirect top-down attention
in the light of a judgment of relevance. Each therefore results from a process
that is action-like in nature. So while the entire sequence of contents during
mind wandering is not goal directed or actively controlled, each individual
content is.
Mind wandering is active, I suggest, in much the same sense that someone
physically wandering around in a garden is active. Such a person’s movements
are actions governed by momentary decisions—now to walk here, now to walk
there—even though there is no overarching goal that governs his actions
(beyond, perhaps, the goal of allowing himself to wander at will).
Moreover, recall that mind wandering often involves inner speech. Since the
latter results from mental rehearsal of speech actions, it, too, is active in nature,
even when not controlled by a sustained overarching goal. It seems likely that
just as sensory-based representations compete with one another through the
bottom-up attentional network to gain entry into working memory, so is there
also competition among potential speech actions for rehearsal and subsequent
global broadcast. Current or recent contents of working memory will prime
one for speech, and in people who habitually engage in inner speech there will
be bottom-up competition among the speech acts one could activate in
response. The one deemed most relevant will be rehearsed, and its forward
model, when attended, will be consciously experienced. So although it can
seem to one during mind wandering that one simply ﬁnds oneself entertaining
sentences in inner speech, in reality the latter are actively caused and
controlled.
When our minds wander, we often have the impression that we are passive
with respect to our own conscious thought processes. (This is especially likely to
be true when our minds wander in ways that strike us as novel, creative, or
unexpected, as we will discuss shortly.) It is not us who controls the contents of
our minds in such circumstances, we think, but some set of forces outside of us.
But this impression is an illusion. In these cases, too, decisions are taken about
the contents that are most relevant to our goals or concerns, and those decisions
control the direction of top-down attention. The difference between cases where
our thoughts seem to us to be actively controlled and those where they do not is
just the difference between cases where we think we know immediately why we
entertain the thoughts that we do, and those where we take ourselves to be
ignorant of those reasons.
168
6. working memory in action

5.2. Explaining creativity
Creative episodes can be divided into two main components or phases, as
emphasized by so-called “GENEPLORE” (for “generate and explore”) models
of creative cognition (Finke et al., 1992; Finke, 1995; Ward et al., 1999). The ﬁrst
is the generation of candidate ideas, and the second is the evaluation and
development of those ideas before acceptance or implementation. (In practice,
of course, the two phases will be intermixed, as one generates and evaluates one
idea while also considering others.) As one might expect, the evaluative, analyt-
ical phase of creativity is associated especially with activity in executive and top-
down attentional regions of cortex, including dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(Ellamil et al., 2012). Our focus here will be on the generative component of
creativity, since it is this that gives rise to the feeling that we are passive with
respect to the emergence of new ideas.
Numerous forms of data suggest that the generative phase of creativity results
from decreased or defocused top-down attentional control. Thus (and consistent
with folk beliefs) we know that numerous factors besides the intention to be
creative (Baumeister et al., 2007) can inﬂuence levels of creativity. Alcohol
increases creativity (Jarosz et al., 2012); sleepiness increases creativity (Wieth &
Zacks, 2011); and being in a good or relaxed mood improves creativity
(Subramaniam et al., 2009). Direct-current stimulation applied to left prefrontal
cortex also increases creativity (Chrysikou et al., 2013), presumably by down-
regulating top-down attentional control.10 And musicians engaged in creative
improvisation show lesser activity in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex than do those
who are playing a tune they know well (Limb & Braun, 2008). Moreover,
particularly creative individuals tend to be lower in what is called “latent inhib-
ition,” which is the capacity to screen from awareness stimuli previously experi-
enced as irrelevant to one’s task (Carson et al., 2003).
Such data might seem to support a passivity view of creativity, since they show
that creativity happens when top-down attentional control is relaxed. But, as
previously, the data are equally consistent with an account in terms of bottom-up
forms of attention competing to inﬂuence the direction of top-down attentional
networks in the absence of a strong and active goal, with the top-down network
being controlled by momentary decisions of maximal relevance. For example,
here is what might happen when someone searches for unusual things one could
do with a brick. The intention to be creative leads to a defocusing of attention,
10 Direct-current stimulation, like transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), suppresses the level
of neural activity in regions to which it is applied.
5. creativity and mind wandering
169

removing the suppressing effect on remotely associated representations that are
activated (albeit only weakly) by the thought of a brick. (On the contrary, it is the
obvious and familiar uses of a brick—such as building a wall—that need to be
suppressed.) These associated representations are received by the region of
ventral parietal cortex that forms part of the bottom-up attentional network.
This communicates back and forth with right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex to
evaluate their degree of interest. The result is a competition to gain control of the
top-down network. This takes place in the medial frontal gyrus and anterior
cingulate cortex, issuing in a decision to redirect the top-down network toward
one set of representations in particular. The result is that a particular idea pops
into the person’s conscious mind, seemingly unbidden, thereby enabling a
reﬂective, conscious evaluation of its merits.
Is there evidence to support such an interpretation? There is some. One
imaging study of creativity, for example, found a trade-off between frontal and
occipital–temporal cortical activity depending on whether the task was mundane
(greater frontal) or creative, suggesting lesser top-down control in the latter case
(Chrysikou & Thompson-Schill, 2011). Another found increased activity in
anterior cingulate cortex in creative conditions (associated with conﬂict moni-
toring and decisions about the direction of top-down control), as well as in the
medial central gyrus of right prefrontal cortex, which is a component of the
bottom-up attentional network, as we noted in Chapter 3.4 (Howard-Jones et al.,
2005). Moreover, numerous studies of creativity have found associated activity in
ventral parietal cortex, which is another crucial component of the bottom-up
attentional network (Bekhtereva et al., 2004; Jung-Beeman et al., 2004; Geake &
Hansen, 2005; Subramaniam et al., 2009).
While more evidence would be welcome, it seems that current ﬁndings are at
least consistent with the active nature of creative idea-generation sketched here.
Moreover, since the level of activation of unattended but weakly active neural
representations will ﬂuctuate stochastically, the present account can accommo-
date quite naturally the partly stochastic nature of creative idea-generation
(Simonton, 2003). For as one rather than another representation becomes more
active, so will it have a greater impact on the competition for control of top-down
attention.
In previous work I urged the beneﬁts of a theory of creativity that is action
based (Carruthers, 2007, 2011b). Among other things, I argued that known
properties of the motor system can help explain the partly stochastic nature of
creativity. For at some levels of representation action selection is itself stochastic
in nature (Rosenbaum et al., 2001, 2008). I also argued that an action-based
account enables human creativity to be situated phylogenetically, as an
170
6. working memory in action

exaptation of the kinds of protean motor behavior exhibited by many species of
animal (especially when escaping from a predator; Driver & Humphries, 1988;
Miller, 1997). These properties, I suggested, are inherited by human speech-
production systems, issuing in the striking creativity of much overt (and inner)
speech. But these suggestions were made before I had come to realize that
attention is itself a form of action. The present account can thus inherit all of
the advantages of my previous one, but broadened to encompass creative imagery
quite generally.
The main point of the present discussion, however, is just that one can provide
an active, sensory-based account of creative idea generation that is consistent
with (and to some degree supported by) the existing evidence.
5.3. Why mind-wander?
Why do people mind-wander at all? The question can be understood either
distally or proximally. Consider the former ﬁrst. From a functional and evolu-
tionary perspective it might seem puzzling that people’s minds should often drift
from the here-and-now, meandering across past, future, and merely possible
scenarios instead. But only a little reﬂection is needed to dispel any air of mystery.
There are frequently lessons to be acquired from the past that were not learned
at the time. Recalling those episodes, thereby making them globally available
in working memory, can issue in novel inferences and affective reactions. The
results can in turn be stored for future use. Moreover, the value of prospective
reasoning has already been emphasized. By entertaining representations of vari-
ous future actions in working memory, one can predict their likely consequences
and respond affectively to them, thereby enabling one to plan (Damasio, 1994;
Gilbert & Wilson, 2007). Even merely hypothetical or counterfactual scenarios
can give rise to potentially useful information. So the adaptive nature of mind
wandering (at least in the absence of any signiﬁcant current task) should not be in
doubt. In Chapter 8 we will consider whether, and to what extent, mind wan-
dering has evolutionary precursors.
Now consider the proximal causes that initiate episodes of mind wandering. In
light of the above, it makes sense that there should be a strong disposition to
begin mind wandering as soon as one ﬁnds oneself without any current task, such
as lying in an fMRI scanner while waiting for instructions from an experimenter
or (more mundanely) when waiting for a bus. For by having such a disposition,
any “down time” of this sort can be put to adaptive use. What in turn grounds
this disposition might be that people ﬁnd mind wandering inherently rewarding
(Picciuto, 2011), in addition to any content-related rewards they might experi-
ence. (Of course the contents one entertains when mind wandering are often—
5. creativity and mind wandering
171

but by no means always—experienced as pleasurable. Think, here, especially of
fantasy.) It is more puzzling, however, why one should so often mind-wander
when engaged in an important task. Why is it often so hard to keep one’s
attention on one’s current task, even when one is highly motivated to do so?
And what causes one to shift attention away from that task when one does?
Kurzban et al. (2013) provide a general model in terms of which this issue can
be understood. They argue that the experience of intellectual effort is an affective
response designed to make one’s current activity seem bad, grounded in a cost–
beneﬁt analysis of that activity in comparison with what else one could be
devoting one’s attention to at the time (including mind wandering). They
amass an impressive range of evidence in support of their model, while contrast-
ing it favorably with competitors. In effect, the idea is that when one switches
attention away from one’s current task and initiates an episode of mind wander-
ing, one has taken a decision that the latter activity is the better of the two in the
circumstances. This decision is not conscious, of course, and people are generally
unaware that they have made it, or why. This is why one seems to just ﬁnd oneself
mind-wandering, passively, often issuing in conscious regret. But in fact, initiating
mind wandering is an action (or is at least action-like), just as are the individual
movements of attention that determine the latter’s contents. Further conﬁrming
the correctness of this account, a very similar model is presented independently by
Shenhav et al. (2013). They propose that the computational function of anterior
cingulate cortex is to take decisions about the allocation of top-down control
mechanisms on the basis of cost–beneﬁt analyses of the various options.
In conclusion, then, a case can be made for saying that all aspects of the stream
of consciousness are really active in nature. Not only is this true, most obviously,
of inner speech and the mental rehearsal of action generally (for example, in
prospection), but it is also true of forms of reﬂection that seem intuitively to be
passive. Even the genesis of creative ideas and seemingly undirected mind
wandering result from decisions to redirect top-down attention in the light of
cost–beneﬁt judgments or judgments of relevance.
6. Conclusion
This chapter has outlined a sensory-based, working-memory-based account of
conscious reﬂection and the stream of consciousness. On this view one’s amodal
attitudes operate entirely in the background, helping to determine the contents of
working memory and the direction that one’s reﬂections will take. Moreover, the
stream of consciousness is thoroughly active in nature, at least to the extent that
its momentary contents are under intentional control. This is because it always
172
6. working memory in action

depends on the direction of attention, and often depends on mental rehearsals of
action, both of which are action-like in nature.
Our common-sense belief that reﬂection is often an active process is thus
vindicated. But common sense also maintains that conscious thinking is often
not active, because thoughts and images enter our minds and interrupt our
reﬂections unbidden, seemingly appearing out of nowhere. According to the
view outlined here, this aspect of common-sense belief is mistaken. Ideas that
appear seemingly from nowhere are really a result of unconscious decisions that
resolve conﬂicts over the direction of attention, or concerning what actions to
rehearse. The difference between the cases that common sense regards as being
under our control and those that it maintains are not is simply that in the former
cases we think we know why we reﬂect as we do, whereas in the latter cases we
don’t. This difference is merely epistemic, however, and demonstrates nothing
about the real nature of the causal processes that produce the conscious contents
in question.
Recall from Chapter 2.3 that philosophers who claim that our amodal attitudes
are sometimes active and under intentional control are committed to the view
that such attitudes admit of two distinct varieties: a set of action-like attitudes,
and a set of passive ones invoked to explain the active status of the former set. As
we saw in Chapter 2.3, this commitment gives rise to a number of problems.
Work needs to be done to explain why active and passive instances of belief, for
instance, should nevertheless be considered as belonging to the same mental-
attitude kind; for the functional roles of those two sorts of instance will be quite
different. And some sort of complex mental architecture will need to be postu-
lated to explain how some propositional attitudes can participate in the inten-
tional control of others. Since we have no knowledge of such an architecture, this
aspect of the stream of consciousness would remain currently unexplained.
The sensory-based model of reﬂection makes no such commitment, of course,
and gives rise to no such problems. It holds that amodal attitudes are never under
direct intentional control, whereas the stream of consciousness always is; and the
latter is explained in terms of mechanisms that are already known to exist, and
about which much is already known. The sensory-based model therefore has
greater explanatory adequacy, as well as an attractive simplicity and elegance that
the philosophers’ account lacks. This amounts to yet another strike against the
latter. In addition to all of the direct evidence against the idea of an amodal
central workspace and in support of its sensory-based competitor, reviewed over
the course of previous chapters, the sensory-based model of reﬂection is also
favored by considerations of simplicity and explanatory adequacy.
6. conclusion
173

7
Reasoning, Working Memory,
and Attitudes
The present chapter will consider the nature of the dual systems of reasoning
advocated by many psychologists. One goal is to continue the work begun in
Chapter 6, developing the sensory-based account of reﬂection in more detail.
A second goal is to further consolidate one of the main claims of Chapter 5. This
is that once we have taken account of all the factors that are known to contribute
to individual differences in reﬂective reasoning ability, there is no variance
remaining that might be explained by the properties of an amodal attitude
workspace. A third goal is to consider two alternative ways in which the dual-
systems framework might be thought to provide support for the idea of a global
workspace in which all types of attitude can be activated.
1. Dual Systems of Reasoning
Scientists who study human cognition across a range of different domains have
increasingly converged on the idea that there are two distinct systems (or types of
system) involved. These domains include learning (Berry & Dienes, 1993; Reber,
1993), conditional and probabilistic reasoning (Evans & Over, 1996; Sloman,
1996, 2002; Stanovich, 1999), decision making (Kahneman & Frederick, 2002;
Kahneman, 2011), and social cognition of various sorts (Petty & Cacioppo, 1986;
Chaiken et al., 1989; Wilson et al., 2000; Lieberman, 2013). Although terminology
has differed, many now use the labels “System 1” and “System 2” to mark the
intended distinction. System 1 is supposed to be fast and unconscious in its
operations, issuing in intuitively compelling answers to learning or reasoning
problems in ways that subjects themselves have no access to. System 2, in
contrast, is supposed to be slow and conscious in its operations, and is engaged
whenever we are induced to tackle reasoning tasks in a reﬂective manner. Many
theorists now accept that System 1 is really a set of systems, arranged in parallel,
while believing that System 2 is a single serially operating ability.

Note that since System 2 is believed to be the system in which reﬂective
thinking and reasoning take place, the best account of the former will also give
us our best theory of the latter. This should provide the sensory-based account of
reﬂection with its strongest test: can it accommodate and explain the dominant
scientiﬁc account of the nature of reﬂective thinking?
1.1. Introducing the two systems
Throughout the latter half of the last century evidence was mounting that human
reasoning performance is subject to systematic errors (Kahneman et al., 1982;
Gilovich et al., 2002). People regularly exhibit biases across a range of domains
and types of reasoning, and they tend to use “quick and dirty” heuristics rather
than employing normatively correct principles of reasoning. While some have
argued that these heuristics are computationally frugal and produce results that
are sufﬁciently reliable in many environments to be adaptive (Gigerenzer et al.,
1999), there is no disputing the fact that people nevertheless go wrong in
predictable ways—sometimes with disastrous consequences. However, there are
also a minority of people who tend to get the normatively correct solutions, and
who do so systematically across types of task (Stanovich, 1999). It was the study
of these individual differences that led to the two-systems framework (in the
domain of reasoning, at least).
One factor that distinguishes those who get the normatively correct answers
to reasoning problems is that they tend to have higher ﬂuid general intelligence,
or g. This is not surprising, of course. One might expect that smart people would
reason better.1 But another factor distinguishing those who tend to get the
answers right is best characterized as a feature of personality: reﬂectiveness, or
“need for cognition” (Stanovich, 1999). People who get the correct answers tend
not, as one says, to jump to conclusions. Rather, they answer more slowly than
other people (De Neys, 2006a), and engage in signiﬁcant amounts of conscious
reﬂection before settling on their answer.
Many reasoning tasks can be arranged so that one answer, in particular, leaps
immediately to mind. (And on social matters, too, people generally arrive at swift
intuitive appraisals of others, or of social situations; Lieberman, 2013.) Those
who fail to reﬂect will then provide this as their answer, often incorrectly. The
cognitive and evaluative systems that issue in these intuitions have come to be
referred to collectively as “System 1.” They operate swiftly outside of conscious
1 Note, however, that given the heavy overlap between ﬂuid g and working-memory abilities,
discussed in Chapter 5, this is already an indication that variance in working-memory capacities
might play a big role in explaining reasoning performance.
1. dual systems of reasoning
175

awareness, and are largely impervious to top-down inﬂuences, at least in the
short term. For example, many of the intuitions produced by System 1 survive
reﬂection (somewhat as visual illusions do). Even when one is convinced of their
incorrectness, one can continue to feel their tug. Many of the biases produced by
System 1 are now well understood, as are the processing heuristics that are
employed (Kahneman, 2011).
The reﬂective system—System 2—in contrast is engaged whenever one pauses
to evaluate one’s initial intuitive answer, and attempts to think through the
problem in a systematic manner. System 2 reasoning processes are conscious
and serially ordered. And many understand System 2 to be governed, necessarily,
by normatively correct principles. (As we will see, this is a mistake.) Although
only some people systematically respond to reasoning tasks in a System 2
manner, it is thought that System 2 reasoning is nevertheless available to
everyone. In what follows our focus will be on the nature of System 2, in
particular. For this appears to be the system in which conscious reﬂection takes
place.
1.2. Properties of the two systems
The sets of properties that have been said to characterize the two systems over the
years are quite extensive. In part this is because the two-systems framework has
been developed by many different theorists, working in different domains, and
with differing theoretical commitments. Everyone agrees that System 1 oper-
ations are unconscious, whereas those of System 2 are conscious; and everyone
agrees that System 1 processes are high in capacity (perhaps involving parallel
processing), whereas System 2 processes are quite limited in capacity and serial in
nature. But beyond this, there are a great many additional contrasts that are often
said to distinguish the two systems. Most of these only work on the whole,
however, or in limited domains.
For example, it is often claimed that System 1 processes are fast and automatic,
whereas System 2 processes are slow and controlled (Frankish, 2009). Something
of the sort may be generally true. But there are also System 1 processes that are
slow and controlled. Consider the phenomenon of “sleeping on it.” It is a familiar
occurrence in daily life that one’s reﬂective reasoning about some problem has
become stuck—one is unable to see a way to a solution. So one lays the problem
aside, either literally going to sleep for the night or occupying oneself with other
tasks. But then sometimes after an interval the solution suddenly and unexpect-
edly emerges into consciousness. It is natural to think that one must have
continued reasoning about the problem, unconsciously, in the interim. Admit-
tedly, this interpretation is not forced on us. For it may be that the reason one had
176
7. reasoning, working memory, and attitudes

got stuck with the problem in the ﬁrst place is that one had adopted an
inappropriate mental “set,” which framed and constrained one’s conscious
reﬂection. What happened during the time when one was asleep or doing other
things, then, may be that this initial set was forgotten. With that constraint out of
the way, one was able to approach the problem afresh, resulting in success.
No doubt this sort of “set shifting” explanation is sometimes appropriate
(Schooler & Melcher, 1995). But it cannot explain those cases where a solution
emerges fully formed into consciousness without any prior attention to the
problem. For if all that happens in the interval following one’s previous attempts
is that one forgets the initial line of approach to the problem that had led one
astray, then one would expect that one would thereafter have to think reﬂectively
about the problem once again in order to achieve a solution. But this isn’t always
what happens. Here, as in the case of creative cognition discussed in Chapter 6.5,
bottom-up cortical attentional processes must continue to sift through potential
solutions while one’s top-down attention is occupied elsewhere, hijacking control
of the latter when something appraised as meeting the task demands is found.
This can take considerable time. And although the process of bottom-up atten-
tional search may not be fully controlled, it is nevertheless goal dependent. And
the eventual decision to switch top-down attention to one of the products of that
search (thereby causing that content to enter consciousness) is controlled.2
It has also often been claimed that System 1 is both universal to all humans and
largely shared with other animals, whereas System 2 is uniquely human while
varying in its properties by culture and individual learning. But in fact some
System 1 processes, too, depend upon individual learning. For many cognitive
skills can become automatized, moving with practice from System 2 to System 1.
The intuitions of a chess Grandmaster, for example, when he glances at a
particular layout of the board (“White has a winning position”), should count
as System 1. But these are intuitions that few other people in the world will share.
Moreover, as we will see in Chapter 8, some System 2 processes (especially those
involving prospective reasoning and episodic memory) are likely to be shared
with other animals.
Most importantly, it has often been thought that System 1 is associative in its
operations (or perhaps heuristic based), whereas System 2 is both rule based and
embodies some sort of normative reasoning competence (Sloman, 2002). It is
true that System 2 processes are partly guided by explicit rules for reasoning and
decision making that have been acquired from one’s culture. (Stanovich, 2009,
2 See Bos et al. (2008) for a demonstration that unconscious reasoning processes can be goal
dependent.
1. dual systems of reasoning
177

refers to such rules as “mindware.”) Among people who have taken courses in
logic or statistics, these rules will be normatively sound. But while it is true that
reﬂection can sometimes involve appeal to valid norms of reasoning, it can also
involve the use of heuristics. Some of these can be good and useful, and some can
be bad. The “sleep on it” heuristic, which is often consciously and reﬂectively
employed by people in our culture, might be a good example of the ﬁrst sort.
But a moment’s thought is sufﬁcient to show that many culturally sanctioned
reasoning heuristics can be quite bad. Consider the common practice in many
cultures of consulting an oracle (such as the entrails of a newly killed chicken)
when making an important decision. It is plain to us that decisions made on
this basis will be at chance. And it is equally obvious that people in such a
culture would be much better off not reﬂecting about the decision at all, given
that reﬂection will call to mind the “look at the entrails” heuristic, which is then
likely to be followed.
There is also intriguing evidence that at least one form of intuitive reasoning
embodies a normative reasoning competence. If so, then System 1 processes
can be rational, not merely in delivering an optimal or near-optimal output, but
also in the processing rules that they employ. The system in question is thought
to be engaged whenever one enters into a verbal argument with someone, and
is said to be an adaptation arising from an “arms race” in evolutionary history
that characterized the relations between communicators and their audiences
(Mercier & Sperber, 2011). Besides the evolutionary logic that predicts the
existence of such a system, the main line of evidence supporting it consists in
an extensive body of work showing that people who fail at paper-and-pencil
tests of reasoning do much better when evaluating the arguments of other
people, or when engaged in debate with others.
Confusingly, Mercier & Sperber themselves describe the argumentation system
as a reﬂective one, on the grounds that it is often engaged when we explicitly and
consciously evaluate the arguments of others or propose counter-arguments
ourselves. This may be so. But since the internal operations of the system are
always unconscious it is plain, I think, that it should be classiﬁed as an intuitive—
System 1—system. For all intuitive systems are capable of issuing in conscious
outputs, and many may help to guide cycles of conscious reﬂection. Indeed, when
presented with someone’s argument, the argumentation system will swiftly and
unconsciously generate an intuition about the strength of that argument, together
with intuitions about its likely weak spots. This ﬁts the normal characterization of
a System 1 system.
It seems, then, that many of the properties that have been said to be distinct-
ive of the two systems don’t really line up with one another. Some have used this
178
7. reasoning, working memory, and attitudes

to criticize the two-systems framework as such (Keren & Schul, 2009). But as
Evans & Stanovich (2013) point out, all it really does is force us to distinguish
between properties that are deﬁnitive of the two systems and those that may
generally, or perhaps only sometimes, hold true of them. There is nothing here
to challenge the distinction between intuitive forms of reasoning (which are
unconscious and high capacity) and reﬂective reasoning (which is conscious and
limited capacity). Even those who have been among the staunchest critics of the
dual-systems framework accept that this distinction is valid (Kruglanski &
Gigerenzer, 2011; Kruglanski, 2013).
1.3. System 2 and working memory
We have already noted that System 2 appears to involve the use of working
memory. This is because differences in ﬂuid g explain a signiﬁcant amount of the
variance among people in their abilities to solve reasoning tasks, and because
there is a heavy overlap between ﬂuid g and working-memory capacity, as we
discussed in Chapter 5.4. But other sources of evidence point toward the same
conclusion. For example, intuitive, biased forms of responding in reasoning
tasks increase when people are put under time pressure, and logical forms of
responding decrease (Evans & Curtis-Holmes, 2005). For it is well known that
time-pressured responding reduces people’s reliance on working-memory
resources. More importantly, perhaps, when people engage in reasoning tasks
under concurrent working-memory load, this impacts their performance when
logical and intuitive responses are in conﬂict, while having no impact on perform-
ance when intuitive methods will sufﬁce (De Neys, 2006a, 2006b). These ﬁndings
demonstrate that working memory plays a signiﬁcant causal role, at least, in System
2 reasoning.
The same conclusion is supported by the available neuroimaging evidence.
Numerous studies demonstrate executive-system involvement in System 2
reasoning. For example, De Neys et al. (2008) show that while anterior cingulate
cortex is active whenever people attempt to answer classic decision-making
problems, right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex is especially active only when
people are able to inhibit the intuitive response and answer correctly.3 Similarly,
3 Recall that anterior cingulate is thought to be involved in the detection of conﬂict (Botvinick
et al., 2004; Kerns et al., 2004). It therefore seems that people generally detect the conﬂict between
intuitive and normative responses in this study, while only more rarely inhibiting the former and
selecting the latter. Recall, too, that right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex forms an important
component of the bottom-up attentional network (Corbetta et al., 2008), as well as playing a crucial
role in a variety of forms of self-control (Aron et al., 2004; Cohen & Lieberman, 2010).
1. dual systems of reasoning
179

Tsujii & Watanabe (2009, 2010) show that ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (espe-
cially in the right hemisphere) is active in trials in which people are able to
overcome an intuitive reasoning bias and answer with the logically correct
solution.
More directly, Goel (2008) reviews evidence showing that when people tackle
familiar reasoning problems that they can solve in a heuristic-based way, a
network involving left temporal regions and left lateral prefrontal cortex is active.
When people work on unfamiliar problems that require them to ignore heuristic
responses and answer logically, in contrast, bilateral regions of dorsal prefrontal
cortex and the parietal lobes are active. The regions involved suggest the dis-
tinctive involvement of the top-down attentional network. Since the latter is a
signature of working-memory activity, we can conclude that logical responding,
in contrast with heuristic responding, makes use of the resources of working
memory.
Important conﬁrmation of these ﬁndings in the domain of reasoning comes
from investigations of the brain regions involved in social cognition. Lieberman
(2009) reviews a range of studies in the ﬁeld of social cognitive neuroscience,
particularly concerning the brain networks that are differentially active when
people respond intuitively versus reﬂectively. The intuitive system involves a
network of regions including the lateral temporal lobes, orbitofrontal cortex, and
the amygdala. The reﬂective system, in contrast, overlaps heavily with the default
network, and includes lateral and dorsal prefrontal cortex, the medial temporal
lobes surrounding the hippocampus, and large areas of dorsal and lateral parietal
cortex. Roughly speaking, the distinction seems to be between a semantic–
evaluative network, on the one hand, and one that involves explicit memories
and the resources of working memory, on the other.
Reviewing these and other forms of evidence, two of the leading proponents of
the two-systems framework have recently concluded that the distinctive feature
of System 2 forms of reasoning, decision making, and social cognition is simply
that they make constitutive use of working memory (Evans & Stanovich, 2013).
All tasks will likely make some use of working memory, of course. For example,
working memory will be involved in understanding the task instructions and
processing some of the stimulus materials. But when answering in a System 2
manner one intervenes to inhibit an intuitive response and takes time to engage
in conscious reﬂection. It is the latter that constitutively depends on the use of
working-memory abilities. So while System 1 comprises a heterogeneous set of
processing systems, System 2 has some claim to be considered a natural kind. For
it can largely be identiﬁed with the working-memory system, which surely
qualiﬁes as such.
180
7. reasoning, working memory, and attitudes

1.4. The case of the missing variance revisited
While some have concluded that working memory is the system underlying
reﬂective forms of thinking, it is by no means true that variations in working-
memory ability alone explain all of the variance among people in reasoning tasks.
So there is an opportunity here to address, again, the question discussed in
Chapter 5.4. This is whether there is room for an amodal attitudinal workspace
to play a role in reasoning tasks, in addition to the sensory-based working-
memory system. To answer this question, we need to consider what other sources
of variance there are underlying people’s reasoning performance.
Stanovich (1999, 2009) argues that variance in reasoning abilities can be fully
accounted for in terms of three factors. The ﬁrst is ﬂuid general intelligence.
Smarter people generally do better. But as we saw in Chapter 5.4, variance in ﬂuid
g, in turn, can be explained by a combination of working-memory capacity and
processing speed. So there is nothing here to indicate the involvement of an
amodal workspace. The second factor has already been mentioned: it is a
disposition to reﬂect. People who often or habitually reﬂect before responding
do better on tests of reasoning, and are better able to avoid the intuitive (but
incorrect) response. Again, there is nothing here to indicate a role for an
amodal workspace. For this factor is, in effect, a feature of personality rather
than a cognitive system of any sort. The third factor underlying variance in
reasoning abilities, according to Stanovich, is mindware. This comprises well-
rehearsed procedures for reasoning, generally acquired through training and
repeated practice, together with explicit beliefs about appropriate norms of
reasoning, mostly learned as a result of formal education. Once again, there is
nothing here to indicate the presence of an amodal workspace in which
reasoning can take place. Rather, this factor comprises a body of implicit and
explicit knowledge.
The argument against an amodal workspace—in which attitudes of all types
can be activated consciously and in which reasoning can take place—is thus
strengthened still further. For this workspace is supposed to be engaged
speciﬁcally during conscious reﬂection. But our best empirically grounded
theories of the latter implicate the sensory-based working-memory system
together with features of personality as well as implicit and explicit forms of
knowledge. While it is now beyond dispute that there is an important distinc-
tion between intuitive and reﬂective forms of reasoning, decision making, and
social responding, there is nothing to suggest that the cognitive system under-
lying conscious reﬂection is anything other than the sensory-based working-
memory system.
1. dual systems of reasoning
181

2. How System 2 Reasoning Works
Given that the only structure that is distinctive of System 2 processing is the
working-memory system, this section will show how working memory can
recruit the resources of acquired skills, System 1 systems, and explicit knowledge
and memories to issue in System 2 performance. The goal is to show, at least in
outline, how the sensory-based theory of reﬂection can account for this import-
ant body of ﬁndings.
2.1. Mindware
Consider what happens when people are presented with a task involving prob-
abilistic reasoning, for example. Those who pause to reﬂect before answering, and
who have taken a course in statistics or probability theory, may recall that they
possess knowledge relevant to determining the answer. Once this has happened,
they may then implement a well-rehearsed body of procedures, perhaps involv-
ing paper-and-pencil calculations, to achieve a solution.
At a more ﬁne-grained level, what may happen is that concepts evoked by
phrases such as, “How likely is it . . . ?” or, “What are the chances . . . ?” in the
presentation of the task activate episodic memories of having taken a relevant
class, or may activate some of the relevant behavioral procedures directly. If the
person is habitually disposed to suppress an initial intuitive response and conduct
a wider search of memory, then what may ensue is an evaluation of various items
of knowledge activated through the bottom-up attentional system, or an evalu-
ation of a number of alternative action schemata. When appraised as sufﬁciently
relevant, one of these may be sufﬁcient to begin implementation of the proced-
ures needed for a solution.
As another example, consider people who are presented with a version of the
Wason selection task, requiring them to select the information that they need to
evaluate the truth of a conditional statement.4 Those who have taken courses in
propositional logic may recognize at an explicit level that this is what is required
of them, perhaps leading them to entertain the question in inner speech, “How
does one evaluate a conditional?” This question, when processed by the language
comprehension system and understood, may activate various items of knowledge
4 For example, participants might be presented with four cards and told that each has a number
on one side and a letter on the other. They are asked to turn over all and only the cards necessary to
evaluate the truth of the conditional statement, “If a card has an even number on one side, then it has
a vowel on the other.” When the cards in question show, “4,” “3,” “K,” and “E,” the correct answer is
the ﬁrst and third. Most people answer with just the 4-card, or else the 4-card and the E-card.
182
7. reasoning, working memory, and attitudes

that compete for control of the language production process, leading them to
rehearse a statement like, “To evaluate a conditional one needs to look for a case
where the antecedent is true and the consequent is false.” Alternatively, the
question may evoke a visual image of the standard truth-table for the material
conditional, which is held in working memory and mapped onto the four
possibilities they have been given for evaluating the conditional in question.
Notice that among people who have acquired the relevant reasoning mind-
ware, a disposition to pause and reﬂect—asking oneself additional questions
before answering and so on—may signiﬁcantly raise the chances that one’s
mindware is brought to bear on the solution to the problem presented. The
mere act of pausing before answering will allow time for bottom-up competitive
processes to do their work, perhaps leading to a recognition that the initial
answer that sprang to mind may not be the best one. Or the act of asking oneself
questions may evoke knowledge by way of answer that would otherwise not have
made it to the level of consciousness.
Having a reﬂective disposition is by no means a necessary condition for getting
the answer right, however. Those who possess relevant mindware that is sufﬁ-
ciently accessible may call it to mind simultaneously with the heuristically based
intuitive answer, appraising it as preferable. For example, a trained logician may
see immediately what information is needed to evaluate the truth of the condi-
tional in a Wason selection task. Arguably, however, this should then be con-
sidered an instance of System 1 rather than System 2 reasoning. For no reﬂection
is needed, and working memory is not constitutively involved. The point made
earlier, that System 1 performance can sometimes be normatively correct, is thus
further reinforced.
2.2. Multiple contributions
Notice that one of the beneﬁts of reﬂection is independent of the sorts of mind-
ware skills and explicit knowledge of norms of reasoning that one might have
acquired through formal education. For reﬂection makes it possible for many
more System 1 systems to have a chance to contribute to the decision, or to the
solution to the problem. Often when one is confronted with a problem there is
one particular solution that is especially intuitive or salient. But by pausing,
asking oneself, “Am I sure that is right?,” or by conducting a search of memory
for other similar cases and how they were dealt with, one may activate knowledge
into working memory that suggests a better decision or a better solution. In effect,
one of the beneﬁts of reﬂection is that by employing the global workspace one is
able to harness the resources of many more System 1 systems. By asking oneself
questions, searching for memories, and so on, one can evoke knowledge or
2. how system 2 reasoning works
183

procedures that were either not activated at all by the initial presentation of the
problem, or were not activated sufﬁciently strongly to outcompete one’s swift
intuitive response.
Reﬂection can also utilize the resources of a single System 1 system on an
iterated basis. This is what happens, for example, when one reﬂectively tries to
understand the actions or mental states of another person. Often the output of
one’s mindreading system is swift and intuitive, of course. One just sees someone
as attempting to open a door, or hears someone as speaking ironically or jokingly.
So normal everyday mindreading qualiﬁes as System 1. But one can, if one
chooses, reﬂect to conﬁrm or overturn one’s initial intuitive interpretation. (We
are especially likely to do this when the stakes are high.) And sometimes people
behave in ways that leave one puzzled. In such cases one can frame questions, call
to mind memories of similar instances of behavior, imagine oneself in the
circumstances of the other person, and so on. Each of these will issue in contents
that are received as input by the mindreading faculty, leading it to suggest an
interpretation. In this way one may work one’s way to a plausible theory for
understanding the other person’s actions, utilizing the resources of the mind-
reading faculty on an iterated basis, together with episodic memories and other
forms of knowledge that are evoked by reﬂection.
Notice that at each stage in reﬂective reasoning of the above sorts, all we need
to appeal to are the sensory-based contents of working memory (visual images,
inner speech, and so on) together with other factors. These include the set of
System 1 systems that receive the contents of working memory as input, as well as
forms of implicit and explicit knowledge that are activated associatively by the
contents of working memory and evaluated through bottom-up attentional
processes, before being inserted into working memory in turn. In order to explain
System 2 reasoning there is no need to appeal to the workings of an amodal
attitude-containing conscious workspace.
2.3. Prospection
Perhaps the most common form of reﬂective reasoning occurs during prospec-
tion. Often when we are trying to decide what to do (or when we know merely
that we may need to decide what to do at a later time), we imagine ourselves
making each of the available choices while responding affectively to the results
(Damasio, 1994; Gilbert & Wilson, 2007). The actions in question are rehearsed,
or the outcomes of those actions are imagined. This issues in sensory-based
content in working memory that is received and elaborated by a variety of System
1 inferential and predictive systems, issuing in yet further contents in working
memory. These contents are also received as input by a suite of evaluative
184
7. reasoning, working memory, and attitudes

mechanisms, issuing in some degree of arousal, and leading us to see the
situations in question as good or bad to some extent.
We know that everyday prospective reasoning falls prey to a variety of biases
and fallacies (Gilbert & Wilson, 2007). For example, in prospection we tend to
concentrate just on the focal event, forgetting to take into account the surround-
ing circumstances. In deciding whether or not to attend a concert in town, one
may call on memories of the music and of previous concerts, while forgetting
about the time spent looking for a parking space and the time spent travelling in
heavy trafﬁc. We also fail to take account of how much else will remain the same
whatever we decide to do. Hence we predict that winning the lottery would be
wonderful, while failing to allow for the fact that one’s marriage will still be just as
aggravating thereafter, and that one’s health will still be just as poor. As a result,
this sort of reasoning would not be classiﬁed as “System 2” by anyone who thinks
that System 2 reasoning is, necessarily, normatively optimal or correct. If one
thinks, in contrast (as I do, and as do the central experts in the ﬁeld), that System
2 reasoning is distinctive only in making constitutive use of the resources of
working memory, then prospective reasoning certainly qualiﬁes, despite its
frequent failings.
Notice that although prospective reasoning is less than optimal, there are many
circumstances in which it is nevertheless more effective than attempting to make
the same decision discursively (Wilson et al., 1993; Wilson, 2002). For if one
bases a decision entirely on reasons one can articulate, one will be apt to focus
just on those factors that are easy to express in words. Moreover, recall from
Chapter 6.1 that the evaluative component of prospective reasoning makes
essential use of orbitofrontal cortex, and that people’s decision making is quite
poor when the latter is damaged, despite the fact that they can still reason in a
discursive way perfectly normally about the choices that confront them
(Damasio, 1994). Rather than attempting to take decisions discursively, a better
strategy is to try to correct for some of the biases inherent in prospective
reasoning, reminding oneself to imagine the context and consequences of the
choices that one faces, as well as the focal events themselves, for example.
3. System 2 Reasoning in Action
We have sketched how System 2 reasoning works, utilizing just the resources of
the sensory-based working-memory system together with System 1 systems and
stored knowledge. But how does System 2 reasoning have an impact on motiv-
ation, memory, and (especially) action? Recall that one thesis of this book is that
our amodal attitudes (including decisions) do not ﬁgure among the contents of
3. system 2 reasoning in action
185

working memory. In that case, since System 2 reasoning takes place in working
memory, it can seem mysterious how reﬂection can have its effects. For instance,
we know that decisions cause actions. But how can a sensory-based event such as
saying to oneself, “I should turn over this card and that card” (rehearsed by a
participant in a Wason selection test) cause the corresponding action?
3.1. Engaging motivational systems
It is easy to see how System 2 processes can issue in new forms of motivation.
This is because such processes make constitutive use of the sensory-based
working-memory system. And as we saw in Chapter 4, working memory makes
its contents globally available, piggybacking on the same attentional mechanisms
that result in the global broadcast of perceptual information. In particular, the
contents of working memory will be received as input by a suite of evaluative
mechanisms that issue in some degree of affect directed at those contents. Just as
seeing a novel event, or hearing someone describe it, can issue in a new motiv-
ational state, so can imagining or thinking of a novel event (in visual imagery or
inner speech). The same kinds of representation will be received by one’s
evaluative mechanisms in each case. The difference concerns just whether those
representations are exogenously or endogenously caused.
Consider how this works in the case of prospection, where one imagines
oneself performing an action or experiencing its results. When considering
whether or not to accept an offer to relocate to Chicago, one might imagine
oneself being in Chicago. As a result, the concept CHICAGO or some set of related
concepts will be bound into the content of the image and broadcast along with it,
while that content evokes positive or negative emotional valence. Similarly the
detailed content of what one imagines—such as the Chicago skyline on a sunny
day, or walking in a bitter winter wind—will evoke affective reactions, somewhat
as if one were really experiencing such things. The images are likely to be less
vivid and determinate than the corresponding perceptions would be, of course,
with corresponding reductions in affective reaction. But the processes in question
are of essentially the same kind. As a result, being in Chicago seems good or bad
to one (or some mixture of the two).
Prospective reasoning about what to say works in a similar manner. When one
mentally rehearses making a remark to an imagined audience the result is an
auditory image of oneself saying that thing. This is made globally available to a
suite of System 1 systems, salient among which is the mindreading system. The
latter predicts the likely effects on one’s interlocutor, and these, in turn, are added
to the contents of working memory. For example, one now sees the person, in
imagination, as horriﬁed, or bored, or amused. Depending on one’s goals and
186
7. reasoning, working memory, and attitudes

values, this may be experienced as a good or bad thing, which in turn causes us to
experience the making of that remark as a good or bad thing. We are thus
motivated to say, or not to say, the original remark through our affective reaction
to its simulated effects.
Not all inner speech has an imagined audience, of course. Sometimes it takes
the form of inner commentary, or is used for purposes of reasoning. In consid-
ering where to go on a winter vacation, for example, the sorts of underlying
competitive processes discussed in Chapter 6.4 may lead one to articulate in inner
speech, “The sea around Bonaire will still be warm in January.” When processed
by the language comprehension and mindreading systems, this is heard as
expressing a judgment with that content. Provided no contrary information is
evoked, this will issue in one’s acceptance of that content. (See Section 3.2 below.)
As a result, one’s evaluative systems will respond to that content as if it were true.
If one generally enjoys swimming in the ocean, the result is likely to be positive
affect directed toward the possibility of being in Bonaire in January.
3.2. Forming new beliefs
It is somewhat less easy to see how System 2 reasoning could issue in new beliefs,
on the model sketched here. For how is it that imagining oneself doing or saying
various things can lead one to form a new belief about what is actually the case in
the world? We surely do not systematically confuse fantasy with reality. But it can
easily seem as if this must be happening, if new beliefs are to be formed on the
basis of what one imagines.
We can make progress with this question by noticing that imagining some-
thing need not lead one to believe in that very thing. If imagining P leads one to
believe P, then that does seem like it would be confusing fantasy with reality. But
frequently when one imagines P, what one actually comes to believe is a condi-
tional of the form, if P then Q. For example, when one imagines throwing a rock
toward a window, one’s imagery (when globally broadcast and processed by a
suite of System 1 predictive mechanisms) may become elaborated to include a
representation of the window shattering (depending on the represented weight of
the rock and the speed of its trajectory). As a result one forms a belief with the
content, if I throw that rock at that window, then it will break. The same
mechanism that leads one to form an expectation of a shattered window when
one sees a rock hurtling toward it is here co-opted to issue in the conditional
belief that the window will shatter if hit by a rock with that sort of momentum. It
is such conditional beliefs that play a crucial role in prospective reasoning. If the
representation of a broken window issues in some degree of negative affect, then
the presence of the conditional belief enables that affective reaction to be
3. system 2 reasoning in action
187

transferred to the antecedent of the conditional. Hence the action of throwing the
rock will come to seem equally bad.
An account of how one can form new beliefs through discursive reasoning (in
inner speech) needs to be somewhat different—although it, too, piggybacks
on an existing mechanism for issuing in new beliefs on the basis of perception.
In this case the mechanism is one that enables us to form new beliefs from
the assertions of other people. When one hears someone say something—for
example, “The sea around Bonaire is warm in January”—the sounds in question
are processed by the language and mindreading systems, with the result that one
hears the person as asserting or telling one that the sea around Bonaire is warm
in January. If one fails to detect any inconsistency with one’s own beliefs, and if
the informant is appraised as trustworthy, then one will form a new belief with
that content.
Now suppose that an episode of discursive reasoning leads one to express
the same sentence in inner speech. (Perhaps one has just read that the sea in the
Caribbean is warm in January. Glancing at a map, one sees that Bonaire is in
the Caribbean. This leads one to say, “The sea around Bonaire is warm in
January.”) Here, too, the sentence will be heard as asserting that the sea around
Bonaire is warm in January. (Alternatively, or in addition, it might be heard as
expressing the judgment that the sea around Bonaire is warm in January.) If no
inconsistencies with one’s existing beliefs are detected, and if we assume that
one’s own assertions (and judgments) are treated as reliable by default, then one
will likewise form the belief that the sea around Bonaire is warm in January. In
effect, one believes one’s own assertions, much as if they were statements from a
reliable informant.
3.3. Mental commitments
Others have suggested a more elaborate mechanism through which episodes of
inner speech can acquire a belief-like role. (The question whether these really are
instances of belief will be addressed in Section 4.) Frankish (2004) argues that we
often hear ourselves, not merely as asserting something in inner or outer speech,
but as committing ourselves to the truth of what we assert. (See also Moran, 2001;
Bilgrami, 2006.) The idea is that an assertion can function in the same sort of way
as a promise does, constraining both our overt and covert behavior in the future
accordingly. Regarding oneself as committed to the truth of the proposition, The
sea around Bonaire is warm in January, for example, one will thereafter feel
obliged to act as if it were true. If one wants to go somewhere in January where
the swimming is warm, one cannot refuse to consider Bonaire without reneging
on one’s previous commitment.
188
7. reasoning, working memory, and attitudes

Notice the contrast between Frankish’s (2004) proposal and the one outlined
in Section 3.2. According to the latter, hearing oneself as asserting that P causes
one (in the absence of any conﬂict with existing belief) to believe that
P. According to the former, hearing oneself as committed to the truth of P
leads one to feel obliged in future to think and act just as if one believed that
P. This requires us to postulate an independent source of motivation, such as a
desire to keep one’s commitments, or the presence of an evaluative mechanism
that leads one to see instances of commitment-keeping as good.
The two proposals are consistent with one another, of course. For one might
treat one’s own assertions as instances of reliable testimony on some occasions
and as commitments on others. And I have no doubt that both are correct, at
least sometimes. But a commitment-based account is only really plausible in
cases where one makes overt statements in the presence of an audience. When
one says something in a public forum one generally feels committed to the
truth of what one has said, and will act accordingly. It is much less likely that
one will hear one’s assertions in inner speech as expressing commitments,
unless they are made with a special imagined intonation and stress. Neverthe-
less, an account in the spirit of Frankish’s can still apply. For if one hears
oneself as judging that P, one will thereafter believe that one has judged that
P (and has not changed one’s mind). As a result, one may feel obliged to think
and act in the future on the assumption that P is true, provided that one wants
to be consistent, or provided that one wants to think and behave as one believes
a rational agent should.
3.4. Making new decisions
It is easy to see how System 2 reasoning can issue in a new decision (and hence
cause action) when the reasoning in question involves prospective imagining.
Since such imagining engages motivational systems in something resembling the
normal way, as we saw in Section 3.1, it will lead to a new decision in something
like the normal way too. For example, suppose one has returned home late at
night without one’s door key, and is reﬂecting on what to do. One imagines
throwing a stone at a bedroom window to rouse the occupant, but the resulting
image of smashed glass leads one to see the action as bad. So one decides not to
do it, and casts around for an alternative. Likewise, if imagining oneself to be
living in Chicago is seen as good, then this may lead one to accept the offer to
relocate (provided that there are no contrary motivations, of course). This is just
regular ﬁrst-order decision making, with decisions resulting from an unopposed
motivation to do the thing in question, or from a perception that the thing is
better than the alternatives.
3. system 2 reasoning in action
189

It is less obvious how episodes of discursive reasoning can issue in novel
decisions. For there is nothing here quite corresponding to the mechanisms
that lead one to accept other people’s testimony (which are then co-opted in
inner speech) in the manner discussed in Section 3.2. Admittedly, people
sometimes tell one what to do, or exhort one to act, or tell one what one
should do, which often creates a social motivation of some sort to act accord-
ingly. And sometimes inner speech can take this form (“Don’t open the fridge!,”
one tells oneself, “Keep your eyes off the chocolate cake!,” “I should turn over
this card and that one,” and so on). In such cases one attempts to inﬂuence
one’s own behavior by simulating the social pressure that other people’s
exhortations and evaluative statements can create. But it seems implausible
that discursive decision making should always take this form. On the contrary,
the speech employed in this form of System 2 reasoning can often be neutral in
tone. After reﬂecting on the facts that one will need cash for an evening on the
town together with the presence of an empty wallet one might conclude, “So,
I will stop at the ATM on the way to the metro.” This doesn’t seem like a self-
directed exhortation, and contains no evaluative concepts. So how does it
achieve its effects?
Sometimes, of course, the components of discursive reasoning that appear
decision-like may be epiphenomenal with respect to the eventual action. In the
case just described, for example, it may be that while saying, “I need cash for the
evening” one imagines oneself having to scrounge from one’s friends, and feels
negative affect as a result. When combined with the image of the nearby ATM
this may lead one to see stopping at the latter as good. It may be that this
perception leads to an (unconscious) decision to act accordingly, which in turn
causes one to say (in inner speech), “I will stop at the ATM.” Although the latter
looks like it plays a decision-like causal role, it does not. Rather, it is caused by the
underlying real decision. And it is the latter that causes one’s later stopping
behavior.
There is also, however, the possibility of appealing here to commitment-like
states of the sort discussed in Section 3.3. Suppose that rehearsal in inner speech
of the sentence, “I will stop at the ATM” is caused by some sort of competitive
interaction among speech-action schemata that does not involve a decision to
visit the ATM. Nevertheless, if one hears that inner sentence as expressing a
commitment to visit the ATM or (more plausibly) as expressing a decision to do
so, one may thereafter feel obliged to act accordingly. Supposing that one wants
to keep one’s commitments, or wants to be the sort of strong-willed person who
sticks by one’s decisions, one may subsequently take a decision to stop at the
ATM, motivated by just such desires.
190
7. reasoning, working memory, and attitudes

Overall, then, the question of how System 2 reasoning has effects on motiv-
ation, memory, and decision making may best be answered pluralistically. Some-
times these effects are pretty direct, relying on the global broadcasting qualities of
working memory that mimic the effects of perception. But in other cases those
effects may be routed through higher-order beliefs and desires. It may be because
one believes that one has made a decision, for example, and wants to be the sort of
person who executes one’s decisions, that one then goes ahead and decides and
acts accordingly. In Section 4 we will focus on this latter sort of possibility,
considering whether it enables us to ﬁnd a place for conscious attitudes of all
kinds within the operations of System 2.
4. A Second Mind?
Some theorists maintain that the dual-systems literature warrants us in thinking
in terms of two kinds of mind (Frankish, 2004, 2009; Evans, 2010). The present
section will examine this suggestion, in order to see whether it provides any
support for the idea of an amodal workspace in which conscious attitude-
involving reﬂection can take place.
4.1. An ambiguity
It is important to distinguish between two things that might be meant by saying
that System 1 and System 2 constitute two distinct minds (Evans, 2010), or by
saying that the addition of System 2 forms of mentality to the basic primate mind
amounts to the creation of a new kind of mind (Dennett, 1996). On the one hand,
such statements can be intended just to emphasize that the two systems have
radically different powers, and need to be accounted for using distinct explana-
tory frameworks. So understood, such claims seem to me to be mostly unobjec-
tionable. For there is no doubt that the powers of the human mind differ very
signiﬁcantly from those of other animals, and that some of these differences are
due to the human capacity for System 2 forms of reasoning.5 If people wish to
mark this difference by saying that the human mind differs in kind from the
minds of nonhuman animals, then I have no principled objection to them doing
so—although I think it is more fruitful, myself, to emphasize the continuities.
On the other hand, in claiming that the two systems constitute two minds, some
have intended something much more ambitious. The claim is that each system
replicates the core functionality of a mind, and contains its own distinctive goals,
5 As we will see in Chapter 8, however, System 2 reasoning comes in degrees, and many other
species of animal are capable of it to some extent.
4. a second mind?
191

beliefs, reasoning processes, and decisions. Frankish (2004, 2009), in particular,
develops such a view. He suggests that the commitments we make at the System 2
level—to want certain things, believe certain things, and decide certain things—
constitute novel forms of wanting, believing, and deciding, respectively. For these
events are said to possess not only the content but the functional proﬁle of the
attitudes in question. Someone who is committed to believing that P will thereafter
reason and act in ways that a P-believer should; and someone who is committed to
having taken a decision to do something will be likely to do that very thing
thereafter, just as would someone who had decided to do that thing in the normal
manner.
Frankish’s view suggests an alternative way of defending the idea of a central
workspace in which attitudes of all types can be activated and conscious. He can
allow that our critique of the traditional account is essentially correct, while
claiming that System 2 attitudes are realized in the controlled use of working
memory together with a set of attitudes that exist at the System 1 level. It is by
rehearsing in inner speech a sentence such as, “I will stop at the ATM,” and by
coming to believe of oneself that one has made a commitment to stop to get cash
(combined with an underlying motivation to execute one’s commitments), that
one constitutes oneself as deciding to stop on the way to the metro to obtain cash.
The event of entertaining the sentence in question is conscious, of course, and
that event is an event of deciding, on this view. So there are conscious as well as
unconscious decisions, contrary to the claims I have been defending in this book.
Similar accounts can then be given of conscious judging, conscious wanting,
conscious wondering, and so on, establishing the existence of conscious attitudes
of all other types.
4.2. System 2 attitudes are not amodal
Let us suppose, for the moment, that System 2 contains attitudes of various
familiar types (beliefs, goals, decisions, and so on), in something resembling the
way Frankish (2004) suggests. It is important to realize, however, that this would
do nothing to vindicate the idea of an amodal workspace in which attitudes of all
types can be active and conscious. For the attitudes in question are modality
speciﬁc (generally involving auditory images of sentences in inner speech).
Admittedly, the events in question acquire the causal role distinctive of an
attitude of some speciﬁc type through the work of an underlying set of amodal
attitudes, such as the belief that one has taken a decision together with a desire to
be the sort of person who stands by one’s decisions. But these attitudes do their
work unconsciously, and they do not themselves belong to System 2. It is also true
that the System 2 events in question will have amodal concepts bound into them,
192
7. reasoning, working memory, and attitudes

such as the amodal content, I will stop at the ATM bound into the content of an
episode of inner speech. But the same is also true of perceptual and working-
memory contents generally, of course. There is nothing here to suggest that the
attitudes that ﬁgure in System 2 are amodal and not sensory dependent.
If Frankish accepts that System 2 attitudes are tokened in working memory
(generally in the form of inner speech) and that working memory is sensory
dependent, then he must also accept that those attitudes constitutively involve
modality-speciﬁc representations. Moreover, they will involve such representa-
tions essentially, not accidentally, since the conscious status of the System 2
events depends on attention directed at midlevel sensory areas of the brain
together with the resulting global broadcast of sensory-based information. So
there is nothing here that can be used to defend the reality of an amodal
workspace. A position of this sort might represent a partial victory for common
sense, nevertheless. For one can represent some of the core theses that are
under attack in this book as involving a conjunction of two claims: ﬁrst,
attitudes of all familiar types can be conscious and globally accessible; second,
the attitudes that ﬁgure in conscious reﬂection can be amodal in nature. I deny
both. But a Frankish-style account would vindicate the ﬁrst claim while drop-
ping the second. It is therefore important to consider whether or not there are
System 2 attitudes, as Frankish claims. I will argue in Sections 4.3 and 4.4 that
there are not.
Notice, however, that a Frankish-style partial vindication of common sense is
likely to provide would-be defenders of common sense with pretty thin gruel.
For conscious attitudes will only exist in some people some of the time, on this
account. Introspection-sampling studies suggest that some people never engage
in inner speech at all, for example (Heavey & Hurlburt, 2008). In that case it
seems unlikely that they will ever experience themselves as making a commit-
ment to the truth of a proposition when they reﬂect. Moreover, it seems quite
plausible that many people never hear themselves as making internal commit-
ments when they do engage in inner speech. And while experiencing oneself as
making judgments and decisions when engaged in inner speech is surely much
more common, it is likely that many people lack the motivations (to be consist-
ent, to be the sort of person who executes one’s decisions) that are necessary to
transform the events in question into Frankish-style attitudes. In addition, of
course, much conscious reﬂection will in any case involve simpler sorts of
attitude-causing activity of the kinds discussed in Section 3, where no appeals
to System 2 attitudes need to be made. This is a far cry from the idea of a
conscious workspace in which attitudes of all types regularly and routinely ﬁgure
in everyone’s reﬂections.
4. a second mind?
193

4.3. There are no System 2 decisions
I have conceded that people sometimes behave in the sorts of way that Frankish
(2004) supposes. Sometimes they hear themselves as making a commitment to
the truth of a proposition, and thereafter feel obliged to constrain their thinking
and deciding accordingly. And sometimes people hear themselves as taking a
decision to do something (in circumstances where the only underlying decision
was to rehearse one sentence rather than another), and thereafter are motivated
to act accordingly. The question is whether these System 2 events are attitudes of
the appropriate kind (beliefs and decisions respectively). Elsewhere I have argued
at length against this idea (Carruthers, 2011a, 2013b), showing how it fails for a
number of different types of attitude in turn. Here I will provide just a sketch of
the main point, focusing on the case of alleged System 2 decisions in particular.
(Section 4.4 will then provide a similar outline of the argument against System 2
beliefs.)
The argument turns on a seemingly compelling claim about the nature of
decisions, discussed in Chapter 2.2. This is that their main functional role is to
constrain and ultimately close off the process of practical reasoning (Bratman,
1987, 1999). Decisions that are taken for the here-and-now activate the appro-
priate motor plans needed to put the decision into effect. And decisions that are
taken for the future give rise to a stored intention. This intention, when later
activated by situational cues, recruits cognitive and motor resources to imple-
ment the decision without one needing to revisit the question of whether or not
to act. While practical reasoning may occur in such a case, one’s reasoning will
concern only how to act, or whether to act now, not whether to act at all. In fact
the central purpose of taking decisions and forming intentions is to close off
reasoning about whether or not to act.
Now notice that the alleged System 2 decisions lack these essential properties.
Suppose that one is looking at a bowl of fruit and reasoning discursively about
which item to select. “The apples look good,” one says to oneself, “but they are
rather large. And the last orange I had was somewhat dried out. So I’ll take the
pear.” Following this, one picks up the pear and begins to eat. The ﬁnal sentence
in this sequence does, indeed, close off the process of discursive, inner-speech-
based reasoning; and we may suppose that it does cause the resulting action. But
on a Frankish-style account it only does so through an additional stage of (uncon-
scious) practical reasoning. It causes one to believe that one has made a decision to
eat the pear, and this interacts with one’s goal of being the sort of person who does
what one decides, to issue in an (unconscious) decision to eat the pear. Note that
this additional practical reasoning is not merely implementational. It is not
194
7. reasoning, working memory, and attitudes

reasoning about how to eat the pear, but about whether or not to do so. And the
resulting decision to eat the pear is surely the real one.
Similar points can be made in cases where one reaches an alleged System 2
decision for the future, as when one concludes an episode of discursive reasoning
with, “I will stop at the ATM on the way to the metro.” On a Frankish-style
account, this statement is heard as expressing a decision and gives rise to a
memory that one has done so. When driving toward the metro and seeing the
bank where the ATM is located, this memory is activated and interacts with the
goal of being the sort of person who executes one’s decisions to issue in a decision
to stop the car. Again it is the latter, surely, that is the real decision, which takes
place unconsciously subsequent to the recall of what one takes to have been an
earlier decision. And what that initial System 2 event (“I will stop at the ATM”)
gives rise to is not a stored intention but an episodic memory of what one believes
to have been a decision.
Someone might propose an alternative to a Frankish-style account. Consider
the simplest case where a (nonverbal) decision to stop at the ATM causes one
to articulate in inner speech, “I will stop at the ATM.” Why can’t one regard the
initial decision as having been bound into the content of the verbal perform-
ance, thereby constituting them both as one and the same decision? In that case
one would not need Frankish’s apparatus of higher-order beliefs and goals
(believing oneself to have made a decision, and wanting to execute one’s
decisions) in order to explain how the decision achieves its effects. On the
contrary, deciding to stop at the ATM is conscious, and causes one to stop at
the ATM when the latter is perceived. Recall from Chapter 4.4 that this account
cannot work, however. This is because the sentence in inner speech is a sensory
forward model generated from a set of motor instructions, while the initiating
attitude and its content have been left behind. That sensory forward model then
needs to be interpreted by the language and mindreading systems working in
concert, leading one to hear oneself as deciding to stop at the ATM. Although
the latter content represents the original decision, there is no good sense in
which it includes or contains that decision. So the idea that the System 2 event
constitutes a conscious (globally available) decision cannot be defended from
this direction either.
4.4. There are no System 2 beliefs
A similar argument can be generated by considering the functional roles of
judgments and beliefs, which were discussed in Chapter 2.1. A judgment is an
event that gives rise to standing beliefs immediately, without further theoretical
reasoning about what to believe; and it is likewise immediately available to enter
4. a second mind?
195

into practical decision making. Likewise a stored belief, when activated, is
immediately available to inﬂuence decision making. In particular, it is immedi-
ately available to inﬂuence what one says in answer to a query. If one believes that
P and is asked, “P?,” the activation of the belief (note: not the belief that one
believes that P, but the ﬁrst-order belief that P) will normally cause one (either by
default, or when combined with a desire to answer truthfully) to answer, “Yes.”6
Now consider a case where someone’s assertion is heard as expressing a belief
and subsequently assumes some of the roles of belief (Frankish-style), but where
the processes that issue in the initial assertion actually involve no such state. For
example, someone in the “free choice” condition of a counter-attitudinal essay-
writing experiment of the sort discussed in Chapter 5.2 says after writing the
essay, “It wouldn’t be bad if tuition were raised next term.” This is heard as
expressing the judgment that it wouldn’t be bad for tuition to be raised, and an
episodic memory with that content is created. (Note that the memory is second
order in nature: it is a memory whose content is that one made a judgment of a
certain sort.) Since the heard-judgment presents as not bad the person’s previous
action of writing an essay defending higher tuition, the person’s affective state
returns to normal.
Sometime later the person is asked, “Would it be bad if tuition were raised next
term?” This activates both a standing belief that higher tuition would be bad and
an episodic memory of having judged that raising tuition would not be bad. The
conﬂict between these two is, in the circumstances, resolved in favor of the latter
(perhaps because it is activated more swiftly), and interacts with the goal of acting
consistently with one’s previous judgments, leading the person to answer, “No, it
wouldn’t be bad.” Notice that the etiology of this assertion is quite different from
what one would expect of a (ﬁrst-order) belief that raising tuition wouldn’t be
bad. Rather, a higher-order belief to the effect that one has such a belief interacts
with the (higher-order) goal of acting consistently with one’s beliefs to issue in
behavior that looks like it manifests a ﬁrst-order belief, but doesn’t really do so.
I conclude, therefore, that the System 2 event of initially saying, “Raising tuition
next term would not be bad” doesn’t have the right kind of functional role to
qualify as a judgment or belief.
Of course in any full discussion of this topic there are moves that can
potentially be made in response to these points that need to be replied to, and
6 While cognitive models of speech production standardly begin from a belief to be expressed
(Levelt, 1989), none that I know of maintains that production of a ﬁrst-order assertion that P begins
from the higher-order belief that one believes that P. Expressing a belief in speech does not normally
need to start from awareness of oneself as possessing such a belief. Rather, it begins from the belief.
196
7. reasoning, working memory, and attitudes

it would need to be shown that the argument generalizes to alleged System 2
attitudes of all types. These are tasks that I have undertaken elsewhere
(Carruthers, 2011a, 2013b). Here I propose just to take for granted that my
critique remains solid when articulated in greater depth and detail. This enables
us to conclude that a Frankish-style attempt at a partial vindication of common
sense is untenable. The inner speech events that we sometimes experience as
expressing commitments, decisions, judgments, and so forth are not, themselves,
attitudes of the relevant types. (They are, however, sensorily embedded attitudes
of hearing as, and this is a kind of sensory-based judgment, of course.) Hence
System 2 is not a workspace in which attitudes of all types can be active and
conscious.
5. An Extended Mind?
The present section will consider the relationship between the account of System
2 reasoning and decision making defended here, and the claim advanced by some
philosophers that the mind extends outside the brain into the surrounding world
(Clark & Chalmers, 1998; Clark, 2008). The question arises quite naturally, since
many forms of System 2 reasoning that are conducted using working memory
alone can equally well be undertaken in the public domain. Arithmetic calcula-
tions, for example, can be done in one’s head or on paper; and episodes of
discursive reasoning can be conducted in inner speech or while “thinking
aloud,” using overt speech or writing. One can then ask whether these public
events should be considered as parts of the mental activities in question, and
hence as parts of the mind. More importantly for our purposes, we can also ask
whether some of these public events can constitute propositional attitudes of
various kinds, thus providing a very different sort of vindication of the idea of a
non-sensory global attitudinal workspace. This is where we begin.
5.1. Extended attitudes?
Humans in literate cultures use written records of various sorts to enhance and
support their memories. Many of us record our future intentions in our calendars
(the trips we intend to make, tasks we intend to complete, and so on), as well as
our aspirations and long-term goals. And many people keep electronic or written
records of factual information (the addresses and phone numbers of friends and
contacts, for example). Should these physical records be considered as intentions
and memories that exist outside the head? Clark & Chalmers (1998) argue that
they should, focusing just on the case of belief, and using an example where
someone’s only access to stored factual information is external.
5. an extended mind?
197

Clark & Chalmers (1998) consider the case of Otto, who suffers from severe
amnesia. Since Otto cannot form new memories internally, in his brain, he carries
with him a notebook in which he records salient items of information. When
Otto reads of an especially interesting exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art
and decides to go, he cannot consult his (internal) memory of the location of the
museum, since he has none. But he can look up the same information in his
notebook, which guides his subsequent behavior in the way that a memory
would. Given that Otto always carries his notebook with him, and that his use
of it is smooth and habitual, Clark & Chalmers argue that its entries are Otto’s
beliefs. So Otto’s mind is not just in his head, but encompasses the physical
notebook as well.
If this conclusion is accepted, and if it generalizes to other, more everyday cases
of external notes and records, then we can draw two further conclusions. One is
that the external environment contains amodal (perceptible but not constitu-
tively sensory) propositional attitudes of various kinds. The second is that the
physical environment forms a sort of globally accessible workspace for cognition.
The states within it can become globally available to multiple faculties of the
mind (through being perceived, as when Otto reads an entry in his notebook),
with the information that they encode thereby becoming conscious. So there is a
globally available workspace in which amodal propositional attitudes can be
stored.7
Clark & Chalmers’ (1998) suggestion suffers from essentially the same weak-
ness as the System 2 attitudes proposed by Frankish (2004), which were critiqued
in Sections 4.3 and 4.4. While the functional role of an entry in Otto’s notebook is
broadly similar to that of a memory, on a more ﬁne-grained level it is markedly
different.8 Granted, when Otto wants to know the location of the Museum of
Modern Art he consults his notebook, just as an ordinary person might consult
her memory; and both forms of search will issue in a sensory-based representa-
tion of that location entertained in working memory, which guides decision
making quite similarly thereafter. But the processes that are involved in search
of the two kinds are quite different.
7 On some views these externally stored attitudes will even qualify as conscious. If a conscious
mental state is a mental state that one is aware of (Rosenthal, 2005), and one becomes aware of what
are actually one’s beliefs by reading entries in a notebook, then those entries can count as conscious
beliefs.
8 Recall from Sections 4.3 and 4.4 that while events in System 2 have roles somewhat like those of
beliefs and decisions, the manner in which they achieve their effects is quite different, relying on
higher-order beliefs about one’s attitudes together with higher-order goals such as a desire to execute
one’s intentions.
198
7. reasoning, working memory, and attitudes

When Otto searches his notebook, he needs to execute some overt physical
actions to do so. In particular, he has to pick up the notebook and turn the pages
to ﬁnd the correct entry (perhaps using an index or table of contents of some
sort). In consequence, he cannot access this information if he is paralyzed, or
while his hands are occupied with something else. And in order to activate the
information contained in the entry, he must rely on overt perception to do so. In
particular, he needs to read the entry, or visually examine a diagram if the
information is encoded in map-like form. Hence he cannot access the informa-
tion contained in his notebook in the dark, or without his reading glasses. When
ordinary folk search for a memory, in contrast, they use a combination of
conceptual cues and top-down attentional signals to activate the information
into working memory. Neither overt action nor external perception are needed.
So (and in contrast with Otto’s case) memories can be accessed while tying one’s
shoelaces or while lying in bed in the dark.
On a coarse-grained level the functional roles of notebook entries and
memories are similar, then. But when examined more closely those roles differ
a good deal. Which level should we use for purposes of individuation? Should
we count notebook entries as forms of memory or not? I assume these
questions concern, not our superﬁcial pragmatic interests, but rather the
psychological kinds that really exist in the world (that is, the psychological
kinds that cognitive science should recognize). In that case it is plain that a
notebook entry is not a memory. For the means by which Otto and ordinary
people access their stored information are quite different. Moreover, in the case
of regular memories the nature and functioning of the storage system (long-
term memory) is itself a topic of study for cognitive science, whereas the
preservation of written entries in notebooks is of interest only to archivists or
applied physicists.
This critique of extended attitudes is similar to that provided by Adams &
Aizawa (2008). Drawing on what they take to be the commitments of cognitive
science generally, they claim that a cognitive state (such as a belief) is a state
possessing underived intentionality over which computational processes of some
sort are deﬁned. A genuine memory of the location of the Museum of Modern
Art will be about that place intrinsically, not in virtue of anyone’s intentions or
interpretations. And a genuine memory should also be able to enter directly into
computational processes of various sorts. An entry in Otto’s notebook, in con-
trast, only represents what it does through the conventions of the English
language, or through Otto’s interpretive dispositions. And the entry itself doesn’t
enter into any computations. It is only the representations that Otto derives from
it through reading that do that.
5. an extended mind?
199

Adams & Aizawa’s critique amounts to the same as the one I sketched earlier if
we assume that cognitive science should only be interested in computational
states that possess underived intentionality. I think my own critique goes deeper,
however, since it depends on fewer substantive assumptions about cognitive
science. Some people think that many of the states studied by cognitive science
lack intentional content altogether, for example (Egan, 1995; Ramsey, 2007). And
as we noted in Chapter 2.5, radical connectionists deny that cognitive science
studies processes that are computational in nature. In contrast, no one thinks that
cognitive scientists should be studying the way ink-marks are preserved on paper,
or how those marks differentially impact the reﬂection of light. These are matters
for physicists to investigate. All we need to assume, then, is that cognitive states
are ones whose natures and interactions can be studied by cognitive scientists
using the standard methods of cognitive science (whatever those are). This alone
enables us to conclude that the entries in Otto’s notebook are not cognitive states
(and are therefore not beliefs).
5.2. An extended workspace?
I have argued that there are no propositional attitudes existing outside the head.
Someone might concede this, while insisting that cognitive processes nevertheless
extend beyond the brain (Clark, 2008). For notice that the procedures used in
both overt and covert forms of reasoning can be quite similar. Someone who is
performing an arithmetic calculation in working memory, for example, may
activate the same sequence of motor commands as would be used when physic-
ally inscribing the relevant numerals on a piece of paper. Each motor command is
used to create a sensory forward model of the result, which when entered into
working memory provides a prompt for the next action in a well-rehearsed
procedure, just as each physical action using paper creates a perception of the
result, and which then provides a prompt for the next action in the procedure. And
just as working memory serves as a repository of sensory-based contents that evoke
and guide the procedure, so one might think of the physical environment including
pencils and paper as doing the same. When one performs a calculation on paper
the “workspace” for the process includes the pencil, paper, and the inscriptions
thereon. When the calculation is done in working memory alone, in contrast, the
process mimics or simulates that overt activity to the same end.
There is no harm in thinking of the surrounding environment as constituting
part of the workspace for a cognitive procedure. For those external props, aids,
and activities support (and in complex cases make possible) the cognitive pro-
cesses in question. But it is another matter to claim that the physical and
behavioral events that take place in that workspace are themselves cognitive.
200
7. reasoning, working memory, and attitudes

Indeed, if we take as our criterion of the cognitive what is a potential object of
scientiﬁc inquiry for cognitive science, then it is plain that the extended work-
space should not be counted as a part of cognition. Cognitive scientists need to
study the processes that lead from motor intentions to motor actions, of course;
and they need to investigate the processes that transform light impacting the
retina into perceptual experiences. They also need to investigate how sensory-
based contents can evoke stored knowledge and activate and guide behavioral
procedures, as well as the manner in which the latter can be activated and used
covertly. But cognitive science has no interest in the question how graphite
moved across the surface of some paper leaves a set of marks, or in the question
how those marks inﬂuence the way light is reﬂected from the surface. Nor is
cognitive science interested in how movements of the keys of a computer are
transformed into digitally stored information. These are questions for physicists
and electronic engineers to answer.
It might be replied that this argument ignores the existence of dynamical-
systems approaches to cognition (Beer, 2000). For example, Thelen et al. (2001)
offer a dynamical-systems account of the interactions between infants and the
detailed properties of their environment in explaining the varied circumstances
in which infants will, or will not, perseverate in their reaching and succumb to the
A not B error.9 In such models, all of the different variables are regarded as being
on a par. No distinction is drawn between internal (putatively cognitive) variables
and those that exist in the surrounding environment. This might be thought to
provide a reason to treat all as equally cognitive, just as Clark (2008) urges.
In fact, however, dynamical-systems theories are ontologically neutral. They
provide abstract mathematical formalisms for studying the behavior over time of
any complex interacting system, no matter how ontologically diverse that system
is. One can, for example, use dynamical-systems theory to study the interactions
among beavers, trees, mud, and water that take place when beavers create dams
across streams. The success of such models should not, of course, lead us to think
that beavers and mud, or beavers and trees, belong to the same ontological kinds.
Likewise, then, when the systems studied involve both mental and physical states.
One cannot conclude from the fact that one can model as a dynamical system the
way an infant’s goals and motor plans interact with features of the physical
environment that the latter are themselves cognitive. Nor can one conclude
that every aspect of the interaction constitutes a part of the infant’s mind.
9 In this paradigm the infant is ﬁrst repeatedly shown an object being hidden in one location—
location A—and allowed to retrieve it. Then the infant is shown the object being placed elsewhere
(location B). Many infants nevertheless perseverate, and reach for location A, not B.
5. an extended mind?
201

It is true, of course, that modern humans have vastly extended the powers of
the mind through the invention and use of a variety of external aids. These
include books, writing implements, computers, and the internet. Humans inter-
acting with these external objects can achieve far more than anyone could hope to
do covertly, using working memory alone. This is, or should be, a truism. But in
order to understand how this happens it is not necessary to claim that the mind
has become extended into the world. This adds nothing to what we can account
for in terms of cycles of interaction between our minds and the physical world,
where the physical world has been arranged so as to prompt and supplement our
mental activity. Moreover, even if we were to think of the physical environment
as constituting a part of the workspace within which cognitive processes occur, it
is not a workspace in which amodal attitudes can be activated. So there is
nothing, here, that can be used either to shore up standard models of reﬂection,
or to undermine the sensory-based account.
6. Conclusion
This chapter has shown that there is nothing in the two-systems literature to
support the existence of an amodal workspace in which attitudes of all kinds can
be activated and conscious. On the contrary, what is distinctive of System 2
processes is just that they make constitutive use of working memory. Moreover,
the factors that explain people’s variance in reasoning abilities leave no room for
any contribution from an amodal workspace. We have also seen that attempts to
claim that there are a set of System 2 attitudes constituting of sensory-based
events in working memory are unsuccessful, as are attempts to locate such
attitudes in overt physical records of one sort or another. More importantly,
and in a more positive vein, we have seen how the framework outlined in
previous chapters can be put to work in explaining episodes of System 2 reason-
ing, with amodal attitudes working in the background to manipulate the sensory-
based contents of working memory (or to issue in overt actions that have similar
effects). In a variety of ways, then, the case for thinking that reﬂection is sensory
based has been strengthened still further, as has the case for denying the existence
of any workspace in which attitudes of all types can be activated and conscious.
202
7. reasoning, working memory, and attitudes

8
The Evolution of Reﬂection
This chapter has two goals. The ﬁrst is to address what is, perhaps, the primary
difﬁculty for the sensory-based account of reﬂection developed in this book. This
is the challenge of explaining why reﬂection should be sensory based. Given that
there are amodal attitudes (as I and most others believe), why is the mind
nevertheless organized in such a way that those attitudes cannot enter into
reﬂection directly? Why can they only operate behind the scenes, directing and
manipulating the sensory-based contents of working memory? My answer to this
challenge is an evolutionary one. Evolution is always constrained by pre-existing
structures. I will suggest that sensory-based attentional and working-memory
systems are an ancient adaptation, placing constraints on later evolutionary
developments. This will require us to review some of the evidence of working-
memory abilities in nonhuman animals.
The second, subsidiary, goal of this chapter is to offer an additional—
evolutionary—argument for the sensory-based account of reﬂection. Given that
reﬂection utilizes working memory (as does the stream of consciousness more
generally), and that working memory is grounded in sensory-based attentional
and rehearsal mechanisms of ancient evolutionary ancestry, it would have
required the emergence of a whole new kind of global workspace in order for
amodal attitudes to be conscious and to ﬁgure in our reﬂections. To the extent
this is implausible, to that extent the sensory-based account is further supported.
1. The Central Puzzle
The present section will lay out and develop the main puzzle that this chapter is
intended to address: why is it that reﬂection is sensory based?
1.1. Content versus format
We can engage in reﬂection about anything under the sun. Indeed, we often
reﬂect about highly abstract matters, such as the state of the economy, the
relationships among friends and acquaintances, the existence of God, or the

principles of logic and mathematics. Only rarely does reﬂection concern the
sensory properties of things and events. Painters and house decorators sometimes
reﬂect on choices of color, and composers may need to reﬂect on what timbre of
instrument would best carry a musical theme. More prosaically, we sometimes
reﬂect on the colors in a sunset or in a tree’s foliage, or on the night-time
screeches of a neighbor’s cat. But for the most part the properties that are the
objects of our reﬂections are not sensory ones. Why, then, are those reﬂections
constrained to take place in a sensory-based format, such as visual imagery or
inner speech? What is the beneﬁt of using sensory-based representations, given
that the things represented are only rarely sensory in nature?
One can imagine someone wanting to respond to this challenge by claiming
that reﬂection about abstract matters is a recent cultural phenomenon, perhaps
restricted to literate and scientiﬁc cultures. For in that case it would not be
puzzling that reﬂection would need to make use of representations that were
designed for other purposes. But such a claim is not remotely plausible. On the
contrary, humans everywhere and always have reﬂected about the mental states
of others, relationships among group members and kin, relationships of owner-
ship and obligation, together with a panoply of potential deities (Brown, 1991).
However, this attempted response to the challenge does get one thing right, as we
will see. This is that reﬂection (construed broadly, to include all inferential
processes that make constitutive use of working memory) was not originally
designed from scratch for thinking about abstract matters of the sort listed above.
Rather, it evolved many millions of years before humans ever walked the Earth,
and is an exaptation of systems that evolved initially for perception and percep-
tually based working memory.
1.2. A design perspective
Another way of articulating the puzzle of the sensory-based character of reﬂec-
tion is to adopt the perspective of a designer or engineer. Supposing one set out to
design a mechanism that could engage in intelligent forms of reasoning and
problem solving across a variety of domains, how would one do it? The question
need not be hypothetical, since there is a branch of cognitive science that
attempts to do just this. Designers in the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence have
developed a number of architectures for intelligent domain-general reasoning.
Two of the most prominent frameworks are Soar models of uniﬁed cognition
(Newell, 1990; Young & Lewis, 1999) and ACT-R accounts (Anderson, 1993;
Lovett et al., 1999). Neither of these requires the representations employed within
the architecture to be sensory based. (Nor, to the best of my knowledge, do any
others.) Given that no one designing a reﬂective reasoning system would
204
8. the evolution of reﬂection

constrain it to be sensory based, the obvious question is why evolution never-
theless did so.
Two points are worth emphasizing here, however. The ﬁrst is that most
artiﬁcial intelligence frameworks were not created with the goal of explaining
the ﬁne-grained details of human performance. (Had the designers pursued such
a goal, they would arguably have made their systems sensory based, given the
evidence of the sensory-based nature of human working memory discussed in
Chapter 4.) Rather, the goal was partly philosophical and partly practical. One
aim was to demonstrate that a machine could be intelligent. Another was to create
intelligent machines that could be put to work on our behalf. These aims enabled
designers to abstract away from the messy details of human performance and the
constraints imposed by human biology.
The second point to emphasize is that while artiﬁcial reasoning mechanisms
do not require the representations employed within them to be sensory based,
neither do they exclude such a possibility. Both Soar and ACT-R, for example, are
neutral on the question of the representational format of the representations they
use. So versions of these architectures could be designed to employ sensory-based
representations. The sensory-based account of reﬂection is therefore consistent
with these models, even if it receives no support from them. It remains the case,
however, that when viewed from the perspective of artiﬁcial intelligence, the
sensory-based nature of reﬂection seems like an arbitrary constraint.
1.3. Constraints on design
Imagine that humans had, from time immemorial, lived in circumstances where
possession of a third hand would have been beneﬁcial. Imagine that many of the
tasks that form an essential part of human life-history could only be performed
with three hands, requiring the cooperation of two or more people. (Suppose
that in these circumstances a lone human could not survive for more than a few
days.) The absence of a third hand would then have seemed almost like a
disability, and it would have been natural to wonder why natural selection
had failed to provide us with what we need. But in this case the answer would
have been straightforward. Bilateral symmetry is an ancient adaptation associ-
ated with deeply embedded principles of embryology, and is almost as old as
animal life itself (Finnerty et al., 2004). Indeed, evolution could not even have
provided humans with four hands rather than two (together with two legs),
given that the four-limb body plan is so deeply ingrained in all amphibians,
reptiles, birds, and mammals.
I will suggest that the brain design enabling the global broadcast of attended
sensory information is almost equally ancient, being common at least to all birds
1. the central puzzle
205

and mammals, and perhaps to all vertebrates. The use of these attentional
networks to sustain and manipulate information in working memory is likewise
quite ancient. When reﬂection on abstract matters started to ﬁgure as an import-
ant aspect of human life-history, therefore (or perhaps earlier, among primates
more generally), there was little option but to co-opt these ancient attentional
networks for the task. Evolving a global workspace in which amodal attitudes of
all types could be activated and conscious may well have been as difﬁcult as
evolving a third hand or a novel pair of limbs. It would have required an entirely
new pattern of cortical organization, which would have needed, in turn, a very
different trajectory of neurogenesis in the developing embryo and fetus.
If this argument is to be successful, then it must be true that the basic organiza-
tion of the nervous system is highly conserved across animals, just as the skeletal
system is. And indeed this is the case (Striedter, 2004; Geary, 2005; Swanson, 2012).
The organization of the nervous system into forebrain (cortex in mammals),
midbrain, hindbrain, and spinal cord is common to all vertebrates, and is discern-
able early in embryogenesis. Moreover, the long-distance wiring maps of the brain
and the forebrain are highly conserved across vertebrates as well, as are many
speciﬁc subsystems within each of the main components (Salas et al., 2003).
It is also possible to make a general argument that we should expect attentional
networks to be among the highly conserved features of vertebrate nervous
systems. (In Section 2 we will see that this expectation is fulﬁlled.) This is because
all but the very simplest animals confront essentially the same problem; namely,
that there is more information potentially available in the world around them
and detectable by their sensory systems than they could possibly hope to make
use of. Indeed, there is much more information actually impacting an organism’s
sensory systems at any given moment than could possibly be processed, let alone
responded to. All animals therefore confront the problem of informational
selection: how to select for processing the information that is most relevant to
their ﬁtness in the circumstances. This is the problem that attentional systems are
designed to solve. By selecting some information for widespread processing from
among the much larger extent available, these systems insure that the organism
confronts its most pressing problems and that motivational, inferential, and
decision-making systems respond to them in a coordinated manner. Indeed,
this is the main beneﬁt of having the brain organization that I have described
as “the centered mind.” A global broadcasting architecture solves the coordin-
ation problem for brains that are inundated with information while being
composed of multiple specialized subsystems, as all brains are (Carruthers,
2006). We should therefore expect this architecture to be highly conserved across
vertebrate species.
206
8. the evolution of reﬂection

2. The Age of Attention
This section will argue that the prediction made at the end of Section 1.3 is
fulﬁlled. Key components of the brain systems for both overt and covert attention
are widespread among vertebrates, and are present in birds and mammals at
least. In later sections we will discuss behavioral evidence suggesting that mem-
bers of these groups make use of the covert attentional system for purposes of
remembering and reasoning, thereby engaging in simple forms of reﬂection.
2.1. Conserved networks
Attentional mechanisms are strongly conserved among primates at least, involv-
ing homologous cortical and subcortical networks. These include a top-down
system in the cortex, linking dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, the frontal eye-ﬁelds,
and the intraparietal sulcus, as well as a bottom-up subcortical system linking
structures such as the amygdala, thalamus, and (especially) the superior collicu-
lus. Indeed, much of what we know about attentional systems in humans was
learned initially from work done with monkeys (Goldman-Rakic et al., 1990;
Goldman-Rakic, 1995; Luck et al., 1997; Baluch & Itti, 2011). The top-down
attentional system plays the same boosting-while-suppressing role that it does
in humans (described in Chapter 3.4), modulating activity not only in sensory
cortices but also in the superior colliculus. And the bottom-up system plays the
same role in grabbing attention and causing the animal to orient toward surpris-
ing, novel, or highly salient stimuli, modulated by the animal’s ongoing needs
and goals.
Homologs of key components of these networks are present in all vertebrates.
Speciﬁcally, in birds and ﬁsh the optic tectum is a homolog of the superior
colliculus, and plays the same role in orienting behavior and in the control of
bottom-up attention (Luiten, 1981; Gruberg et al., 2006; Knudsen, 2011). Indeed,
the same microcircuits in the two structures control the boosting-while-
suppressing role of attention on neural responses, modulated by both bottom-
up and top-down signals (Mysore & Knudsen, 2013). Moreover, the forebrains of
birds, at least, contain a homolog of the frontal eye-ﬁelds, called the arcopallial
gaze ﬁelds, or AGF (Winkowski & Knudsen, 2007, 2008). These modulate neural
activity in the optic tectum as well as in sensory areas, and the mechanism
through which this modulation operates has now been successfully modeled
(Lai et al., 2011).
While important components of the attentional networks present in humans
and other mammals are present in all vertebrates, it is not yet known whether other
components of the cortical network likewise have homologs in the forebrains of
2. the age of attention
207

birds and ﬁsh. (These would include dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and the in-
traparietal sulcus, as well as the bottom-up cortical network linking right ventral
parietal cortex with right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and the anterior cingu-
late.) Nor is it known how the functions of these networks have become elaborated
over the course of evolution. But at a neurophysiological level, at least, we can
conclude that attentional networks are ancient structures, highly conserved over
evolutionary timescales.
2.2. Covert attention in birds
The frontal eye-ﬁelds in humans and other mammals play a central role in the
control of eye movements, and the superior colliculus is crucial for an animal to
display an orienting response to a novel or salient stimulus. Hence this network is
important for the control of overt attention. While it has been known for many
years that the frontal eye-ﬁelds in primates play an important role in covert forms
of attention as well (just as they do in humans), the role of the superior colliculus
has often been thought to be restricted to control of the overt orienting response.
But knowledge of the modulating role that signals from the frontal eye-ﬁelds play
in the superior colliculus would lead one to predict that the latter is also
inﬂuenced by covert forms of attention. This has now been demonstrated
behaviorally in monkeys (Lovejoy & Krauzlis, 2010). The task required the
animals to ignore distractor stimuli while attending covertly to a cued location
that would inform them where to orient next. Innervation of the superior
colliculus disrupted performance in this task, but only when distractor stimuli
were present. Hence it was covert attention that was disrupted, not overt orien-
tation and eye movements.
We know, too, that the homolog of the frontal eye-ﬁelds in birds is involved in
the control of both overt and covert forms of attention. Application of a strong
electrical stimulus to a component of this forebrain region causes the bird to
orient toward the corresponding region of space, thus engaging in a shift in overt
attention. But application of a weak electrical stimulus leads to the neural and
behavioral enhancements that are characteristic of a shift in covert attention
(Winkowski & Knudsen, 2007, 2008). Speciﬁcally, when stimulated for a speciﬁc
region of visual space, the neural responses to stimuli emanating from that region
are enhanced in the optic tectum, and the bird is also more successful at noticing
and discriminating those stimuli.
Since attention is necessary to evoke and sustain episodic memories in humans
(as we saw in Chapter 4.1), and since the interplay between these networks
performs such an important role in both prospective and retrospective forms of
reﬂective reasoning, it is worth noting that episodic memory networks, too, are
208
8. the evolution of reﬂection

highly conserved across species. (Behavioral evidence of episodic memory in
birds will be discussed in Section 3.) In humans the hippocampus, together with
parahippocampal structures on the inside of the temporal lobe, play an essen-
tial role in the formation and retrieval of episodic memories (as well as in
prospection). Allen & Fortin (2013) review evidence for the presence of these
structures across species. They conclude that the hippocampus itself is hom-
ologous in all mammals and birds, and may be present in vertebrates generally.
The parahippocampal system is homologous in all mammals, but is replaced in
birds by a closely analogous set of structures. Moreover, just as the hippocam-
pus receives direct signals from the prefrontal cortex in mammals, so does it
receive signals from the analogous region of the avian forebrain, called the
nidopallium caudolaterale.
2.3. Brain plasticity?
I have been arguing that the mechanisms responsible for the global broadcast of
attended representations in the brain are of ancient ancestry and are highly
conserved across vertebrate species. So when humans (and perhaps other pri-
mates) began to reason about abstract, non-perceptible states and properties they
were constrained to use this ancient sensory-based system to do so. But this
argument only works if one cannot easily evolve a new network. What would
have been needed would have been one with similar boosting-while-suppressing
properties to the attentional network, which would likewise result in the global
broadcast of targeted representations. But it would be focused on semantic and
decision-making networks in the frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes, rather
than on midlevel sensory regions of cortex. In addition, an objector might say
that the evidence of cortical plasticity that has accumulated in recent decades
counts against the picture of a ﬁxed rigid brain architecture. If brains can be
plastic in response to injury or training, then surely they can be equally ﬂexible
over evolutionary timescales?
Let me ﬁrst address the question of cortical plasticity. We know that regions of
cortex devoted to processing input from, say, a particular ﬁnger can expand or
contract in response to training, or to injury that results in loss of input
(Buonomano & Merzenich, 1998). But the mechanism involved seems to be
invasion of new synapses from nearby regions of cortex. This is very different
from the new long-range cortical connections that would be required to build a
new kind of attentional system and a global workspace in which amodal attitudes
can be activated.
We also know that regions of cortex can acquire wholly new processing
properties in response to novel input. Thus the left fusiform gyrus in the temporal
2. the age of attention
209

lobe, which in illiterate people is a face-processing area, becomes the visual word-
form area in people who have learned to read (Dehaene, 2009). Even more
dramatically, regions of left visual cortex become specialized for language pro-
cessing in people who are congenitally blind (Bedny et al., 2011).1 The explan-
ation for these changes is thought to be that regions of cortex that have speciﬁc
computational properties, as well as the right kinds of long-range connections
to realize a new function, can acquire novel content-processing properties in
response to new forms of input (Dehaene, 2004; Anderson, 2010). Plainly,
however, this is not the sort of plasticity that would be needed for the creation
of an amodal attentional system. For the latter would require a new long-range
network to be built, not just the use of existing regions to process novel forms of
content.
Admittedly, we do know that long-range functional connections can be
strengthened as a result of training. This is presumably what happens to the
top-down attentional system in people who improve their ﬂuid g as a result of
working-memory training (Jaeggi et al., 2008, 2011). And there is direct evidence
of increased long-range connectivity in people who have learned to read. The
result is a strengthening of the arcuate fasciculus, which is a pathway linking the
visual word-form area with regions of the brain subserving semantic and phono-
logical processes (Thiebaut de Schotten et al., 2014). But the increases measured
in this study reﬂect white-matter volume, which varies with the extent of
myelination of the long-range ﬁbers in question. So the improved functional
connectivity may result from increasing myelination of existing neurons, rather
than from the growth of new ones. Indeed, we lack any model of how new long-
range connections could be grown as a result of learning. For these connections
are created early in development, with the axons growing along genetically
speciﬁed chemical gradients while brain regions are still differentiating from
one another (Huber et al., 2003).
What is known about brain plasticity does nothing to undermine the idea that
long-range brain networks are highly conserved across species, then. But this
doesn’t really address the point that the networks necessary to support an amodal
global workspace might have evolved at some point in the primate or hominin
1 Intriguingly, if attentional systems directed at midlevel visual areas remain functional in
congenitally blind people, then it may be that non-sensory syntactic or semantic information can
be globally broadcast in such people in the absence of any sensory basis. For the neural activity in
such areas that can be boosted or suppressed by the direction of attention carries linguistic, not
visual, content. This would then be a counter-example to the claim of this book that all working-
memory contents are sensory based. But this would hardly be a victory for amodal models of
reﬂective thinking, either. That congenitally blind people may be capable of certain kinds of amodal
reﬂection says nothing whatever about the rest of us.
210
8. the evolution of reﬂection

line, with these networks now existing alongside the strongly conserved sensory-
based ones. But consider how complex this new system would have had to be.
Not only would a new form of attentional system have needed to be created,
targeted at many different cortical sites that realize amodal attitudes of various
sorts, but numerous connections would need to have been built from each of
these sites to the brain regions needed for the global availability of attended
amodal representations. These would include regions for forming new memories,
for generating affective reactions, for drawing inferences of various sorts, for
reporting in speech, and for decision making. While all this is no doubt possible
in principle, it is far from clear that network-wide changes of this magnitude can
be created out of nothing over the course of merely a few million years. Indeed,
given the highly conservative nature of the evolution of brain architecture in
general (Swanson, 2012), it seems somewhat unlikely.
There is an important dialectical point to be made here, however. This is that
I do not need to provide a positive demonstration that an amodal workspace
could not have evolved. For we have already reviewed numerous sources of
evidence over previous chapters suggesting that it has not, in fact, done so. Our
task in this chapter is rather to provide a plausible explanation for the sensory-
based character of reﬂection, which otherwise seems so unsuited for the amodal
purposes for which reﬂection is often now used. (This explanation will at the
same time provide a positive reason for believing that reﬂection is sensory based,
since this is what one might then expect on evolutionary grounds alone.) For this,
I just need to show that the sensory-based working-memory system is of ancient
ancestry, and that it would not have been easy for evolution to create a new
system for amodal use. I take it that both points are now on the way to being
established. The upshot is that it should be easy to understand how humans had
little option but to co-opt the sensory-based system inherited from their primate
ancestors. This would need to be employed for reﬂection about unobservable as
well as observable properties.2
3. Episodic Memory and Prospection in Birds
Section 2 discussed neurological evidence that the brain systems exist in birds
that are necessary for simple forms of reﬂection (including episodic memory and
prospection). The present section will discuss behavioral evidence suggesting that
2 Moreover, the same constraint might well iterate further back into the evolutionary past. For
even if other creatures, likewise, use their sensory-based working-memory systems for reﬂective
reasoning about unobservable properties, it may be that they, too, had no option but to do so given
the ancestral designs they inherited.
3. episodic memory and prospection in birds
211

these networks are, indeed, used for such purposes, thus enabling them to deal
adaptively with perceptible features of their environment. Most of the evidence
derives from work done with corvids (rooks, crows, and jays), together with parrots
and cockatoos. It is not known whether members of these species are unusual in
employing for purposes of reﬂection the brain networks that all birds share, or
whether other avian species might perform similarly in some circumstances.3
3.1. What, where, and when
Some have suggested that “mental time-travel” (or the capacity to re-experience
the past and imagine the future) is a uniquely human ability (Suddendorf &
Corballis, 1997, 2007). Critics of this view have mostly shied away from the
question of animal consciousness, as well as from the question whether animals
can represent themselves in the past and future. They have focused on animals’
capacities to represent the what, where, and when properties of events. But in fact,
given the shared brain architecture discussed in Section 2, if it can be shown that
animals recall what happened, where, and when, and that they can use this
information to guide their overall behavior, then it would be reasonable to
conclude that these representations are globally broadcast as a result of top-
down attentional signals, just as human episodic memories are. Hence they will
qualify as conscious in at least the access-conscious sense we have been employ-
ing in this book. (The question of self-consciousness is another matter, however,
and is one that I won’t address here.)
Across a series of studies Clayton and colleagues have investigated the memory
abilities of scrub jays, demonstrating the birds’ ﬂexible use of what, where, and
when components (Clayton & Dickinson, 1999; Clayton et al., 2001, 2003, 2005).
Many birds cache food for later consumption, and it is well known that their
memory for the locations of their caches can be remarkable (Bednekoff & Balda,
1997). But in the absence of experimentation one cannot tell whether they also
recall what they have cached, and when they did so. This is what Clayton and
colleagues have been able to demonstrate, using a variety of controls to rule out
simpler associationist explanations of their data. They have been able to show,
moreover, that the memories in question are ﬂexibly available in the service of
behavior, interacting appropriately with newly acquired beliefs and goals.
One of the basic ﬁndings is as follows (Clayton et al., 2003). Naïve scrub jays
were given the opportunity to cache both peanuts and dead crickets in two
separate locations, repeating the process on successive days for three days. On
3 Note that there will be many differences among species that could inﬂuence performance in any
given test, such as variations in neophilia and neophobia (Auersperg et al., 2011).
212
8. the evolution of reﬂection

the fourth day they were allowed, when hungry, to retrieve their caches from the
ﬁrst day. One group of birds found both forms of food in good condition,
whereas the other group found that the crickets had degraded in the interval.
This experience was repeated on the ﬁfth day with the caches created on the
second day. Then on the sixth day the birds were allowed to access the cache
locations used on the third day, which had actually been emptied of all caches by
the experimenters. The question was where the birds would look who had learned
that crickets degrade after a three-day interval. In fact these birds all went initially
to the location where they had cached peanuts, and while they thereafter searched
in both locations, they spent far more time looking for peanuts than crickets. The
control group, in contrast (who expected that the crickets would still be fresh),
searched initially in the cricket-cache locations, and spent most of their time
searching for crickets. (This is what one would expect, since scrub jays greatly
prefer crickets to peanuts.) Moreover, the switch in behavior was speciﬁc to the
three-day interval. When given a test just one day after caching (when the decay-
group would have had no reason to think that the crickets would yet have
decayed), both groups searched preferentially for crickets.
In order to explain the behavior of birds in these and related experiments, we
need to suppose that they have memories specifying what they cached, where
they cached it, and when they did so. And these memories must be centrally
available, interacting with their goals and other beliefs to determine appropriate
forms of action. So their memories are at least episodic like. Admittedly, it does
not yet follow that the birds’ access to these memories takes the form of re-
experiencing the process of initial caching, as a human episodic memory would.
But given the commonalities in the brain mechanisms involved, and given that
human memories are formed when the hippocampus binds together sensory
representations that are active during the original event, it is reasonable to expect
that the same will be true of birds as well. This expectation will be further
strengthened if it can be shown that birds show future-oriented behavior of the
sort that would be guided by prospective reasoning in humans. For the latter
involves a sort of pre-experiencing of potential future actions and their conse-
quences, as we have seen in previous chapters.
3.2. Avian prospection
Corvids are known to be remarkable problem-solvers, fashioning tools out of
sticks or pieces of wire to retrieve food, for example (Weir et al., 2002; Weir &
Kacelnik, 2006). In the case of the experiments just cited, the birds involved were
New Caledonian crows, who use sticks as tools in the wild, and for whom a
disposition to do so seems to be innately channeled (Kenward et al., 2005). But
3. episodic memory and prospection in birds
213

similar behavior has also been found in rooks, who do not use tools in the wild
(Bird & Emery, 2009a). So it seems that the cognitive capacities underlying this
behavior involve general-purpose reasoning abilities of some sort, rather than a
domain-speciﬁc adaptation. This is consistent with the use of prospection, but of
course it does not demonstrate it. Nevertheless, we can at least conclude that
corvids (and cockatoos; see Auersperg et al., 2013) are quite adept at discerning
the physical affordances of things, and of adapting their behavior accordingly.
What we would like is evidence of some capacity to “think ahead” beyond
immediately perceptible physical affordances. Just such evidence is provided by
Bird & Emery (2009a), who presented rooks with a problem whose solution
would require two separate actions: using a large stone to drop down a trans-
parent tube to open a trap-door to obtain a small stone, which could then be
dropped down another (narrower) tube to open a door to obtain food. All of the
components necessary for success were visible throughout, but the birds were
offered a choice between using the ﬁrst stone to get a stone of similar size (which
would be too large to insert into the apparatus to get the food), or using it to get a
smaller stone. All the birds solved this problem on the ﬁrst trial. In order to solve it,
they had to be able to perceive the size-affordances of the various stones, for sure.
But it is hard to see how one could get to a solution (without using trial and error)
unless one imagined attempting to drop the available stone down the various tubes,
predicted the results, and then imagined what one could do from there.
The rooks who participated in the experiment just described were later pre-
sented with an even more challenging task (Bird & Emery, 2009b). They were
shown a pile of stones next to a tall Perspex tube containing water, in which some
food ﬂoated on a platform. The water level was too low for the birds to reach their
beaks into the container to get the food. A solution required realizing that by
dropping a series of stones into the container one could raise the water level far
enough to bring the food within reach. Two of the birds solved this task on the
ﬁrst trial, and the remaining two birds solved it on the second trial. Although
these birds had previously used stones to obtain a reward, the setup here was
quite different, and required multiple stones to be dropped in sequence to raise
the water level sufﬁciently. The birds made no attempt to reach the food after
dropping the ﬁrst stone, but immediately went to retrieve another. This suggests
that they had envisaged, in advance, the sequence of actions that they needed to
perform. Note that when employed with apes and human children, experiments
of this sort have been regarded as tests of imaginative insight (Hanus et al., 2011).
It is reasonable, then, to reach the same conclusion in the case of the rooks.
Even more remarkably, Taylor et al. (2010) show that crows can solve a three-
step problem. The birds were presented with a setup containing the following
214
8. the evolution of reﬂection

components: some food visible in a Perspex container, but too far from the
entrance to be reached either by beak or with a short stick; a short stick hanging
on a piece of string from a branch; and a long stick behind the bars of a cage, but
too deep within the cage for the birds to reach by beak. A solution would require
pulling up the string to get the short stick, using the short stick to get the long
stick, and then using the long stick to get the meat. The birds had previously been
given experience with some (but only some) of the components of the task.
Speciﬁcally, they had experienced: (1) using a long stick to extract meat from a
container, (2) getting a long stick from behind some bars with their beaks and
using it to get meat from a container, (3) using a stick that was too short to get the
meat in a container, and (4) pulling up a string on which some meat was
attached. None had pulled up a string to obtain a stick, and none had used a
stick to obtain another stick from behind some bars.
All four birds had solved this task by the fourth trial, and two solved it on their
ﬁrst trial. One of these two birds inspected the setup for a full 110 seconds before
acting, and then completed the entire sequence smoothly and without hesitation.
The other of the two inspected the setup for forty-three seconds, then pulled up
and dropped the string. He then inspected the setup for a further forty seconds
before executing the entire three-step sequence. It is hard to see what either bird
could have been doing during these pauses that would have led to a solution
except engaging in something closely resembling human prospection. We can
presume that they mentally rehearsed some of the actions suggested by the visible
affordances of the setup, foresaw the consequences, and held those in working
memory while rehearsing other actions, until all three of the necessary compo-
nents were in place, and were in the correct order.
In the experiments described thus far, the potential rewards were visible
throughout. The problem for the birds was to ﬁgure out a means to get them.
But there are also data showing that corvids can plan for future need. For
example, Raby et al. (2007) show that jays can plan for tomorrow’s breakfast.
The jays were housed in a cage consisting of three adjoining compartments,
which could be separated from one another. Each evening they were fed in the
central compartment with the doors to the other compartments left open, but
each morning they were conﬁned to one of the two adjoining compartments,
either to the left or right on alternating days. In one of these compartments there
was always food available at breakfast, but in the other the birds had to remain
hungry for two hours until released into the central compartment. For six days
the birds followed this alternating cycle (with the order counterbalanced across
birds), and during this time the food they had available to eat in the central
compartment at night was powdered pine-nuts, which cannot be cached. Then
3. episodic memory and prospection in birds
215

for the ﬁrst time they were provided with whole nuts in the evening. As a result,
the birds cached some of the nuts, and did so much more in the compartment
where no food had been available to them in the morning. The birds were able to
foresee that they would be hungry in that compartment in future, and acted to
assuage that future hunger. (A further experiment ruled out a simpler disposition
to cache in places associated with hunger.)
Correia et al. (2007) were able to demonstrate the same point using a different
paradigm.4 The experiments utilized the phenomenon of speciﬁc satiety. This is
the fact (familiar to all of us) that an animal that has fed to satiety on a speciﬁc
type of food is no longer willing to eat more of that food, but will nevertheless eat
a different food. (Think of a chocolate dessert after a large steak entrée.) Correia
et al. ﬁrst showed that the speciﬁc satiety effect extends to caching behavior. That
is, birds who have fed to satiety on food A will preferentially cache food B when
allowed to cache either A or B. Then the experimenters presented the birds with
the following sequence: feeding to satiety on food A; ten minutes to cache either
food A or food B; a delay of thirty minutes followed by feeding to satiety on food
B; followed by a ten-minute opportunity to recover caches made at the second
stage. (Birds in the control condition were fed to satiety on food A both times.)
While all the birds initially cached food B at the second stage (the food that had
not been devalued by satiety), those in the switched condition changed their
strategy on the second trial, and thereafter cached food A, apparently foreseeing
that this was the food that they would want at the ﬁnal stage of the trial (when
they would already have been eating food B).
Each of the experiments described above contained numerous control condi-
tions designed to rule out alternative, deﬂationary explanations. When taken
together with the ﬁndings outlined in Section 2 (that birds share the brain-
networks necessary to engage in episodic memory and prospection of the future)
the resulting data provide powerful reasons for thinking that the use of an
attention-based working-memory system for purposes of episodic-like remem-
bering and prospective reasoning is widespread in the animal kingdom.
4. Working Memory in Mammals
In Section 2 we noted that important components, at least, of attentional and
episodic memory networks are homologous across mammalian species. The
4 This demonstration was later extended to a distinct species of jay, while adding a separate set of
control conditions (Cheke & Clayton, 2012).
216
8. the evolution of reﬂection

present section will review behavioral evidence suggesting that mammals do,
indeed, possess working-memory systems not unlike our own and that apes, at
least, make use of those systems for purposes of prospective reasoning. Section 5
will then address the question of the differences in working-memory abilities
between humans and other animals.
4.1. Different forms of memory revisited
Before we begin our discussion of the evidence of working memory in mammals,
it is important to revisit the distinctions drawn in Chapter 1.3 between working
memory and two other forms of memory with which it is sometimes conﬂated.
One is sensory short-term memory, which can retain information in sensory
cortices for around two seconds in the absence of attention. The contents of
working memory, in contrast, are attention-dependent and conscious, and can be
held in an active state for as long as attention is directed at them.
Some experimental results with animals that have been thought to support the
existence of working-memory capacities are in fact best interpreted as tests of
sensory short-term memory. Thus consider the ﬁnding that chimpanzees and
baboons can reliably recall a random sequence of spatial positions up to a limit of
ﬁve to six items (or in the case of one animal, nine items) (Kawai & Matsuzawa,
2000; Inoue & Matsuzawa, 2007, 2009; Fagot & Lillo, 2011). The temporal delays
in these experiments are of the order of fractions of a second, with the animals’
response to the entire sequence generally being executed very swiftly over a
period of around two seconds. So while these tasks might involve working
memory, the data can be accounted for in terms of sensory short-term memory
alone.
The other contrast is with a form of long-term memory that is sometimes
called in the human literature “long-term working memory” (Ericsson & Kintsch,
1995). These are representations that are no longer among the active contents of
working memory (having fallen out of the focus of attention), but which remain
readily accessible to working-memory processes. Sometimes these representa-
tions have been recently activated from long-term memory, but sometimes they
concern stimuli that were previously encoded into working memory but will be
forgotten within a period of minutes. In this context it is important to note that
numerous comparative studies of animals, such as those that use the radial-arm
maze with rodents, employ the term “working memory,” when it is really a form
of long-term memory that is being measured. For the timescales involved, as well
as the number of items that can be recalled, far exceed human working-memory
abilities. Indeed, some writers are quite explicit that working memory in such
studies should be deﬁned as memory that is used within a testing session (often
4. working memory in mammals
217

lasting for minutes or hours) but not typically between testing sessions (such as
the next day) (Dudchenko, 2004; Shettleworth, 2010).
As we noted in Chapter 1.3, working memory can be distinguished empirically
from all forms of long-term memory through its sensitivity to attentional inter-
ference. Information sustained in working memory will be lost if subjects are
distracted and turn their attention fully to other matters. Long-term memories, in
contrast, will merely decay at the normal rate in such circumstances. Kawai &
Matsuzawa (2000), for example, note that on some occasions the test chimpanzee
who was about to recall a sequence of spatial positions was interrupted for a few
seconds by a loud disturbance in a neighboring cage, but was nevertheless able to
complete the sequence correctly thereafter. Although the authors suggest that this
behavior manifests the operation of working memory, in fact it is unlikely.
Undiminished performance following sustained and full distraction is an indica-
tion that long-term memory is involved.
4.2. Working memory and g in mice
In Chapter 5.3 we noted that working-memory abilities in humans depend
heavily on capacities to resist interference from competing stimuli and competing
memories. We also noted that they are tightly correlated with differences in ﬂuid
general intelligence, or g. Both factors have been explored in a series of experi-
mental studies with mice.
The ﬁrst study identiﬁed a general-intelligence factor that explains about 40
percent of variance across a range of dissimilar learning tasks (Matzel et al.,
2003). Moreover, while this g-factor is not signiﬁcantly correlated with measures
of simple working-memory retention, it is strongly correlated with performance
in a more complex working-memory task, in which the animals have to resist
interference from competing memories (Kolata et al., 2005). In both cases the
animals were ﬁrst trained on two visually distinct radial-arm mazes located in the
same room. In the test of working-memory retention, the animals were conﬁned
to the central compartment of one of the mazes for a ﬁxed interval of sixty or
ninety seconds having made their ﬁrst four correct choices before being allowed
to complete their search. In the test of working-memory interference, in contrast,
the animals were removed from the ﬁrst maze having made three correct choices
and placed in the second maze; after three correct choices there, they were
returned to the ﬁrst maze until they had made another three correct choices,
and so on. The fact that performance on the interference working-memory test
but not the retention working-memory test correlates with a measure of g in mice
provides conﬁrming evidence that mice and humans have homologous working-
memory mechanisms.
218
8. the evolution of reﬂection

One might question whether this and other experiments conducted in the
same lab are genuinely measuring active working memory rather than long-term
working memory. For how are we to know that the mice kept a representation of
the arms already visited active in the focus of attention? Indeed, in experiments
with rats using the eight-arm radial maze, rats typically show near-perfect
performance on the ﬁnal four arms of the maze following delays of a number
of hours after visiting the ﬁrst four arms, enabling us to be quite conﬁdent that
long-term memory is involved (Shettleworth, 2010). On reﬂection, however, we
can be sure that active working memory is also used. So while the tests might not
be suitable for measuring working-memory span (since both short-term and
long-term memory are involved), they can enable us to draw conclusions about
the relationship between working memory and g.
The reason why interrupted search in a radial-arm maze involves inter-
actions between short-term and long-term working memory is as follows.
When commencing search following an interruption, the animal will need to
access long-term representations of the four arms previously visited, holding
those active in working memory long enough to select a ﬁfth. And thereafter,
for the ﬁnal three choices, the animal will need to use spatial retrieval cues to
access a long-term memory of each of the arms initially visited while keeping
active in working memory the immediately previous selections, and while
orienting itself appropriately to make another choice. In addition, in the
interference condition of the experiments described earlier (in which the
mice are switched back and forth between two mazes) irrelevant memories
will need to be suppressed, requiring the mice to pay careful online attention to
the cues that individuate the arms of the two mazes. At the very least we can be
conﬁdent that this task will place signiﬁcant demands on the animals’ use of
selective attention, which is at the core of human working-memory abilities, as
we saw in Chapter 4.5
A subsequent study of correlations between working-memory abilities and g in
mice attempted to pull apart the components of working memory still further
(Kolata et al., 2007). It involved tests of working-memory retention time, work-
ing-memory retention capacity, as well as capacities for selective attention. The
ﬁrst measured the temporal limits of the animals’ capacity to recall which of the
two arms in a T-maze they had previously visited. The test of working-memory
5 Moreover, recall from Chapter 5.3 that some of the research on human working memory
suggests that attentional control and efﬁcient access to long-term memory are two distinct compo-
nents of human working-memory abilities, while also making separate contributions to ﬂuid g
(Unsworth & Spillers, 2010).
4. working memory in mammals
219

capacity used a non-spatial version of the radial-arm maze, in which cues
attached to baited cups at the end of each arm were randomly shufﬂed following
each choice, in such a way that the mice would need to keep in mind the cues
(and which ones they had already selected) without relying on spatial pos-
ition. Finally, the test of selective attention used two distinct discrimination
tasks (one involving shapes and the other involving odors) which had initially
been learned in separate contexts. At test, the animals were then presented
with all cues of both kinds in one or other of the two contexts, so that they
would need to ignore one set of cues on which they had previously been
trained in favor of the other. The results of this experiment were that retention
time did not correlate with g at all, working-memory capacity correlated moder-
ately with g, whereas selective attention was strongly correlated with g. This, too,
is what one might have predicted from what we know about human working
memory.
Perhaps the most impressive set of results from this series of studies with
mice is the ﬁnding that working-memory training improves g, just as it can do in
humans (Light et al., 2010). In the ﬁrst of these experiments animals who
received training using two alternating radial-arm mazes scored signiﬁcantly
higher than controls on subsequent tests of general learning abilities, while also
scoring higher on a test of selective attention. The second experiment then
showed that it is the attentional component of working-memory training specif-
ically that leads to an improvement in g. This experiment used three groups of
mice. One group received training in two alternating and visually similar radial-
arm mazes located within the same room, which would require the mice to attend
to minor differences in cues provided by spatial context to discriminate the arms
of the two mazes. A second group also received training on two alternating
radial-arm mazes, but this time located in separate rooms, thus placing fewer
attentional demands on the animals. The third group was a control, and received
no working-memory training. The ﬁnding was that the attentionally demanding
group showed the greatest increase in g, while the second group also displayed
signiﬁcant improvement relative to controls.
Taken together, this series of ﬁndings with mice suggests that working-memory
abilities in this species are heavily dependent on attentional capacities (just as
they are in humans), and that mice not only have a simple capacity to retain
salient information beyond the temporal window of sensory short-term memory,
but that they (like humans) can do so in the face of interference, and can
manipulate that information in the service of a goal. This set of ﬁndings provides
further conﬁrmation, therefore, that core working-memory abilities are homolo-
gous across mammals.
220
8. the evolution of reﬂection

4.3. Future planning in apes
We turn now to evidence of the use of working memory for purposes of future
planning. One set of studies has carefully documented the behavior of an alpha
male chimpanzee in an open-plan zoo (Osvath, 2009; Osvath & Karvonen, 2011).
The male initially collected and stored piles of stones early in the morning, to
throw at zoo visitors later in the day as part of an aggressive threat-display. When
the zoo keepers responded by removing his stashes before the zoo opened each
day to prevent this, he proved quite adept at concealing his stashes, and at
manufacturing projectiles afterward by breaking off pieces of brittle concrete
from the walls in his enclosure. Note that at the times when he collected and
concealed his stashes he was in a calm state, in the absence of the stimuli (human
visitors) that would later provoke his rage. Such behavior in a human would likely
be caused by imagining the later presence of the audience and mental rehearsal of
the actions involved in grasping and throwing projectiles, issuing in a positive
affective response which would in turn motivate the collection of some stones.
It is reasonable to assume that similar processes took place in the mind of the
chimpanzee.
Experimental data with chimpanzees point toward similar conclusions. In one
experiment, chimpanzees not only selected and carried with them to their
sleeping quarters a tool that they would need the next day to access a desired
reward, but they remembered to bring it back with them on their return
(Mulcahy & Call, 2004). In a conceptual replication of this experiment by another
lab, chimpanzees again selected a tool needed to retrieve a later reward, and
remembered to bring the tool with them when returning (Osvath & Osvath,
2008). Moreover, the animals were able to resist a smaller current reward
(a grape), choosing instead the tool that would get them a more valued reward
later (a container of juice). In addition, when presented with a number of
unfamiliar objects (while being prevented from handling them) they reliably
selected and took with them the one best suited to obtain the future reward.
Note that humans would solve a task of this sort by mentally rehearsing some
actions directed toward the juice-container involving the various objects, noting
which ones could be successful.
In Section 3.2 we discussed how rooks can solve the ﬂoating-reward problem,
by dropping stones into a tube containing water to raise the reward high enough
to be reached. Replicating and extending a study by Mendes et al. (2007), Hanus
et al. (2011) presented essentially the same task to apes and human children. (The
main differences were that the tube was initially dry in some conditions, and that
in all conditions accessing the reward required the participants to spit water into
4. working memory in mammals
221

the tube to make the peanut rise to the top.) Some of the apes, and some of the
six-year-old children, were able to solve this task. (None of the four-year-old
children did so.) Moreover, some of the apes who failed seemed to have ﬁgured
out what was necessary to succeed, but they had trouble transporting water in
their mouths from the nearby bucket and spitting it accurately enough into the
tube. After a few attempts, they lost interest. It is hard to imagine how one could
solve this problem except by mentally rehearsing some of the actions open to one
in the circumstances, envisaging and evaluating the likely consequences.
Moreover, Völter & Call (2014) review a variety of forms of evidence of
advance planning in apes before describing their own experiments involving
both apes and human children. Participants were presented with a vertical
maze, in which a reward positioned on the top level had to be moved down
through two more levels before it could be accessed at the bottom. At each
level the reward could be directed left or right, with different alternatives
having been visibly closed off by the experimenters before the start of the trial.
On some trials participants would need to plan two steps ahead in order to
succeed. The apes mostly succeeded in this task, and performed about as well
as ﬁve-year-old children. (At any rate the younger ones did: older apes
showed a marked decline in their working-memory abilities in this experi-
ment, just as happens in older humans.) Moreover, their failures tended not
to result from failures of advance planning (as did those of the children), but
rather from difﬁculties in suppressing prepotent motor responses. That is,
having moved the reward to the left on one level, say, there was a tendency to
repeat that action at the next level, even if the correct choice was a move
to the right.
This body of evidence from captive chimpanzees is fully consistent with what
we know of the behavior of chimpanzees in the wild (Janmaat et al., 2014). For
example, chimpanzees in the Congo regularly harvest termites from both
above-ground and subterranean nests, each of which requires a distinct set of
tools. The subterranean nests, in particular, require a sharp, stout puncturing
stick, which is always made from the branches of a particular species of tree.
The chimpanzees never arrived at the site of a subterranean nest without
bringing such a stick with them, unless one had previously been left at the
site. And this was true even though the nearest appropriate tree was tens of
meters away in the forest, from which point the nest site could not be seen
(Sanz et al., 2004). Such behavior in humans would involve imagining the target
together with mental rehearsal of the actions needed to acquire it, which would
both remind and motivate one to deviate from one’s path to ﬁnd an appropri-
ate species of tree.
222
8. the evolution of reﬂection

It seems that apes, like humans and corvids, make use of their working-
memory systems for purposes of advance planning. Note that all of the examples
of such planning considered so far have involved observable states and proper-
ties. It is unlikely, however, that planning in nonhuman animals is restricted to
such properties. This is because of evidence that chimpanzees, at least, are
capable of reasoning ﬂexibly about the mental states of competitors (Fletcher &
Carruthers, 2013). If chimpanzees can plan their route to some food in such a
way as to avoid being seen or heard by a competitor, for example (Melis et al.,
2006), then their working-memory contents must include sensorily embedded
mental-state concepts, just as human reasoning often does. This means that while
it can still be true, as I claim, that the sensory-based working-memory system was
designed initially for perceiving, recalling, and reasoning about observable fea-
tures of the world, it would be an over-simpliﬁcation to claim that the use of this
system by all nonhuman animals is entirely conﬁned to such properties.6
5. Evolutionary Developments across Species?
Very little is known for sure about evolutionary developments in working-
memory capacities across species (Carruthers, 2013c). Given the tight connection
between working-memory abilities and ﬂuid g, however, and given how smart
humans are in comparison to most other animals, one might expect to ﬁnd
signiﬁcant differences. The present section will provide a brief review of the main
possibilities.
5.1. Simple retention capacities
Some have claimed that nonhuman apes have a working-memory limit of two
items, in contrast with the human limit of three to four chunks of information
6 Recall from Chapter 2.4 that many animals can engage in inferences involving amodal repre-
sentations. However, many of these representations (although amodal) are representations of
observable objects or properties, such as an individual conspeciﬁc, a type of action, or the numer-
osity of a set. This is by no means true of all amodal representations employed by nonhuman
animals, however. For example, a dominance hierarchy cannot be observed, and neither can the
large-scale spatial layout of a territory. Knowledge of these things must be constructed over time
from multiple observations. It is an open question, though, whether the inferences that baboons
draw concerning dominance hierarchies take place in working memory. (I assume that the map-like
inferences made by bees when navigating do not.) They might rather be System 1 inferences of a
domain-speciﬁc sort, involving mechanisms that are innate or innately channeled, and whose
operations are unreﬂective and unconscious. The data from chimpanzees, in contrast, suggest that
these animals engage in ﬂexible forms of System 2 planning that are sensitive to the mental states of
other agents, indicating that these animals, like humans, can engage in conscious reﬂection about
unobservables.
5. evolutionary developments across species?
223

(Read, 2008). But this claim is based on a questionable analysis of the working-
memory requirements of various tasks that apes cannot solve, and assumes that
failure does not result from other sources, such as lack of understanding of
physical forces and their effects. In contrast, experimental work with animals
suggests that their working-memory limits may fall within the human range.
Consider, for example, a test of serial recall of position conducted with a macaque
monkey, modeled on tests that have been employed with humans (Botvinick
et al., 2009). The retention interval required in this test was about four seconds
for the ﬁrst item in the sequence, increasing to eleven seconds for the fourth,
which places it squarely in the domain of working memory. The monkey was
successful in recalling the ﬁrst three items in a sequence, but was at chance with
the fourth.7
It should be stressed, however, that the work on human working memory
demonstrating that it has a capacity limit of three to four chunks (rather than
Miller’s famous seven  two) has focused on the pure memory-sustaining
function of working memory (Cowan, 2001). Great care has been taken to
exclude other strategies for maintaining representations in working memory,
such as covert mental rehearsal and informational chunking, which can extend its
overall capacity still further. In the serial-recall test just described, in contrast, the
monkey may have used mental rehearsals of its planned movements to support
its working memory of the sequence of positions, thereby extending its pure
memory-sustaining limits. This would be consistent with a claimed working-
memory limit of one to two items.
Other data suggesting that animals have working-memory retention capacities
in the human range are not so easily critiqued, however. For example, using
paradigms that have previously been employed with human infants, it has been
shown that monkeys can track three to four items of food placed sequentially into
one of two opaque containers (where those items remain out of sight for a period
of at least a few seconds). The monkeys reliably distinguish between containers
that hold two versus three items, and also three versus four items, but not three
versus ﬁve items (Hauser et al., 2000).8 Similar tests have been conducted with
horses, showing that they can distinguish between a bucket into which two apples
have been placed and one containing three apples, while failing to distinguish
7 The experiment also demonstrated a very similar proﬁle of recency, latency, and other effects
commonly found with humans, further conﬁrming the suggestion that both species employ an
homologous working-memory mechanism.
8 One might wonder why these data do not demonstrate that monkeys have a working-memory
limit of seven (three items in one container and four in another) rather than four. The answer is that
comparisons between containers beneﬁt from chunking, and don’t just reﬂect raw retention limits.
224
8. the evolution of reﬂection

between buckets containing four apples and six apples respectively (Uller &
Lewis, 2009).
In such experiments it seems unlikely that the animals could beneﬁt from
chunking, since all of the items are of the same type. And it is likewise unclear
how nonverbal forms of behavioral rehearsal could assist with the task (especially
in the case of horses, whose repertoire of actions differs so widely from that of the
human demonstrator). So the limit of three to four items revealed here seems
most likely to reﬂect pure working-memory retention capacity. But until com-
parative psychologists employ direct tests of simple working-memory retention
abilities that can be conducted in parallel with adult humans, children, and
members of various other species of animal, we will not be able to know for sure.
5.2. Attentional control and mental manipulation
It would not be especially surprising if it turns out that pure working-memory
retention abilities are similar across mammalian species, despite the intuitive
differences in intelligence between them. For we know that the simple reten-
tion component of working memory is not a reliable predictor of ﬂuid g in
humans (nor is it stable within a single individual across separate occasions of
testing). Rather, only complex span tasks and so-called “n-back” tasks lead to
stable results over time and are reliable predictors of g (Engle, 2010). What we
should expect, then, is that humans will excel at working-memory tasks that
place the greatest weight on capacities for attentional control and the mental
manipulation of representations. While this suggestion is certainly consistent
with the advantage that humans are said to enjoy over other animals in
executive function abilities, there have been no systematic comparative inves-
tigations of the question.
What we can say with some conﬁdence, however, is that humans will be the
only creatures that sometimes constrain the ways in which they employ their
working-memory abilities in accordance with socially acquired rules of reasoning
(in the manner discussed in Chapter 7). While many animals employ System 2
reasoning in the broad sense that their reasoning makes constitutive use of
working memory (as we have seen in Sections 3 and 4 of this chapter), none
will reason in accordance with explicit norms that have been learned from others
in their group. As a result, there will be many speciﬁc types of reﬂection that are
unique to humans. Also as a result, human reasoning abilities display a cultural
“ratchet effect,” as each generation uses the reasoning procedures acquired from
the surrounding culture to further reﬁne and improve those procedures. These
can then be transmitted to others in turn. The result is that we now have logic,
mathematics, and scientiﬁc method.
5. evolutionary developments across species?
225

5.3. Conceptual chunking and inner speech
There are other ways in which one can be conﬁdent that human working-
memory abilities differ systematically from those of other animals. One is that
humans are surely unique in the extent to which their working-memory pro-
cesses beneﬁt from conceptual chunking of information, resulting from a vastly
greater conceptual repertoire. It is well known that when various items can be
brought together under a single concept this makes them much easier to remem-
ber. This is even true of human infants. In the absence of any grouping cues,
fourteen-month-old infants can keep track of only three objects at once. How-
ever, they signiﬁcantly exceed this limit when given conceptual, linguistic, or
spatial cues enabling them to parse a larger array into smaller units (Feigenson &
Halberda, 2008). Since no one doubts that human concepts (many of which are,
of course, acquired through linguistic communication) greatly outnumber those
available to other animals, we can be conﬁdent that humans are unique in the
extent to which (and the ﬂexibility with which) their reﬂections beneﬁt from
chunking.
Moreover, while other animals, like humans, can mentally rehearse actions for
purposes of reasoning (as we have seen in Sections 3 and 4), there is an entire class
of actions that can only be rehearsed by humans. These are speech actions, since
humans are uniquely capable of speech. Mental rehearsal of speech actions gives
rise to inner speech, which occupies a good deal of the conscious mental lives of
many people. This point now merges with the one made in Section 5.2, that
humans are unique in using explicit norms of reasoning to constrain their reﬂec-
tions. For many of these norms concern linguistically expressed propositions.
5.4. Chronic mind wandering?
Even if the working-memory capacities of animals were comparable to those of
humans in all major respects, it may nevertheless be the case that animals only
make use of them when confronted with speciﬁc practical, learning, or reason-
ing problems. Humans, in contrast, make frequent use of working memory in
ways that are irrelevant to any current task, thereby constituting the default
network (Buckner et al., 2008; Spreng et al., 2009). Even when one is not
confronted with a task one’s mind will be occupied with fantasies, episodic
memories, imagined social situations, imagined conversations, snatches of song,
and so on, all of which rely heavily on working memory. Indeed, even when
humans are engaged in a task they are apt to begin mind wandering, during
which working memory is populated with representations unrelated to the task
demands (Mason et al., 2007).
226
8. the evolution of reﬂection

There is little comparative data bearing directly on this question. But the
suggestion that humans may be unique in how much they make use of working
memory is at least consistent with the vastly greater extent of human creativity,
innovation, and long-term planning. For much of the time that humans spend
mind wandering is occupied with reviewing and exploring future scenarios and
anticipating future problems or successes. Moreover, there is evidence that mind
wandering is signiﬁcantly correlated with creativity, involving, as it does,
defocused attention combined with executive control and selection (Baird et al.,
2012). It has also been suggested that the uniquely human disposition to engage
in pretend play in childhood is an adaptation for increased creativity in adult-
hood, encouraging us to use working memory for purposes of creative scenario-
building (Picciuto & Carruthers, 2014).
Data suggesting that chronic mind wandering may not be uniquely human,
however, come from a study comparing default-network activity in humans and
chimpanzees (Rilling et al., 2007). Similar regions of the brain displayed greater
activity at rest in both species, including medial prefrontal cortex and posterior
cingulate cortex, suggesting that chimpanzees, too, spend much of their time
ruminating when not engaged in other tasks. These data need to be treated with
caution, however, because default-mode networks overlapping those of humans
have now been found in both monkeys and rodents under conditions of general
anesthesia (Vincent et al., 2007; Lu et al., 2012). So default-mode activity does not
entail conscious mind wandering of the sort that would implicate the resources of
working memory. Rather, the explanation for these ﬁndings may be that the main
components of the default network (especially medial regions of both prefrontal
and parietal cortex) are important connecting hubs in the neural architecture of
the brain, serving to link together other more-modular regions (Sporns, 2011). As
such they will generally exhibit greater neural activity than the regions they
connect, just as airports that serve as major hubs show greater ﬂight activity
than others. In humans we know that these default-network hubs play an
important role in mind wandering. But it does not follow that any animal with
similar brain connectivity will also make use of its working memory when at rest
to replay the past and explore the future to anything like the extent that we do.
It seems, then, that at present there is no real evidence to counter the
suggestion that humans are unique in making frequent use of working memory
for purposes of rumination and mind wandering. Yet this suggestion is supported
(albeit weakly) by a theoretical inference from differences in long-term planning
and creativity.
Note, however, that none of the likely differences between humans and other
animals discussed in this section are suggestive of architectural differences
5. evolutionary developments across species?
227

between the species. Rather, those differences concern the extent to which
humans can exert executive control over the contents of working memory
(including capacities to enforce compliance with explicit norms of reasoning),
the extent to which humans engage in conceptual chunking, differences in
behavioral repertoire that underlie our unique capacity for inner speech, and
perhaps differences in the extent to which we engage in stimulus-independent
thought at all. Such differences reﬂect merely different modes of use of the same
sensory-based working-memory system that we share with other animals.
6. Conclusion
The primary goal of this chapter has been to answer a puzzle: why is it that
human reﬂection is sensory based, given that so much of what we reﬂect about is
abstract and unobservable? The answer, I have suggested, is that human reﬂec-
tion makes use of the same sensory-based working-memory system that we share
with other animals. Not only do all birds and mammals possess at least important
components of this system, but some birds and some mammals make use of it, as
we do, for reﬂecting about the past and future. The system is of ancient ancestry,
making use of even earlier-emerging sensory attentional mechanisms, and it
evolved initially for reasoning about the perceptible properties of things. It is
reasonable to suggest that the evolution of this key component of human
cognition was constrained by pre-existing architectures, just as the evolution of
the human body-plan was constrained by the symmetrical four-limbed architec-
ture that we share with all other vertebrates.
Another goal of this chapter has been to use the same set of comparative data
to construct a further—evolutionary—argument in support of the sensory-based
account of reﬂection and the stream of consciousness. Since many other animals
are capable of using top-down attentional signals and mental rehearsals of action
to reason in an off-line reﬂective manner about perceptible features of their
environment, one should predict that human capacities for reﬂection would
somehow utilize the same shared sensory-based mechanisms. For it is rare for
evolution to build a whole new set of mechanisms from scratch, of the sort that
would be necessary to support an amodal attitudinal workspace for reﬂection.
Even in advance of any experimental investigation of human working-memory
abilities, therefore, one might have predicted that they would turn out to be
sensory based. Since that is just what we seem to ﬁnd, our credence in those
ﬁndings is strengthened still further.
228
8. the evolution of reﬂection

9
Conclusion
The Conscious Mind as Marionette
This brief concluding chapter will summarize the case against an amodal work-
space in which propositional attitudes of all types can be activated and conscious,
while reminding us of the explanatory virtues of the competing sensory-based
account. Some implications for philosophy will then be sketched, and questions
for future consideration raised.
1. Against the Intuitive View
Our intuitive view (widely endorsed among philosophers) is that thoughts of all
types can become activated and conscious when we reﬂect, entering into pro-
cesses of reasoning and decision making with other such thoughts. (See
Chapter 1.1.) I have suggested, in contrast, that reﬂection is always sensory
based, and that our amodal attitudes are only ever active behind the scenes,
inﬂuencing and controlling the sensory-based contents of working memory.
One part of the case against the intuitive view is an absence-of-evidence
argument. There is ample evidence that the working-memory system is sensory
based, utilizing the top-down attentional network (often in conjunction with
mental rehearsals of action) to issue in the global broadcast of sensory-based
representations. (See Chapters 3 and 4.) There is also ample evidence that
conscious reﬂection often utilizes the sensory-based working-memory system,
involving inner speech, for example, or visually imagined future actions. More-
over, there is good reason to think that these sensory-based representations are
not epiphenomenal with respect to our reﬂections and the behavior that results,
but play important causal roles in each. (See Chapters 5 and 6.) So we can take it
as solidly established that reﬂection is often sensory based. In contrast, there is no
substantial evidence that reﬂection ever contains, among its contents, conscious
activations of amodal attitudes. Nor is there any evidence of the attentional or
other networks that would enable such attitudes to become globally available

(and thus access-conscious). Hence the most reasonable, best warranted conclu-
sion to draw is that reﬂection is always sensory based.
It should be emphasized that little or no evidential weight can be placed on the
fact that we ﬁnd it highly intuitive to believe that amodal attitudes such as goals,
decisions, and intentions are often conscious. For the intuition in question, albeit
natural, can be explained away. This can be done in a way that is independently
motivated, by appealing to people’s implicit assumption that their thoughts are
transparently available to them. (See Chapter 1.1 and Carruthers, 2011a.) This
assumption leads us to feel that we are directly aware of our attitudes while we
manipulate sensory-based contents in working memory, resulting from the
interpretive work of the mindreading faculty. Moreover, the introspection-
sampling data suggesting that people are sometimes aware of entertaining purely
propositional (non-sensory) thoughts (Heavey & Hurlburt, 2008) can likewise be
given an alternative—and equally convincing—explanation. (See Chapter 1.1 and
Carruthers, 2011a.) So there is no real evidence here with which to support the
case for a workspace in which amodal propositional attitudes can be activated
and conscious.
Moreover, as we will be reminded in Section 2, the sensory-based account can
provide at least an outline of an explanation of the ways in which reﬂection and
the stream of consciousness are created and controlled, appealing to known
mechanisms and processes. In contrast, the amodal-attitude account is incapable
of explaining how reﬂection takes place. For to offer such an explanation one
would need to appeal to known mechanisms of one sort or another. But as
already noted above, we know of no mechanisms that can result in the global
broadcast of amodal attitudes. This provides us with another argument against
the amodal-workspace view. For whenever there is competition among theories
of some domain, the theory that can offer an explanation of the domain always
trumps a theory that needs to appeal to as-yet-unknown mechanisms to do so
(other things being equal, of course). This is our situation here: the sensory-based
view can explain how reﬂection takes place in terms of known mechanisms,
whereas the amodal-attitude account cannot.
A related argument from simplicity supports the same conclusion. Everyone
should be committed to sensory-based forms of reﬂection and the stream of
consciousness anyway. For no one denies that sometimes our reﬂections involve
sensory images of one sort or another. Yet there is no convincing evidence of an
amodal reﬂective system, as we have seen. So it is simpler to suppose that
sensory-based reﬂection is the only kind of reﬂection that there is. Since one
should not postulate additional systems or structures without necessity, one
should not believe in an amodal attitude workspace. The fact that we ﬁnd such
230
9. conclusion: the conscious mind as marionette

a workspace intuitive is not a reason for adding additional components to our
cognitive models, especially since this intuition is explicable in light of our everyday
assumption that minds are transparent to themselves. (See Chapter 1.1 and
Carruthers, 2011a.)
Although there is no direct evidence supporting the existence of an amodal
workspace in which reﬂection can take place, there might nevertheless be indirect
evidence. In particular, if there were things that reﬂection can do that the
sensory-based working-memory system is incapable of doing, then that might
provide some reason for believing in the existence of a propositional-attitude
workspace. If logical reasoning, for example, could not be performed in sen-
sory-based format, then that might force us to accept an amodal workspace by
default. There is no reason to suppose that there are any such limits on what a
working-memory system can do, however. (See Chapters 5, 6, and 7.) So the
conclusion of the absence-of-evidence, absence-of-explanation, and simplicity-
based arguments can stand: the most reasonable conclusion is that reﬂection is
always sensory based.
Another part of the case against the intuitive view consists of a number of
failures-of-prediction argument. (See Chapter 5.) If the human mind contains an
amodal workspace in which attitudes of all types can be consciously activated and
ﬁgure in our reﬂections, then a variety of predictions can be made. Two are
especially important. One is that self-knowledge of our currently activated
attitudes (or at least their contents) should be direct and non-interpretive. But
the evidence suggests that this is not the case. (See Chapter 5.2 and Carruthers,
2011a.) Another prediction is that if the human mind contains such an amodal
workspace, then the properties of that system should make a signiﬁcant contri-
bution to our general intelligence. In that case we should need to appeal to
differences among people in the properties of the amodal reﬂective system in
order to account for some portion of their variance in ﬂuid general intelligence.
But this seems not to be the case, either. Rather, variations in ﬂuid g can be fully
accounted for in terms of some combination of variance in sensory-based
working-memory ability, speed of processing, and perhaps associative learning.
(See Chapter 5.4.)
The ﬁnal part of the case against the intuitive view picks up on a less-central
(but nevertheless widely endorsed) aspect of the account. This is the claim that
amodal attitudes such as judgments and decisions are sometimes forms of action,
and are under direct intentional control. The result is that we are required to
postulate two fundamentally different kinds of propositional attitude: those that
are active and controlled, and those that are passive and do the controlling
(Arpaly & Schroeder, 2012; Kornblith, 2012). As we saw in Chapter 2.3, this is
1. against the intuitive view
231

not only conceptually problematic, but requires us to postulate a set of unknown
mechanisms to make active control of attitudes possible. In contrast, the sensory-
based account of reﬂection maintains that all attitudes share the same passive
nature, whereas the contents of working memory (the contents of reﬂection and
the stream of consciousness) are always actively controlled. (See Chapter 6.) The
sensory-based view therefore provides a simpler, more cohesive account of the
nature of our amodal attitudes, while nevertheless accommodating our belief that
reﬂection is a controlled active process.
In sum: (1) there is no substantial evidence of the existence of an amodal
attitude workspace; (2) belief in such a workspace leaves us unable to explain how
reﬂection takes place, whereas the sensory-based account can provide such an
explanation, appealing to known mechanisms; (3) it is simpler to think that all
reﬂection is sensory based than to maintain that some is sensory based (as
everyone accepts) while some involves conscious amodal attitudes; (4) the
hypothesis of an amodal workspace makes at least two clear predictions that
we have good reason to think are false; and (5) the hypothesis of an amodal
workspace provides an account of the active nature of conscious reﬂection that is
in various ways problematic. Collectively then, we have good reason to reject the
intuitive view.
2. The Positive Picture
The sensory-based account accepts that there are, indeed, a number of types of
amodal attitude, including goals, non-sensory judgments, decisions, and inten-
tions. But it claims that these attitudes cannot, themselves, ﬁgure consciously
among the contents of reﬂection. Rather, they are active in the background,
motivating the shifts of attention and mental rehearsals of action that generate
the sensory-based contents of reﬂection and the stream of consciousness. Put
differently, amodal attitudes belong within the executive component of the
working-memory system, rather than among the globally broadcast contents of
that system. Amodal attitudes are never conscious, therefore (in the access-
conscious sense, at least). For only the sensory-based contents of working
memory are made globally accessible. The only propositional attitudes that are
ever conscious are sensorily dependent ones such as episodic memories and
sensorily embedded judgments (seeing as, hearing as, imagining as, and so forth).
This is not to say, however, that amodal concepts and propositions are never
consciously accessible. On the contrary, amodal concepts are routinely bound
into the sensory-based contents of perception and working memory, and are
globally broadcast as components of the object-ﬁles or event-ﬁles to which they
232
9. conclusion: the conscious mind as marionette

belong. The result is generally a sensorily embedded event of seeing as, hearing
as, or imagining as. For example, a sentence in inner speech might be experienced
as expressing a decision to stop by the ATM on the way to the metro. This is then
a sensorily embedded judgment with the content, I have decided to stop at the
ATM on the way to the metro. The result is an amodal proposition that is bound
into the sensory content of an imagined (mentally rehearsed) sentence as its
meaning. But the event of hearing as is not an amodal attitude. Even less is it an
amodal decision to stop by the ATM on the way to the metro. The latter event
(supposing that it occurred, and that the sentence in inner speech didn’t have
some more complex etiology) was the cause of the event that ﬁgured consciously
in reﬂection. It did not itself do so. (See Chapters 6 and 7.) Nor does the sensorily
embedded judgment that one has made a new decision ever come to constitute
such a decision, even though one might constrain one’s future behavior to be
consistent with it. (See Chapter 7.4.)
The sensory-based account builds on our knowledge of the relationship
between attention and the global broadcasting of sensory-involving representa-
tions, as well as of the neural mechanisms that underlie each. (See Chapter 3.)
This knowledge coheres quite nicely with the account of working memory that
has emerged out of numerous scientiﬁc labs over the last twenty years. This is that
working memory depends on top-down attentional signals directed at midlevel
sensory regions of the brain, enabling memories and other representations to be
sustained and manipulated in a global workspace. (See Chapter 4.) We also know
that mentally rehearsed actions will issue in sensory forward models of the likely
consequences of those actions, which can also be globally broadcast when
attended to. (See Chapter 4.4, as well as Chapter 6.3 and Chapter 6.4.) As a result,
among the contents of working memory will often be episodes of inner speech
together with visual and other representations of potential actions. Since there is
extensive evidence supporting each of its main components, we can conclude that
the sensory-based model of reﬂection is built on solid scientiﬁc foundations.
According to the sensory-based account, not only is reﬂection always active (or
at least action-like) in nature, but so is the stream of consciousness more
generally. (See Chapter 6.) This is because the two main determinants of the
contents of working memory (attention and the mental rehearsal of action) are
themselves action-like, in that they are controlled by executive decision-making
processes. Even seemingly passive forms of mind wandering (where one ﬁnds
oneself entertaining a given content, one knows not why) are really active in
nature. In such cases the competition for attentional resources induced by
bottom-up forms of attention results in a decision to redirect the spotlight of
top-down attention onto the representations in question, thereby rendering them
2. the positive picture
233

conscious. Our belief that reﬂection is often an active process is thus preserved,
while the intuition that much of the stream of consciousness is passive in nature
is explained away.1
The sensory-based model is also consistent with, while receiving additional
support from, contemporary accounts of System 2 forms of reﬂective reasoning
and decision making. Indeed, it has the resources to explain many aspects of
those accounts. (See Chapter 7.) In particular, it can explain how culturally
acquired norms of reasoning can come to control some instances of System 2
reasoning. Such norms can be stored in the form of well-rehearsed action
schemata that can be evoked by the task instructions or features of the context.
(Think, here, of many familiar arithmetic procedures.) Or they can be stored as
explicit beliefs about standards of reasoning that can be activated into working
memory by top-down attention and used to guide appropriate sequences of
mentally rehearsed action thereafter.
Finally, the sensory-based model has the resources to explain why conscious
reﬂection should be sensory based, despite the fact that many of our thoughts
concern abstract non-sensory properties of one sort or another. (See Chapter 8.)
For there is reason to think that the sensory-based working-memory system is an
ancient adaptation, and that both birds and nonhuman mammals use it for
episodic recollection and for purposes of prospective reasoning about observable
properties and events. When humans began to evolve, it is likely that they were
constrained to make use of this pre-existing sensory-based system, just as they
were constrained to be bilaterally symmetrical and to have just four limbs.
In sum, the sensory-based account can explain many known properties of
reﬂection and the stream of consciousness, while appealing to known mechan-
isms and well-understood cognitive processes. It coheres well with surrounding
scientiﬁc theories while being strongly supported by an inference to the best
explanation of the available data.
3. Implications for Philosophy and Future Questions
This section will describe and brieﬂy discuss some potential implications of the
sensory-based account of reﬂection. It will also mention some questions for
future research.
1 The explanation is that we conﬂate our lack of knowledge of the decisions that determine the
contents of the stream of consciousness with contents that are not actually determined by decisions
at all.
234
9. conclusion: the conscious mind as marionette

3.1. The thoughts of nonhuman animals
As we noted in Chapter 1.2, many philosophers have denied that animals are
capable of genuine thought. Instead animals are, at best, said to be capable only of
proto-thoughts (Dummett, 1991; Brandom, 1994; McDowell, 1994; Bermúdez,
2003; Hurley, 2006). In large part these claims have been driven by beliefs about
the distinctive inferential promiscuity enjoyed by human propositional attitudes.
Philosophers have thought that in principle any one of our attitudes can enter
into inferences with any other attitude, and can do so in indeﬁnitely ﬂexible ways.
Expressed in terms that are more friendly to cognitive science, the belief is that
humans (and only humans) possess a central cognitive workspace in which any
of our attitudes can be activated and conscious, thereby making them available to
interact with any other activated attitudes.
The sensory-based account of reﬂection, of course, maintains that there is no
such workspace. Indeed, it claims that there are no differences in kind between
the attitudes of humans and other animals. Both employ structured amodal
representational states that guide and motivate both action and attention. (See
Chapter 2.4.) The main differences are just that humans are capable of manipu-
lating the sensory-based contents of working memory in more ﬂexible, creative,
and culture-speciﬁc ways, and that only humans, of course, are capable of
entertaining sentences of inner speech. While the powers of the human mind
may be very different from those of other animals, the underlying cognitive
architecture is shared, as are capacities for amodal thought.
There are some respects in which the human mind is unique, no doubt, and in
Chapter 8 we discussed some of them. We are unique in being capable of mentally
rehearsing, not just actions, but speech actions; we are probably unique in the extent
to which we can exert executive control over the working-memory system; and we
may be unique in making chronic and creative use of that system. But none of this
warrants claiming that our minds differ in kind from the minds of nonhuman
animals. Admittedly, being capable of inner speech may make a qualitative differ-
ence to what our minds are able to achieve, especially when embedded within a
culture (such as our own) that encourages the acquisition of valid norms of reasoning
to which conscious sequences of reﬂection can be made to conform. But this is a
difference in the use that we make of a working-memory system that we share with
other animals, rather than a whole other kind of mind.
3.2. The generality constraint
Many philosophers have endorsed a related constraint on what it takes to possess
genuine concepts, one that is likely to exclude nonhuman animals from
3. implications for philosophy and future questions
235

qualifying. In particular, many have claimed that it is essential to concepts that
they should be freely combinable with one another to issue in novel thoughts,
hypotheses, or suppositions. Evans (1982) was the ﬁrst to propose this famous
“generality constraint” on concept-possession, which has been widely endorsed
by philosophers since (Peacocke, 1992; Camp, 2004; Beck, 2012). The constraint
is that each of the concepts possessed by a subject must be capable of combining
with all others of appropriate form or adicity to issue in novel thoughts. Hence if
one possesses the concepts F and a needed to entertain the thought Fa, and one
can also combine the concepts G and b in the thought Gb, then one must likewise
be capable of entertaining the thoughts Fb and Ga.
I have criticized the generality constraint at length elsewhere (Carruthers,
2009b). In brief, I argue that it conﬂates together two things that should be
kept separate. One is a genuine structural constraint on concepts, namely that
they should be capable of combining with some other concepts to give rise to
compositionally structured thoughts. For it is essential to concepts that they
should be the building blocks of thought. The other is a distinctively human
ability to freely combine concepts with all other concepts of appropriate form. This
may reﬂect only greatly increased capacities for creative concept-combination
and creative thought. Since there are no good reasons for insisting that creatures
must be capable of creative thought in order to be capable of thought at all, nor
are there good reasons for insisting that genuine concepts must satisfy the gener-
ality constraint.
Given the sensory-based account of reﬂection, however, it is a moot question
whether even human concepts satisfy the generality constraint directly, or
whether the capacity for free combination of concepts piggybacks on our lin-
guistic capacity for free combination of words. Which of these views is correct
may depend on the best account of creative language production. On one
account, concepts are always combined together ﬁrst into a thought-to-be-
expressed (Levelt, 1989). If true, then this would vindicate the claim that
human concepts are freely co-combinable directly. For if a sentence expresses a
novel metaphor, say, then it would follow that the corresponding novel combin-
ation of concepts must ﬁrst have occurred in thought. On an alternative view,
however, when we think creatively it is words that are brought together in novel
combinations, with the speech gestures that would produce those combinations
of words being evaluated swiftly for relevance by bottom-up competitive pro-
cesses prior to articulation aloud or in inner speech (Dennett, 1991; Carruthers,
2011b; Lind et al., 2014). On this account, creative concept combination would be
a causal product of creative word combination, rather than taking place directly.
Given that speech production probably happens in parallel, however, with
236
9. conclusion: the conscious mind as marionette

choices of semantics, syntax, and phonology taking place simultaneously—or at
least interactively (Nozari et al., 2011)—it may be that the truth is a complicated
mixture of both views. This is a topic for future research.
3.3. Personal versus subpersonal attitudes
Philosophers commonly distinguish between personal-level attitudes, which are
the attitudes of the whole person, and subpersonal attitudes, which are the
attitudes of some part or subsystem within the person (Davies, 2000; Hornsby,
2000). This raises the question, of course, of what it is for an attitude to be
possessed by the whole person, rather than a part. Consider an unconscious
decision to redirect attention toward the sound of one’s own name at a party, for
example. Is this a personal-level decision or not? On the one hand, if the sensory-
based model of reﬂection is correct, then all decisions are unconscious, resulting
from competitive interactions among goals, desires, information, and/or action
plans. (See Chapters 6 and 7.) But on the other hand, the decision in question is
one that the person is unaware of having taken, and neither is it taken for reasons
that are conscious. All that one is aware of is the sudden sound of one’s own
name, resulting from an unconscious decision to shift attention. If this latter
consideration is taken to show that the decision is not a personal one, then it will
follow that there are no personal-level decisions. Similar considerations can then
be used to establish that there are no personal-level goals, intentions, or amodal
judgments either.
Although the sensory-based account leaves no room for a distinction between
conscious and unconscious amodal attitudes (rather, all are unconscious), a
related distinction can still be drawn. This may provide philosophers with at
least some of what they want. In particular, one can distinguish between attitudes
that are formed as a result of one’s conscious reﬂections and those that are caused
by unconscious processes (Levy, 2014). Although attitudes that result from
conscious reﬂection are still unconscious ones (albeit ones that subjects often
know to exist, resulting from mindreading-based interpretation of the sensory-
based contents of reﬂection), they are nevertheless ones whose formation the
entire person has contributed to. Asking oneself in inner speech, “What should
I decide?,” for example, issues in a globally broadcast request for information,
thereby allowing all the different consumer subsystems that receive such broad-
casts a chance to contribute an answer. There is a good sense, then, in which
attitudes that are formed as a result of conscious reﬂection are owned by the
whole person, in a way that a decision to redirect attention to the sound of one’s
own name is not. On this view, then, personal and subpersonal attitudes would be
attitudes of the very same kind, but differing in etiology. Personal attitudes would
3. implications for philosophy and future questions
237

be (unconscious) attitudes that are caused by conscious reﬂection whereas sub-
personal attitudes are not.
3.4. Rational agency
We noted in Chapter 1.2 that numerous philosophers have developed a concep-
tion of agency, or of rational agency, that requires one’s attitudes and actions to
be appropriately sensitive to reasons (McDowell, 1994; Brandom, 1994, 2000;
Korsgaard, 1996, 2009). If reasons, in turn, are thought to require conscious
attitudes—either because reasons are conscious attitudes, or because reasons are
features of the world accessible to us through conscious attitudes—then it follows
from the arguments of this book that there is no such thing as conscious agency.
It will be important for philosophers working in this tradition, therefore, to
consider whether they can make do with the thinner notion of a personal-level
attitude outlined in Section 3.3. That is, such philosophers need to ask themselves
whether the purposes for which a concept of rational agency is needed really
require sensitivity to conscious attitudes, or whether it could be enough that one
is sensitive to processes of conscious (sensory-based) reﬂection. This, too, is a
topic for future research.
Philosophers belonging to this and other traditions who think that the forma-
tion and deployment of attitudes is sometimes under our direct control confront
a similar dilemma. Either it turns out that they are ﬂat-out wrong because
(according to the sensory-based account) our attitudes are never under our direct
control, or the philosophical purposes subserved by their claims don’t really
require direct control over attitudes, and it would be sufﬁcient that we can
inﬂuence our attitudes indirectly, by engaging in conscious forms of sensory-
based reﬂection that are under direct control.
Sensorily embedded attitudes can ﬁgure consciously in reﬂection, of course (as
we have often noted), but their doing so is not constitutively active. Rather, they
are caused by unconscious mental actions, and of course no one will deny that we
can have indirect control over our attitudes. For example, the tokening of a
sentence in inner speech is caused by the decision to rehearse the motor-plan
in question. But the resulting sensorily embedded judgment (such as hearing
oneself as deciding to stop at the ATM) is caused by comprehension processes
getting to work on the sensory forward model of the rehearsed action. So the
resulting sensorily embedded judgment is no more active than is hearing some-
one else say that they will stop at the ATM. In each case we have a passively
formed judgment that is caused by a prior action (in the one case, one’s own, in
the other case, the action of someone else).
238
9. conclusion: the conscious mind as marionette

What is true, of course, is that humans have the capacity for rational, norm-
governed control of reﬂection. Since reﬂection is an active process, generated by
shifts of attention and mental rehearsals of action, it is under intentional control.
And since humans are capable of acquiring true beliefs about rational norms,
they are capable of controlling their reﬂections in accordance with those norms,
provided they recall them and are motivated to do so.2 But the fact that reﬂection
can be under direct rational control does not entail, of course, that any attitudes
are under such control. And the latter is false if the sensory-based account of
reﬂection is true.
3.5. Moral responsibility
Some accounts of moral responsibility assume that actions for which we are
responsible are those that issue from conscious attitudes and conscious decisions
(King & Carruthers, 2012). Given the correctness of the sensory-based model
defended in this book, such accounts, too, face a dilemma: either they are false, or
there is no such thing as moral responsibility. Assuming that the latter option is
unacceptable, where does that leave us? Would we then have no way of accom-
modating the sorts of considerations that motivate such views? For example,
would we have no way of distinguishing between actions that result from so-
called “implicit attitudes” (Greenwald et al., 2002) and those that result from
conscious reﬂection? Imagine someone who has an implicit bias against black
people of which he is unaware. When reviewing applicants for a job, this leads
him to pass over a well-qualiﬁed black applicant in favor of a white candidate
who is somewhat less qualiﬁed. It is disputable whether or not he is blameworthy
for doing so. What is surely not disputable, however, is that he is much less
blameworthy than someone who thinks to himself, “I don’t want a black person
working for me” while reviewing the materials, leading him to reject the person’s
application.
This distinction can be accommodated, however, by drawing on the point
made in Section 3.3. This is that a decision that results from conscious reﬂection
about the (alleged) de-merits of black people is one that the entire person has an
opportunity to contribute to. It therefore reﬂects, in some sense, his entire self
(Levy, 2014). In contrast, where the decision results unknowingly from an
unconscious bias, it is only this bias that the decision reﬂects. All of the person’s
other goals and values might pull in the contrary direction, in such a way that,
2 How much human reﬂection actually takes place in accordance with rational norms is another
matter entirely, of course. In fact, we know from the literature on dual systems of reasoning that the
proportion will be small or negligible in most cases.
3. implications for philosophy and future questions
239

had his attention been drawn to the difference in qualiﬁcations between the two
candidates as well as his own implicit bias, he would immediately have selected
the black candidate.
3.6. Other issues
The belief that there are conscious as well as unconscious thoughts may have
inﬂuenced debates in a number of other areas of philosophy. For example, those
discussing freedom of the will might assume that free decisions are ones that are
conscious and under our control. Any such discussions will need to be revisited if
the sensory-based account is correct. I won’t presume to guess the outcome of
such re-examinations. But it should be plain that, since some version of the
amodal workspace account is quite widely accepted, much new thinking may
need to be done. Indeed, since for many people the amodal model has the status
of a background assumption, rather than a clearly articulated explicit doctrine, it
may require some work even to ﬁgure out which philosophical theories may need
to be re-examined. I propose to leave this work to others. My goal in this book has
been to develop the sensory-based account of reﬂection in enough detail to show
that it is well established, while demonstrating that there is no such thing as an
amodal workspace in which attitudes of all types can be activated and conscious.
Figuring out the further philosophical implications of the account is something
I am happy to leave to others.
3.7. Remaining questions for science
In addition to some of the questions for future philosophical research mentioned
earlier in this section, there are (of course) numerous scientiﬁc issues remaining.
We need a much better understanding of the manner in which top-down
attentional signals can result in the global broadcasting of targeted information,
and of how these signals can be guided by concepts and goals to activate
representations endogenously. We also need to know much more about the
bottom-up attentional networks, and how they interact with both standing
valuational systems and current goals to determine the relevance of the various
representations received. And then we need to understand how the top-down
and bottom-up attention networks interact, as well as the contributions made by
the component parts of each. Moreover, we need to understand how decisions are
taken to direct top-down attention and to select actions to be rehearsed, at both
cognitive and neural levels of description. Once all this knowledge is in place,
only then will we have a ﬁrm grip on the nature and causal determinants of
conscious reﬂection and the stream of consciousness.
240
9. conclusion: the conscious mind as marionette

4. Conclusion
The science of working memory has a great deal to teach us about the nature of
human thought. For the contents of working memory are not only conscious but
sensory based, and it seems that there are no non-sensory systems that can
likewise contain endogenously caused conscious states. So conscious thought,
too, is constrained to be sensory based. This result is consistent with sensori-
motor and empiricist theories of thought, of course, of the sort defended by
Barsalou (1999) and Prinz (2002). But a better view is that there are many forms
of amodal—non-sensory-based—thought, which remain unconscious (and
which function within the executive component of the working-memory system,
among other roles). Moreover, amodal concepts can be bound into the sensory-
based contents of working memory, issuing in sensorily embedded attitudes of
hearing as, imagining as, and so on. What is true is just that even the most
abstract of our conscious reﬂections are constrained to have a sensory-based
format.
Building on scientiﬁc accounts of the working-memory system, and weaving
these together with a range of related ﬁndings in cognitive science, I have tried to
show that one can construct at least the outline of a theory of how both the
stream of consciousness in general, and conscious reﬂection in particular, are
produced. No doubt there are many details remaining to be added, and much
that may need to be corrected. But I hope that at least the overall framework of
the theory of conscious thought that I have provided will survive the test of time,
and will be deepened and corroborated by further scientiﬁc scrutiny.
4. conclusion
241


References
Acton, G. & Schroeder, D. (2001). Sensory discrimination as related to general intelli-
gence. Intelligence, 29, 263–71.
Adams, F. & Aizawa, K. (2008). The Bounds of Cognition. Blackwell.
Addis, D., Wong, A., & Schacter, D. (2007). Remembering the past and imagining the
future: Common and distinct neural substrates during event construction and elabor-
ation. Neuropsychologia, 45, 1363–77.
Allen, T. & Fortin, N. (2013). The evolution of episodic memory. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 110, 10379–86.
Amodio, D. & Devine, P. (2006). Stereotyping and evaluation in implicit race bias:
Evidence for independent constructs and unique effects on behavior. Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 91, 652–61.
Anderson, J. (1993). Rules of the Mind. Erlbaum.
Anderson, M. (2010). Neural reuse: A fundamental organizational principle of the brain.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 33, 245–66.
Andrews-Hanna, J., Smallwood, J., & Spreng, R.N. (2014). The default network and self-
generated thought: Component processes, dynamic control, and clinical relevance.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1316, 29–52.
Anscombe, E. (1957). Intention. Blackwell.
Aron, A., Robbins, T., & Poldrack, R. (2004). Inhibition and the right inferior frontal
cortex. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 170–7.
Arpaly, N. & Schroeder, T. (2012). Deliberation and acting for reasons. Philosophical
Review, 121, 209–39.
Auersperg, A., Kacelnik, A., & von Bayern, A. (2013). Explorative learning and functional
inferences on a ﬁve-step means–means–end problem in Gofﬁn’s cockatoos (Cacatua
gofﬁni). PLoS One, 8, e68979.
Auersperg, A., von Bayern, A., Gajdon, G., Huber, L., & Kacelnik, A. (2011). Flexibility in
problem solving and tool use of Kea and New Caledonian Crows in a multi access box
paradigm. PLoS One, 6, e20231.
Awh, E. & Jonides, J. (2001). Overlapping mechanisms of attention and spatial working
memory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5, 119–26.
Baars, B. (1988). A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness. Cambridge University Press.
Baddeley, A. (1986). Working Memory. Oxford University Press.
Baddeley, A. & Hitch, G. (1974). Working memory. In G. Bower (ed.), The Psychology of
Learning and Motivation, vol. 8, Academic Press.
Baillargeon, R., He, Z., Setoh, P., Scott, R., & Yang, D. (2014). The development of false-
belief understanding and why it matters. In M. Banaji & S. Gelman (eds.), The
Development of Social Cognition, Erlbaum.
Baird, B., Smallwood, J., Mrazek, M., Kam, J., Franklin, M., & Schooler, J. (2012). Inspired
by distraction: Mind wandering facilitates creative incubation. Psychological Science, 23,
1117–22.

Balci, F., Freestone, D., & Gallistel, C.R. (2009). Risk assessment in man and mouse.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106, 2459–63.
Baluch, F. & Itti, L. (2011). Mechanisms of top–down attention. Trends in Neurosciences,
34, 210–24.
Bargh, J., Gollwitzer, P., Lee Chai, A., Barndollar, K., & Trötschel, R. (2001). The
automated will: Nonconscious activation and pursuit of behavioral goals. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 1014–27.
Barrett, C. (2005). Enzymatic computation and cognitive modularity. Mind & Language,
20, 259–87.
Barrett, L. (1998). Discrete emotions or dimensions? The role of valence focus and arousal
focus. Cognition and Emotion, 12, 579–99.
Barrett, L. & Bar, M. (2009). See it with feeling: Affective predictions during object percep-
tion. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 364, 1325–34.
Barsalou, L. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22,
577–660.
Barth, H., Kanwisher, N., & Spelke, E. (2003). The construction of large number repre-
sentations in adults. Cognition, 86, 201–21.
Bartolomeo, P. & Chokron, S. (2002). Orienting of attention in left unilateral neglect.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 26, 217–34.
Baumeister, R., Schmeichel, B., DeWall, C., & Vohs, K. (2007). Is the conscious self a help,
an hindrance, or an irrelevance to the creative process? In A. Columbus (ed.), Advances
in Psychology Research, vol. 53, Nova Science Publishers.
Bayne, T. & Montague, M. (eds.) (2011). Cognitive Phenomenology. Oxford University Press.
Beck, D., Muggleton, N., Walsh, V., & Lavie, N. (2006). Right parietal cortex plays a
critical role in change blindness. Cerebral Cortex, 16, 712–17.
Beck, J. (2012). The Generality Constraint and the structure of thought. Mind, 121, 563–600.
Bednekoff, P. & Balda, R. (1997). Clark’s nutcracker spatial memory: Many errors might
not be due to forgetting. Animal Behavior, 54, 691–8.
Bedny, M. & Caramazza, A. (2011). Perception, action, and word meanings in the human
brain: The case from action verbs. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1224,
81–95.
Bedny, M., Caramazza, A., Pascual-Leone, A., & Saxe, R. (2012). Typical neural repre-
sentations of action verbs develop without vision. Cerebral Cortex, 22, 286–93.
Bedny, M., Pascual-Leone, A., Dodell-Feder, D., Fedorenko, E., & Saxe, R. (2011).
Language processing in the occipital cortex of congenitally blind adults. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 108, 4429–34.
Beer, R. (2000). Dynamical approaches to cognitive science. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
4, 91–9.
Bekhtereva, N., Korotkov, A., Pakhomov, S., Roudas, M., Starchenko, M., & Medvedev, S.
(2004). Pet study of brain maintenance of verbal creative activity. International Journal
of Psychophysiology, 53, 11–20.
Bekinschtein, T., Dehaene, S., Rohaut, B., Tadel, F., Cohen, L., & Naccache, L. (2009).
Neural signature of the conscious processing of auditory regularities. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 106, 1672–7.
244
references

Benton, S., Kraft, R., Glover, J., & Plake, B. (1984). Cognitive capacity differences among
writers. Journal of Educational Psychology, 76, 820–34.
Berkeley, G. (1710). A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge. London:
Rhames and Pepyat.
Bermúdez, J. (2003). Thinking without Words. Oxford University Press.
Berridge, K. & Kringelbach, M. (2008). Affective neuroscience of pleasure: reward in
humans and animals. Psychopharmacology, 199, 457–80.
Berry, D. & Dienes, Z. (1993). Implicit learning. Erlbaum.
Berryhill, M. (2012). Insights from neuropsychology: Pinpointing the role of the posterior
parietal cortex in episodic and working memory. Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience,
6, 1–12.
Berryhill, M., Chein, J., & Olsen, I. (2011). At the intersection of attention and memory:
The mechanistic role of the posterior parietal lobe in working memory. Neuropsycho-
logia, 49, 1306–15.
Berryhill, M., Phuong, L., Picasso, L., Cabeza, R., & Olson, I. (2007). Parietal lobe and
episodic memory: Bilateral damage causes impaired free recall of autobiographical
memory. The Journal of Neuroscience, 27, 14415–23.
Bickel, W., Yi, R., Landes, R., Hill, P., & Baxter, C. (2011). Remember the future: Working
memory training decreases delay discounting among stimulant addicts. Biological
Psychiatry, 69, 260–5.
Bilgrami, A. (2006). Self-Knowledge and Resentment. Harvard University Press.
Binder, J., Westbury, C., McKiernan, K., Possing, E., & Medler, D. (2005). Distinct brain
systems for processing concrete and abstract concepts. Journal of Cognitive Neurosci-
ence, 17:6, 1–13.
Bird, C. & Emery, N. (2009a). Insightful problem solving and creative tool modiﬁcation
by captive nontool-using rooks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106,
10370–5.
Bird, C. & Emery, N. (2009b). Rooks use stones to raise the water level to reach a ﬂoating
worm. Current Biology, 19, 1410–14.
Bisley, J. (2011). The neural basis of visual attention. Journal of Physiology, 589, 49–57.
Blakemore, S-J., Frith, C., & Wolpert, D. (2001). The cerebellum is involved in predicting
the sensory consequences of action. Neuroreport, 12, 1879–85.
Block, N. (1986). Advertisement for a semantics for psychology. Midwest Studies in
Philosophy, 10, 615–78.
Block, N. (1995). A confusion about the function of consciousness. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 18, 227–47.
Block, N. (2002). The harder problem of consciousness. The Journal of Philosophy, 99,
1–35.
Block, N. (2013). The grain of vision and the grain of attention. Thought, 1, 170–84.
Boghossian, P. (2003). The normativity of content. Philosophical Issues, 13, 31–45.
Boly, M., Balteau, E., Schnakers, C., Degueldre, C., Moonen, G., Luxen, A., Phillips, C.,
Peigneux, P., Maquet, P., & Laureys, S. (2007). Baseline brain activity ﬂuctuations
predict somatosensory perception in humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 104, 12187–92.
references
245

Bos, M., Dijksterhuis, A., & van Baaren, R. (2008). On the goal-dependency of uncon-
scious thought. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 44, 1114–20.
Botterill, G. & Carruthers, P. (1999). The Philosophy of Psychology. Cambridge University
Press.
Botvinick, G., Cohen, J., & Carter, C. (2004). Conﬂict monitoring and anterior cingulate
cortex: An update. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 539–46.
Botvinick, G., Wang, J., Cowan, E., Roy, S., Bastianen, C., Mayo, P., & Houk, J. (2009). An
analysis of immediate serial recall performance in a macaque. Animal Cognition, 12,
671–8.
Brandom, R. (1994). Making it Explicit. Harvard University Press.
Brandom, R. (2000). Articulating Reasons. Harvard University Press.
Bratman, M. (1987). Intentions, Plans, and Practical Reason. Harvard University Press.
Bratman, M. (1999). Faces of Intention. Cambridge University Press.
Brehmer, Y., Westerberg, H., & Bäckman, L. (2012). Working-memory training in
younger and older adults: Training gains, transfer, and maintenance. Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience, 6, 63.
Bressan, P. & Pizzighello, S. (2008). The attentional cost of inattentional blindness.
Cognition, 106, 370–83.
Brewer, B. (1999). Perception and Reason. Oxford University Press.
Bridge, H., Harrold, S., Holmes, E., Stokes, M., & Kennard, C. (2012). Vivid visual
mental imagery in the absence of the primary visual cortex. Journal of Neurology,
259, 1062–70.
Broadway, J. & Engle, R. (2010). Validating running memory span: Measurement of
working memory capacity and links with ﬂuid intelligence. Behavior Research Methods,
42, 563–70.
Brown, D. (1991). Human Universals. McGraw-Hill.
Buchsbaum, B., Greer, S., Chang, W-L., & Berman, K. (2005). Meta-analysis of neuroima-
ging studies of the Wisconsin Card-Sorting Task and component processes. Human
Brain Mapping, 25, 35–45.
Buckner, R. (2010). The role of the hippocampus in prediction and imagination. Annual
Review of Psychology, 61, 27–48.
Buckner, R., Andrews-Hanna, J., & Schacter, D. (2008). The brain’s default network:
Anatomy, function, and relevance to disease. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 1124, 1–38.
Buonomano, D. & Merzenich, M. (1998). Cortical plasticity: From synapses to maps.
Annual Review of Neuroscience, 21, 149–86.
Burge, T. (1996). Our entitlement to self-knowledge. Proceedings of the Aristotelian
Society, 96, 91–116.
Burgess, G., Gray, J., Conway, A., & Braver, T. (2011). Neural mechanisms of interference
control underlie the relationship between ﬂuid intelligence and working memory span.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 140, 674–92.
Buttelmann, D., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2009). Eighteen-month-old infants
show false belief understanding in an active helping paradigm. Cognition, 112, 337–42.
Butterﬁll, S. & Apperly, I. (2013). How to build a minimal theory of mind. Mind &
Language, 28, 606–37.
246
references

Cabeza, R. (2008). Role of parietal regions in episodic memory retrieval: The dual
attentional processes hypothesis. Neuropsychologia, 46, 1813–27.
Cabeza, R., Ciaramelli, E., & Moscovitch, M. (2012). Cognitive contributions of the
ventral parietal cortex: An integrative theoretical account. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
16, 338–52.
Cabeza, R., Mazuz, Y., Stokes, J., Kragel, J., Woldorff, M., Ciaramelli, E., Olson, I., &
Moscovich, M. (2010). Overlapping parietal activity in memory and perception: Evidence
for the attention to memory model. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23, 3209–17.
Camp, E. (2004). The generality constraint, nonsense, and categorical restrictions. Philo-
sophical Quarterly, 54, 209–31.
Camp, E. (2009). A language of Baboon thought? In R. Lurz (ed.), The Philosophy of
Animal Minds, Cambridge University Press.
Campana, G., Cowey, A., & Walsh, V. (2002). Priming of motion direction and area
V5/MT: A test of perceptual memory. Cerebral Cortex, 12, 663–9.
Capon, A., Handley, S., & Dennis, I. (2003). Working memory and reasoning: An
individual differences perspective. Thinking and Reasoning, 9, 203–44.
Carrasco, M. & McElree, B. (2001). Covert attention accelerates the rate of visual
information processing. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 98, 5363–7.
Carrasco, M., Ling, S., & Read, S. (2004). Attention alters appearance. Nature Neurosci-
ence, 7, 308–13.
Carruthers, P. (2000). Phenomenal Consciousness. Cambridge University Press.
Carruthers, P. (2005). Consciousness. Oxford University Press.
Carruthers, P. (2006). The Architecture of the Mind. Oxford University Press.
Carruthers, P. (2007). The creative-action theory of creativity. In P. Carruthers,
S. Laurence, & S. Stich (eds.), The Innate Mind: Volume 3: Foundations and the Future,
Oxford University Press.
Carruthers, P. (2009a). Action-awareness and the active mind. Philosophical Papers, 38,
133–56.
Carruthers, P. (2009b). Invertebrate concepts confront the generality constraint (and
win). In R. Lurz (ed.), The Philosophy of Animal Minds, Cambridge University Press.
Carruthers, P. (2011a). The Opacity of Mind. Oxford University Press.
Carruthers, P. (2011b). Creative action in mind. Philosophical Psychology, 24, 347–61.
Carruthers, P. (2013a). Mindreading in infancy. Mind & Language, 28, 141–72.
Carruthers, P. (2013b). On knowing your own beliefs. In N. Nottelmann (ed.), New Essays
on Belief, Palgrave MacMillan.
Carruthers, P. (2013c). Evolution of working memory. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 110, 10371–8.
Carson, S., Peterson, J., & Higgins, D. (2003). Decreased latent inhibition is associated
with increased creative achievement in high-functioning individuals. Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 85, 499–506.
Centerbar, D. & Clore, G. (2006). Do approach–avoidance actions create attitudes?
Psychological Science, 17, 22–9.
Chaiken, S., Liberman, A., & Eagly, A. (1989). Heuristic and systematic processing within
and beyond the persuasion context. In J. Uleman & J. Bargh (eds.), Unintended
Thought, Guilford Press.
references
247

Chalmers, D. (1996). The Conscious Mind. Oxford University Press.
Chalmers, D. (1997). Availability: The cognitive basis of experience. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 20, 148–9.
Chein, J. & Morrison, A. (2010). Expanding the mind’s workspace: Training and transfer
effects with a complex working memory span task. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 17,
193–9.
Cheke, L. & Clayton, N. (2012). Eurasian jays (Garrulus glandarius) overcome their
current desires to anticipate two distinct needs and plan for them appropriately. Biology
Letters, 8, 171–5.
Cheney, D. & Seyfarth, R. (2007). Baboon Metaphysics. University of Chicago Press.
Christoff, K. (2012). Undirected thought: Neural determinants and correlates. Brain
Research, 1428, 51–9.
Christoff, K., Gordon, A., Smallwood, J., Smith, R., & Schooler, J. (2009). Experience
sampling during fMRI reveals default network and executive system contributions to
mind wandering. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106, 8719–24.
Chrysikou, E. & Thompson-Schill, S. (2011). Dissociable brain states linked to common
and creative object use. Human Brain Mapping, 32, 665–75.
Chrysikou, E., Hamilton, R., Coslett, H., Datta, A., Bikson, M., & Thompson-Schill, S.
(2013). Noninvasive transcranial direct current stimulation over the left prefrontal
cortex facilitates cognitive ﬂexibility in tool use. Cognitive Neuroscience, 4, 81–9.
Chun, M., Golomb, J., & Turk-Browne, N. (2011). A taxonomy of external and internal
attention. Annual Review of Psychology, 62, 73–101.
Churchland, P.M. (1979). Eliminative materialism and the propositional attitudes. Jour-
nal of Philosophy, 78, 67–90.
Churchland, P.M. (1993). State-space semantics and meaning holism. Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research, 53, 667–72.
Churchland, P.M. (2012). Plato’s Camera: How the Physical Brain Captures a Landscape
of Abstract Universals. MIT Press.
Cialdini, R. & Petty, R. (1981). Anticipatory opinion effects. In R. Petty, T. Ostrom, &
T. Brock (eds.), Cognitive Responses in Persuasion, Erlbaum.
Ciaramelli, E., Grady, C., & Moscovitch, M. (2008). Top–down and bottom–up attention
to memory: A hypothesis (AtoM) on the role of the posterior parietal cortex in memory
retrieval. Neuropsychologia, 46, 1828–51.
Clark, A. (2008). Supersizing the Mind. Oxford University Press.
Clark, A. & Chalmers, D. (1998). The extended mind. Analysis, 58, 7–19.
Clay, O., Edwards, J., Ross, L., Okonkwo, O., Wadley, V., Roth, D., & Ball, K. (2009).
Visual function and cognitive speed of processing mediate age-related decline in
memory span and ﬂuid intelligence. Journal of Aging Health, 21, 547–66.
Clayton, N. & Dickinson, A. (1999). Scrub-jays (Aphelocoma coerulescens) remember the
relative time of caching as well as the location and content of their caches. Journal of
Comparative Psychology, 113, 403–16.
Clayton, N., Dally, J., Gilbert, J., & Dickinson, A. (2005). Food caching by western scrub-
jays (Aphelocoma californica) is sensitive to the conditions at recovery. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 31, 115–24.
248
references

Clayton, N., Yu, K., & Dickinson, A. (2001). Scrub jays (Aphelocoma coerulescens) form
integrated memories of the multiple features of caching episodes. Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 27, 17–29.
Clayton, N., Yu, K., & Dickinson, A. (2003). Interacting cache memories: Evidence for
ﬂexible memory use by western scrub-jays (Aphelocoma californica). Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 29, 14–22.
Cohen, J. & Lieberman, M. (2010). The common neural basis of exerting self-control in
multiple domains. In Y. Trope, R. Hassin, & K. Ochsner (eds.), Self-Control, Oxford
University Press.
Cohen, M., Alvarez, G., & Nakayama, K. (2011). Natural-scene perception requires
attention. Psychological Science, 22, 1165–72.
Colom, R., Abad, F., Quiroga, A., Shih, P., & Flores-Mendoza, C. (2008). Working memory
and intelligence are highly related constructs, but why? Intelligence, 36, 584–606.
Colom, R., Quiroga, Á., Shih, P., Martínez, K., Burgaleta, M., Martínez-Molina, A.,
Román, F., Requena, L., & Ramírez, I. (2010). Improvement in working memory is
not related to increased intelligence scores. Intelligence, 38, 497–505.
Colom, R., Rebollo, I., Palacios, A., Juan-Espinosa, M., & Kyllonen, P. (2004). Working
memory is (almost) perfectly predicted by g. Intelligence, 32, 277–96.
Conway, A., Kane, M., & Engle, R. (2003). Working memory capacity and its relation to
general intelligence. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7, 547–52.
Cools, R., Gibbs, S., Miyakawa, A., Jagust, W., & D’Esposito, M. (2008). Working memory
capacity predicts dopamine synthesis capacity in the human striatum. The Journal of
Neuroscience, 28, 1208–12.
Corbetta, M. & Shulman, G. (2002). Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven atten-
tion in the brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 3, 201–15.
Corbetta, M., Patel, G., & Shulman, G. (2008). The reorienting system of the human brain:
From environment to theory of mind. Neuron, 58, 306–24.
Correia, S., Dickinson, A., & Clayton, N. (2007). Western scrub-jays anticipate future
needs independently of their current motivational state. Current Biology, 17, 856–61.
Cowan, N. (1988). Evolving conceptions of memory storage, selective attention, and their
mutual constraints within the human information processing system. Psychological
Bulletin, 104, 163–91.
Cowan, N. (1995). Attention and Memory. Oxford University Press.
Cowan, N. (2001). The magical number 4 in short-term memory: A reconsideration of
mental storage capacity. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24, 87–185.
Cowan, N., Elliott, E., Saults, J.S., Morey, C., Mattox, S., Hismjatullina, A., & Conway, A.
(2005). On the capacity of attention: Its estimation and its role in working memory and
cognitive aptitudes. Cognitive Psychology, 51, 42–100.
Cowan, N., Li, D., Mofﬁtt, A., Becker, T., Martin, E., Saults, S., & Christ, S. (2011).
A neural region of abstract working memory. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23,
2852–63.
Coyle, T., Pillow, D., Snyder, A., & Kochunov, P. (2011). Processing speed mediates the
development of general intelligence (g) in adolescence. Psychological Science, 22,
1265–9.
references
249

Crick, F. & Koch, C. (1990). Towards a neurobiological theory of consciousness. Seminars
in the Neurosciences, 2, 263–75.
Crick, F. & Koch, C. (2003). A framework for consciousness. Nature Neuroscience, 6,
119–26.
Cristescu, T., Devlin, J., & Nobre, A. (2006). Orienting attention to semantic categories.
NeuroImage, 33, 1178–87.
Curtis, C. (2006). Prefrontal and parietal contributions to spatial working memory.
Neuroscience, 139, 173–80.
D’Esposito, M. (2007). From cognitive to neural models of working memory. Philosoph-
ical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 362, 761–72.
Dade, L., Zatorre, R., Evans, A., & Jones-Gottman, M. (2001). Working memory in
another dimension: functional imaging of human olfactory working memory. Neuro-
image, 14, 650–60.
Damasio, A. (1994). Descartes’ Error. Papermac.
Daneman, M. & Carpenter, P. (1980). Individual differences in working memory and
reading. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 19, 450–66.
Daneman, M. & Carpenter, P. (1983). Individual differences in integrating information
between and within sentences. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 9, 561–84.
Daneman, M. & Green, I. (1986). Individual differences in comprehending and producing
words in context. Journal of Memory and Language, 25, 1–18.
Daselaar, S., Porat, Y., Huijbers, W., & Pennartz, C. (2010). Modality-speciﬁc and
modality-independent components of the human imagery system. NeuroImage, 52,
677–85.
Davies, M. (1991). Concepts, connectionism, and the language of thought. In W. Ramsey,
S. Stich, & D. Rumelhart (eds.), Philosophy and Connectionist Theory, Erlbaum.
Davies, M. (1998). Language, thought, and the language of thought (Aunty’s own
argument revisited). In P. Carruthers & J. Boucher (eds.), Language and Thought,
Cambridge University Press.
Davies, M. (2000). Interaction without reduction: The relationship between personal and
sub-personal levels of description. Mind & Society, 2, 87–105.
De Brigard, F. (2012). The role of attention in conscious recollection. Frontiers in
Psychology, vol. 3, article 29.
De Neys, W. (2006a). Automatic–heuristic and executive–analytic processing during
reasoning: Chronometric and dual-task considerations. Quarterly Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology, 59, 1070–100.
De Neys, W. (2006b). Dual processing in reasoning: Two systems but one reasoner.
Psychological Science, 17, 428–33.
De Neys, W., Vartanian, O., & Goel, V. (2008). Smarter than we think: When our brains
detect that we are biased. Psychological Science, 19, 483–9.
Deary, I., Bell, P., Bell, A., Campbell, M., & Fazal, N. (2004). Sensory discrimination and
intelligence: Testing Spearman’s other hypothesis. American Journal of Psychology, 117,
1–18.
Deary, I., Penke, L., & Johnson, W. (2010). The neuroscience of human intelligence
differences. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11, 201–11.
250
references

Dehaene, S. (1997). The Number Sense. Penguin Press.
Dehaene, S. (2004). Evolution of human cortical circuits for reading and arithmetic: The
“neuronal recycling” hypothesis. In S. Dehaene, J. Duhamel, M. Hauser, & G. Rizzolatti
(eds.), From Monkey Brain to Human Brain, MIT Press.
Dehaene, S. (2009). Reading in the Brain. Penguin Press.
Dehaene, S. & Changeux, J-P. (2011). Experimental and theoretical approaches to con-
scious processing. Neuron, 70, 200–27.
Dehaene, S., Changeux, J-P., Naccache, L., Sackur, J., & Sergent, C. (2006). Conscious,
preconscious, and subliminal processing: A testable taxonomy. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 10, 204–11.
Dehaene, S., Naccache, L., Le Clec’H, G., Koechlin, E., Mueller, Mi., Dehaene-Lambertz,
G., van de Moortele, P-F., & Le Bihan, D. (1998). Imaging unconscious semantic
priming. Nature, 395, 597–600.
Del Cul, A., Baillet, S., & Dehaene, S. (2007). Brain dynamics underlying the nonlinear
threshold for access to consciousness. PLoS Biology, 5:10, e260.
Demetriou, A., Spandoudis, G., Shayer, M., Mouyi, A., Kazi, S., & Platsidou, M. (2013).
Cycles in speed–working memory–G relations: Towards a developmental–differential
theory of the mind. Intelligence, 41, 34–50.
Dennett, D. (1978). Towards a computational theory of consciousness. In D. Dennett,
Brainstorms, Harvester Press.
Dennett, D. (1991). Consciousness Explained. Penguin Press.
Dennett, D. (1996). Kinds of Minds. Basic Books.
Dennett, D. (2001). Are we explaining consciousness yet? Cognition, 79, 221–37.
Diekhof, E., Biedermann, F., Ruebsamen, R., & Gruber, O. (2009). Top-down and
bottom-up modulation of brain structures involved in auditory discrimination. Brain
Research, 1297, 118–23.
Dijksterhuis, A. & Aarts, H. (2010). Goals, attention, and (un)consciousness. Annual
Review of Psychology, 61, 467–90.
Dijksterhuis, A., Bos, M., Nordgren, L., & van Baaren, R. (2006). On making the right
choice: The deliberation-without-attention effect. Science, 311, 1005–7.
Dretske, F. (1979). Simple seeing. In D. Gustafson & B. Tapscott (eds.), Body, Mind, and
Method, Reidel.
Dretske, F. (1988). Explaining Behavior. MIT Press.
Dretske, F. (1995). Naturalizing the Mind. MIT Press.
Driver, P. & Humphries, N. (1988). Protean Behavior: The Biology of Unpredictability.
Oxford University Press.
Dudchenko, P. (2004). An overview of the tasks used to test working memory in rodents.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 28, 699–709.
Dummett, M. (1991). Frege and Other Philosophers. Oxford University Press.
Edelman, G. (2003). Naturalizing consciousness: A theoretical framework. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 100, 5520–4.
Egan, F. (1995). Computation and content. Philosophical Review, 104, 181–203.
Eichenbaum, H., Sauvage, M., Fortin, N., Komorowski, R., & Lipton, P. (2012). Towards a
functional organization of episodic memory in the medial temporal lobe. Neuroscience
and Biobehavioral Reviews, 36, 1597–608.
references
251

Ellamil, M., Dobson, C., Beeman, M., & Christoff, K. (2012). Evaluative and generative
modes of thought during the creative process. NeuroImage, 59, 1783–94.
Elliot, A. & Devine, P. (1994). On the motivational nature of cognitive dissonance:
Dissonance as psychological discomfort. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
67, 382–94.
Engle, R. (2002). Working memory capacity as executive attention. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 11, 19–23.
Engle, R. (2010). Role of working-memory capacity in cognitive control. Current Anthro-
pology, 51, S17–S26.
Engle, R., Carullo, J., & Collins, K. (1991). Individual differences in working memory for
comprehension and following directions. Journal of Educational Research, 84, 253–62.
Engle, R., Tuholksi, S., Laughlin, J., & Conway, A. (1999). Working memory, short-term
memory, and ﬂuid general intelligence: A latent-variable approach. Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology: General, 128, 309–31.
Ericsson, A. & Kintsch, W. (1995). Long-term working memory. Psychological Review,
102, 211–45.
Ericsson, A. & Simon, H. (1993). Protocol Analysis: Verbal Reports as Data. Revised
edition, MIT Press.
Evans, G. (1982). The Varieties of Reference. Oxford University Press.
Evans, J. (2010). Thinking Twice: Two Minds in One Brain. Oxford University Press.
Evans, J. & Curtis-Holmes, J. (2005). Rapid responding increases belief bias: Evidence for
the dual-process theory of reasoning. Thinking & Reasoning, 11, 382–9.
Evans, J. & Over, D. (1996). Rationality and Reasoning. Psychology Press.
Evans, J. & Stanovich, K. (2013). Dual-process theories of higher cognition: Advancing
the debate. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 8, 223–41.
Fagot, J. & Lillo, C. (2011). A comparative study of working memory: Immediate serial
spatial recall in baboons and humans. Neuropsychologia, 49, 3870–80.
Farroni, T., Johnson, M., Menon, E., Zulian, L., Faraguna, D., & Csibra, G. (2005).
Newborns’ preference for face-relevant stimuli: Effect of contrast polarity. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 102, 17245–50.
Feigenson, L. & Halberda, J. (2008). Conceptual knowledge increases infants’ memory
capacity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105, 9926–30.
Festinger, L. (1957). A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. Stanford University Press.
Field, H. (1977). Logic, meaning, and conceptual role. Journal of Philosophy, 74, 379–409.
Finke, R. (1995). Creative realism. In S. Smith, T. Ward, & R. Finke (eds.), The Creative
Cognition Approach, Cambridge University Press.
Finke, R., Ward, T., & Smith, S. (1992). Creative Cognition. MIT Press.
Finnerty, J., Pang, K., Burton, P., Paulson, D., & Martindale, M. (2004). Origins of bilateral
symmetry: Hox and Dpp expression in a sea anemone. Science, 304, 1335–7.
Fiske, S. & Taylor, S. (2008). Social Cognition: From Brains to Behavior. McGraw Hill.
Fletcher, L. & Carruthers, P. (2013). Behavior-reading versus mentalizing in animals. In
J. Metcalfe & H. Terrace (eds.), Agency and Joint Attention, Oxford University Press.
Fodor, J. (1975). The Language of Thought. Harvard University Press.
Fodor, J. (1983). The Modularity of Mind. MIT Press.
Fodor, J. (1990). A Theory of Content and Other Essays. MIT Press.
252
references

Fodor, J. & McLaughlin, B. (1990). Connectionism and the problem of systematicity.
Cognition, 35, 183–204.
Fodor, J. & Pylyshyn, Z. (1988). Connectionism and cognitive architecture. Cognition, 28,
3–71.
Franconeri, S., Alvarez, G., & Cavanagh, P. (2013). Flexible cognitive resources: Competitive
content maps for attention and memory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 17, 134–41.
Frankish, K. (2004). Mind and Supermind. Cambridge University Press.
Frankish, K. (2009). Systems and levels. In J. Evans & K. Frankish (eds.), In Two Minds,
Oxford University Press.
Frith, C., Blakemore, S-J., & Wolpert, D. (2000). Abnormalities in the awareness and
control of action. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London: B, 355,
1771–88.
Frith, U. & Frith, C. (2003). Development and neurophysiology of mentalizing. Philo-
sophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 358, 459–73.
Gallistel, R., Mark, T., King, A., & Lantham, P. (2001). The rat approximates an ideal
detector of rates of reward. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior
Processes, 27, 354–72.
Ganis, G., Keenan, J., Kosslyn, S., & Pascual-Leone, A. (2000). Transcranian magnetic
stimulation of primary motor cortex affects mental rotation. Cerebral Cortex, 10,
175–80.
Gathercole, S. (1994). Neuropsychology and working memory: A review. Neuropsych-
ology, 8, 494–505.
Gazzaley, A. & Nobre, A. (2012). Top–down modulation: Bridging selective attention and
working memory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16, 129–35.
Gazzaley, A., Cooney, J., McEvoy, K., Knight, R., & D’Esposito, M. (2005). Top-down
enhancement and suppression of the magnitude and speed of neural activity. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 17, 507–17.
Geake, J. & Hansen, P. (2005). Neural correlates of intelligence as revealed by fMRI of
ﬂuid analogies. NeuroImage, 26, 555–64.
Geary, D. (2005). The Origin of Mind. American Psychological Association.
Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P., & the ABC Research Group (1999). Simple Heuristics that Make
Us Smart. Oxford University Press.
Gilbert, D. & Wilson, T. (2007). Prospection: Experiencing the future. Science, 317,
1351–4.
Gilovich, T., Grifﬁn, D., & Kahneman, D. (eds.) (2002). Heuristics and Biases. Cambridge
University Press.
Giurfa, M., Zhang, S., Jenett, A., Menzel, R., & Srinivasan, M. (2001). The concepts of
“sameness” and “difference” in an insect. Nature, 410, 930–3.
Glüer, K. & Wikforss, Å. (2009). Against content normativity. Mind, 118, 31–70.
Goel, V. (2008). Anatomy of deductive reasoning. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11,
435–41.
Goldenberg, G., Müllbacher, W., & Nowak, A. (1995). Imagery without perception: A case
study of anosognosia for cortical blindness. Neuropsychologia, 33, 1373–82.
Goldin-Meadow, S. (2005). Hearing Gesture: How our Hands Help us Think. Harvard
University Press.
references
253

Goldman, A. (2006). Simulating Minds. Oxford University Press.
Goldman-Rakic, P. (1995). Cellular basis of working memory. Neuron, 14, 477–85.
Goldman-Rakic, P., Funahashi, S., & Bruce, C. (1990). Neocortical memory circuits.
Quarterly Journal of Quantitative Biology, 55, 1025–38.
Goldstone, R. (1994). Inﬂuences of categorization on perceptual discrimination. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 123, 178–200.
Goldstone, R., Lippa, Y., & Shiffrin, R. (2001). Altering object representations through
category learning. Cognition, 78, 27–43.
Gollwitzer, P. & Sheeran, P. (2006). Implementation intentions and goal achievement:
A meta-analysis of effects and processes. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology,
38, 69–119.
Gray, J. & Thompson, P. (2004). Neurobiology of intelligence: Science and ethics. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 5, 471–82.
Greenwald, A., Banaji, M., Rudman, L., Farnham, S., Nosek, B., & Mellott, D. (2002).
A uniﬁed theory of implicit attitudes, stereotypes, self-esteem, and self-concept. Psy-
chological Review, 109, 3–25.
Gruberg, E., Dudkin, E., Wang, Y., Marin, G., Salas, C., Sentis, E., Letelier, J., Mpodozis, J.,
Malpeli, J., Cui, H., Ma, R., Northmore, D., & Udin, S. (2006). Inﬂuencing and
interpreting visual input: the role of a visual feedback system. Journal of Neuroscience,
26, 10368–71.
Grush, R. (2004). The emulation theory of representation: Motor control, imagery, and
perception. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 27, 377–442.
Halberda, J., Mazzocco, M., & Feigenson, L. (2008). Individual differences in nonverbal
number acuity correlate with maths achievement. Nature, 455, 665–9.
Hanus, D., Mendes, N., Tennie, C., & Call, J. (2011). Comparing the performances of apes
(Gorilla gorilla, pan troglodytes, Pongo pymaeus) and human children (Homo sapiens)
in the ﬂoating peanut task. PLoS One, 6, e19555.
Harris, J., Miniussi, C., Harris, I., & Diamond, M. (2002). Transient storage of a tactile
memory trace in primary somatosensory cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 22, 8720–5.
Hassabis, D., Kumaran, D., & Maguire, E. (2007). Using imagination to understand the
neural basis of episodic memory. The Journal of Neuroscience, 27, 14365–74.
Hassin, R. (2013). Yes it can: On the functional abilities of the human unconscious.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 8, 195–207.
Hassin, R., Bargh, J., Engell, A., & McCulloch, K. (2009). Implicit working memory.
Consciousness and Cognition, 18, 665–78.
Hauser, M., Carey, S., Hauser, L. (2000). Spontaneous number representation in semi-
free-ranging rhesus monkeys. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological
Sciences, 267, 829–33.
Heavey, C. & Hurlburt, R. (2008). The phenomena of inner experience. Consciousness and
Cognition, 17, 798–810.
Herwig, U., Abler, B., Schönfeldt-Lecuona, C., Wunderlich, A., Grothe, J., Spitzer, M., &
Walter, H. (2003). Verbal storage in a premotor–parietal network: Evidence from
fMRI-guided magnetic stimulation. NeuroImage, 20, 1032–41.
Hickok, G. & Poeppel, D. (2007). The cortical organization of speech processing. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 8, 393–402.
254
references

Hills, T. (2006). Animal foraging and the evolution of goal-directed cognition. Cognitive
Science, 30, 3–41.
Hills, T. & Dukas, R. (2012). The evolution of cognitive search. In P. Todd, T. Hills, &
T. Robbins (eds.), Cognitive Search: Evolution, Algorithms, and the Brain, MIT Press.
Hills, T., Jones, M., & Todd, P. (2012). Optimal foraging in semantic memory. Psycho-
logical Review, 119, 431–40.
Hornsby, J. (2000). Personal and sub-personal: A defense of Dennett’s early distinction.
Philosophical Explorations, 3, 6–24.
Horton, W. & Keysar, B. (1996). When do speakers take into account common ground?
Cognition, 59, 91–117.
Howard-Jones, P., Blakemore, S-J., Samuel, E., Summers, I., & Claxton, G. (2005).
Semantic divergence and creative story generation: An fMRI investigation. Cognitive
Brain Research, 25, 240–50.
Huang, J. & Bargh, J. (2014). The selﬁsh goal: Autonomously operating motivational
structures as the proximate cause of human judgment and behavior. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 37, 121–35.
Huber, A., Kolodkin, A., Ginty, D., & Cloutier, J-F. (2003). Signaling at the growth cone:
Ligand-receptor complexes and the control of axon growth and guidance. Annual
Review of Neuroscience, 26, 509–63.
Hurlburt, R. (2009). Unsymbolized thinking, sensory awareness, and mindreading.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 32, 149–50.
Hurlburt, R. & Akhter, S. (2008). Unsymbolized thinking. Consciousness and Cognition,
17, 1364–74.
Hurley, S. (2006). Making sense of animals. In S. Hurley & M. Nudds (eds.), Rational
Animals? Oxford University Press.
Hutchinson, J., Uncapher, M., & Wagner, A. (2009). Posterior parietal cortex and episodic
retrieval: Convergent and divergent effects of attention and memory. Learning and
Memory, 16, 343–56.
Ikkai, A., McCollough, A., & Vogel, E. (2010). Contralateral delay activity provides a
neural measure of the number of representations in working memory. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 103, 1963–8.
Inoue, S. & Matsuzawa, T. (2007). Working memory of numerals in chimpanzees.
Current Biology, 17, R1004–R1005.
Inoue, S. & Matsuzawa, T. (2009). Acquisition and memory of sequence order in young
and adult chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes). Animal Cognition, 12, S59–S69.
Izard, V., Sann, C., Spelke, E., & Streri, A. (2009). Newborn infants perceive abstract
numbers. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106, 10382–5.
Jackendoff, R. (2007). Language, Consciousness, Culture: Essays on Mental Structure. MIT
Press.
Jackendoff, R. (2012). A User’s Guide to Thought and Meaning. Oxford University Press.
Jaeggi, S., Buschkuehl, M., Jonides, J., & Perrig, W. (2008). Improving ﬂuid intelligence
with training on working memory. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
105, 6829–33.
Jaeggi, S., Buschkuehl, M., Jonides, J., & Shah, P. (2011). Short- and long-term beneﬁts of
cognitive training. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108, 10081–6.
references
255

Jaeggi, S., Buschkuehl, M., Shah, P., & Jonides, J. (2014). The role of individual differences
in cognitive training and transfer. Memory and Cognition, 42, 464–80.
Jaeggi, S., Studer-Luethi, B., Buschkuehl, M., Su, Y-F., Jonides, J., & Perrig, W. (2010). The
relationship between n-back performance and matrix reasoning—implications for
training and transfer. Intelligence, 38, 625–35.
Janmaat, K., Polansky, L., Dagui Ban, S., & Boesch, C. (2014). Wild chimpanzees plan
their breakfast time, type, and location. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 111, 16343–8.
Jarosz, A., Colﬂesh, G., & Wiley, J. (2012). Uncorking the muse: Alcohol intoxication
facilitates creative problem solving. Consciousness and Cognition, 21, 487–93.
Jaušovec, N. & Jaušovec, K. (2012). Working memory training: Improving intelligence—
changing brain activity. Brain and Cognition, 79, 96–106.
Jeannerod, M. (2006). Motor Cognition. Oxford University Press.
Jensen, O., Kaiser, J., & Lachaux, J-P. (2007). Human gamma-frequency oscillations
associated with attention and memory. Trends in Neurosciences, 30, 317–24.
Ji, L., Peng, K., & Nisbett, R. (2000). Culture, control, and perception of relationships in
the environment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 943–55.
Jones, S., Pritchett, D., Stufﬂebeam, S., Hamalainen, M., & Moore, C. (2007). Neural
correlates of tactile detection: A combined magnetoencephalography and biophysically
based computational modeling study. Journal of Neuroscience, 27, 10751–64.
Jonides, J., Lewis, R., Nee, D., Lustig, C., Berman, M., & Moore, K. (2008). The mind and
brain of short-term memory. Annual Review of Psychology, 59, 193–224.
Jordan, K., MacLean, E., & Brannon, E. (2008). Monkeys match and tally quantities across
senses. Cognition, 108, 617–25.
Jung, R. & Haier, R. (2007). The Parieto-Frontal Integration Theory (PFIT) of intel-
ligence: Converging neuroimaging evidence. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 30,
135–54.
Jung-Beeman, M., Bowden, E., Haberman, J., Frymiare, J., Arambel-Liu, S., Greenblatt, R.,
Reber, P., & Kounios, J. (2004). Neural activity when people solve verbal problems with
insight. PLoS Biology, 2, 500–10.
Kaas, J. (1997). Topographic maps are fundamental to sensory processing. Brain Research
Bulletin, 44, 107–12.
Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, Fast and Slow. Farrar, Straus, and Grioux.
Kahneman, D. & Frederick, S. (2002). Representativeness revisited: Attribute substitution
in intuitive judgment. In T. Gilovich, D. Grifﬁn, & D. Kahneman (eds.), Heuristics and
Biases, Cambridge University Press.
Kahneman, D. & Triesman, A. (1984). Changing views of attention and automaticity. In
R. Parasuraman & D. Davies (eds.), Varieties of Attention, Academic Press.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (eds.) (1982). Judgment Under Uncertainty:
Heuristics and Biases. Cambridge University Press.
Kahneman, D., Triesman, A., & Gibbs, B. (1992). The reviewing of object ﬁles: Object
speciﬁc integration of information. Cognitive Psychology, 24, 175–219.
Kanai, R., Muggleton, N., & Walsh, V. (2008). TMS over the intraparietal sulcus induces
perceptual fading. Journal of Neurophysiology, 100, 3343–50.
256
references

Kane, M. & Engle, R. (2003). Working-memory capacity and the control of attention: The
contributions of goal neglect, response competition, and task set to Stroop interference.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 132, 47–70.
Kane, M., Bleckley, M.K., Conway, A., & Engle, R. (2001). A controlled-attention view of
working memory capacity. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 130, 169–83.
Kane, M., Brown, L., McVay, J., Silvia, P., Myin-Germeys, I., & Kwapil, T. (2007). For
whom the mind wanders and when: An experience-sampling study of working mem-
ory and executive control in daily life. Psychological Science, 18, 614–21.
Kane, M., Hambrick, D., & Conway, A. (2005). Working memory capacity and ﬂuid
intelligence are strongly related constructs. Psychological Bulletin, 131, 66–71.
Kane, M., Hambrick, D., Tuholski, S., Wilhelm, O., Payne, T., & Engle, R. (2004). The
generality of working memory capacity: A latent-variable approach to verbal and
visuospatial memory span and reasoning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
133, 189–217.
Kastner, S. & Pinsk, M. (2004). Visual attention as a multilevel selection process. Cogni-
tive, Affective, and Behavioral Neuroscience, 4, 483–500.
Kaufman, S., DeYoung, C., Gray, J., Brown, J., & Mackintosh, N. (2009). Associative
learning predicts intelligence above and beyond working memory and processing
speed. Intelligence, 37, 374–82.
Kawai, N. & Matsuzawa, T. (2000). Numerical memory span in a chimpanzee. Nature,
403, 39.
Kawato, M., Kuroda, T., Imamizu, H., Nakano, E., Miyauchi, S., & Yoshioka, T. (2003).
Internal forward models in the cerebellum: fMRI study on grip force and load force
coupling. Progress in Brain Research, 142, 171–88.
Kelly, A., Uddin, L., Biswal, B., Castellanos, F., & Milham, M. (2008). Competition
between functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability. NeuroImage, 39,
527–37.
Kentridge, R., Nijboer, T., & Heywood, C. (2008). Attended but unseen: Visual attention
is not sufﬁcient for visual awareness. Neuropsychologia, 46, 864–9.
Kenward, B., Weir, A., Rutz, C., & Kacelnik, A. (2005). Tool manufacture by naïve
juvenile crows. Nature, 433, 121.
Keren, G. & Schul, Y. (2009). Two is not always better than one: A critical evaluation of
two-system theories. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 4, 533–50.
Kerns, J., Cohen, J., MacDonald, A., Cho, R., Stenger, V., & Carter, C. (2004). Anterior
cingulate conﬂict monitoring and adjustments of control. Science, 303, 1023–6.
Kidd, C., Piantadosi, S., & Aslin, R. (2012). The Goldilocks Effect: Human infants allocate
attention to visual sequences that are neither too simple nor too complex. PLoS ONE, 7,
e36399.
Kiewra, K. & Benton, S. (1988). The relationship between information processing ability
and notetaking. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 13, 33–44.
Kim, H. & Cabeza, R. (2007). Trusting our memories: Dissociating the neural correlates of
conﬁdence in veridical vs. illusory memories. Journal of Neuroscience, 27, 12190–7.
King, J. & Just, M. (1991). Individual differences in syntactic processing: The role of
working memory. Journal of Memory and Language, 30, 580–602.
references
257

King, M. & Carruthers, P. (2012). Moral responsibility and consciousness. Journal of
Moral Philosophy, 9, 200–28.
Klingberg, T. (2010). Training and plasticity of working memory. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 14, 317–24.
Knudsen, B. & Liszkowski, U. (2012). 18-month-olds predict speciﬁc action mistakes
through attribution of false belief, not ignorance, and intervene accordingly. Infancy,
17, 672–91.
Knudsen, E. (2007). Fundamental components of attention. Annual Review of Neurosci-
ence, 30, 57–78.
Knudsen, E. (2011). Control from below: The role of a midbrain network in spatial
attention. European Journal of Neuroscience, 33, 1961–72.
Koch, C. & Tsuchiya, N. (2007). Attention and consciousness: Two distinct brain pro-
cesses. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11, 16–22.
Koch, C., Oliveri, M., Torriero, S., Carlesimo, G., Turriziani, P., & Caltagirone, C. (2005).
rTMS evidence of different delay and decision processes in a fronto-parietal neuronal
network activated during spatial working memory. NeuroImage, 24, 34–9.
Kolata, S., Light, K., Grossman, H., Hale, G., & Matzel, L. (2007). Selective attention is a
primary determinant of the relationship between working memory and general learn-
ing ability in outbred mice. Learning and Memory, 14, 22–8.
Kolata, S., Light, K., Townsend, D., Hale, G., Grossman, H., & Matzel, L. (2005).
Variations in working memory capacity predict individual differences in general
learning abilities among genetically diverse mice. Neurobiology of Learning and Mem-
ory, 84, 241–6.
Kornblith, H. (2012). On Reﬂection. Oxford University Press.
Korsgaard, C. (1996). Sources of Normativity. Cambridge University Press.
Korsgaard, C. (2009). The activity of reason. Proceedings and Addresses of the American
Philosophical Association, 83, 27–47.
Kosslyn, S. (1994). Image and Brain. MIT Press.
Kosslyn, S., Thompson, W., & Ganis, G. (2006). The Case for Mental Imagery. Oxford
University Press.
Kosslyn, S., Téglás, E., & Endress, A. (2010). The social sense: Susceptibility to others’
beliefs in human infants and adults. Science, 330, 1830–4.
Kroesbergen, E., Van Luit, J., Van Lieshout, E. Van Loosbroek, E., & Van de Rijt, B.
(2009). Individual differences in early numeracy: The role of executive functions and
subitizing. Journal of Psychoeducational Assessment, 27, 226–36.
Kruglanski, A. (2013). Only one? The default interventionist perspective as a unimodel—
Commentary on Evans & Stanovich (2013). Perspectives on Psychological Science, 8,
242–7.
Kruglanski, A. & Gigerenzer, G. (2011). Intuitive and deliberate judgments are based on
common principles. Psychological Review, 118, 97–109.
Kunda, Z. (1999). Social Cognition. MIT Press.
Kundu, B., Sutterer, D., Emrich, S., & Postle, B. (2013). Strengthened effective connect-
ivity underlies transfer of working memory training to tests of short-term memory and
attention. The Journal of Neuroscience, 33, 8705–15.
Kurzban, R. (2011). Why Everyone (Else) is a Hypocrite. Princeton University Press.
258
references

Kurzban, R., Duckworth, A., Kable, J., & Myers, J. (2013). An opportunity cost model of
subjective effort and task performance. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36, 661–79.
Kyllonen, P. & Christal, R. (1990). Reasoning ability is (little more than) working-
memory capacity?! Intelligence, 14, 389–433.
Lai, D., Brandt, S., Luksch, H., & Wessel, R. (2011). Recurrent antitopographic inhibition
mediates competitive stimulus selection in an attention network. Journal of Neuro-
physiology, 105, 793–805.
Lamme, V. (2003). Why visual awareness and attention are different. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 7, 12–18.
Landman, R., Spekreijse, H., & Lamme, V. (2003). Large capacity storage of integrated
objects before change blindness. Vision Research, 43, 149–64.
Lau, H. & Passingham, R. (2007). Unconscious activation of the cognitive control system
in the human prefrontal cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 27, 5805–11.
Lepsien, J. & Nobre, A. (2006). Cognitive control of attention in the human brain: Insights
from orienting attention to mental representations. Brain Research, 1105, 20–31.
Lepsien, J., Thornton, I., & Nobre, A. (2011). Modulation of working-memory mainten-
ance by directed attention. Neuropsychologia, 49, 1569–77.
Leslie, S-J., Khemlani, S., & Glucksberg, S. (2011). All ducks lay eggs: The generic
overgeneralization effect. Journal of Memory and Language, 65, 887–900.
Levelt, W. (1983). Monitoring and self-repair in speech. Cognition, 14, 41–104.
Levelt, W. (1989). Speaking: From Intention to Articulation. MIT Press.
Levine, D., Warach, J., & Farah, M. (1985). Two visual systems in mental imagery:
Dissociation of “what” and “where” in imagery disorders due to bilateral posterior
cerebral lesions. Neurology, 35, 1010–18.
Levy, N. (2014). Consciousness and Moral Responsibility. Oxford University Press.
Levy, R. & Goldman-Rakic, P. (2000). Segregation of working memory functions within
the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Experimental Brain Research, 133, 23–32.
Lewis, D. (1970). How to deﬁne theoretical terms. The Journal of Philosophy, 67, 427–46.
Lewis-Peacock, J., Drysdale, A., Oberauer, K., & Postle, B. (2012). Neural evidence for a
distinction between short-term memory and the focus of attention. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 24, 61–79.
Lhermitte, F. (1983). “Utilization behavior” and its relation to lesions of the frontal lobes.
Brain, 106, 237–55.
Lhermitte, F. (1986). Human autonomy and the frontal lobes. II. Patient behavior in
complex and social situations: the “environmental dependency syndrome.” Annals of
Neurology, 19, 335–43.
Li, D., Christ, S., & Cowan, N. (2014). Domain-general and domain-speciﬁc functional
networks in working memory. NeuroImage, 102, 646–56.
Lieberman, M. (2009). What zombies can’t do: A social cognitive neuroscience approach
to the irreducibility of reﬂective consciousness. In J. Evans & K. Frankish (eds.), In Two
Minds, Oxford University Press.
Lieberman, M. (2013). Social: Why our brains are wired to connect. Crown Publishers.
Light, K., Kolata, S., Wass, C., Denman-Brice, A., Zagalsky, R., & Matzel, L. (2010).
Working memory training promotes general cognitive abilities in genetically hetero-
geneous mice. Current Biology, 20, 777–82.
references
259

Limb, C. & Braun, A. (2008). Neural substrates of spontaneous musical performance: An
fMRI study of jazz improvisation. PLoS ONE, 3(2), e1679.
Lind, A., Hall, L., Breidegard, B., Balkenius, C., & Johansson, P. (2014). Speakers’
acceptance of real-time speech exchange indicates that we use auditory feedback to
specify the meaning of what we say. Psychological Science, 25, 1198–205.
Lisman, J. & Sternberg, E. (2013). Habit and nonhabit systems for unconscious and
conscious behavior: Implications for multitasking. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
25, 273–83.
Loar, B. (1981). Mind and meaning. Cambridge University Press.
Lovejoy, L. & Krauzlis, R. (2010). Inactivation of primate superior colliculus impairs
covert selection of signals for perceptual judgments. Nature Neuroscience, 13, 261–7.
Lovett, M., Reder, L., & Lebiere, C. (1999). Modeling working memory in a uniﬁed
architecture: An ACT-R perspective. In A. Miyake & P. Shah (eds.), Models of Working
Memory, Cambridge University Press.
Lu, H., Zou, Q., Gu, H., Raichle, M., Stein, E., & Yang, Y. (2012). Rat brains also
have a default mode network. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109,
3979–84.
Luck, S., Chelazzi, L., Hillyard, S., & Desimone, R. (1997). Neural mechanisms of spatial
selective attention in areas V1, V2, and V4 of Macaque visual cortex. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 77, 24–42.
Luiten, P. (1981). Afferent and efferent connections of the optic tectum in the carp
(Cyprinus carpio L.). Brain Research, 220, 51–65.
Luo, Y. (2011). Do 10-month-old infants understand others’ false beliefs? Cognition, 121,
289–98.
Lupyan, G. (2012). Linguistically modulated perception and cognition: The label-feedback
hypothesis. Frontiers in Psychology, 3:54.
Lupyan, G. & Spivey, M. (2010a). Redundant spoken labels facilitate perception of
multiple items. Attention, Perception, and Psychophysics, 72, 2236–53.
Lupyan, G. & Spivey, M. (2010b). Making the invisible visible: Auditory cues facilitate
visual object detection. PLoS ONE, 5, e11452.
MacDonald, M., Just, M., & Carpenter, P. (1992). Working memory constraints on the
processing of syntactic ambiguity. Cognitive Psychology, 24, 56–98.
Mack, A. & Rock, I. (1998). Inattentional Blindness. MIT Press.
Mahon, B. & Caramazza, A. (2008). A critical look at the embodied cognition hypothesis
and a new proposal for grounding conceptual content. Journal of Physiology—Paris, 102,
59–70.
Marcus, G. (2001). The Algebraic Mind. MIT Press.
Marien, H., Custers, R., Hassin, R., & Aarts, H. (2012). Unconscious goal activation and
the hijacking of the executive function. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
103, 399–415.
Martin, A. (2007). The representation of object concepts in the brain. Annual Review of
Psychology, 58, 25–45.
Mason, M., Norton, N., Van Horn, J., Wegner, D., Grafton, S., & Macrae, C. (2007).
Wandering minds: The default network and stimulus-independent thought. Science,
315, 393–5.
260
references

Masuda, T. & Nisbett, R. (2001). Attending holistically vs analytically: Comparing the
context sensitivity of Japanese and Americans. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 81, 922–34.
Matzel, L., Han, Y., Grossman, H., Karnik, M., Patel, D., Scott, N., Specht, S., & Gandhi, C.
(2003). Individual differences in the expression of a “general” learning ability in mice.
Journal of Neuroscience, 23, 6423–33.
Mayer, J., Bittner, R., Nikolić, D., Bledowski, C., Goebel, R., & Linden, D. (2007). Common
neural substrates for visual working memory and attention. NeuroImage, 36, 441–53.
Mayes, A. & Roberts, N. (2002). Theories of episodic memory. In A. Baddeley,
M. Conway, & J. Aggleton (eds.), Episodic Memory, Oxford University Press.
Mazoyer, B., Zago, L., Mellet, E., Bricogne, S., Etard, O., Houdé, O., Crivello, F., Joliot, M.,
Petit, L., & Tzourio-Mazoyer, N. (2001). Cortical networks for working memory and
executive functions sustain the conscious resting state in man. Brain Research Bulletin,
54, 287–98.
McCormick, P. (1997). Orienting attention without awareness. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 23, 168–80.
McDowell, J. (1994). Mind and World. Harvard University Press.
McGinn, C. (1982). The structure of content. In A. Woodﬁeld (ed.), Thought and Object,
Oxford University Press.
McVay, J. & Kane, M. (2009). Conducting the train of thought: Working memory
capacity, goal neglect, and mind wandering in an executive-control task. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 35, 196–204.
Mechelli, A., Price, C., Friston, K., & Ishai, A. (2004). Where bottom–up meets top–down:
Neuronal interactions during perception and imagery. Cerebral Cortex, 14, 1256–65.
Meister, I., Wienemann, M., Buelte, D., Grünewald, C., Sparing, R., & Dambeck, N.
(2006). Hemiextinction induced by transcranial magnetic stimulation over the right
temporo-parietal junction. Neuroscience, 142, 119–23.
Melis, A., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2006). Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) conceal visual
and auditory information from others. Journal of Comparative Psychology, 120, 154–62.
Melnick, M., Harison, B., Park, S., Bennetto, L., & Tadin, D. (2013). A strong interactive
link between sensory discriminations and intelligence. Current Biology, 23, 1013–17.
Mendes, N., Hanus, D., & Call, J. (2007). Raising the level: Orangutans use water as a tool.
Biology Letters, 3, 453–5.
Menon, V. (2011). Large-scale brain networks and psychopathology: A unifying triple
network model. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 15, 483–506.
Menzel, R. & Giurfa, M. (2006). Dimensions of cognition in an insect, the honeybee.
Behavioral and Cognitive Neuroscience Reviews, 5, 24–40.
Menzel, R., Greggers, U., Smith, A., Berger, S., Brandt, R., Brunke, S., Bundrock, G., Hülse,
S., Plümpe, T., Schaupp, F., Schüttler, E., Stach, S., Stindt, J., Stollhoff, N., & Watzl, S.
(2005). Honey bees navigate according to a map-like spatial memory. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 102, 3040–5.
Menzel, R., Kirbach, A., Haass, W-D., Fisher, B., Fuchs, J., Koblofsky, M., Lehmann, K.,
Reiter, L., Meyer, H., Nguyen, H., Jones, S., Norton, P., & Greggers, U. (2011).
A common frame of reference for learned and communicated vectors in honeybee
navigation. Current Biology, 21, 645–50.
references
261

Mercier, H. & Sperber, D. (2011). Why do humans reason? Arguments for an argumen-
tative theory. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 34, 57–74.
Mesulam, M. (1999). Spatial attention and neglect: parietal, frontal and cingulate contri-
butions to the mental representation and attentional targeting of salient extrapersonal
events. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 354, 1325–46.
Metcalfe, J. & Mischel, W. (1999). A hot/cool-system analysis of delay of gratiﬁcation:
Dynamics of willpower. Psychological Review, 106, 3–19.
Meyer, C., Hagmann-von Arx, P., Lemola, S., & Grob, A. (2010). Correspondence
between the general ability to discriminate sensory stimuli and general intelligence.
Journal of Individual Differences, 31, 46–56.
Mikels, J., Reuter-Lorenz, P., Beyer, J., & Fredrickson, B. (2008). Emotion and working
memory: Evidence for domain-speciﬁc processes for affective maintenance. Emotion, 8,
256–66.
Miller, G. (1997). Protean primates: The evolution of adaptive unpredictability in com-
petition and courtship. In R. Byrne & A. Whiten (eds.), Machiavellian Intelligence II,
Cambridge University Press.
Millikan, R. (1984). Language, Thought, and Other Biological Categories. MIT Press.
Milner, D. & Goodale, M. (1995). The Visual Brain in Action. Oxford University Press.
Mischel, H. & Mischel, W. (1983). The development of children’s knowledge of self-
control strategies. Child Development, 54, 603–19.
Miyake, A., Friedman, N., Emerson, M., Witzki, A., Howerter, A., & Wager, T. (2000).
The unity and diversity of executive functions and their contributions to complex
“frontal lobe” tasks: A latent variable analysis. Cognitive Psychology, 41, 49–100.
Mo, L., Xu, G., Kay, P., & Tan, L-H. (2011). Electrophysiological evidence for the left-
lateralized effect of language on preattentive categorical perception of color. Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108, 14026–30.
Mole, C. (2010). Attention is Cognitive Unison. Oxford University Press.
Monchi, O., Petrides, M., Petre, V., Worsley, K., & Dagher, A. (2001). Wisconsin card
sorting revisited: Distinct neural circuits participating in different stages of the task
identiﬁed by event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging. The Journal of
Neuroscience, 21, 7733–41.
Moore, D. & Johnson, S. (2011). Mental rotation of dynamic, three-dimensional stimuli
by 3-month-old infants. Infancy, 16, 435–45.
Moran, R. (2001). Authority and Estrangement. Princeton University Press.
Moro, V., Berlucchi, G., Lerch,J., Tomaiuolo, F., & Aglioti, S. (2008). Selective deﬁcit inmental
visual imagery with intact primary visual cortex and visual perception. Cortex, 44, 109–18.
Moskowitz, G. (2005). Social Cognition: Understanding Self and Others. Guilford Press.
Mottaghy, F. (2006). Interfering with working memory in humans. Neuroscience, 139,
85–90.
Mottaghy, F., Döring, T., Müller-Gärtner, H-W., Töpper, R., & Krause, B. (2002). Bilateral
parieto-frontal network for verbal working memory: An interference approach using
repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS). European Journal of Neuroscience,
16, 1627–32.
Mulcahy, N. & Call, J. (2004). Apes save tools for future use. Science, 312, 1038–40.
262
references

Müller, N. & Knight, R. (2006). The functional neuroanatomy of working memory:
Contributions of human brain lesion studies. Neuroscience, 139, 51–8.
Mysore, S. & Knudsen, E. (2013). A shared inhibitory circuit for both exogenous and
endogenous control of stimulus selection. Nature Neuroscience, 16, 473–8.
Nee, D., Brown, J., Askren, M., Berman, M., Demiralp, E., Krawitz, A., & Jonides, J.
(2013). A meta-analysis of executive components of working memory. Cerebral Cortex,
23, 264–82.
Negri, G., Rumiati, R., Zadini, A., Ukmar, M., Mahon, B., & Caramazza, A. (2007). What
is the role of motor simulation in action and object recognition? Evidence from apraxia.
Cognitive Neuropsychology, 24, 795–816.
Newell, A. (1990). Uniﬁed Theories of Cognition. Harvard University Press.
Nichols, S. & Stich, S. (2003). Mindreading. Oxford University Press.
Nisbett, R. (2003). The Geography of Thought. The Free Press.
Nisbett, R. (2009). Intelligence and How to Get It. Norton & Company.
Novick, J., Trueswell, J., & Thompson-Schill, S. (2010). Broca’s area and language
processing: Evidence for the cognitive control connection. Language and Linguistics
Compass, 4, 906–24.
Nozari, N., Dell, G., & Schwartz, M. (2011). Is comprehension necessary for error
detection? A conﬂict-based account of monitoring in speech production. Cognitive
Psychology, 63, 1–33.
O’Brien, L. & Soteriou, M. (eds.) (2009). Mental Action. Oxford University Press.
Oliveri, M., Turriziani, P., Carlesimo, G., Koch, G., Tomaiuolo, F., Panella, M., &
Caltagirone, C. (2001). Parietal-frontal interactions in visual-object and visual-spatial
working memory: Evidence from transcranial magnetic stimulation. Cerebral Cortex,
11, 606–18.
Onishi, K. & Baillargeon, R. (2005). Do 15-month-olds understand false beliefs? Science,
308, 255–8.
Oppenheim, G. & Dell, G. (2010). Motor movement matters: The ﬂexible abstractness of
inner speech. Memory & Cognition, 38, 1147–60.
Ormrod, J. & Cochran, K. (1988). Relationship of verbal ability and working memory to
spelling achievement and learning to spell. Reading Research and Instruction, 28,
33–43.
Osvath, M. (2009). Spontaneous planning for future stone throwing by a male chimpan-
zee. Current Biology, 19, R190–R191.
Osvath, M. & Karvonen, E. (2011). Spontaneous innovation for future deception in a male
chimpanzee. PLoS One, 7, e36782.
Osvath, M. & Osvath, H. (2008). Chimpanzee and orangutan forethought: Self-control
and pre-experience in the face of future tool use. Animal Cognition, 11, 661–74.
Oyserman, D. & Lee, S. (2008). Does culture inﬂuence what and how we think? Effects of
priming individualism and collectivism. Psychological Bulletin, 134, 311–42.
Palmer, S. (1999). Vision Science. MIT Press.
Papineau, D. (1987). Reality and Representation. Blackwell.
Pasternak, T. & Greenlee, M. (2005). Working memory in primate sensory systems.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 6, 97–107.
references
263

Paulesu, E., Frith, C., & Frackowiak, R. (1993). The neural correlates of the verbal
component of working memory. Nature, 362, 342–5.
Peacocke, C. (1992). A Study of Concepts. MIT Press.
Peacocke, C. (2008). Truly Understood. Oxford University Press.
Perner, J. (2010). Who took the cog out of cognitive science? Mentalism in an era of anti-
cognitivism. In P. Frensch & R. Schwarzer (eds.), Cognition and Neuropsychology:
Volume 1, Psychology Press.
Pessoa, L. (2013). The Cognitive-Emotional Brain. MIT Press.
Pessoa, L. & Ungerleider, L. (2004). Neural correlates of change detection and change
blindness in a working memory task. Cerebral Cortex, 14, 511–20.
Petty, R. & Cacioppo, J. (1986). The elaboration likelihood model of persuasion. In
L. Berkowitz (ed.), Advances in Experimental Social Psychology (vol. 19), Academic
Press.
Pfurtscheller, G. & Neuper, C. (1997). Motor imagery activates primary sensorimotor area
in humans. Neuroscience Letters, 239, 65–8.
Picciuto, E. (2011). The pleasures of suppositions. Philosophical Psychology, 22, 487–503.
Picciuto, E. & Carruthers, P. (2014). The origins of creativity. In E. Paul & S. Kaufman
(eds.), The Philosophy of Creativity, Oxford University Press.
Pietroski, P. (2010). Concepts, meanings, and truth: First nature, second nature and hard
work. Mind and Language, 25, 247–78.
Pinsk, M., Doniger, G., & Kastner, S. (2004). Push-pull mechanism of selective attention
in human extrastriate cortex. Journal of Neurophysiology, 92, 622–9.
Pitt, D. (2004). The phenomenology of cognition. Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research, 59, 1–36.
Posner, M. & Gilbert, C. (1999). Attention and primary visual cortex. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 96, 2585–7.
Postle, B. (2006). Working memory as an emergent property of the mind and brain.
Neuroscience, 139, 23–38.
Postle, B., Ferrarelli, F., Hamidi, M., Feredoes, E., Massimini, M., Peterson, M., Alexander, A.,
& Tononi, G. (2006). Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation dissociates work-
ing memory manipulation from retention functions in the prefrontal, but not
posterior parietal, cortex. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18, 1712–22.
Poulin-Dubois, D. & Chow, V. (2009). The effect of a looker’s past reliability on infants’
reasoning about beliefs. Developmental Psychology, 45, 1576–82.
Povinelli, D. and Vonk, J. (2004). We don’t need a microscope to explore the chimpan-
zee’s mind. Mind and Language, 19, 1–28.
Prabhakaran, V., Smith, J.A., Desmond, J., Glover, G., & Gabrieli, J. (1997). Neural
substrates of ﬂuid reasoning: An fMRI study of neocortical activation during perform-
ance of the Raven’s Progressive Matrices Test. Cognitive Psychology, 33, 43–63.
Prinz, J. (2002). Furnishing the Mind. MIT Press.
Prinz, J. (2012). The Conscious Brain. Oxford University Press.
Pylyshyn, Z. (2003). Seeing and Visualizing. MIT Press.
Raby, C., Alexis, D., Dickinson, A., & Clayton, N. (2007). Planning for the future by
western scrub-jays. Nature, 445, 919–21.
264
references

Raghubar, K., Barnes, M., & Hecht, S. (2010). Working memory and mathematics:
A review of developmental, individual difference, and cognitive approaches. Learning
and Individual Differences, 20, 110–22.
Raichle, M., MacLeod, A., Snyder, A., Powers, W., Gusnard, D., & Shulman, G. (2001).
A default mode of brain function. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 98,
676–82.
Ramsey, W. (2007). Representation Reconsidered. Cambridge University Press.
Read, D. (2008). Working memory: A cognitive limit to non-human primate recursive
thinking prior to hominid evolution? Evolutionary Psychology, 6, 676–714.
Reber, A. (1993). Implicit Learning and Tacit Knowledge. Oxford University Press.
Reddy, L., Tsuchiya, N., & Serre, T. (2010). Reading the mind’s eye: Decoding category
information during mental imagery. Neuroimage, 50, 818–25.
Redick, T., Shipstead, Z., Harrison, T., Hicks, K., Fried, D., Hambrick, D., Kane, M., &
Engle, R. (2012a). No evidence of intelligence improvement after working memory
training: A randomized, placebo-controlled study. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 142, 359–79.
Redick, T., Unsworth, N., Kelly, A., & Engle, R. (2012b). Faster, smarter? Working
memory capacity and perceptual speed in relation to ﬂuid intelligence. Journal of
Cognitive Psychology, 24, 844–54.
Rensink, R., O’Regan, J., & Clark, J. (1997). To see or not to see: The need for attention to
perceive changes in scenes. Psychological Science, 8, 368–73.
Reuter, F., Del Cul, A., Audoin, B., Malikova, I., Naccache, L., Ranjeva, J.P., Lyon-Caen, O.,
Ali Cherif, A., Cohen, L., Dehaene, S., & Pelletier, J. (2007). Intact subliminal processing
and delayed conscious access in multiple sclerosis. Neuropsychologia, 45, 2683–91.
Reuter, F., Del Cul, A., Malikova, I., Naccache, L., Confort-Gouny, S., Cohen, L., Cheriff,
A., Cozzone, P., Pelletier, J., Ranjeva, J., Dehaene, S., & Audoin, B. (2009). White matter
damage impairs access to consciousness in multiple sclerosis. Neuroimage, 44, 590–9.
Rey, G. (2013). We are not all “self-blind”: A defense of a modest introspectionism. Mind
& Language, 28, 259–85.
Reynolds, J. & Chelazzi, L. (2004). Attentional modulation of visual processing. Annual
Reviews Neuroscience, 27, 611–47.
Richter, W., Somorjat, R., Summers, R., Jarnasz, N., Menon, R., Gati, J., Georgopoulos, A.,
Tegeler, C., Ugerbil, K., & Kim, S. (2000). Motor area activity during mental rotation
studied by time-resolved single-trial fMRI. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12,
310–20.
Rilling, J., Barks, S., Parr, L., Preuss, T., Faber, T., Pagnoni, G., Bremner, D., & Votaw, J.
(2007). A comparison of resting-state brain activity in humans and chimpanzees.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104, 17146–51.
Riquimaroux, H., Gaioni, S., & Suga, N. (1991). Cortical computational maps control
auditory perception. Science, 251, 565–8.
Robertson, I., Tegner, R., Tham, K., Lo, A., & Nimmo-smith, I. (1995). Sustained attention
training for unilateral neglect: Theoretical and rehabilitation implications. Journal of
Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 17, 416–30.
Rolls, E. (1999). The Brain and Emotion. Oxford University Press.
references
265

Rosenbaum, D. (2010). Human Motor Control (second edition). Academic Press.
Rosenbaum, D., Meulenbroek, R., Vaughan, J., & Jansen, C. (2001). Posture-based motion
planning. Psychological Review, 108, 709–34.
Rosenbaum, D., Vaughan, J., Meulenbroek, R., Jax, S., & Cohen, R. (2008). Smart moves:
The psychology of everyday perceptual-motor acts. In E. Morsella, J. Bargh, &
P. Gollwitzer (eds.), Oxford Handbook of Human Action, Oxford University Press.
Rosenthal, D. (2005). Consciousness and Mind. Oxford University Press.
Rottschy, C., Langner, R., Dogan, I., Reetz, K., Laird, A., Schulz, J., Fox, P., & Eickhoff, S.
(2012). Modelling neural correlates of working memory: A coordinate-based meta-
analysis. NeuroImage, 60, 830–46.
Rumelhart, D. & McClelland, J. (1986). Parallel Distributed Processing. MIT Press.
Russell, J. (1980). A circumplex model of affect. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 39, 1161–78.
Sadaghiani, S., Hesselmann, G., & Kleinschmidt, A. (2009). Distributed and antagonistic
contributions of ongoing activity ﬂuctuations to auditory stimulus detection. Journal of
Neuroscience, 29, 13410–17.
Salas, C., Broglio, C., & Rodriguez, F. (2003). Evolution of forebrain and spatial cognition
in vertebrates: Conservation across diversity. Brain, Behavior and Evolution, 62, 72–82.
Sanz, C., Morgan, D., & Gulick, S. (2004). New insights into chimpanzees, tools, and
termites from the Congo basin. American Naturalist, 164, 567–81.
Saults, J. & Cowan, N. (2007). A central capacity limit to the simultaneous storage of
visual and auditory arrays in working memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 136, 663–84.
Saxe, R. (2009). Theory of mind (neural basis). In W. Banks (ed.), Encyclopedia of
Consciousness, MIT Press.
Saxe, R., Whitﬁeld-Gabrieli, S., Pelphrey, K., & Scholz, J. (2009). Brain regions for
perceiving and reasoning about other people in school-aged children. Child Develop-
ment, 80, 1197–209.
Schacter, D. (2001). The Seven Sins of Memory. Houghton & Mifﬂin.
Schacter, D., Addis, D., & Buckner, R. (2007). Remembering the past to imagine the
future: The prospective brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 8, 657–61.
Schönwiesner, M., Novitski, N., Pakarinen, S., Carlson, S., Tervaniemi, M., & Näätänen, R.
(2007). Heschl’s gyrus, posterior superior temporal gyrus, and mid-ventrolateral pre-
frontal cortex have different roles in the detection of acoustic changes. Journal of
Neuophysiology, 97, 2075–82.
Schooler, J. & Melcher, J. (1995). The ineffability of insight. In S. Smith, T. Ward, &
R. Finke (eds.), The Creative Cognition Approach, MIT Press.
Schooler, J., Ohlsson, S., & Brooks, K. (1993). Thoughts beyond words: When language
overshadows insight. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 122, 166–83.
Schretlen, D., Pearlson, G., Anthony, J., Aylward, E., Augustine, A., Davis, A., & Barta, P.
(2000). Elucidating the contributions of processing speed, executive ability, and frontal
lobe volume to normal age-related differences in ﬂuid intelligence. Journal of the
International Neuropsychological Society, 6, 52–61.
Scott, M., Yeung, H., Gick, B., & Werker, J. (2013). Inner speech captures the perception
of external speech. Journal of the Acoustic Society of America, 133, 286–92.
266
references

Scott, R. & Baillargeon, R. (2009). Which penguin is this? Attributing false beliefs about
object identity at 18 months. Child Development, 80, 1172–96.
Scott, R., Baillargeon, R., Song, H., & Leslie, A. (2010). Attributing false beliefs about non-
obvious properties at 18 months. Cognitive Psychology, 63.
Searle, J. (1983). Intentionality. Cambridge University Press.
Serences, J., Ester, E., Vogel, E., & Awh, E. (2009). Stimulus-speciﬁc delay activity in
human primary visual cortex. Psychological Science, 20, 207–14.
Sergent, C. & Dehaene, S. (2004). Is consciousness a gradual phenomenon? Evidence for
an all-or-none bifurcation during the attentional blink. Psychological Science, 15,
1656–74.
Sergent, C., Baillet, S., & Dehaene, S. (2005). Timing of the brain events underlying access
to consciousness during the attentional blink. Nature Neuroscience, 8, 1391–400.
Sergent, C., Wyart, V., Babo-Rebelo, M., Cohen, L., Naccache, L., & Tallon-Baudry, C.
(2013). Cueing attention after the stimulus is gone can retrospectively trigger conscious
perception. Current Biology, 23, 150–5.
Sestieri, C., Shulman, G., & Corbetta, M. (2010). Attention to memory and the environ-
ment: Functional specialization and dynamic competition in human posterior parietal
cortex. The Journal of Neuroscience, 30, 8445–56.
Shamosh, N., & Gray, J. (2008). Delay discounting and intelligence: A meta-analysis.
Intelligence, 38, 289–305.
Shamosh, N., DeYoung, C., Green, A., Reis, D., Johnson, M., Conway, A., Engle, R.,
Braver, T., & Gray, J. (2009). Individual differences in delay discounting: Relation to
intelligence, working memory, and anterior prefrontal cortex. Psychological Science, 19,
904–11.
Shenhav, A., Botvinick, M., & Cohen, J. (2013). The expected value of control: An
integrative theory of anterior cingulate cortex function. Neuron, 79, 217–40.
Shergill, S., Bullmore, E., Brammer, M., Williams, S., Murray, R., & McGuire, P. (2001).
A functional study of auditory verbal imagery. Psychological Medicine, 31, 241–53.
Shettleworth, S. (2010). Cognition, Evolution, and Behavior. Second Edition. Oxford
University Press.
Shintel, H. & Keysar, B. (2009). Less is more: A minimalist account of joint action in
communication. Topics in Cognitive Science, 1, 260–73.
Shipstead, Z., Lindsey, D., Marshall, R., & Engle, R. (2014). The mechanisms of working
memory capacity: Primary memory, secondary memory, and attention control. Journal
of Memory and Language, 72, 116–41.
Shipstead, Z., Redick, T., & Engle, R. (2010). Does working memory training generalize?
Psychologica Belgica, 50, 245–76.
Shipstead, Z., Redick, T., Hicks, K., & Engle, R. (2012). The scope and control of attention
as separate aspects of working memory. Memory, 20, 608–28.
Shomstein, S. & Yantis, S. (2006). Parietal cortex mediates voluntary control of spatial and
nonspatial auditory attention. Journal of Neuroscience, 26, 435–9.
Shuler, M. & Bear, M. (2006). Neurons in the primary visual cortex respond differently to
a ﬂash of light after it has been paired with a reward, unexpectedly showing that
cognitive information is coded at this level in the cortex. Science, 311, 1606–9.
Siewert, C. (1998). The Signiﬁcance of Consciousness. Princeton University Press.
references
267

Simon, L., Greenberg, J., & Brehm, J. (1995). Trivialization: The forgotten mode of
dissonance reduction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 247–60.
Simons, D. & Levin, D. (1997). Change blindness. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 1, 261–7.
Simonton, D. (2003). Scientiﬁc creativity as constrained stochastic behavior. Psychological
Bulletin, 129, 475–94.
Sligte, I., Scholte, H.S., & Lamme, V. (2008). Are there multiple visual short-term memory
stores? PLoS ONE, 3, e1699.
Sloman, S. (1996). The empirical case for two systems of reasoning. Psychological Bulletin,
119, 3–22.
Sloman, S. (2002). Two systems of reasoning. In T. Gilovich, D. Grifﬁn, & D. Kahneman
(eds.), Heuristics and Biases, Cambridge University Press.
Smallwood, J., Brown, K., Baird, B., & Schooler, J. (2011). Cooperation between the
default mode network and the frontal–parietal network in the production of an internal
train of thought. Brain Research, 1428, 60–70.
Smolensky, P. (1991). Connectionism, constituency, and the language of thought. In
B. Loewer and G. Rey (eds.), Meaning in Mind, Blackwell.
Smolensky, P. (1995). Constituent structure and the explanation of an integrated con-
nectionist/symbolic cognitive architecture. In C. MacDonald and G. MacDonald (eds.),
Connectionism, Blackwell.
Smolensky, P. & Legendre, G. (2006). The Harmonic Mind (2 volumes). MIT Press.
Song, H. & Baillargeon, R. (2008). Infants’ reasoning about others’ false perceptions.
Developmental Psychology, 44, 1789–95.
Song, H., Onishi, K., Baillargeon, R., & Fisher, C. (2008). Can an actor’s false belief be
corrected by an appropriate communication? Psychological reasoning in 18.5-month-
old infants. Cognition, 109, 295–315.
Soto, D., Mäntylä, T., & Silvanto, J. (2011). Working memory without consciousness.
Current Biology, 21, R912.
Southgate, V. & Vernetti, A. (2014). Belief-based action prediction in preverbal infants.
Cognition, 130, 1–10.
Southgate, V., Chevallier, C., & Csibra, G. (2010). Seventeen-month-olds appeal to false
beliefs to interpret others’ referential communication. Developmental Science, 13,
907–12.
Southgate, V., Senju, A., & Csibra, G. (2007). Action anticipation through attribution of
false belief by 2-year-olds. Psychological Science, 18, 587–92.
Sperber, D. & Wilson, D. (1995). Relevance: Communication and Cognition. Second
Edition. Blackwell.
Sperling, G. (1960). The information available in brief visual presentations. Psychological
Monographs: General and Applied, 74, 1–29.
Sporns, O. (2011). Networks of the Brain. MIT Press.
Spreng, R., Mar, R., & Kim, A. (2009). The common neural basis of autobiographical
memory, prospection, navigation, theory of mind, and the default mode: A quantitative
meta-analysis. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21, 489–510.
Sreenivasan, K., Sambhara, D., & Jha, A. (2011). Working memory templates are main-
tained as feature-speciﬁc perceptual codes. Journal of Neurophysiology, 106, 115–21.
Stalnaker, R. (2002). Common ground. Linguistics and Philosophy, 25, 701–21.
268
references

Stanovich, K. (1999). Who is Rational? Studies of Individual Differences in Reasoning.
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Stanovich, K. (2009). What Intelligence Tests Miss: The Psychology of Rational Thought.
Yale University Press.
Stephens, D. & Krebs, J. (1987). Foraging Theory. Princeton University Press.
Stippich, C., Ochmann, H., & Sartor, K. (2002). Somatotopic mapping of the human
primary sensorimotor cortex during motor imagery and motor execution by functional
magnetic resonance imaging. Neuroscience Letters, 331, 50–4.
Störmer, V., McDonald, J., & Hillyard, S. (2009). Cross-modal cueing of attention alters
appearance and early cortical processing of visual stimuli. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 106, 22456–61.
Strawson, G. (1994). Mental Reality. MIT Press.
Striedter, G. (2004). Principles of Brain Evolution. Sinauer Associates.
Subramaniam, K., Kounios, J., Parrish, T., & Jung-Beeman, M. (2009). A brain mechan-
ism for facilitation of insight by positive affect. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21,
415–32.
Suddendorf, T. & Corballis, M. (1997). Mental time travel and the evolution of the human
mind. Genetic, Social and General Psychology Monographs, 123, 133–67.
Suddendorf, T. & Corballis, M. (2007). The evolution of foresight: What is mental time
travel, and is it unique to humans? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 30, 299–316.
Suddendorf, T., Addis, D., & Corballis, M. (2009). Mental time travel and the shaping of
the human mind. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,
364, 1317–24.
Sugita, Y. (2008). Face perception in monkeys reared with no exposure to faces. Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105, 394–8.
Summerﬁeld, J., Hassabis, D., & Maguire, E. (2010). Differential engagement of brain
regions within a “core” network during scene construction. Neuropsychologia, 48,
1501–9.
Surian, L., Caldi, S., & Sperber, D. (2007). Attribution of beliefs by 13-month-old infants.
Psychological Science, 18, 580–6.
Süß, H-M., Oberauer, K., Wittmann, W., Wilhelm, O., & Schulze, R. (2002). Working-
memory capacity explains reasoning ability—and a little bit more. Intelligence, 30,
261–88.
Swanson, L. (2012). Brain Architecture. (Second Edition.) Oxford University Press.
Szameitat, A., Shen, S., & Sterr, A. (2007). Motor imagery of complex everyday move-
ments. An fMRI study. NeuroImage, 34, 702–13.
Tang, C., Eaves, E., Ng, J., Carpenter, D., Mai, X., Schroeder, D., Condon, C., Colom, R., &
Haier, R. (2010). Brain networks for working memory and factors of intelligence
assessed in males and females with fMRI and DTI. Intelligence, 38, 293–303.
Tangney, J., Baumeister, R., & Boone, A. (2004). High self-control predicts good adjust-
ment, less pathology, better grades, and interpersonal success. Journal of Personality,
72, 271–324.
Taylor, A., Elliffe, D., Hunt, G., & Gray, R. (2010). Complex cognition and behavioral
innovation in New Caledonian crows. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences, 277, 2637–43.
references
269

Thelen, E., Schöner, G., Scheier, C., & Smith, L. (2001). The dynamics of embodiment:
A ﬁeld theory of infant perseverative reaching. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24, 1–34.
Thiebaut de Schotten, M., Cohen, L., Amemiya, E., Braga, L., & Dehaene, S. (2014).
Learning to read improves the structure of the arcuate fasciculus. Cerebral Cortex, 24,
989–95.
Thierry, G., Athanasopoulos, P., Wiggett, A., Dering, B., & Kuipers, J-R. (2009). Uncon-
scious effects of language-speciﬁc terminology on preattentive color perception. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106, 4567–70.
Thompson-Schill, S. (2013). Data presented at the University of Maryland Cognitive
Science Colloquium, September 2013.
Tian, X. & Poeppel, D. (2012). Mental imagery of speech: Linking motor and perceptual
systems through internal simulation and estimation. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience,
6, 314.
Todd, J. & Marois, R. (2004). Capacity limit of visual short-term memory in human
posterior parietal cortex. Nature, 428, 751–4.
Todd, J., Fougnie, D., & Marois, R. (2005). Visual short-term memory load suppresses
temporo-parietal junction activity and induces inattentional blindness. Psychological
Science, 16, 965–72.
Tononi, G. (2008). Consciousness as integrated information: A provisional manifesto.
Biology Bulletin, 215, 216–42.
Tononi, G. & Koch, C. (2008). The neural correlates of consciousness: An update. Annals
of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1124, 239–61.
Träuble, B., Marinovic, V., & Pauen, S. (2010). Early theory of mind competencies: Do
infants understand others’ beliefs? Infancy, 15, 434–44.
Treue, S. & Maunsell, J. (1996). Attentional modulation of visual motion processing in
cortical areas MT and MST. Nature, 382, 539–41.
Tsujii, T. & Watanabe, S. (2009). Neural correlates of dual-task effect on belief-bias
syllogistic reasoning: A near-infrared spectroscopy study. Brain Research, 1287,
118–25.
Tsujii, T. & Watanabe, S. (2010). Neural correlates of belief-bias reasoning under time
pressure: A near-infrared spectroscopy study. NeuroImage, 50, 1320–6.
Tulving, E. (2002). Episodic memory: From mind to brain. Annual Review of Psychology,
53, 1–25.
Tulving, E. & Markowitsch, H. (1998). Episodic and declarative memory: Role of the
hippocampus. Hippocampus, 8, 198–204.
Tye, M. (1995). Ten Problems of Consciousness. MIT Press.
Tye, M. (2000). Consciousness, Color, and Content. MIT Press.
Uddin, L., Supekar, K., Amin, H., Rykhlevskaia, E., Nguyen, D., Greicius, M., and Menon, V.
(2010). Dissociable connectivity within human angular gyrus and intraparietal sulcus:
Evidence from functional and structural connectivity. Cerebral Cortex, 20, 2636–46.
Uller, C. & Lewis, J. (2009). Horses select the greater of two quantities in small numerical
contrasts. Animal Cognition, 12, 733–8.
Ungerleider, L. & Mishkin, M. (1982). Two cortical visual systems. In D. Ingle,
M. Goodale, & R. Mansﬁeld (eds.), Analysis of Visual Behavior, MIT Press.
270
references

Unsworth, N. & Engle, R. (2007). The nature of individual differences in working memory
capacity: Active maintenance in primary memory and controlled search from second-
ary memory. Psychological Review, 114, 104–32.
Unsworth, N. & Spillers, G. (2010). Working memory capacity: Attention control,
secondary memory, or both? A direct test of the dual-component model. Journal of
Memory and Language, 62, 392–406.
Van Boxtel, J., Tsuchiya, N., & Koch, C. (2010). Consciousness and attention: On
sufﬁciency and necessity. Frontiers in Psychology, 1, article 217.
van der Wel, R., Sebanz, N., & Knoblich, G. (2014). Do people automatically track others’
beliefs? Evidence from a continuous measure. Cognition, 130, 128–33.
Vargha-Khadem, F., Gadian, D., Watkins, K., Connelly, A., Van Paesschen, W., &
Mishkin, M. (1997). Differential effects of early hippocampal pathology on episodic
and semantic memory. Science, 277, 376–80.
Veillet, B. & Carruthers, P. (2011). The case against cognitive phenomenology. In
T. Bayne & M. Montague (eds.), Cognitive Phenomenology, Oxford University
Press.
Vetter, P. & Newen, A. (2014). Varieties of cognitive penetration in visual perception.
Consciousness and Cognition, 27, 62–75.
Vetter, P., Smith, F., & Muckli, L. (2014). Decoding sound and imagery content in early
visual cortex. Current Biology, 24, 1256–62.
Vincent, J., Patel, G., Fox, M., Snyder, A., Baker, J., Van Essen, D., Zempel, J., Snyder, L.,
Corbetta, M., & Raichle, M. (2007). Intrinsic functional architecture in the anaesthe-
tized monkey brain. Nature, 447, 83–6.
Vincent, J., Snyder, A., Fox, M., Shannon, B., Andrews, J., Raichle, M., & Buckner, R.
(2006). Coherent spontaneous activity identiﬁes a hippocampal–parietal memory
network. Journal of Neurophysiology, 96, 3517–31.
Vingerhoets, G., de Lange, F., Vandemaele, P., Deblaere, K., & Achten, E. (2002). Motor
imagery in mental rotation: An fMRI study. NeuroImage, 17, 1623–33.
Voisin, J., Bidet-Caulet, A., Bertrand, O., & Fonlupt, P. (2006). Listening in silence
activates auditory areas: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Journal of
Neuroscience, 26, 273–8.
Völter, C. & Call, J. (2014). Younger apes and human children plan their moves in a maze
task. Cognition, 130, 186–203.
Vuilleumier, P. (2005). How brains beware: Neural mechanisms of emotional attention.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9, 585–94.
Vuontela, V., Rama, P., Raninen, A., Aronen, H., & Carlson, S. (1999). Selective interfer-
ence reveals dissociation between memory for location and color. Neuroreport, 10,
2235–40.
Wagner, A., Shannon, B., Kahn, I., & Buckner, R. (2005). Parietal lobe contributions to
episodic memory retrieval. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9, 445–53.
Wallis, J., Anderson, K., & Miller, E. (2001). Single neurons in prefrontal cortex encode
abstract rules. Nature, 411, 953–6.
Ward, T., Smith, S., & Finke, R. (1999). Creative cognition. In R. Sternberg (ed.),
Handbook of Creativity, Cambridge University Press.
references
271

Wegner, D. & Wheatley, T. (1999). Apparent mental causation: Sources of the experience
of the will. American Psychologist, 54, 480–91.
Weir, A. & Kacelnik, A. (2006). A New Caledonian crow (Corvus moneduloides) creatively
re-designs tools by bending or unbending aluminium strips. Animal Cognition, 9,
317–34.
Weir, A., Chappell, J., & Kacelnik, A. (2002). Shaping of hooks in New Caledonian Crows.
Science, 297, 981.
Wexler, M., Kosslyn, S., & Berthoz, A. (1998). Motor processes in mental rotation.
Cognition, 68, 77–94.
Wheeler, M., Peterson, S., & Buckner, R. (2000). Memory’s echo: Vivid remembering
reactivates sensory-speciﬁc cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 97,
11125–9.
Wieth, M. & Zacks, R. (2011). Time of day effects on problem solving: When the non-
optimal is optimal. Thinking & Reasoning, 17, 387–401.
Williams, B. (1973). Deciding to believe. In his Problems of the Self. Cambridge University
Press.
Wilson, M. & Fox, G. (2007). Working memory for language is not special: Evidence for
an articulatory loop for novel stimuli. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14, 470–3.
Wilson, T. (2002). Strangers to Ourselves. Harvard University Press.
Wilson, T., Lindsey, S., & Schooler, T. (2000). A model of dual attitudes. Psychological
Review, 107, 101–26.
Wilson, T., Schooler, J., Hodges, S., Klaaren, K., & LaFleur, S. (1993). Introspecting about
reasons can reduce post-choice satisfaction. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
19, 331–9.
Winawer, J., Witthoft, N., Frank, M., Wu, L., Wade, A., & Boroditsky, L. (2007). Russian
blues reveal effects of language on color discrimination. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 104, 7780–5.
Winkowski, D. & Knudsen, E. (2007). Top-down control of multimodal sensitivity in the
Barn Owl optic tectum. Journal of Neuroscience, 27, 13279–91.
Winkowski, D. & Knudsen, E. (2008). Distinct mechanisms for the top-down control of
neural gain and sensitivity in the Owl optic tectum. Neuron, 60, 698–708.
Wolpert, D. & Ghahramani, Z. (2000). Computational principles of movement neurosci-
ence. Nature Neuroscience, 3, 1212–17.
Wolpert, D. & Kawato, M. (1998). Multiple paired forward and inverse models for motor
control. Neural Networks, 11, 1317–29.
Wu, C., Weissman, D., Roberts, K., & Woldorff, M. (2007). The neural circuitry under-
lying the executive control of spatial attention. Brain Research, 1134, 189–98.
Wu, W. (2011). Confronting many-many problems: Attention and agentive control.
Nous, 45, 50–76.
Yeo, B.T., Krienen, F., Sepulcre, J., Sabuncu, M., Lashkari, D., Hollinshead, M., Roffman,
J., Smoller, J., Zöllei, L., Polimeni, J., Fischl, B., Liu, H., & Buckner, R. (2011). The
organization of human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 106, 1125–65.
Yott, J. & Poulin-Dubois, D. (2012). Breaking the rules: Do infants have a true under-
standing of false belief? British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 30, 156–71.
272
references

Young, R. & Lewis, R. (1999). The Soar cognitive architecture and human working
memory. In A. Miyake & P. Shah (eds.), Models of Working Memory, Cambridge
University Press.
Zanto, T., Rubens, M., Thangavel, A., & Gazzaley, A. (2011). Causal role of the prefrontal
cortex in top–down modulation of visual processing and working memory. Nature
Neuroscience, 14, 656–61.
references
273


Index of Names
Aarts, H. 139, 140; see also Marien, H. (2012)
Abad, F. see Colom, R. (2008)
Abler, B. see Herwig, U. (2003)
Achten, E. see Vingerhoets, G. (2002)
Acton, G. 132
Adams, F. 199–200
Addis, D. 136, 137; see also Schacter, D. (2007),
Suddendorf, T. (2009)
Aglioti, S. see Moro, V. (2008)
Aizawa, K. 199–200
Akhter, S. 117
Alexander, A. see Postle, B. (2006)
Alexis, D. see Raby, C. (2007)
Ali Cherif, A. see Reuter, F. (2007, 2009)
Allen, T. 209
Alvarez, G. see Cohen, M. (2011), Franconeri,
S. (2013)
Amemiya, E. see Thiebaut de Schotten,
M. (2014)
Amin, H. see Uddin, L. (2010)
Amodio, D. 21
Anderson, J. 204
Anderson, K. see Wallis, J. (2001)
Anderson, M. 210
Andrews, J. see Vincent, J. (2006)
Andrews-Hanna, J. 137; see also Buckner,
R. (2008)
Anscombe, E. 30
Anthony, J. see Schretlen, D. (2000)
Apperly, I. 43
Arambel-Liu, S. see Jung-Beeman, M. (2004)
Aron, A. 60, 179
Aronen, H. see Vuontela, V. (1999)
Arpaly, N. 28, 231
Askren, M. see Nee, D. (2013)
Aslin, R. see Kidd, C. (2012)
Athanasopoulos, P. see Thierry, G. (2009)
Audoin, B. see Reuter, F. (2007, 2009)
Auersperg, A. 212, 214
Augustine, A. see Schretlen, D. (2000)
Awh, E. 89; see also Serences, J. (2009)
Aylward, E. see Schretlen, D. (2000)
Baars, B. 48, 51–2, 82
Babo-Rebelo, M. see Sergent, C. (2013)
Bäckman, L. see Brehmer, Y. (2012)
Baddeley, A. 75, 76, 95
Baillargeon, R. 42, 43; see also Scott, R. (2010),
Song, H. (2008)
Baillet, S. see Del Cul, A. (2007), Sergent,
C. (2005)
Baird, B. 227; see also Smallwood, J. (2011)
Baker, J. see Vincent, J. (2007)
Balci, F. 37
Balda, R. 212
Balkenius, C. see Lind, A. (2014)
Ball, K. see Clay, O. (2009)
Balteau, E. see Boly, M. (2007)
Baluch, F. 207
Banaji, M. see Greenwald, A. (2002)
Bar, M. 23, 145
Bargh, J. 140; see also Hassin, R. (2009), Rilling,
J. (2007)
Barndollar, K. see Bargh, J. (2001)
Barnes, M. see Raghubar, K. (2010)
Barrett, C. 68
Barrett, L. 22, 23, 145
Barsalou, L. 32, 33, 241
Barta, P. see Schretlen, D. (2000)
Barth, H. 37
Bartolomeo, P. 55
Bastianen, C. see Botvinick, G. (2009)
Baumeister, R. 167; see also Tangney, J. (2004)
Baxter, C. see Bickel, W. (2011)
Bayne, T. 50
Bear, M. 23
Beck, D. 56
Beck, J. 33, 236
Becker, T. see Cowan, N. (2011)
Bednekoff, P. 212
Bedny, M. 37, 38, 210
Beeman, M. see Ellamil, M. (2012)
Beer, R. 201
Bekhtereva, N. 170
Bekinschtein, T. 52, 54
Bell, A. see Deary, I. (2004)
Bell, P. see Deary, I. (2004)
Bennetto, L. see Melnick, M. (2013)
Benton, S. 120
Berger, S. see Menzel, R. (2005)
Berkeley, G. 34
Berlucchi, G. see Moro, V. (2008)
Berman, K. see Buchsbaum, B. (2005)
Berman, M. see Jonides, J. (2008), Nee,
D. (2013)
Bermúdez, J. 11, 33, 235
Berridge, K. 24
Berry, D. 174

Berryhill, M. 89, 111, 147
Berthoz, A. see Wexler, M. (1998)
Bertrand, O. see Voisin, J. (2006)
Beyer, J. see Mikels, J. (2008)
Bickel, W. 124
Bidet-Caulet, A. see Voisin, J. (2006)
Biedermann, F. see Diekhof, E. (2009)
Bikson, M. see Chrysikou, E. (2013)
Bilgrami, A. 188
Binder, J. 136
Bird, C. 214
Bisley, J. 56, 62, 92
Biswal, B. see Kelly, A. (2008)
Bittner, R. see Mayer, J. (2007)
Blakemore, S-J. 94; see also Frith, C. (2000),
Howard-Jones, P. (2005)
Bleckley, M.K. see Kane, M. (2001)
Bledowski, C. see Mayer, J. (2007)
Block, N. 2, 20, 47, 48, 49, 52, 56
Boesch, C. see Janmaat, K. (2014)
Boghossian, P. 20
Boly, M. 54
Boone, A. see Tangney, J. (2004)
Boroditsky, L. see Winawer, J. (2007)
Bos, M. 177; see also Dijksterhuis, A. (2006)
Botterill, G. 20
Botvinick, M. 167, 179, 224; see also Shenhav,
A. (2013)
Bowden, E. see Jung-Beeman, M. (2004)
Braga, L. see Thiebaut de Schotten, M. (2014)
Brammer, M. see Shergill, S. (2001)
Brandom, R. 10, 11, 20, 32, 235, 238
Brandt, R. see Menzel, R. (2005)
Brandt, S. see Lai, D. (2011)
Brannon, E. see Jordan, K. (2008)
Bratman, M. 19, 25, 143, 194
Braun, A. 169
Braver, T. see Burgess, G. (2011), Shamosh,
N. (2009)
Brehm, J. see Simon, L. (1995)
Brehmer, Y. 90
Breidegard, B. see Lind, A. (2014)
Bremner, D. see Rilling, J. (2007)
Bressan, P. 58
Brewer, B. 10
Bricogne, S. see Mazoyer, B. (2001)
Bridge, H. 14
Broadway, J. 121
Broglio, C. see Salas, C. (2003)
Brooks, K. see Schooler, J. (1993)
Brown, D. 204
Brown, J. see Kaufman, S. (2009), Nee, D. (2013)
Brown, K. see Smallwood, J. (2011)
Brown, L. see Kane, M. (2007)
Bruce, C. see Goldman-Rakic, P. (1990)
Brunke, S. see Menzel, R. (2005)
Buchsbaum, B. 129
Buckner, R. 134, 136, 137, 158, 167, 226;
see also Schacter, D. (2007), Vincent,
J. (2006), Wagner, A. (2005), Wheeler,
M. (2000), Yeo, B.T. (2011)
Buelte, D. see Meister, I. (2006)
Bullmore, E. see Shergill, S. (2001)
Bundrock, G. see Menzel, R. (2005)
Buonomano, D. 209
Burgaleta, M. see Colom, R. (2010)
Burge, T. 11
Burgess, G. 130
Burton, P. see Finnerty, J. (2004)
Buschkuehl, M. see Jaeggi, S. (2008, 2010,
2011, 2014)
Buttelmann, D. 42, 43
Butterﬁll, S. 43
Cabeza, R. 147, 148; see also Berryhill,
M. (2007)
Cacioppo, J. 174
Caldi, S. see Surian, L. (2007)
Call, J. 221, 222; see also Hanus, D. (2011),
Melis, A. (2006), Mendes, N. (2007)
Caltagirone, C. see Koch, C. (2005), Oliveri,
M. (2001)
Camp, E. 40, 236
Campana, G. 103
Campbell, M. see Deary, I. (2004)
Capon, A. 118
Caramazza, A. 34, 37, 38; see also Bedny,
M. (2012), Negri, G. (2007)
Carey, S. see Hauser, M. (2000)
Carlesimo, G. see Koch, C. (2005), Oliveri,
M. (2001)
Carlson, S. see Schönwiesner, M. (2007),
Vuontela, V. (1999)
Carpenter, D. see Tang, C. (2010)
Carpenter, M. see Buttelmann, D. (2009)
Carpenter, P. 120; see also MacDonald,
M. (1992)
Carrasco, M. 61, 62
Carruthers, P. ix, 9, 20, 22, 31, 33, 36, 43, 48, 49,
50–1, 66, 69, 73, 81, 97, 98, 112–13, 116, 140,
159, 160, 166, 170, 194, 206, 223, 227, 230,
231, 236, 239
Carson, S. 169
Carter, C. see Botvinick, G. (2004), Kerns,
J. (2004)
Carullo, J. see Engle, R. (1991)
Castellanos, F. see Kelly, A. (2008)
Cavanagh, P. see Franconeri, S. (2013)
Centerbar, D. 24
Chaiken, S. 174
Chalmers, D. 2, 47, 49, 51, 197–8
Chang, W-L. see Buchsbaum, B. (2005)
Changeux, J-P. 52, 53; see also Dehaene,
S. (2006)

INDEX OF NAMES

Chappell, J. see Weir, A. (2002)
Chein, J. 90; see also Berryhill, M. (2011)
Cheke, L. 216
Chelazzi, L. 62; see also Luck, S. (1997)
Cheney, D. 35–6
Chevallier, C. see Southgate, V. (2010)
Cho, R. see Kerns, J. (2004)
Chokron, S. 55
Chow, V. 42
Christ, S. see Cowan, N. (2011), Li, D. (2014)
Christal, R. 118
Christoff, K. 167; see also Ellamil, M. (2012)
Chrysikou, E. 169, 170
Chun, M. 62, 63
Churchland, P.M. 39, 40–1, 77
Cialdini, R. 162
Ciaramelli, E. 147, 148; see also Cabeza,
R. (2010)
Clark, A. 197–8, 200, 201
Clark, J. see Rensink, R. (1997)
Claxton, G. see Howard-Jones, P. (2005)
Clay, O. 128
Clayton, N. 212–13, 216; see also Correia,
S. (2007), Raby, C. (2007)
Clore, G. 24
Cloutier, J-F. see Huber, A. (2003)
Cochran, K. 120
Cohen, J. 60; see also Botvinick, G. (2004),
Kerns, J. (2004), Shenhav, A. (2013)
Cohen, L. see Bekinschtein, T. (2009), Reuter,
F. (2007, 2009), Sergent, C. (2013), Thiebaut
de Schotten, M. (2014)
Cohen, M. 56, 179
Cohen, R. see Rosenbaum, D. (2008)
Colﬂesh, G. see Jarosz, A. (2012)
Collins, K. see Engle, R. (1991)
Colom, R. 121, 122; see also Tang, C. (2010)
Condon, C. see Tang, C. (2010)
Confort-Gouny, S. see Reuter, F. (2009)
Connelly, A. see Vargha-Khadem, F. (1997)
Conway, A. 121; see also Burgess, G. (2011),
Cowan, N. (2005), Engle, R. (1999), Kane,
M. (2001, 2005), Shamosh, N. (2009)
Cools, R. 150
Cooney, J. see Gazzaley, A. (2005)
Corballis, M. 158, 212
Corbetta, M. 55, 60, 145, 179; see also Sestieri,
C. (2010), Vincent, J. (2007)
Correia, S. 216
Coslett, H. see Chrysikou, E. (2013)
Cowan, E. see Botvinick, G. (2009)
Cowan, N. 61, 78, 83, 84, 89, 110, 111, 121, 145,
224; see also Li, D. (2014)
Cowey, A. see Campana, G. (2002)
Coyle, T. 129
Cozzone, P. see Reuter, F. (2009)
Crick, F. 52
Cristescu, T. 92
Crivello, F. see Mazoyer, B. (2001)
Csibra, G. see Farroni, T. (2005), Southgate,
V. (2007, 2010)
Cui, H. see Gruberg, E. (2006)
Curtis, C. 89
Curtis-Holmes, J. 179
Custers, R. see Marien, H. (2012)
D’Esposito, M. 76; see also Cools, R. (2008),
Gazzaley, A. (2005)
Dade, L. 76
Dagher, A. see Monchi, O. (2001)
Dagui Ban, S. see Janmaat, K. (2014)
Dally, J. see Clayton, N. (2005)
Damasio, A. 23, 94, 159, 171, 184–5
Dambeck, N. see Meister, I. (2006)
Daneman, M. 120
Daselaar, S. 135, 137
Datta, A. see Chrysikou, E. (2013)
Davies, M. 42, 237
Davis, A. see Schretlen, D. (2000)
De Brigard, F. 57, 63, 147, 148
de Lange, F. see Vingerhoets, G. (2002)
De Neys, W. 119, 175, 179
Deary, I. 121, 132
Deblaere, K. see Vingerhoets, G. (2002)
Degueldre, C. see Boly, M. (2007)
Dehaene, S. 12, 36, 50, 52, 53, 110, 210; see also
Bekinschtein, T. (2009), Del Cul, A. (2007),
Reuter, F. (2007, 2009), Sergent, C. (2005),
Thiebaut de Schotten, M. (2014)
Dehaene-Lambertz, G. see Dehaene, S. (1998)
Del Cul, A. 52; see also Reuter, F. (2007, 2009)
Dell, G. 97; see also Nozari, N. (2011)
Demetriou, A. 129
Demiralp, E. see Nee, D. (2013)
Denman-Brice, A. see Light, K. (2010)
Dennett, D. 48, 52, 163, 191, 236
Dennis, I. see Capon, A. (2003)
Dering, B. see Thierry, G. (2009)
Desimone, R. see Luck, S. (1997)
Desmond, J. see Prabhakaran, V. (1997)
Devine, P. 21, 115
Devlin, J. see Cristescu, T. (2006)
DeWall, C. see Baumeister, R. (2007)
DeYoung, C. see Kaufman, S. (2009), Shamosh,
N. (2009)
Diamond, M. see Harris, J. (2002)
Dickinson, A. 212; see also Clayton, N. (2001,
2003, 2005), Correia, S. (2007), Raby,
C. (2007)
Diekhof, E. 54
Dienes, Z. 174
Dijksterhuis, A. 139, 140, 160; see also Bos,
M. (2008)
Dobson, C. see Ellamil, M. (2012)
INDEX OF NAMES


Dodell-Feder, D. see Bedny (2011)
Dogan, I. see Rottschy, C. (2012)
Doniger, G. see Pinsk, M. (2004)
Döring, T. see Mottaghy, F. (2002)
Dretske, F. 20, 47, 64
Driver, P. 171
Drysdale, A. see Lewis-Peacock, J. (2012)
Duckworth, A. see Kurzban, R. (2013)
Dudchenko, P. 218
Dudkin, E. see Gruberg, E. (2006)
Dukas, R. 150
Dummett, M. 11, 32, 235
Eagly, A. see Chaiken, S. (1989)
Eaves, E. see Tang, C. (2010)
Edelman, G. 52
Edwards, J. see Clay, O. (2009)
Egan, F. 200
Eichenbaum, H. 78
Eickhoff, S. see Rottschy, C. (2012)
Ellamil, M. 167
Elliffe, D. see Taylor, A. (2010)
Elliot, A. 115
Elliott, E. see Cowan, N. (2005)
Emerson, M. see Miyake, A. (2000)
Emery, N. 214
Emrich, S. see Kundu, B. (2013)
Endress, A. see Kosslyn, S. (2010)
Engell, A. see Hassin, R. (2009)
Engle, R. 89, 120, 122–1, 167, 225; see also
Conway, A. (2003), Kane, M. (2001, 2004),
Redick, T. (2012a, 2012b), Shamosh,
N. (2009), Shipstead, Z. (2010, 2012, 2014)
Ericsson, A. 83, 91, 217
Ester, E. see Serences, J. (2009)
Etard, O. see Mazoyer, B. (2001)
Evans, A. see Dade, L. (2001)
Evans, G. 10, 33, 236
Evans, J. 174, 179, 180, 191
Faber, T. see Rilling, J. (2007)
Fagot, J. 217
Faraguna, D. see Farroni, T. (2005)
Farah, M. see Levine, D. (1985)
Farnham, S. see Greenwald, A. (2002)
Farroni, T. 41
Fazal, N. see Deary, I. (2004)
Fedorenko, E. see Bedny (2011)
Feigenson, L. 226; see also Halberda, J. (2008)
Feredoes, E. see Postle, B. (2006)
Ferrarelli, F. see Postle, B. (2006)
Festinger, L. 115
Field, H. 20
Finke, R. 169; see also Ward, T. (1999)
Finnerty, J. 205
Fischl, B. see Yeo, B.T. (2011)
Fisher, B. see Menzel, R. (2011)
Fisher, C. see Song, H. (2008)
Fiske, S. 162
Fletcher, L. 36, 223
Flores-Mendoza, C. see Colom, R. (2008)
Fodor, J. 15, 20, 40, 42, 64
Fonlupt, P. see Voisin, J. (2006)
Fortin, N. 209; see also Eichenbaum, H. (2012)
Fougnie, D. see Todd, J. (2005)
Fox, G. 95
Fox, M. see Vincent, J. (2006, 2007)
Fox, P. see Rottschy, C. (2012)
Frackowiak, R. see Paulesu, E. (1993)
Franconeri, S. 57
Frank, M. see Winawer, J. (2007)
Frankish, K. 21, 176, 188–9, 191–6, 198
Franklin, M. see Baird, B. (2012)
Frederick, S. 174
Fredrickson, B. see Mikels, J. (2008)
Freestone, D. see Balci, F. (2009)
Fried, D. see Redick, T. (2012a)
Friedman, N. see Miyake, A. (2000)
Friston, K. see Mechelli, A. (2004)
Frith, C. 95, 136, 143; see also Blakemore, S-J.
(2001), Paulesu, E. (1993)
Frith, U. 136
Frymiare, J. see Jung-Beeman, M. (2004)
Fuchs, J. see Menzel, R. (2011)
Funahashi, S. see Goldman-Rakic, P. (1990)
Gabrieli, J. see Prabhakaran, V. (1997)
Gadian. D. see Vargha-Khadem, F. (1997)
Gaioni, S. see Riquimaroux, H. (1991)
Gajdon, G. see Auersperg, A. (2011)
Gallistel, C.R. 37; see also Balci, F. (2009)
Gandhi, C. see Matzel, L. (2003)
Ganis, G. 155; see also Kosslyn, S. (2006)
Gathercole, S. 103
Gati, J. see Richter, W. (2000)
Gazzaley, A. 61, 89; see also Zanto, T. (2011)
Geake, J. 170
Geary, D. 206
Georgopoulos, A. see Richter, W. (2000)
Ghahramani, Z. 93
Gibbs S. see Cools, R. (2008)
Gibbs, B. see Kahneman, D. (1992)
Gick, B. see Scott, M. (2013)
Gigerenzer, G. 133, 175, 179
Gilbert, C. 14
Gilbert, D. 22, 81, 94, 158, 171, 184–5
Gilbert, J. see Clayton, N. (2005)
Gilovich, T. 175
Ginty, D. see Huber, A. (2003)
Giurfa, M. 39
Glover, G. see Prabhakaran, V. (1997)
Glover, J. see Benton, S. (1984)
Glucksberg, S. see Leslie, S-J. (2011)
Glüer, K. 20

INDEX OF NAMES

Goebel, R. see Mayer, J. (2007)
Goel, V. 180; see also De Neys, W. (2008)
Goldenberg, G. 14
Goldin-Meadow, S. 162
Goldman, A. 113, 117
Goldman-Rakic, P. 127, 207
Goldstone, R. 70
Gollwitzer, P. 26; see also Bargh, J. (2001)
Golomb, J. see Chun, M. (2011)
Goodale, M. 13
Gordon, A. see Christoff, K. (2009)
Grady, C. see Ciaramelli, E. (2008)
Grafton, S. see Mason, M. (2007)
Gray, J. 121, 123; see also Burgess, G. (2011),
Kaufman, S. (2009), Shamosh, N. (2009)
Gray, R. see Taylor, A. (2010)
Green, A. see Shamosh, N. (2009)
Green, I. 120
Greenberg, J. see Simon, L. (1995)
Greenblatt, R. see Jung-Beeman, M. (2004)
Greenlee, M. 103
Greenwald, A. 21, 239
Greer, S. see Buchsbaum, B. (2005)
Greggers, U. see Menzel, R. (2005, 2011)
Greicius, M. see Uddin, L. (2010)
Grifﬁn, D. see Gilovich, T. (2002)
Grob, A. see Meyer, C. (2010)
Grossman, H. see Kolata, S. (2005, 2007),
Matzel, L. (2003)
Grothe, J. see Herwig, U. (2003)
Gruber, O. see Diekhof, E. (2009)
Gruberg, E. 207
Grünewald, C. see Meister, I. (2006)
Grush, R. 93
Gu, H. see Lu, H. (2012)
Gulick, S. see Sanz, C. (2004)
Gusnard, D. see Raichle, M. (2001)
Haass, W-D. see Menzel, R. (2011)
Haberman, J. see Jung-Beeman, M. (2004)
Hagmann-von Arx, P. see Meyer, C. (2010)
Haier, R. 121; see also Tang, C. (2010)
Halberda, J. 120, 226
Hale, G. see Kolata, S. (2005, 2007)
Hall, L. see Lind, A. (2014)
Hamalainen, M. see Jones, S. (2007)
Hambrick, D. see Kane, M. (2004, 2005), Redick,
T. (2012a)
Hamidi, M. see Postle, B. (2006)
Hamilton, R. see Chrysikou, E. (2013)
Han, Y. see Matzel, L. (2003)
Handley, S. see Capon, A. (2003)
Hansen, P. 170
Hanus, D. 214, 221; see also Mendes, N. (2007)
Harison, B. see Melnick, M. (2013)
Harris, I. see Harris, J. (2002)
Harris, J. 76
Harrison, T. see Redick, T. (2012a)
Harrold, S. see Bridge, H. (2012)
Hassabis, D. 137; see also Summerﬁeld,
J. (2010)
Hassin, R. 85, 88; see also Marien, H. (2012)
Hauser, L. see Hauser, M. (2000)
Hauser, M. 224
He, Z. see Baillargeon, R. (2014)
Heavey, C. 81, 95, 117, 161, 193, 230
Hecht, S. see Raghubar, K. (2010)
Herwig, U. 95
Hesselmann, G. see Sadaghiani, S. (2009)
Heywood, C. see Kentridge, R. (2008)
Hickok, G. 65, 163
Hicks, K. see Redick, T. (2012a), Shipstead,
Z. (2012)
Higgins, D. see Carson, S. (2003)
Hill, P. see Bickel, W. (2011)
Hills, T. 150, 151
Hillyard, S. see Luck, S. (1997), Störmer,
V. (2009)
Hismjatullina, A. see Cowan, N. (2005)
Hitch, G. 75
Hodges, S. see Wilson, T. (1993)
Hollinshead, M. see Yeo, B.T. (2011)
Holmes, E. see Bridge, H. (2012)
Hornsby, J. 237
Horton, W. 165
Houdé, O. see Mazoyer, B. (2001)
Houk, J. see Botvinick, G. (2009)
Howard-Jones, P. 170
Howerter, A. see Miyake, A. (2000)
Huang, J. 140
Huber, A. 210
Huber, L. see Auersperg, A. (2011)
Huijbers, W. see Daselaar, S. (2010)
Hülse, S. see Menzel, R. (2005)
Humphries, N. 171
Hunt, G. see Taylor, A. (2010)
Hurlburt, R. 81, 95, 117, 161, 193, 230
Hurley, S. 10, 11, 33, 49, 235
Hutchinson, J. 148
Ikkai, A. 89, 111
Imamizu, H. see Kawato, M. (2003)
Inoue, S. 217
Ishai, A. see Mechelli, A. (2004)
Itti, L. 207
Izard, V. 37
Jackendoff, R. 7, 68–9, 73
Jaeggi, S. 90, 122, 210
Jagust, W. see Cools, R. (2008)
Janmaat, K. 222
Jansen, C. see Rosenbaum, D. (2001)
Jarnasz, N. see Richter, W. (2000)
Jarosz, A. 169
INDEX OF NAMES


Jaušovec, K. 123
Jaušovec, N. 123
Jax, S. see Rosenbaum, D. (2008)
Jeannerod, M. 63, 76, 93, 94, 95
Jenett, A. see Giurfa, M. (2001)
Jensen, O. 61
Jha, A. see Sreenivasan, K. (2011)
Ji, L. 152
Johansson, P. see Lind, A. (2014)
Johnson, M. see Farroni, T. (2005), Shamosh,
N. (2009)
Johnson, S. 155
Johnson, W. see Deary, I. (2010)
Joliot, M. see Mazoyer, B. (2001)
Jones, M. see Hills, T. (2012)
Jones, S. 54; see also Menzel, R. (2011)
Jones-Gottman, M. see Dade, L. (2001)
Jonides, J. 76, 89; see also Jaeggi, S. (2008, 2010,
2011, 2014), Nee, D. (2013)
Jordan, K. 36, 37
Juan-Espinosa, M. see Colom, R. (2004)
Jung, R. 121
Jung-Beeman, M. 170; see also Subramaniam,
K. (2009)
Just, M. 120; see also MacDonald, M. (1992)
Kaas, J. 77
Kable, J. see Kurzban, R. (2013)
Kacelnik, A. 213; see also Auersperg, A. (2011,
2013), Kenward, B. (2005), Weir, A. (2002)
Kahn, I. see Wagner, A. (2005)
Kahneman D. 66, 133, 174, 175, 176; see also
Gilovich, T. (2002)
Kaiser, J. see Jensen, O. (2007)
Kam, J. see Baird, B. (2012)
Kanai, R. 55
Kane, M. 89, 121, 126, 167; see also Conway,
A. (2003), Redick, T. (2012a)
Kanwisher, N. see Barth, H. (2003)
Karnik, M. see Matzel, L. (2003)
Karvonen, E. 221
Kastner, S. 14; see also Pinsk, M. (2004)
Kaufman, S. 129
Kawai, N. 217, 218
Kawato, M. 94
Kay, P. see Mo, L. (2011)
Kazi, S. see Demetriou, A. (2013)
Keenan, J. see Ganis, G. (2000)
Kelly, A. 167; see also Redick, T. (2012b)
Kennard, C. see Bridge, H. (2012)
Kentridge, R. 57, 87
Kenward, B. 213
Keren, G. 179
Kerns, J. 167, 179
Keysar, B. 165
Khemlani, S. see Leslie, S-J. (2011)
Kidd, C. 149
Kiewra, K. 120
Kim, A. see Spreng, R. (2009)
Kim, H. 148
Kim, S. see Richter, W. (2000)
King, A. see Gallistel, R. (2001)
King, J. 120
King, M. 239
Kintsch, W. 83, 91, 217
Kirbach, A. see Menzel, R. (2011)
Klaaren, K. see Wilson, T. (1993)
Kleinschmidt, A. see Sadaghiani, S. (2009)
Klingberg, T. 123
Knight, R. 103; see also Gazzaley, A. (2005)
Knoblich, G. see van der Wel, R. (2014)
Knudsen, B. 42
Knudsen, E. 60–1, 89, 149, 207–8
Koblofsky, M. see Menzel, R. (2011)
Koch, C. 52, 56, 90; see also Oliveri, M. (2001),
Van Boxtel, J. (2010)
Kochunov, P. see Coyle, T. (2011)
Koechlin, E. see Dehaene, S. (1998)
Kolata, S. 218, 219; see also Light, K. (2010)
Kolodkin, A. see Huber, A. (2003)
Komorowski, R. see Eichenbaum, H. (2012)
Kornblith, H. 28, 231
Korotkov, A. see Bekhtereva, N. (2004)
Korsgaard, C. 10, 11, 238
Kosslyn, S. 66, 71, 76, 149; see also Ganis,
G. (2000), Wexler, M. (1998)
Kounios, J. see Jung-Beeman, M. (2004),
Subramaniam, K. (2009)
Kovács, A. 42, 44
Kraft, R. see Benton, S. (1984)
Kragel, J. see Cabeza, R. (2010)
Krause, B. see Mottaghy, F. (2002)
Krauzlis, R. 208
Krawitz, A. see Nee, D. (2013)
Krebs, J. 150
Krienen, F. see Yeo, B.T. (2011)
Kringelbach, M. 24
Kroesbergen, E. 120
Kruglanski, A. 179
Kuipers, J-R. see Thierry, G. (2009)
Kumaran, D. see Hassabis, D. (2007)
Kunda, Z. 162
Kundu, B. 90
Kuroda, T. see Kawato, M. (2003)
Kurzban, R. 48, 172
Kwapil, T. see Kane, M. (2007)
Kyllonen, P. 118; see also Colom, R. (2004)
Lachaux, J-P. see Jensen, O. (2007)
LaFleur, S. see Wilson, T. (1993)
Lai, D. 207
Laird, A. see Rottschy, C. (2012)
Lamme, V. 52; see also Landman, R. (2003),
Sligte, I. (2008)

INDEX OF NAMES

Landes, R. see Bickel, W. (2011)
Landman, R. 84
Langner, R. see Rottschy, C. (2012)
Lantham, P. see Gallistel, R. (2001)
Lashkari, D. see Yeo, B.T. (2011)
Lau, H. 88, 140
Laughlin, J. see Engle, R. (1999)
Laureys, S. see Boly, M. (2007)
Lavie, N. see Beck, D. (2006)
Le Bihan, D. see Dehaene, S. (1998)
Le Clec’H, G. see Dehaene, S. (1998)
Lebiere, C. see Lovett, M. (1999)
Lee Chai, A. see Bargh, J. (2001)
Lee, S. 152
Legendre, G. 40
Lehmann, K. see Menzel, R. (2011)
Lemola, S. see Meyer, C. (2010)
Lepsien, J. 89
Lerch, J. see Moro, V. (2008)
Leslie, A. see Scott, R. (2010)
Leslie, S-J. 65
Letelier, J. see Gruberg, E. (2006)
Levelt, W. 96, 161, 162, 196, 236
Levin, D. 56
Levine, D. 103
Levy, N. 237, 239
Levy, R. 127
Lewis, D. 20
Lewis, J. 204, 225
Lewis, R. see Jonides, J. (2008)
Lewis-Peacock, J. 90–1
Lhermitte, F. 143
Li, D. 61; see also Cowan, N. (2011)
Liberman, A. see Chaiken, S. (1989)
Lieberman, M. 60, 136, 174, 175, 179, 180
Light, K. 220; see also Kolata, S. (2005, 2007)
Lillo, C. 217
Limb, C. 169
Lind, A. 163, 236
Linden, D. see Mayer, J. (2007)
Lindsey, D. see Shipstead, Z. (2014)
Lindsey, S. see Wilson, T. (2000)
Ling, S. see Carrasco, M. (2004)
Lippa, Y. see Goldstone, R. (2001)
Lipton, P. see Eichenbaum, H. (2012)
Lisman, J. 151
Liszkowski, U. 43
Liu, H. see Yeo, B.T. (2011)
Lo, A. see Robertson, I. (1995)
Loar, B. 20
Lovejoy, L. 208
Lovett, M. 204
Lu, H. 227
Luck, S. 207
Luiten, P. 207
Luksch, H. see Lai, D. (2011)
Luo, Y. 42
Lupyan, G. 71, 72
Lustig, C. see Jonides, J. (2008)
Luxen, A. see Boly, M. (2007)
Lyon-Caen, O. see Reuter, F. (2007)
Ma, R. see Gruberg, E. (2006)
MacDonald, A. see Kerns, J. (2004)
MacDonald, M. 120
Mack, A. 54, 56
Mackintosh, N. see Kaufman, S. (2009)
MacLean, E. see Jordan, K. (2008)
MacLeod, A. see Raichle, M. (2001)
Macrae, C. see Mason, M. (2007)
Maguire, E. see Hassabis, D. (2007),
Summerﬁeld, J. (2010)
Mahon, B. 34; see also Negri, G. (2007)
Mai, X. see Tang, C. (2010)
Malikova, I. see Reuter, F. (2007, 2009)
Malpeli, J. see Gruberg, E. (2006)
Mäntylä, T. see Soto, D. (2011)
Maquet, P. see Boly, M. (2007)
Mar, R. see Spreng, R. (2009)
Marcus, G. 40
Marien, H. 141
Marin, G. see Gruberg, E. (2006)
Marinovic, V. see Träuble, B. (2010)
Mark, T. see Gallistel, C.R. (2001)
Markowitsch, H. 20, 136
Marois, R. 89, 111; see also Todd, J. (2005)
Marshall, R. see Shipstead, Z. (2014)
Martin, A. 136
Martin, E. see Cowan, N. (2011)
Martindale, M. see Finnerty, J. (2004)
Martínez, K. see Colom, R. (2010)
Martínez-Molina, A. see Colom, R. (2010)
Mason, M. 134, 226
Massimini, M. see Postle, B. (2006)
Masuda, T. 152
Matsuzawa, T. 217, 218
Mattox, S. see Cowan, N. (2005)
Matzel, L. 218; see also Kolata, S. (2005, 2007),
Light, K. (2010)
Maunsell, J. 62
Mayer, J. 89
Mayes, A. 78
Mayo, P. see Botvinick, G. (2009)
Mazoyer, B. 137
Mazuz, Y. see Cabeza, R. (2010)
Mazzocco, M. see Halberda, J. (2008)
McClelland, J. 40
McCollough, A. see Ikkai, A. (2010)
McCormick, P. 57
McCulloch, K. see Hassin, R. (2009)
McDonald, J. see Störmer, V. (2009)
McDowell, J. 10, 11, 28, 33, 235, 238
McElree, B. 61
McEvoy, K. see Gazzaley, A. (2005)
INDEX OF NAMES


McGinn, C. 20
McGuire, P. see Shergill, S. (2001)
McKiernan, K. see Binder, J. (2005)
McLaughlin, B. 40
McVay, J. 167; see also Kane, M. (2007)
Mechelli, A. 76
Medler, D. see Binder, J. (2005)
Medvedev, S. see Bekhtereva, N. (2004)
Meister, I. 55
Melcher, J. 177
Melis, A. 223
Mellet, E. see Mazoyer, B. (2001)
Mellott, D. see Greenwald, A. (2002)
Melnick, M. 131
Mendes, N. 221; see also Hanus, D. (2011)
Menon, E. see Farroni, T. (2005)
Menon, R. see Richter, W. (2000)
Menon, V. 137, 145; see also Uddin, L. (2010)
Menzel, R. 39; see also Giurfa, M. (2001)
Mercier, H. 178
Merzenich, M. 209
Mesulam, M. 55
Metcalfe, J. 124
Meulenbroek, R. see Rosenbaum, D. (2001,
2008)
Meyer, C. 132
Meyer, H. see Menzel, R. (2011)
Mikels, J. 76
Milham, M. see Kelly, A. (2008)
Miller, E. see Wallis, J. (2001)
Miller, G. 171
Millikan, R. 20
Milner, D. 13
Miniussi, C. see Harris, J. (2002)
Mischel, H. 124
Mischel, W. 124
Mishkin, M. 127; see also Vargha-Khadem,
F. (1997)
Miyakawa A. see Cools, R. (2008)
Miyake, A. 127
Miyauchi, S. see Kawato, M. (2003)
Mo, L. 71
Mofﬁtt, A. see Cowan, N. (2011)
Mole, C. 62
Monchi, O. 129
Montague, M. 50
Moonen, G. see Boly, M. (2007)
Moore, C. see Jones, S. (2007)
Moore, D. 155
Moore, K. see Jonides, J. (2008)
Moran, R. 188
Morey, C. see Cowan, N. (2005)
Morgan, D. see Sanz, C. (2004)
Moro, V. 14
Morrison, A. 90
Moscovich, M. see Cabeza, R. (2010, 2012),
Ciaramelli, E. (2008)
Moskowitz, G. 162
Mottaghy, F. 90
Mouyi, A. see Demetriou, A. (2013)
Mpodozis, J. see Gruberg, E. (2006)
Mrazek, M. see Baird, B. (2012)
Muckli, L. see Vetter, P. (2014)
Mueller, Mi. see Dehaene, S. (1998)
Muggleton, N. see Beck, D. (2006), Kanai,
R. (2008)
Mulcahy, N. 221
Müllbacher, W. see Goldenberg, G. (1995)
Müller, N. 103
Müller-Gärtner, H-W. see Mottaghy, F. (2002)
Murray, R. see Shergill, S. (2001)
Myers, J. see Kurzban, R. (2013)
Myin-Germeys, I. see Kane, M. (2007)
Mysore, S. 60, 149, 207
Näätänen, R. see Schönwiesner, M. (2007)
Naccache, L. see Bekinschtein, T. (2009),
Dehaene, S. (1998, 2006), Reuter, F. (2007,
2009), Sergent, C. (2013)
Nakano, E. see Kawato, M. (2003)
Nakayama, K. see Cohen, M. (2011)
Nee, D. 127; see also Jonides, J. (2008)
Negri, G. 143
Neuper, C. 94
Newell, A. 204
Newen, A. 66
Ng, J. see Tang, C. (2010)
Nguyen, D. see Uddin, L. (2010)
Nguyen, H. see Menzel, R. (2011)
Nichols, S. 49, 113, 114
Nijboer, T. see Kentridge, R. (2008)
Nikolić, D. see Mayer, J. (2007)
Nimmo-smith, I. see Robertson, I. (1995)
Nisbett, R. 121, 151–2; see also Ji, L. (2000)
Nobre, A. 89; see also Cristescu, T. (2006),
Lepsien, J. (2011)
Nordgren, L. see Dijksterhuis, A. (2006)
Northmore, D. see Gruberg, E. (2006)
Norton, N. see Mason, M. (2007)
Norton, P. see Menzel, R. (2011)
Nosek, B. see Greenwald, A. (2002)
Novick, J. 163
Novitski, N. see Schönwiesner, M. (2007)
Nowak, A. see Goldenberg, G. (1995)
Nozari, N. 163, 237
O’Brien, L. 4
O’Regan, J. see Rensink, R. (1997)
Oberauer, K. see Lewis-Peacock, J. (2012), Sü,
H-M. (2002)
Ochmann, H. see Stippich, C. (2002)
Ohlsson, S. see Schooler, J. (1993)
Okonkwo, O. see Clay, O. (2009)
Oliveri, M. 103; see also Koch, C. (2005)

INDEX OF NAMES

Olsen, I. see Berryhill, M. (2007, 2011), Cabeza,
R. (2010)
Onishi, K. 42; see also Song, H. (2008)
Oppenheim, G. 97
Ormrod, J. 120
Osvath, H. 221
Osvath, M. 221
Over, D. 174
Oyserman, D. 152
Pagnoni, G. see Rilling, J. (2007)
Pakarinen, S. see Schönwiesner, M. (2007)
Pakhomov, S. see Bekhtereva, N. (2004)
Palacios, A. see Colom, R. (2004)
Palmer, S. 93
Panella, M. see Oliveri, M. (2001)
Pang, K. see Finnerty, J. (2004)
Papineau, D. 20
Park, S. see Melnick, M. (2013)
Parr, L. see Rilling, J. (2007)
Parrish, T. see Subramaniam, K. (2009)
Pascual-Leone, A. see Bedny, M. (2011, 2012),
Ganis, G. (2000)
Passingham, R. 88, 140
Pasternak, T. 103
Patel, D. see Matzel, L. (2003)
Patel, G. see Corbetta, M. (2008), Vincent,
J. (2007)
Pauen, S. see Träuble, B. (2010)
Paulesu, E. 95
Paulson, D. see Finnerty, J. (2004)
Payne, T. see Kane, M. (2004)
Peacocke, C. 4, 28, 31, 236
Pearlson, G. see Schretlen, D. (2000)
Peigneux, P. see Boly, M. (2007)
Pelletier, J. see Reuter, F. (2007, 2009)
Pelphrey, K. see Saxe, R. (2009)
Peng, K. see Ji, L. (2000)
Penke, L. see Deary, I. (2010)
Pennartz, C. see Daselaar, S. (2010)
Perner, J. 36
Perrig, W. see Jaeggi, S. (2008, 2010)
Pessoa, L. 23, 55
Peterson, J. see Carson, S. (2003)
Peterson, M. see Postle, B. (2006)
Peterson, S. see Wheeler, M. (2000)
Petit, L. see Mazoyer, B. (2001)
Petre, V. see Monchi, O. (2001)
Petrides, M. see Monchi, O. (2001)
Petty, R. 162, 174
Pfurtscheller, G. 94
Phillips, C. see Boly, M. (2007)
Phuong, L. see Berryhill, M. (2007)
Piantadosi, S. see Kidd, C. (2012)
Picasso, L. see Berryhill, M. (2007)
Picciuto, E. 171, 227
Pietroski, P. 67
Pillow, D. see Coyle, T. (2011)
Pinsk, M. 14
Pitt, D. 50
Pizzighello, S. 58
Plake, B. see Benton, S. (1984)
Platsidou, M. see Demetriou, A. (2013)
Plümpe, T. see Menzel, R. (2005)
Poeppel, D. 65, 95, 96, 163
Polansky, L. see Janmaat, K. (2014)
Poldrack, R. see Aron, A. (2004)
Polimeni, J. see Yeo, B.T. (2011)
Porat, Y. see Daselaar, S. (2010)
Posner, M. 14
Possing, E. see Binder, J. (2005)
Postle, B. 76, 90; see also Kundu, B. (2013),
Lewis-Peacock, J. (2012)
Poulin-Dubois, D. 42, 43
Povinelli, D. 36
Powers, W. see Raichle, M. (2001)
Prabhakaran, V. 118
Preuss, T. see Rilling, J. (2007)
Price, C. see Mechelli, A. (2004)
Prinz, J. 14, 32, 34, 57, 68, 83, 241
Pritchett, D. see Jones, S. (2007)
Pylyshyn, Z. 40, 66, 76, 77
Quiroga, Á. see Colom, R. (2008, 2010)
Raby, C. 215
Raghubar, K. 119
Raichle, M. 134; see also Lu, H. (2012), Vincent,
J. (2006, 2007)
Rama, P. see Vuontela, V. (1999)
Ramírez, I. see Colom, R. (2010)
Ramsey, W. 200
Raninen, A. see Vuontela, V. (1999)
Ranjeva, J.P. see Reuter, F. (2007, 2009)
Read, D. 224
Read, S. see Carrasco, M. (2004)
Reber, A. 174
Reber, P. see Jung-Beeman, M. (2004)
Rebollo, I. see Colom, R. (2004)
Reddy, L. 76
Reder, L. see Lovett, M. (1999)
Redick, T. 121, 122, 129, 130; see also Shipstead,
Z. (2010, 2012)
Reetz, K. see Rottschy, C. (2012)
Reis, D. see Shamosh, N. (2009)
Reiter, L. see Menzel, R. (2011)
Rensink, R. 56
Requena, L. see Colom, R. (2010)
Reuter, F. 53
Reuter-Lorenz, P. see Mikels, J. (2008)
Rey, G. 116
Reynolds, J. 62
Richter, W. 155
Rilling, J. 227
INDEX OF NAMES


Riquimaroux, H. 77
Robbins, T. see Aron, A. (2004)
Roberts, K. see Wu, C. (2007)
Roberts, N. 78
Robertson, I. 55
Rock, I. 54, 56
Rodriguez, F. see Salas, C. (2003)
Roffman, J. see Yeo, B.T. (2011)
Rohaut, B. see Bekinschtein, T. (2009)
Rolls, E. 159
Román, F. see Colom, R. (2010)
Rosenbaum, D. 97, 170
Rosenthal, D. 198
Ross, L. see Clay, O. (2009)
Roth, D. see Clay, O. (2009)
Rottschy, C. 89, 127
Roudas, M. see Bekhtereva, N. (2004)
Roy, S. see Botvinick, G. (2009)
Rubens, M. see Zanto, T. (2011)
Rudman, L. see Greenwald, A. (2002)
Ruebsamen, R. see Diekhof, E. (2009)
Rumelhart, D. 40
Rumiati, R. see Negri, G. (2007)
Russell, J. 22
Rutz, C. see Kenward, B. (2005)
Rykhlevskaia, E. see Uddin, L. (2010)
Sabuncu, M. see Yeo, B.T. (2011)
Sackur, J. see Dehaene, S. (2006)
Sadaghiani, S. 54
Salas, C. 206; see also Gruberg, E. (2006)
Sambhara, D. see Sreenivasan, K. (2011)
Samuel, E. see Howard-Jones, P. (2005)
Sann, C. see Izard, V. (2009)
Sanz, C. 222
Sartor, K. see Stippich, C. (2002)
Saults, J. 61; see also Cowan, N. (2005, 2011)
Sauvage, M. see Eichenbaum, H. (2012)
Saxe, R. 136, 137; see also Bedny, M. (2011,
2012)
Schacter, D. 78, 83, 137, 158; see also Addis
D. (2007), Buckner, R. (2008)
Schaupp, F. see Menzel, R. (2005)
Scheier, C. see Thelen, E. (2001)
Schmeichel, B. see Baumeister, R. (2007)
Schnakers, C. see Boly, M. (2007)
Scholte, H.S. see Sligte, I. (2008)
Scholz, J. see Saxe, R. (2009)
Schöner, G. see Thelen, E. (2001)
Schönfeldt-Lecuona, C. see Herwig, U. (2003)
Schönwiesner, M. 61
Schooler, J. 164, 177; see also Baird, B. (2012),
Christoff, K. (2009), Smallwood, J. (2011)
Schooler, T. see Wilson, T. (1993, 2000)
Schretlen, D. 128
Schroeder, D. 132; see also Tang, C. (2010)
Schroeder, T. 28, 231
Schul, Y. 179
Schulz, J. see Rottschy, C. (2012)
Schulze, R. see Sü, H-M. (2002)
Schüttler, E. see Menzel, R. (2005)
Schwartz, M. see Nozari, N. (2011)
Scott, M. 95, 96
Scott, N. see Matzel, L. (2003)
Scott, R. 42; see also Baillargeon, R. (2014)
Searle, J. 19
Sebanz, N. see van der Wel, R. (2014)
Senju, A. see Southgate, V. (2007)
Sentis, E. see Gruberg, E. (2006)
Sepulcre, J. see Yeo, B.T. (2011)
Serences, J. 76
Sergent, C. 13, 52, 53; see also Dehaene,
S. (2006)
Serre, T. see Reddy, L. (2010)
Sestieri, C. 148
Setoh, P. see Baillargeon, R. (2014)
Seyfarth, R. 35–6
Shah, P. see Jaeggi, S. (2011, 2014)
Shamosh, N. 123
Shannon, B. see Vincent, J. (2006), Wagner,
A. (2005)
Shayer, M. see Demetriou, A. (2013)
Sheeran, P. 26
Shen, S. see Szameitat, A. (2007)
Shenhav, A. 144, 146, 167, 172
Shergill, S. 95
Shettleworth, S. 218, 219
Shiffrin, R. see Goldstone, R. (2001)
Shih, P. see Colom, R. (2008), see Colom,
R. (2010)
Shintel, H. 165
Shipstead, Z. 89, 121, 122, 123, 130, 131; see
also Redick, T. (2012a)
Shomstein, S. 61
Shuler, M. 23
Shulman, G. 55, 60, 145; see also Corbetta,
M. (2008), Raichle, M. (2001), Sestieri,
C. (2010)
Siewert, C. 50
Silvanto, J. see Soto, D. (2011)
Silvia, P. see Kane, M. (2007)
Simon, H. 164
Simon, L. 115
Simons, D. 56
Simonton, D. 170
Sligte, I. 84
Sloman, S. 174, 177
Slovic, P. see Kahneman, D. (1982)
Smallwood, J. 136, 167; see also Andrews-
Hanna, J. (2014), Baird, B. (2012), Christoff,
K. (2009)
Smith, A. see Menzel, R. (2005)
Smith, F. see Vetter, P. (2014)
Smith, J.A. see Prabhakaran, V. (1997)

INDEX OF NAMES

Smith, L. see Thelen, E. (2001)
Smith, R. see Christoff, K. (2009)
Smith, S. see Finke, R. (1992), Ward, T. (1999)
Smolensky, P. 40
Smoller, J. see Yeo, B.T. (2011)
Snyder, A. see Coyle, T. (2011), Raichle,
M. (2001), Vincent, J. (2006, 2007)
Snyder, L. see Vincent, J. (2007)
Somorjat, R. see Richter, W. (2000)
Song, H. 42; see also Scott, R. (2010)
Soteriou, M. 4
Soto, D. 87
Southgate, V. 42, 43
Spandoudis, G. see Demetriou, A. (2013)
Sparing, R. see Meister, I. (2006)
Specht, S. see Matzel, L. (2003)
Spekreijse, H. see Landman, R. (2003)
Spelke, E. see Barth, H. (2003), Izard, V. (2009)
Sperber, D. 83, 96, 178; see also Surian,
L. (2007)
Sperling, G. 84
Spillers, G. 89, 121, 130, 219
Spitzer, M. see Herwig, U. (2003)
Spivey, M. 72
Sporns, O. 53, 137, 227
Spreng, R. 136, 137, 226; see also Andrews-
Hanna, J. (2014)
Sreenivasan, K. 76
Srinivasan, M. see Giurfa, M. (2001)
Stach, S. see Menzel, R. (2005)
Stalnaker, R. 165
Stanovich, K. 133–4, 174, 175, 177, 179, 180,
181
Starchenko, M. see Bekhtereva, N. (2004)
Stein, E. see Lu, H. (2012)
Stenger, V. see Kerns, J. (2004)
Stephens, D. 150
Sternberg, E. 151
Sterr, A. see Szameitat, A. (2007)
Stich, S. 49, 113, 114
Stindt, J. see Menzel, R. (2005)
Stippich, C. 94
Stokes, J. see Cabeza, R. (2010)
Stokes, M. see Bridge, H. (2012)
Stollhoff, N. see Menzel, R. (2005)
Störmer, V. 62
Strawson, G. 50
Streri, A. see Izard, V. (2009)
Striedter, G. 206
Studer-Luethi, B. see Jaeggi, S. (2010)
Stufﬂebeam, S. see Jones, S. (2007)
Su, Y-F. see Jaeggi, S. (2010)
Subramaniam, K. 169, 170
Suddendorf, T. 158, 212
Suga, N. see Riquimaroux, H. (1991)
Sugita, Y. 41
Summerﬁeld, J. 138
Summers, I. see Howard-Jones, P. (2005)
Summers, R. see Richter, W. (2000)
Supekar, K. see Uddin, L. (2010)
Surian, L. 42
Sü, H-M. 118
Sutterer, D. see Kundu, B. (2013)
Swanson, L. 206, 211
Szameitat, A. 94
Tadel, F. see Bekinschtein, T. (2009)
Tadin, D. see Melnick, M. (2013)
Tallon-Baudry, C. see Sergent, C. (2013)
Tan, L-H. see Mo, L. (2011)
Tang, C. 121
Tangney, J. 123
Taylor, A. 214–15
Taylor, S. 162
Tegeler, C. see Richter, W. (2000)
Téglás, E. see Kosslyn, S. (2010)
Tegner, R. see Robertson, I. (1995)
Tennie, C. see Hanus, D. (2011)
Tervaniemi, M. see Schönwiesner, M. (2007)
Tham, K. see Robertson, I. (1995)
Thangavel, A. see Zanto, T. (2011)
Thelen, E. 201
Thiebaut de Schotten, M. 210
Thierry, G. 70
Thompson, P. 121
Thompson, W. see Kosslyn, S. (2006)
Thompson-Schill, S. 23, 170; see also
Chrysikou, E. (2013), Novick, J. (2010)
Thornton, I. see Lepsien, J. (2011)
Tian, X. 95, 96
Todd, J. 55, 89, 111
Todd, P. see Hills, T. (2012)
Tomaiuolo, F. see Moro, V. (2008), Oliveri,
M. (2001)
Tomasello, M. see Buttelmann, D. (2009), Melis,
A. (2006)
Tononi, G. 52, 56; see also Postle, B. (2006)
Töpper, R. see Mottaghy, F. (2002)
Torriero, S. see Koch, C. (2005)
Townsend, D. see Kolata, S. (2005)
Träuble, B. 42
Treue, S. 62
Triesman, A. 66; see also Kahneman, D. (1992)
Trötschel, R. see Bargh, J. (2001)
Trueswell, J. see Novick, J. (2010)
Tsuchiya, N. 56; see also Reddy, L. (2010), Van
Boxtel, J. (2010)
Tsujii, T. 180
Tuholksi, S. see Engle, R. (1999), Kane,
M. (2004)
Tulving, E. 20, 42, 136
Turk-Browne, N. see Chun, M. (2011)
Turriziani, P. see Koch, C. (2005), Oliveri,
M. (2001)
INDEX OF NAMES


Tversky, A. see Kahneman, D. (1982)
Tye, M. 48, 50, 52, 64
Tzourio-Mazoyer, N. see Mazoyer, B. (2001)
Uddin, L. 92; see also Kelly, A. (2008)
Udin, S. see Gruberg, E. (2006)
Ugerbil, K. see Richter, W. (2000)
Ukmar, M. see Negri, G. (2007)
Uller, C. 225
Uncapher, M. see Hutchinson, J. (2009)
Ungerleider, L. 55, 127
Unsworth, N. 89, 121, 130, 219; see also Redick,
T. (2012b)
van Baaren, R. see Bos, M. (2008), Dijksterhuis,
A. (2006)
Van Boxtel, J. 57
van de Moortele, P-F. see Dehaene, S. (1998)
Van de Rijt, B. see Kroesbergen, E. (2009)
van der Wel, R. 44
Van Essen, D. see Vincent, J. (2007)
Van Horn, J. see Mason, M. (2007)
Van Lieshout, E. see Kroesbergen, E. (2009)
Van Loosbroek, E. see Kroesbergen, E. (2009)
Van Luit, J. see Kroesbergen, E. (2009)
Van Paesschen, W. see Vargha-Khadem,
F. (1997)
Vandemaele, P. see Vingerhoets, G. (2002)
Vargha-Khadem, F. 20
Vartanian, O. see De Neys, W. (2008)
Vaughan, J. see Rosenbaum, D. (2001, 2008)
Veillet, B. 50–1, 69, 73
Vernetti, A. 43
Vetter, P. 66, 76
Vincent, J. 148, 227
Vingerhoets, G. 94, 155
Vogel, E. see Ikkai, A. (2010), Serences, J. (2009)
Vohs, K. see Baumeister, R. (2007)
Voisin, J. 62
Völter, C. 222
von Bayern, A. see Auersperg, A. (2011, 2013)
Vonk, J. 36
Votaw, J. see Rilling, J. (2007)
Vuilleumier, P. 60
Vuontela, V. 104
Wade, A. see Winawer, J. (2007)
Wadley, V. see Clay, O. (2009)
Wager, T. see Miyake, A. (2000)
Wagner, A. 147; see also Hutchinson,
J. (2009)
Wallis, J. 39
Walsh, V. see Beck, D. (2006), Campana,
G. (2002), Kanai, R. (2008)
Walter, H. see Herwig, U. (2003)
Wang, J. see Botvinick, G. (2009)
Wang, Y. see Gruberg, E. (2006)
Warach, J. see Levine, D. (1985)
Ward, T. 169; see also Finke, R. (1992)
Wass, C. see Light, K. (2010)
Watanabe, S. 180
Watkins, K. see Vargha-Khadem, F. (1997)
Watzl, S. see Menzel, R. (2005)
Wegner, D. 114; see also Mason, M. (2007)
Weir, A. 213; see also Kenward, B. (2005)
Weissman, D. see Wu, C. (2007)
Werker, J. see Scott, M. (2013)
Wessel, R. see Lai, D. (2011)
Westbury, C. see Binder, J. (2005)
Westerberg, H. see Brehmer, Y. (2012)
Wexler, M. 155
Wheatley, T. 114
Wheeler, M. 135
Whitﬁeld-Gabrieli, S. see Saxe, R. (2009)
Wienemann, M. see Meister, I. (2006)
Wieth, M. 169
Wiggett, A. see Thierry, G. (2009)
Wikforss, Å. 20
Wiley, J. see Jarosz, A. (2012)
Wilhelm, O. see Kane, M. (2004), Sü, H-M.
(2002)
Williams, B. 29
Williams, S. see Shergill, S. (2001)
Wilson, D. 83, 96
Wilson, M. 95
Wilson, T. 22, 81, 94, 158, 160, 171, 174,
184–5
Winawer, J. 71
Winkowski, D. 207, 208
Witthoft, N. see Winawer, J. (2007)
Wittmann, W. see Sü, H-M. (2002)
Witzki, A. see Miyake, A. (2000)
Woldorff, M. see Cabeza, R. (2010), Wu,
C. (2007)
Wolpert, D. 93; see also Blakemore, S-J. (2001),
Frith, C. (2000)
Wong, A. see Addis, D. (2007)
Worsley, K. see Monchi, O. (2001)
Wu, C. 61
Wu, L. see Winawer, J. (2007)
Wu, W. 62, 63
Wunderlich, A. see Herwig, U. (2003)
Wyart, V. see Sergent, C. (2013)
Xu, G. see Mo, L. (2011)
Yang, D. see Baillargeon, R. (2014)
Yang, Y. see Lu, H. (2012)
Yantis, S. 61
Yeo, B.T. 137, 145, 167
Yeung, H. see Scott, M. (2013)
Yi, R. see Bickel, W. (2011)
Yoshioka, T. see Kawato, M. (2003)
Yott, J. 43

INDEX OF NAMES

Young, R. 204
Yu, K. see Clayton, N. (2001, 2003)
Zacks, R. 169
Zadini, A. see Negri, G. (2007)
Zagalsky, R. see Light, K. (2010)
Zago, L. see Mazoyer, B. (2001)
Zanto, T. 89
Zatorre, R. see Dade, L. (2001)
Zempel, J. see Vincent, J. (2007)
Zhang, S. see Giurfa, M. (2001)
Zöllei, L. see Yeo, B.T. (2011)
Zou, Q. see Lu, H. (2012)
Zulian, L. see Farroni, T. (2005)
INDEX OF NAMES


Index of Subjects
access-consciousness see consciousness
action
concept 37–8
nature of 143–4
active attitude see attitude
affect 22–4, 73, 79, 159–60, 172
agency see rational
amodal attitude see attitude
amodal content
in imagery 79
in perception 64–8, 72–3
in working memory 79–80
amodal workspace 16, 100–6, 108–14, 125–7,
181, 192–3, 197–8, 200–2
animal
attention 207–8
concepts 32, 236
minds 10–11, 17, 235
anterior cingulate cortex 144, 146, 167, 170,
172, 179
attention
action-like nature of 144–52
bottom–up 55, 60–1, 63, 137, 145, 146, 148,
160, 167–8, 170, 177, 207
directed at sensory areas 14, 60, 61–2, 91–2,
101, 109
evolution of 205–9, 211
and ﬂuid general intelligence 131–3
limits on 89, 111
as a natural kind 62–3
necessary for consciousness 54–7
neural effects of 61–2
not sufﬁcient for consciousness 57–8
overt vs covert 59, 124, 149–50
top-down 60–1, 63, 76, 89, 104, 145, 148,
150, 167–8, 169–70, 207
see also consciousness, working memory
attitudes 1
active vs passive 10–11, 27–31, 173, 231–2
amodal 2, 4, 5–6, 15, 31–9, 198, 232
conscious 5–6, 11, 47, 192–7
extended 197–200
personal vs subpersonal 146, 237
sensorily embedded 7–8, 24, 46, 51, 65, 81–2,
97–9, 232–3, 238
structured 39–44
unconscious 7–8, 15, 27
in working memory 80–2, 97–100
see also implicit, self-knowledge
baboon 35–6, 40
basal ganglia 23, 60
bees 38–9
belief 19–22, 115–16, 187–8
kinds of 20–1
normativity of 20
see also judgment
binding 14–15, 16, 66–7, 72–3, 79–80, 96
see also amodal content, attitude
centered mind ix, 206
chunking 110, 111, 224–5, 226
cognitive phenomenology 50–1
commitment 21, 188–9
concept 32–8, 39–40, 66–7
see also generality constraint
conceptual content see amodal content
connectionism 40, 200
consciousness
access vs phenomenal 2–3, 47–8, 49–50,
68–9
and attention 54–8
creature vs state 47
endogenous vs exogenous 2–3, 4
global broadcasting theory of 2, 48–50, 51–4
and working memory 82–8
see also attention, stream of consciousness,
working memory
corollary discharge 31, 93
see also efference copy
creativity 169–71, 227, 236
decision 25–6, 145–7, 189, 194
default network 134–8, 227
desire 19–20
affective 22–3
direct motivational 24
dissonance 115–16
distributed representation 40–1, 44
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 24, 60, 89, 90,
109, 135–6, 138, 141, 167, 169, 207
dynamical system 201–2
efference copy 93–4, 95
episodic memory 6, 20, 41–2, 77–9, 136, 147–9
in animals 209
in birds 212–13
event-ﬁle 42, 67
see also object-ﬁle

executive 8, 15, 61, 75–6, 88, 90, 123, 126–7,
128–9, 169, 179, 232, 241
extended mind 197–202
forward model 31, 93–8, 161, 195
frontal eye-ﬁelds 60, 63, 89, 92, 109, 136, 149,
151, 207–8
general intelligence, ﬂuid 120–1
explaining variance in 124–33, 232
in mice 218–20
generality constraint 32–3, 235–6
global
availability 2, 5, 492, 83, 125, 134, 171, 186,
198, 230
broadcasting 10, 14, 23, 46, 50, 58, 60, 64, 66,
68–9, 76, 78–80, 83–4, 88
workspace 10, 14, 16, 74, 82
see also amodal workspace, attention,
consciousness, working memory
goal 24, 26–7
unconscious 139–42, 161–3
habit 151–2, 153
hippocampus 20, 42, 78, 135, 136, 158, 180,
209, 213
imagery 76–7
dynamic 154–6
implicit attitude 21–2, 239
inferential promiscuity 10, 49, 235
see also amodal workspace, generality
constraint
inner speech 95–7
attitudes in 97–100
causes of 161–6, 168
pragmatics in 164–6
insight 214
intention 25–6, 114–15
intraparietal sulcus 60, 63, 89, 90, 92, 109, 111,
135, 136, 138, 147–8, 207
introspection sampling 117–18, 230
judgment 21, 24, 195–6
active vs passive 29–30
sensorily embedded 46, 51, 65, 82, 97–9,
233, 238
language of thought 40, 42
long-term working memory 83, 91, 219
manipulation see mental manipulation
mathematical thought 119–20
medial frontal gyrus 60, 170
memory-span task 12
mental manipulation 93, 103, 155–8, 225
mental rehearsal 92–7, 104, 153–6, 161
mental time travel 158, 212
mind wandering 134–8, 166–8, 171–2, 227
mindreading 9, 36, 42–4, 184
mindware 134, 181, 182–3
motor imagery 31, 93–4
n-back task 13
neglect 55
nonconceptual content 22, 50–1, 66–7, 68–9,
71, 73, 80, 95–6, 130–1
numerosity 36–7
object-ﬁle 34, 66, 80
see also event-ﬁle
orbitofrontal cortex 23, 24, 159–60,
180, 185
plasticity 209–10
Hebbian 40–1
posterior cingulate cortex 134, 135, 136,
137, 227
propositional attitude see attitude
prospection 22–3, 94, 136, 158–60, 184–5
in apes 221–3
in birds 213–16
proto-concept 11, 33
proto-thought 11, 235
rational agent 10–11, 238–9
reasoning see System 1, System 2, working
memory
reﬂection 1–2
active nature of 3–4, 142, 153–4, 173
amodal attitudes in 2, 3, 5–6
conscious status of 3
error theory of 8–9
evolutionary constraints on 204, 205–6
sensory basis of 7–8, 14–15, 30, 140, 161,
173, 175, 204, 228, 229, 233–4
see also System 2
rehearsal see mental rehearsal
rote memory 21, 99
self-knowledge 30–1, 112–18, 231
sensorimotor theory 32–5, 241
sensory discrimination 132–3
speech production 95, 161–3, 196, 236–7
stream of consciousness 1–3, 10
active vs passive 4, 8, 16–17, 28–30, 139,
166–72, 173
endogenously caused 2–3, 4
error theory of 8–9
sensory basis of 4, 7–8, 101, 106
superior colliculus 60, 207, 208
System 1 175–8
System 2 119, 133, 175–7, 179–80, 185, 186–91,
191–2, 202, 234
INDEX OF SUBJECTS


System 2 (cont.)
belief 195–7
decision 194–5
temporal discounting 123–4
temporo-parietal junction 55, 60, 135, 137, 148
think aloud 164, 165
thought 2, 10–11, 33, 40, 49, 229, 235–6
see also amodal content, attitude, concept
unconscious 139–40
valence 22–7, 80, 159–60
ventral parietal cortex 55, 60, 135, 137,
147–9, 170
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex 56, 60, 149, 170,
179, 180
visual image 14
Wason selection task 182–3
working memory ix, 12–13
amodal content in 15
attitudes in 80–2
in birds 213–16
components of 126–7
conceptual involvement in 79–82, 96
conscious status of 82–5
and default network 134–8
dependence on attention 12, 88–91,
111–12, 121–1
and ﬂuid general intelligence 121–2,
128–9, 130–1
limits 89, 111, 224
in mammals 218–23, 224–5
multiple-modes model of 108–10
no unconscious form of 85–8
in reasoning 118–20, 133–4
sensory basis of 14–15, 76, 100–7,
131–3, 229
training 90, 122–3, 220
two-systems model of 110–12
use of perceptual systems in 76–7
vs long-term memory 12, 217–18
vs sensory short-term memory
12–13, 217
see also executive, reﬂection, System 2

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

