
 
Table of Contents
Preface
Introduction
I. SHIRLEY JACKSON: DOMESTIC HORROR
II. THE PERSISTENCE OF SUPERNATURALISM
III. RAMSEY CAMPBELL: THE FICTION OF PARANOIA
IV. THE ALTERNATIVES TO SUPERNATURALISM
V. PSEUDO-, QUASI-, AND ANTI-WEIRD FICTION
Epilogue
Notes
Bibliography

The Modern
Weird Tale
S.T. Joshi
McFarland & Company, Inc., Publishers
Jefferson, North Carolina, and London
Library of Congress Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
Joshi, S.T., 1958–
The modern weird tale / by S.T. Joshi.
p.     cm.
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 0-7864-0986-X
1. Horror tales, American—History and criticism. 2. American fiction—
20th century—History and criticism. 3. English fiction—20th century—History
and criticism. 4. Horror tales, English—History and criticism. I. Title.
PS374.H67J67     2001
813’.0873809—dc21 00-54805
CIP
British Library cataloguing data are available
©2001 S.T. Joshi. All rights reserved
No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by
any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying or recording, or
by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing
from the publisher.
Front cover: ©2001 Index Stock
McFarland & Company, Inc., Publishers
Box 611, Jefferson, North Carolina 28640
www.mcfarlandpub.com

To Stefan R. Dziemianowicz

Preface
This book is an informal follow-up to The Weird Tale (1990), in which I
discussed six writers of the “Golden Age” of the horror tale (roughly 1880–
1940). No reference to that earlier volume is, however, necessary in
understanding this one. Probably the most vexing problem I have faced is to
decide which authors of post–World War II weird fiction—especially the authors
of the horror “boom” of the 1970s and 1980s, many of whom retain a popular
following to the present day—should be covered in this study. I do not know if I
have evolved any very coherent rationale for the inclusion or exclusion of a
given writer; in some cases I will admit frankly that I have written about certain
authors simply because I happen to like them. I hope that I have in general
covered those weird writers who are either unavoidable on purely literary
grounds or because of their prominence in the field; the two groups, obviously,
are not identical. My discussions generally cover works published prior to 1994.
In the course of my work on this book I have considered (or had suggested
to me) such authors as Iain Banks, Charles Beaumont, L. P. Davies, Les Daniels,
Dennis Etchison, Charles L. Grant, James Herbert, K. W. Jeter, Robert R.
McCammon, Richard Matheson, David J. Schow, Rod Serling, Dan Simmons,
Steve Rasnic Tem, Thomas Tessier, Chet Williamson, and a number of others.
My reasons for excluding these authors are very complex and are not to be taken
as judgments on their literary work. I particularly regret that, although I have
attempted to probe the relationship between the weird tale and the mystery story
in such writers as Robert Bloch and Thomas Harris, I have been unable to
explore the very involved interplay between weird and science fiction, especially
as represented in the two pioneering writers in this mode, Fritz Leiber and Ray
Bradbury. Their work is so voluminous and complex as to be impervious to brief
analysis, and it seems to me that my book is already large enough.
My method of citation of works is, in the interests of space, very
condensed. I have assigned abbreviations to all important primary works and
some secondary works I discuss; these abbreviations can be found in the
bibliography at the rear of the volume (an asterisk indicates the edition I have
used if it is not the first). In the text, therefore, I cite these works only by
abbreviation and page number. My bibliography should not in every instance be
considered complete; rather, it lists only those works by and about the author I
have consulted for this volume. Save where indicated, however, I have attempted
to read all the weird work of the authors I cover.

It is my pleasure to thank the many associates who have assisted me in the
writing of this book. I could write an entire essay on the help provided by Stefan
R. Dziemianowicz—in the supplying of texts, in suggestions for arrangement, in
guidance on individual authors, and in many other less tangible ways—and if
this book does nothing more than to encourage him to write his own study, I
shall be content. Other individuals such as Lance Arney, Scott D. Briggs, Rusty
Burke, Richard Fumosa, Sam Gafford, Jay Gregory, Anna Magee, Steven J.
Mariconda, Marc A. Michaud, and Darrell Schweitzer have helped in various
ways. I am especially grateful to Ramsey Campbell, T. E. D. Klein, and Thomas
Ligotti for reading my chapters on their work and making highly illuminating
comments. It is difficult to write about living authors, especially if one is
acquainted with them, and I hope that my objectivity has not suffered in these or
other instances.
I am aware that some, or much, of this book is deliberately controversial or
polemical; but I hope it is evident that I have not come to my views carelessly
and that my intent in expressing them is simply the utterance of the truth as I see
it (insofar as there can be “truth” in such matters). I may well be wrong, but I
would be reluctant to acknowledge that I am malicious. Criticism is not an exact
science, and the expression of an informed judgment is my only goal and
purpose.
—S. T. J.

Introduction
During the early part of the twentieth century, weird fiction was not so
much a genre as the consequence of a world view, and relatively few authors of
what could only retrospectively be called weird fiction were conscious of writing
in a specifically weird mode that was to be radically distinguished from
“mainstream” writing. H. P. Lovecraft (1890–1937) is in many ways a watershed
here: not only was he (because of his early interest in and publication by the
American pulp magazines) the first significant writer who understood that his
work was “weird,” and who for various reasons was repeatedly rebuffed by
mainstream publishers, he was perhaps also the last writer whose weird fiction
was the systematic embodiment of a world view.
Weird writing has certainly proliferated since Lovecraft’s time, and
especially since about 1970, but it is not at all clear that much of this mass of
writing has any literary significance or much chance of survival. Indeed, there
appears to be a consensus among informed critics that the amount of meritorious
weird fiction being written today is in exactly inverse proportion to its quantity.
One can only ask: what happened?
The query should be interpreted not merely to the causes for the decline in
the quality of weird writing just as it is (or was) becoming a spectacularly
marketable phenomenon, but to why and how weird fiction became concretized
into a definite genre. The answer to this second question may help us to answer
the first. By “genre” I mean a certain body of conventionalized scenarios and
tropes from which authors can draw and upon which they can, as it were, hang a
tale in a formulaic way, since these scenarios and tropes have become so
common and readily comprehensible to readers that their mere citation triggers
certain stock responses and situates the work in an easily identifiable class. Such
tropes, in weird fiction, include the vampire, the ghost, the reanimated corpse,
the haunted house, and the like. They were, certainly, already well used by the
late Victorian period, and Lovecraft himself felt that many of them were so stale
that they ought to be avoided entirely or utilized in some distinctive manner so
as to lend them freshness and vigor. His general solution was to transfer the
locus of fear from the mundane to what he called the “Great Outside”—the
illimitable voids of outer space. As a result, he effected a remarkable union
between weird fiction and the emerging mode of science fiction. But few have
followed in his footsteps—either because he did what he did so well and so

completely, or because it was felt that this sort of “cosmic horror” was best left
to Lovecraft’s generally mediocre and unimaginative disciples and imitators.
Weird fiction appears now to have become a genre for various historical
reasons that I shall examine presently. One of the worst effects of such a
development is that certain themes and tropes are used in a very mechanical
fashion because they have come to be regarded as staples of a horrific scenario:
we are, for example, still inundated, year after year, with vampire novels, only a
small proportion of which (e.g., the work of Les Daniels, Anne Rice’s Interview
with the Vampire, Dan Simmons’s Carrion Comfort) bring any sort of originality
to this tired theme. It is as if the evocation of a vampire were felt to be in itself
sufficient to raise a shudder. What is more, the vampire is now so common a
trope that the more careless writers (and even some of the better ones) feel no
need to provide a rationale or justification for the vampire’s existence, or to
incorporate the entity within any world view.
Moreover, it seems as if the whole approach to weird fiction today is flawed
in its very conception. The purpose of most modern weird writing seems to be
merely to frighten. This is an inevitable result of the elimination of a
philosophical basis for the weird: all that is left (if, indeed, anything is left) is the
emotion of horror. If I may utter an apparent paradox: horror fiction is not meant
to horrify. This is to say that the primary purpose of weird fiction should not be
to send a tingle up one’s spine; that is merely, as it were, an epiphenomenon of
the weird. Winfield Townley Scott said many years ago: “To scare is a slim
purpose in poetry.”1 He did not explain this statement, but his meaning can be
inferred from his noting that Lovecraft’s poetry (unlike his fiction) “touched no
depths of human significance.” If weird fiction is to be a legitimate literary
mode, it must touch depths of human significance in a way that other literary
modes do not; and its principal means of doing so is the utilization of the
supernatural as a metaphor for various conceptions regarding the universe and
human life. Hence the need for a world view that structures and defines the use
of the weird in literature. Mere shudder-mongering has no literary value,
however artfully accomplished.
All this is why so much modern weird writing is, in the profoundest sense,
lifeless (I mean no pun): it neither utilizes weird themes and situations in an
original way nor embodies a distinctive world view. It is scarcely to be
wondered that many have begun to speak direly of the death of weird writing as
an art form.2 This is, no doubt, a little premature, and if the “death of horror”
means nothing more than that the legions of second-rate hacks will cease
flooding the market with their vapid and slipshod products, then weird fiction

may well emerge purged and cleansed and will continue to supply its small
modicum of genuine literature to a discriminating readership.
Another perplexing difficulty in dealing with the whole field of weird
fiction is that of terminology. Although the term “ghost story” seems to be dying
out as a generic designation for the entire field, we now find ourselves facing the
ominous and blunt term “horror” as the general designation for the weird. My
own term “weird fiction” (which is really Lovecraft’s) seems to be gaining some
currency among critics, but I do not expect it to be used in those bookstores that
have segregated what is believed to be weird fiction into a separate “horror”
section. I myself fall into the habit of using the two terms synonymously, but
strictly speaking I regard “horror” as a subset of the weird, since fantasy of the
Dunsany or Tolkien type is just as much a branch of weird fiction as any other;
and “horror” itself must be subdivided into supernatural and nonsupernatural
horror.
But there may be a problem with using the term “horror” at all: what other
mode of writing is designated by an emotion? “Science fiction” is clearly a
formal designation, as are “mystery fiction” and “detective fiction.” The only
other terms that seem even remotely to parallel horror are humor and romance;
but the latter has now become so stereotyped that it has in effect become a
formal designation, whereas the former is something that can be thought to
infiltrate all forms of writing—even weird writing—and is rarely a literary mode
in itself.3 The term “horror” also suggests (falsely, to my mind) that the arousal
of fear is somehow the prime concern of weird writing.
I do not know what one is to do about this whole issue. For a time the term
“dark fantasy” was used for certain types of weird writing, mostly involving the
quiet and purportedly subtle intrusion of the weird into the mundane world, with
an emphasis on indirection and suggestion. But I find this term highly
paradoxical, since I can think of “fantasy” as meaning only imaginary-world
fantasy, and certainly much of Tolkien is about as “dark” as anyone could want.
However, this is certainly not what is designated by the term “dark fantasy.”
It may be well at this point to discuss in a little more detail the history of
modern weird writing. It is my impression that what has frequently been termed
the “ghettoization” of weird fiction—especially in America—occurred as a
direct result of the pulp magazines. All the standard “genres” we now recognize
—mystery, horror, science fiction, western, romance—either grew out of the
pulp magazines of the 1920s (even though the pulps as originally conceived at
the turn of the century were by no means specialized in terms of content) or
received a considerable impetus from them. As a result, weird material in
particular disappeared almost entirely from mainstream magazines, since there

seemed to develop a notion that such material now had a market of its own.
Lovecraft evidently never even considered submitting his work to
magazines such as Harper’s or Scribner’s or Atlantic Monthly; the loftiest he
ever aimed at was the venerable and well-paying pulp Argosy (he was rejected).
In 1936 he remarked: “After all, a taste for fantasy in large doses is a rather
unusual thing. Most readers like it only occasionally—relishing a Machen book
now and then, or faintly appreciating the timid and insipid bits (like ‘The House
of the Laburnums’ [by Mollie Panter-Downes] in the Dec. Harper’s) sparingly
scattered through the conventional magazines.…”4 It is interesting to note that,
among his several inconclusive dealings with major publishing firms, Lovecraft
conducted tentative negotiations in 1930 with Clifton P. Fadiman (then of Simon
& Schuster) for a book of his work: Fadiman stated bluntly that he wanted a
novel and not a collection of tales.5 This prejudice against books of short weird
fiction persists today, even though it is scarcely to be denied that the weird tale
as an art form generally works better in small compass.
The demise of the pulps in the 1940s led to the birth of paperback book
publishing; and some of the genres—particularly mystery and science fiction—
flourished in this new medium. Weird fiction, for whatever reason, did not. Until
recent times, of course, weird fiction was never written in any great quantity;
before the establishment of the pulp magazine Weird Tales, no periodical was
ever devoted exclusively to the weird, and the many competitors to that
venerable and long-running journal (1923–54) were all short-lived, so that for
most of its history it remained the only genuine market in America for the
publication of weird short fiction. After the demise of Weird Tales (and, really,
even somewhat before), many weird talents felt more attracted to other genres.
Robert Bloch, Ray Bradbury, and Fritz Leiber had all published weird work in
the pulps, but Bloch then made his reputation in the mystery-suspense field;
Bradbury and Leiber in the science fiction field. There simply is no dominant
weird writer in America between H. P. Lovecraft and Stephen King. Richard
Matheson and Charles Beaumont did good work in the field, but they too
spanned several different genres; the unquestionably brilliant Shirley Jackson
was always considered simply an odd mainstream writer, and the bulk of her
work only borders upon the weird by any conventional standard.
The role of the small or specialty press in this situation is difficult to gauge.
Arkham House was established in 1939 by August Derleth and Donald Wandrei
initially for the sole purpose of publishing Lovecraft, but it rapidly expanded its
scope to issue other weird writers, mainly from the pulps. It certainly seems as if
Arkham House and its congeners—Gnome Press, Shasta, and a few others—had

some influence in perpetuating the ghettoization of weird fiction: Derleth, after
receiving generally hostile or condescending reviews of the first few Arkham
House books, ceased altogether to attempt an appeal to the mainstream, and the
other small presses made even less of an effort to do so. No one wants to
condemn the small presses prior to 1970; they certainly issued meritorious work
that might not have seen print in any other venue. I do believe, however, that
their self-segregation from general literature and publishing played some role—
small but deleterious—in the isolation of the field.
All the above describes the situation in America; in England there was
never so much of a distinction between weird and mainstream fiction nor so
abrupt a hiatus between oldtime and modern weird writing. The Victorian ghost
story, reaching its apotheosis with M. R. James (1862–1936), metamorphosed
smoothly into what is really the very different form of the psychological ghost
story with such writers as Walter de la Mare, Oliver Onions, L. P. Hartley, John
Collier, and Robert Aickman. Aickman and Lovecraft were Ramsey Campbell’s
two strongest early influences, and as a result Campbell neatly effected a union
between the British and the American weird traditions. The imaginary-world
fantasy did well in England: the early Dunsany had laid the groundwork, and the
field was developed by E. R. Eddison, J. R. R. Tolkien, and Mervyn Peake (and
in America by Clark Ashton Smith and, perhaps, A. Merritt, if he is to be classed
here). And yet, even here Aickman was virtually a lone voice in the purely
supernatural tale in the 1960s until the emergence of Campbell and other writers
in the 1970s and 1980s. (The occultist novels of Dennis Wheatley [1897– 1977]
cannot be said to count as serious literature. They do not, in any event, appear to
have influenced later writers.) It seems to me that the recent boom in horror
writing is more a sociological than a literary phenomenon; and yet, I am not sure
that anyone has adequately explained why horror novels suddenly became
bestsellers, why film adaptations of them became blockbusters, and why many
average readers who did not previously demonstrate any interest in the weird
should suddenly be reading this material. All one can say is that the phenomenon
did occur, perhaps as a result of certain writers’ conscious tailoring of their work
to suit a popular audience not otherwise familiar with the weird. Some believe
that the critical event was the publication of Ira Levin’s Rosemary’s Baby
(1967), a very mediocre work whose success was augmented by the (much
superior) film of the following year; but I see the canonical date as 1971, when
William Peter Blatty’s The Exorcist and Thomas Tryon’s The Other
simultaneously appeared at the top of the bestseller lists.6 Both were, of course,
turned into very successful films, the latter in 1972 and the former in 1973. From
this point on there was no looking back. Stephen King published his first book,

Carrie, in 1974, and has now become the most remarkable publishing
phenomenon in literary history. Other writers who have at least some pretensions
to literary merit—Peter Straub, Anne Rice, Clive Barker—also regularly make
the bestseller lists, as do a number of writers substantially inferior to them on the
literary scale (John Saul, Dean R. Koontz, John Farris). There is considerable
evidence that this “boom” is coming to an end: even King’s more recent works
are remaining on the bestseller lists for shorter and shorter periods. It is, of
course, a testament to the complete unreliability of bestseller lists as gauges of
literary merit that not a single one of Ramsey Campbell’s works has ever been a
notable commercial success or has ever been made into a film. This applies even
more to the work of Robert Aickman and Thomas Ligotti, although T. E. D.
Klein’s The Ceremonies (1984) achieved bestseller status briefly.
There has, of course, been an appalling amount of entirely subliterary
material published in the last two decades, as talentless hacks have sought to
capitalize on the success of the horror field as a commercial phenomenon. What
these writers have failed to note is that even Blatty and Tryon did not sit down to
write “horror novels” but were actually trying (and, on the whole, succeeded) to
deal with serious human issues through the horror tale (in one instance
supernatural horror; in the other psychological horror), and that the commercial
success of The Exorcist and The Other was as much a surprise to their authors as
to anyone else. Both these novels are really rather good and deserve to survive as
literary documents, not merely as artifacts in the history of publishing. But it is
clear that the overwhelming number of hack writers who regurgitate tired old
themes have nothing to say and merit the instant oblivion they in any case
achieve. The problem with all this, however, is that weird fiction tends to be
tainted by these inferior examples and to be judged by them rather than by those
relatively obscure or unpopular works that truly raise the weird tale to an art
form. This may be more a function of mainstream critics’ laziness than anything
else: there is no reason why weird fiction should be judged by its worst instances
rather than by its best, as all other fields are judged.
One reason why the weird tale has become both commercially successful
and, in my view, literarily problematical is what Stefan Dziemianowicz has
termed the “banalization” of horror.7 This means the increasing concern of weird
writers to depict the minute details of the mundane lives of mundane people,
both in an attempt to win the reader’s sympathy (most of us are, after all, pretty
ordinary) and to lay the groundwork for the intrusion of the weird into a familiar
realm. In the end this technique is not so different in approach from Lovecraft’s
brand of realism, although he emphasized topographical over psychological
realism. Although this dwelling on issues that are of concern to most normal

people—relationships between husband, wife, and children; difficulties on the
job; problems of modern urban life—is a very large reason for the popular
success of writers like King and Straub, it does not seem to me as if this should
be the primary focus of weird fiction. This is not what Winfield Townley Scott
meant by touching “depths of human significance,” especially since most weird
writers treat these issues superficially and sentimentally, and without sufficiently
integrating them into the weird scenario. Many modern weird writers do not
appear to have taken much notice of Lovecraft’s words on this matter: “I could
not write about ‘ordinary people’ because I am not in the least interested in
them. Without interest there can be no art. Man’s relations to man do not
captivate my fancy. It is man’s relation to the cosmos—to the unknown—which
alone arouses in me the spark of creative imagination. The humanocentric pose
is impossible to me, for I cannot acquire the primitive myopia which magnifies
the earth and ignores the background.”8
Weird fiction should not be about ordinary people. Even if one does not
adopt the “cosmic” attitude of Lovecraft, even if one wishes to depict the
insidious incursion of the weird into the ordinary, the emphasis should be on the
weird and not the ordinary. It is because so many weird writers emphasize the
latter rather than the former that their work seems to me thin and poorly
conceived: amidst all the effort spent upon portraying realistic human figures,
not enough attention is devoted to what is presumably the raison d’être of the
work itself—the weird phenomenon. I do not think this is merely a personal
prejudice. If weird fiction is to be a distinct mode of writing, then it should not
feel the need to ape so many of the conventions that make mainstream fiction a
distinct mode of writing. Even Ramsey Campbell tends to write about
wholesome middle-class characters and their charming little children in his
novels, and it is this that makes his novels so much less compelling than his
short stories, which feature the bizarre not only in terms of the supernatural but
in terms of the warped human characters he puts on stage. There is scarcely a
single “normal” character in all Thomas Ligotti’s work, and this is what gives it
much of its effectiveness.
I am not saying that weird fiction should simply deal with odd people; but
the overall scenario should be odd and strange, with the human figures
subordinate to the general weird conception. Stephen King may fancy himself
the modern-day Theodore Dreiser, just as Peter Straub imagines that he is our
contemporary Henry James, but a plowing through even a single one of their
gargantuan tomes full of hackneyed portrayals of boring people and their boring
problems that have nothing to do with the weird phenomenon is enough to make
one despair for the future of all weird writing. It is only the exceptionally

talented writer—a Shirley Jackson or a Robert Aickman—who has the insight to
depict human relationships in all their complexity and the skill to incorporate
these relationships into the very fabric of the weird situation.
Another matter of great concern to me is the proliferation of the “horror
novel” in modern weird writing. Consider the following: Critics of supernatural
horror fiction have repeatedly observed that the novel is a difficult form for
telling a tale of terror. After brooding for years over this matter from the
viewpoint of a potential novelist, not to mention the many aborted attempts at
actually writing the things, I find this form too difficult for me. The realistic
novel makes certain demands that are entirely alien to supernatural literature as I
understand its aims and possibilities. The best I could do would be to produce a
mystery or suspense narrative with a supernatural plot motive. But such a work
bears little resemblance to the masterpieces of the form that it’s been my
ambition to ape: “The Fall of the House of Usher” [by Poe], “The Willows” [by
Algernon Blackwood], “The White People” [by Arthur Machen], “The Colour
out of Space” [by Lovecraft], and so on.9
This gauntlet has recently been thrown down by Thomas Ligotti, a master
of the weird short story. It has its troubling aspects—Ligotti arbitrarily assumes
that a weird novel will be “realistic,” and in general his argument bears much
resemblance to Poe’s criticism of the long poem—but it must also be said that
many current weird writers have failed to take note of the difficulties of
sustaining weirdness over novel length or even to realize that the whole
enterprise is highly problematical. The enormous commercial success of the
contemporary horror novel has been a fatal attraction to writers; even Ramsey
Campbell has confessed that he has been forced into writing novels in order to
continue being a professional writer. The issues—constantly raised by Lovecraft
—of whether there is or ought to be any such thing as a “professional writer,”
and whether genuine literature can be consistently produced by a such a person,
do not, apparently, seem to have occurred to anyone.
Commercial demands for the production of novels (as opposed to
collections of short stories), combined with the difficulty of maintaining a
“nonrealistic” weird conception over novel length without merely lapsing into
conventionalized imaginary-world fantasy, have led to the proliferation of novels
whose basic scenarios may have genuine literary potential only in the short story
or may not be weird at all in their essence but fundamentally allied to suspense
or melodrama. Again I point to Campbell, since this most talented of modern
weird writers has himself been only indifferently successful in the novel; many
of his works have been spun out to novel length only by increasing the number
of characters involved (Obsession, The Hungry Moon) rather than by the

creation of a plot that actually requires a novel for its exposition. There seem to
be three solutions to this general difficulty: write a frankly nonrealistic novel;
write a novel that is avowedly largely a mystery or suspense tale with
supernatural interludes, or perhaps one that does not involve the supernatural at
all; or write a novel that is truly structured around a complex supernatural
phenomenon. Let us consider each of these in greater detail.
The first has been tried and found quite successful, but it has now become
so distinct a form that it is virtually beyond the scope of the purely supernatural
horror tale. Dunsany was a pioneer in this regard: The Blessing of Pan (1927),
The Curse of the Wise Woman (1933), The Story of Mona Sheehy (1939), and
The Strange Journeys of Colonel Polders (1950) are all tours de force in that,
although emphatically set in the “real” world, they are very little concerned with
mundane human motivations in the manner of mainstream novels; they are, in
some inexplicable way, imaginary-world fantasies without the imaginary world.
Subsequent efforts at nonrealistic weird fiction have generally fallen more
conventionally into the imaginary-world pattern, and Eddison, Tolkien, Peake,
and their followers have certainly produced very brilliant and substantial work in
this form, but this is now regarded as a distinct subgenre of its own with little
relation to the main body of weird writing. Perhaps only Jonathan Carroll’s The
Land of Laughs (1980) should be cited here—a work that is curiously similar to
the novels of Dunsany mentioned above, in that it portrays an imaginary world
somehow inserted within the realm of the real. Clive Barker has also attempted
something along this line, with relative success in Weaveworld (1987), and with
spectacular lack of success in The Great and Secret Show (1989) and Imajica
(1991).
It is a fact that the overwhelming majority of weird novels written in the
last two decades are subject to Ligotti’s complaint that they are merely mystery
or suspense tales with or without supernatural interludes. Some of these are
nevertheless 
very 
successful, 
even 
though—especially 
with 
purely
nonsupernatural work—it sometimes becomes problematical to classify them
within weird fiction at all. There is a lively debate as to whether the
nonsupernatural suspense novels of Thomas Harris are or are not weird—and
there are many other works of this type. A number of unquestionably brilliant
novels of this sort have certainly been produced, from Bloch’s The Scarf (1947)
and Psycho (1959), to Campbell’s The Face That Must Die (1979), to Iain
Banks’s The Wasp Factory (1984), to Harris’s The Silence of the Lambs (1988).
But there will always be a question as to whether these are genuinely weird. It is,
however, in those novels that are theoretically based upon a supernatural
premise, but in which that premise that does not always function in a systematic

way, that the “banalization” of horror is particularly evident. In many of King’s
or Straub’s novels there is not even a mystery or suspense foundation for the
weird but merely long stretches of irrelevant character portrayal and
melodramatic human conflict. This tendency reaches its nadir in the soap-opera
supernaturalism of Charles L. Grant.
Only rarely are novels actually founded upon a weird situation of novel
length. I do not see any formula for the creation of such a thing, and one can
only point to the successes: Tryon’s The Other and Harvest Home (1973); Rice’s
Interview with the Vampire (1976); Campbell’s Incarnate (1983) and Midnight
Sun (1990); Barker’s The Damnation Game (1985); Klein’s The Ceremonies;
David J. Schow’s The Shaft (1990); and, of course, the grandfather (or should
one say grandmother) of them all, Shirley Jackson’s The Haunting of Hill House
(1959). It is of note that not a single one of Machen’s or Dunsany’s or
Blackwood’s novels can be called horror novels as such. They may perhaps be
weird (although even this is in doubt in the case of such a tenuous if poignant
work as Machen’s The Hill of Dreams), but they must be classed more as fantasy
than as supernatural horror. There were a few other fairly successful weird
novels prior to Lovecraft (among them William Hope Hodgson’s The House on
the Borderland [1908] and Leonard Cline’s The Dark Chamber [1927]), but of
those written subsequent to Lovecraft, the above are all I can think of that rank
among the authentic masterpieces of the form. It can be seen that these novels
have virtually nothing in common with each other, either in theme or in style or
in execution; it is simply that in each instance the author has conceived of a
scenario that is sufficiently complex and sufficiently supernatural in its essence
such that a novel is required for its exposition.
Weird fiction, in spite of the recent appearance of vast amounts of rubbish,
is still a relatively small field, and its best practitioners are all highly distinctive
and individual writers who do not appear to have very much in common. This is
why I find a thematic approach to this field generally unsatisfying, since it is
frequently made only at the expense of ignoring what makes each author’s work
unique in its employment of a given theme. How, really, can one compare the
use of the vampire in the work of Les Daniels and Anne Rice? In the end it
seems as if weird authors will simply continue to produce whatever they are
moved to produce at the moment, and it is we critics who have the onerous task
of tidying up after them and classifying their work in this or that subcategory.
But it is also the responsibility of critics to sort the good from the bad, the
original from the hackneyed, the substantial from the vacuous, the aesthetically
polished from the superficially slick; and in that task we have much work to do.

 
I. SHIRLEY JACKSON: DOMESTIC HORROR
Shirley Jackson (1916–1965)1 and Ramsey Campbell are the two leading
writers of weird fiction since Lovecraft. In making this assertion I am not merely
bypassing other writers who, at least in their own minds, aspire to that title—in
particular the bestselling quartet of Stephen King, Peter Straub, Clive Barker,
and Anne Rice—but am making the problematical assertion that Jackson is a
weird writer at all. In truth, only one of her novels is avowedly supernatural—
the masterful Haunting of Hill House (1959)—while others are weird only
slightly or not at all. In addition, only perhaps 15 or 20 of her 100-odd short
stories can be said to belong to the weird tale or to the mystery story or to
science fiction. Certainly there is nothing supernatural about “The Lottery”
(1948), whose impact rests on the very possibility of its occurrence. But I wish to
place Jackson within the realm of weird fiction not only for the nebulous reason
that the whole of her work has a pervasive atmosphere of the odd about it, but,
more importantly, because her entire work is unified to such a degree that
distinctions about genre and classification become arbitrary and meaningless.
Like Arthur Machen, Shirley Jackson developed a view of the world that
informed all her writing, whether supernatural or not; but that world view is
more akin to the cheerless and nihilistic misanthropy of Bierce than to Machen’s
harried antimaterialism. It is because Shirley Jackson so keenly detected horror
in the everyday world, and wrote of it with rapier-sharp prose, that she ranks as a
twentieth-century Bierce.
Jackson began her career writing short stories—the first one, “Janice,”
dating to 1938, when she was attending Syracuse University. In late 1941 she
published a sketch, “My Life with R. H. Macy,” in the New Republic, and from
1943 onward she appeared regularly in the New Yorker, Mademoiselle,
Harper’s, Woman’s Home Companion, Good Housekeeping, Collier’s, Ladies’
Home Journal, Woman’s Day, and other general fiction or women’s magazines.
“The Lottery,” of course, catapulted her to fame and notoriety, setting off a furor
after its appearance in the New Yorker for June 26, 1948. Jackson wittily
recounts the story’s reception in a lecture, “Biography of a Story” (1960; C).
Shortly thereafter her first novel, The Road through the Wall (1948), appeared.
The celebrity of “The Lottery” caused Jackson’s publishers to push for a
collection of her stories, and it emerged in early 1949 under the same title, The
Lottery. This heterogeneous volume shows signs of hasty assemblage: the stories
are for the most part notable, but their rather disconcerting variety does not

produce a unified effect, especially as two of the stories—“My Life with R. H.
Macy” and “Charles” (1948)—are plainly, if peculiarly, autobiographical.
This strain of quasi-autobiography became much more pronounced from
the late 1940s onward, as Jackson began to write a whole series of stories about
her family, most centering around her four children. First published in women’s
magazines, these stories or sketches were collected in two of her most popular
books, Life among the Savages (1953) and Raising Demons (1957). The former
was actually a bestseller for a short time, and it continues to be reprinted.
It is surprising that Jackson never subsequently made an effort to collect her
nondomestic short fiction. Not merely did The Lottery fail to include all the
fiction she had published up to that time (it also included nine stories that, as far
as I can tell, were unpublished), but there are some 20 stories written subsequent
to The Lottery that were not reprinted in the posthumous collection, Come Along
with Me (1968), edited by her husband Stanley Edgar Hyman. About a dozen of
her later family stories also remain uncollected. Some of these are not only
among her most famous and most frequently anthologized—including “One
Ordinary Day, with Peanuts” (1955), first published in Fantasy and Science
Fiction—they are among her best.2
The course of Jackson’s novelistic career (she wrote six novels, not
including Come Along with Me, left unfinished at her death) reveals both a
growing mastery of the novel form and an increasing dosage of the weird,
culminating with The Haunting of Hill House. The Road through the Wall is an
entirely mainstream satire on suburban life, but is too episodic to be effective as
a whole; it reads like a series of short stories stitched together in no especial
order. Hangsaman (1951) has more unity and a fine atmosphere of the strange—
probably the result of Jackson’s employment of stream-of- consciousness, which
produces a weirdly hallucinatory effect—but in the end, it is also a nonweird
Bildungsroman. The Bird’s Nest (1954) approaches the weird in its study of a
woman with multiple personalities—a phenomenon explicitly compared by the
woman’s psychiatrist to demonic possession (B 198–99)—but, aside from being
very clumsy in its execution, it involves nothing genuinely supernatural or
weird. Indeed, the very analogy of split personality to demonic possession
renders the concept wholly natural, since it is now something entirely
encompassed by natural science (or, at least, it is so presented by Jackson, whose
character is cured in the end by psychoanalysis). The Sundial (1958) is wholly
unclassifiable: although there are some powerful dream or hallucination
sequences, this tale of a twisted family convinced that the rest of the world is
soon going to end borders on the weird through the author’s bland suggestion
that perhaps the family members, far from being insane, may actually be right. It

is one of the most pungent satires ever written. The Haunting of Hill House, of
course, is explicitly supernatural and was so conceived by Jackson, although its
true emphasis may lie elsewhere. It is certainly her most polished and integrated
novel. We Have Always Lived in the Castle (1962) seems to be regarded as a
weird tale by many (perhaps because it was initially marketed as such by her
publishers, who wished to capitalize on the success of Hill House). But if it is
weird, it is in a highly peculiar and perhaps backhanded way, for all that it is a
gripping work. Come Along with Me promised to be supernatural, but I do not
know enough about its genesis or purpose to say whether it would actually have
turned out to be so.
Jackson’s world view does not extend into the realm of metaphysics: it is
not possible to deduce from her work any coherent conception of the nature of
the universe. She is wholly and avowedly concerned with human relationships,
and it is from their complexities that both horror and the supernatural emerge in
her work. Both early and late in her career Jackson was affirming that, at least
for her, the supernatural is a metaphor for human beings’ relations to each other
and to society. Consider a remark in 1948:
I have had for many years a consuming interest in magic and the
supernatural. I think this is because I find there so convenient a shorthand
statement of the possibilities of human adjustment to what seems to be at
best an inhuman world…. [E]verything I write [involves] the sense which I
feel, of a human and not very rational order struggling inadequately to keep
in check forces of great destruction, which may be the devil and may be
intellectual enlightenment [O 125].
It is appropriate, then, that a proper starting-point for the study of Jackson’s
fiction from a weird perspective may not be her actual weird work but those tales
for which she gained an entirely different following: her family chronicles
collected in Life among the Savages and Raising Demons.

DOMESTIC FICTION
The strain of autobiography that is so dominant throughout Jackson’s work
can be traced to her very earliest writing. Her first professionally published
story, “My Life with R. H. Macy” (L), appears to be a lightly fictionalized
account of a job she had as a saleswoman at Macy’s department store. The
stories she wrote about her family date from no earlier than 1948, several years
after she began her literary career, but they continued at a fairly constant pace to
the end of her life. Jackson admitted to her parents that many of these stories
were potboilers: “They are written simply for money … I won’t write love
stories and junk about gay young married couples, and they won’t take ordinary
children stories, and this sort of thing is a compromise between their notions and
mine … and is unusual enough so that I am the only person I know of who is
doing it” (O 145). This dismissal of her domestic stories may be somewhat
disingenuous: to be sure, they brought in needed income (the $1000 she received
for each story came in very handy in supporting four children, as Hyman, a
university professor, never made much money of his own from his literary
criticism), but the zest, vigor, and wit with which they are written testify to their
importance to Jackson.
James Egan, in a thoughtful essay that attempts to reconcile Jackson’s
domestic fiction and her weird work, sees a twofold division of her work, as
“either the expression of an idyllic domestic vision or the inversion of that vision
into the fantastic and Gothic.”3 This assessment seems fundamentally correct,
but it may require a little more shading. Especially when we examine the
chronology of Jackson’s short fiction, we will find that the domestic stories
themselves undergo a gradual modification, brought on, perhaps, by her marital
problems or simply by the fact that her children grew up and no longer exhibited
that affinity to “magic” (see O 209) which Jackson thought the very young
reveal. The later domestic fiction now and then displays a brooding irony and
even misanthropy that bring it surprisingly close in tone to her other work.
Life among the Savages and Raising Demons were both stitched together
from a number of stories originally published in magazines. Jackson’s skill in
this process of editing and rewriting the tales into a unified whole cannot be
overemphasized, especially in the former work. It is true that both books remain
somewhat episodic, but she has weaved the tales together in such a way that they
flow naturally one into the other; some of the stories have been so extensively
revised as to be nearly unrecognizable from their originals. Although Jackson

appears to pay lip service to the conventions of middle-class life in the 1950s,
the vibrancy of her writing, the flawlessly exact capturing of her children’s
idiosyncrasies, and above all her complete lack of sentimentality make these
stories pungent and vivid even today.
The overriding question, in regard to these works, is the degree of their
veracity; that is, the extent to which they are unvarnished or faithful
transcriptions of actual events in Jackson’s life and in the life of her family. It is,
of course, naive to imagine that any autobiographical writing simply relates
events as they occurred; and Jackson’s remark that these stories allowed her to
see her children “through a flattering veil of fiction” (O 119) may be all we need
to infer that her domestic fiction, no less than her other work, is in some sense a
creation of the imagination. Egan’s reference to this work as “idyllic” is correct
insofar as Jackson systematically attempts to present what may in reality have
been highly traumatic events as the sources of harmless jests—her son being
struck by a car, for instance, in which he suffered a concussion and some broken
bones.
The importance of this domestic fiction—as regards her other work, at any
rate—rests in its employment of very basic familial or personal scenarios that
she would reuse in her weird stories in perverted and twisted ways: things like
riding a bus, employing a maid, taking children shopping, going on vacation,
putting up guests, and, in general, adhering—or seeming to adhere—to the
“proper conduct” expected of her as a middle-class housewife. It is interesting
that her function as a writer is almost never mentioned in these nonweird works,
or if it is, she pokes fun at it as an anomaly for a wife with four children. “The
Third Baby’s the Easiest” captures the idea perfectly, as Jackson registers with a
desk clerk at the hospital:
“Age?” she asked. “Sex? Occupation?”
“Writer,” I said.
“Housewife,” she said.
“Writer,” I said.
“I’ll just put down housewife,” she said [LS 426].
It is important to note, however, that this body of domestic fiction really
does undergo some significant changes over the years; it is in no sense a
monolithic block of determined cheer. Some cracks begin to appear as early as
“Lucky to Get Away” (1953), in which Jackson emphatically betrays a
weariness with the unending round of housework required of her as a mother,
especially as her husband contributes nothing to the household chores:
I got to feeling that I could not bear the sight of the colored cereal
bowls for one more morning, could not empty one more ashtray, could not

brush one more head or bake one more potato or let out one more dog or
pick up one more jacket. I snarled at the bright faces regarding me at the
breakfast table and I was strongly tempted to kick the legs out from under
the chair on which my older son was teetering backward [RD 583].
The humor in this passage is, surely, a little sardonic.
Three other pieces show that Jackson’s relationship with her husband might
not have been one of unending bliss. One of the many curious things about these
stories is the infrequency with which her husband even appears: they are all
about herself and her children, and when her husband does make an appearance
it is almost always as a clumsy buffoon (“The Life Romantic,” “The Box”). In
“Queen of the May,” in which Hyman has been invited to judge a beauty contest,
the tone becomes a little more sinister: the jealousy Jackson felt toward her
husband (a known philanderer) is much in evidence:
“Daddy is going to see a lot of girls,” Sally told Barry. She turned to
me. “Daddy likes to look at girls, doesn’t he?”
There was a deep, enduring silence, until at last my husband’s eye fell
on Jannie. “And what did you learn in school today?” he asked with wild
enthusiasm [RD 661–62].
Still odder and still more bitter is “One Last Chance,” in which her husband
announces somewhat sheepishly that an old flame of his will be dropping by (in
fact she cancels her plans and never arrives), tactlessly and unintentionally
suggesting that this woman is much prettier and a better cook than his wife. I
have no idea whether this was an actual incident in Jackson’s life, but it is
interesting to note that her vindictiveness here is directed even at her children:
I gathered up ten clean sheets and six pillowcases and went first into
Barry’s room, where I removed six Teddy bears … a green rabbit, two
hidden lollipops and a wooden train from the bed and stripped and made it.
Then I took up my armload of linen and went into Sally’s room, sighed and
removed from her bed a stack of coloring books, a disintegrated box of
crayons, two dolls and an Oz book. I stacked the stuff on the floor where
she would be sure to fall over it and quickly stripped and made the bed.4
Most telling is the article “On Being a Faculty Wife,” which scathingly lays
bare Jackson’s resentment at the ostracism and condescension she suffers from
the academic community of Bennington College, where the young girls all
revere her husband but take scant notice of her. Incredibly, the following bit of
venom was omitted when the piece, which first appeared in Mademoiselle, was
reprinted in Raising Demons:
…she [a student] turned to me and asked casually, “How long have
you been married?”

“Sixteen years.”
“Sixteen years? Gosh, he doesn’t look that old. Where did you meet
him?”
“In college.”
“You went to college too? How many years?”
“Four.”
“Gosh. How come you just ended up doing housework and stuff?
Couldn’t you get a job?”
“I have a job. I cook and sew and clean and shop and make beds and
drive people places and—“
“No, I meant a job. Like … you know, doing something. Because
wouldn’t it give you something to talk about at home? Because after all
he’s a very cultured man, you know.”5
Note here Jackson’s curious response to the query “Couldn’t you get a
job?” Although by now an author of some stature, she does not reply, “I am a
writer,” but “I cook and sew and clean…” No doubt the point is to emphasize
that housework is indeed a job of some consequence, but, as with nearly all the
domestic stories, Jackson suppresses or conceals a major facet of her life—her
writing.
Some of the later, uncollected domestic fiction comes off sounding a little
tired: Jackson must have realized that her material was running dry, especially as
her children were growing up into the less superficially “cute” stage of young
adulthood. Indeed, a late piece, “Karen’s Complaint” (1959), is quite poignant in
depicting Jackson’s sense of loneliness and aimlessness as her youngest child
begins to go to school and she faces the prospect of an empty house for the first
time in nearly two decades. However haphazardly her household appeared to be
run, she took evident pride in providing a loving home for her husband and
children. It is exactly this sense of togetherness and warmth that is obtrusively
lacking in her other fiction. Where the reality of her own family lay, no one but
she herself could have answered: perhaps all the carefree and well-adjusted
children in her domestic fiction were themselves imaginary—her greatest
fantasy.

DOMESTIC INTO WEIRD
The transformation of some incidents found in the domestic fiction into
something very different and much more disturbing occasionally occurs with
scarcely an alteration save that of context. I am reminded of Plautus’ remark in
the prologue to Amphitryo:
Are you disappointed
To find it’s a tragedy? Well, I can easily change it.
    …I can easily make it a comedy,
And never alter a line.6
The textbook example of this is the story “Charles.” Here the transition has
occurred in the reverse direction, as the story was first published in a magazine
and gathered in The Lottery before being reprinted in Life among the Savages. In
its earlier two contexts the story is subtly menacing and rather grim: her son
Laurie (mentioned by name in all three versions), attending kindergarten, tells of
a strange boy, Charles, who is by turns extremely unruly or even evil (“‘Today
Charles hit the teacher.’ ‘He kicked the teacher’s friend.’” [L 71–72]) and
excessively well-behaved. Later, when Jackson meets Laurie’s teacher, she finds
out that there is no Charles in the class. I shall return to the implications of this
story later. But here I wish to note what a remarkably different atmosphere this
story has when it is buried in the genial confines of Life among the Savages:
there the whole tale comes off as simply another prank by her cute but
headstrong son. In the former instances, though, one has the strong sensation that
her son may well have serious problems of adjustment.
Another means for effecting the transition from domestic to weird, or vice
versa, is omission. A very peculiar tale, “The House,” was reprinted in Life
among the Savages—but not all of it. The latter portion was excised, no doubt
because it is precisely here that the tale veers off into suggestions of the
supernatural. At the outset it is difficult to ascertain whether, in its magazine
appearance, this story is genuinely autobiographical, since Jackson never refers
to her husband or children by name. In any case, the story concerns her family
moving into an old, somewhat ramshackle, and faintly sinister house in New
England (the precise location is never specified in the original appearance). The
narrative of fixing up the house for habitation and moving in is told with mild
humor—certainly not with the overt hilarity of pieces like “Look, Ma, We’re
Moving!” (1952) or “Worldly Goods”—but with an undercurrent of the strange.
The house seems almost animate:

There was a door to an attic that preferred to stay latched, and would
latch itself no matter who was inside; another door hung by custom slightly
ajar, although it would close good-humoredly for a time when some special
reason required it. We had five attics, we discovered, built into one another;
one of them kept bats, and we shut that one up; another one, light and
cheerful in spite of a small window, liked to be a place of traffic and
became a place to store things temporarily.
An old clothesline hung across the basement, and after the line I put in
the back yard had fallen down for the third time, I resigned myself and
hung a new line in the basement, and clothes dried there quickly and
freshly…. One bedroom chose the children. It was large and light and
showed height marks on one wall, and seemed to mind not at all when
crayon marks appeared on the wallpaper and paint got spilled on the floor.7
The house controls its inhabitants, not the inhabitants the house. It is on its
sufferance that they are there at all. All this may be only mildly disturbing; but
then an old lady comes to pay a visit:
“It’s a lovely old house,” I said.
“Do you think so?” She turned quickly to look at me. “Do you really
think it’s a lovely old house?”
“We’re very happy here.”
“I’m glad.” She folded her hands and smiled again. “It’s always been
such a good house,” she said. “The old doctor always used to say it was a
good house.”
“The old doctor?”
“Doctor Ogilvie.”
“Doctor Ogilvie?”
“I see they kept the pillars, after all,” she said, nodding. “We always
thought they gave the house character.”
“There was a hornets’ nest in one,” I said weakly. Doctor Ogilvie had
built the house in 1816!8
The first passage I quoted above was included in Life among the Savages,
but again context robs it of any undertones of the weird; and that reprint breaks
off the tale shortly thereafter. If anything, this story could be a model of
Jackson’s ability to transform the events of her own life into weird fiction.
Jackson’s work returns time and again to certain fundamental domestic
themes, sometimes in an autobiographical manner, sometimes in a mainstream
manner, and sometimes in a weird manner. It is again worth emphasizing that
these distinctions are arbitrary and nebulous; it takes only a small touch to push a

story from one of these groups to another, and some stories remain resolutely
averse to clear categorization.
Consider, for example, the number of stories by Jackson involving the
hiring of a maid. There are at least four such tales, and they all play startling
variations of tone and mood upon this one theme. Chronologically the first is
“Tootie in Peonage” (1942; C), one of Jackson’s earliest stories. It tells of a
young woman, Tootie Maple, whom the narrator hires to help with the
housework. It is an amusing tale of how Tootie has too many other pressing
things to do—painting her toenails, finishing the latest issue of True Confessions
—to get down to her actual duties. But the real object of satire is the housewife
who hired her, who lacks the strength of will either to order Tootie to do her
work or to fire her. The next maid story, “Family Magician” (1949), is a rather
odd and benign weird tale about a maid, Mallie, who appears to fulfill her
household responsibilities through magic. The tale is not of much note save in
being Jackson’s first avowedly supernatural work. Then comes “Monday
Morning,” incorporated in Life among the Savages and similar in tone to “Tootie
in Peonage.” In this explicitly autobiographical story we read of the maid
Phoebe, who shows up more than an hour late. It is all very amusing:
“Where’s Phoebe?” she [Jannie] said.
“She didn’t come today,” Laurie said. “Mommy’s terrible mad.
Mommy’s probably going to kill her.”
“Laurie,” I said, but they had already started, “Mommy’s going to kill
Phoebe, Mommy’s going to kill Phoebe” [LS 438].
Then we come to the extremely nasty “Strangers in Town” (1959). The tale
does not focus upon the maid, named Mallie (as in “Family Magician”), but it is
clear that this maid too has supernatural powers: she gathers an acorn, a
mushroom, and a scrap of grass and makes a stew out of them.
The simple act of riding a bus or train and traveling to a strange location—
usually a big city—has generated a number of Jackson’s most powerful stories,
whether weird or otherwise. We see an innocuous version of this in chapter four
of Raising Demons, in which Jackson relates taking her children to New York.
Other such tales are much more ominous. “The Tooth” (1949; L) is a queer and
meandering story of a young woman who travels to New York to see a dentist. I
confess to being at a loss as to what point this story is trying to make, but the
atmosphere of shimmering, dreamlike fantasy that was to become a Jackson
trademark finds its first genuine embodiment here. “Pillar of Salt” (1948; L)
involves a nearly identical scenario, although here a couple from New
Hampshire comes to New York for a vacation. The emphasis is, inevitably, on
the wife, whose appreciation of the city oscillates between amazement and

condescension (looking at a set of miniature milk bottles being sold as toys, she
notes archly, “We get our milk from cows” [L 177]). Gradually the giganticism,
pace, and impersonality of the city overwhelm her, and her plight is keenly
encapsulated by her complete inability to cross a busy street even when the light
is with her:
The minute the light changes, she told herself firmly; there’s no sense.
The light changed before she was ready and in the minute before she
collected herself traffic turning the corner overwhelmed her and she shrank
back against the curb. She looked longingly at the cigar store on the
opposite corner, with her apartment house beyond; she wondered, How do
people ever manage to get there, and knew that by wondering, by admitting
a doubt, she was lost [L 184].
“The Bus” (1965; C) finally takes this topos into the realm of the
supernatural. An old woman is dropped off at the wrong stop late at night.
Eventually she catches a ride on a truck to some dismal-looking roadhouse. As
the atmosphere becomes at once more menacing and more unreal, the old
woman imagines herself a child in her room, looks in a closet, and finds her old
doll speaking to her: “‘Go away, old lady, go away, old lady, go away’” (C 200).
At this point the old woman wakes up—it was all a dream and she is still on the
bus! Not content with this trite device, Jackson gives it a further predictable twist
by having the old woman get off at the same wrong stop as before.
Several other stories speak of the peculiar vulnerability of people on
vacation, away from their friends and their familiar environment. “The Summer
People” (1949; C) is a mordant tale about an elderly couple who decide to stay
on in their summer cottage past Labor Day, something they have never done
before. The dour countryfolk of the region appear to resent this decision
—“‘Nobody ever stayed at the lake past Labor Day before’” (C 73)—and
insidiously conspire against them: the couple cannot get kerosene or ice, the mail
suddenly stops, the groceries can’t be delivered, and so on. This masterful story
is worth considering in several other respects, but the gradual isolation of the
couple, as one by one the locals turn against them through sheer inaction, is
harrowing. There is, of course, nothing supernatural about this tale, but a work
like this makes the strongest possible case for the inclusion of the
nonsupernatural horror story as a genuine subset of the weird tale.
“The Lovely House” (1952; retitled “A Visit” in C) introduces the
supernatural in the subtlest way. A college girl, Margaret, goes with her friend
Carla Rhodes to the latter’s palatial home, whose location is never specified.
Initially it all seems idyllic:
Carla stopped before the doorway and stood for a minute, looking first

behind her, at the vast reaching gardens and the green lawn going down to
the river, and the soft hills beyond, and then at the perfect grace of the
house, showing so clearly the long-boned structure within, the curving
staircases and the arched doorways and the tall thin lines of steadying
beams, all of it resting back against the hills, and up, past rows of windows
and the flying lines of the roof, on, to the tower… [C 98].
The tale develops a powerful atmosphere of weirdness through the
deliberately artificial dialogue—it is as if all the characters know they are in a
work of fiction. Carla’s brother Paul arrives; Margaret spends much time with
him. She goes up to the tower and has an enigmatic talk with Carla’s
grandmother. Throughout the story Mrs. Rhodes is weaving a tapestry of the
house. This is the end of the tale:
“You will not leave us before my brother comes again?” Carla asked
Margaret.
“I have only to put the figures into the foreground,” Mrs. Rhodes said,
hesitating on her way to the drawing room. “I shall have you exactly if you
sit on the lawn near the river.”
“We shall be models of stillness,” said Carla, laughing. “Margaret, will
you come and sit beside me on the lawn” [C 120]?
What does this mean? What is the significance of Paul’s remark that
“‘without this house I could not exist?’” (C 119). Is this not a pun, meaning that
neither he nor the entire family can live without (i.e., outside) the house? And
isn’t Margaret now being woven into the fabric of the house by way of the
tapestry? This exquisite and haunting tale—a fantastically transmogrified
version of a visit Dylan Thomas paid to Jackson’s home in Westport,
Connecticut (O 151–52)—exemplifies the “quiet weird tale” at its pinnacle. And,
of course, it embodies a theme that we can already see is a dominant one in
Jackson’s work and perhaps also her life: the manner in which a house can
subsume its occupants.
Some of Jackson’s strangest stories—which are perhaps only on the
borderland of the weird—seem like satires of middle-class tact and etiquette. A
few of the domestic stories may be of some relevance here, as Jackson feels (or
claims to feel) embarrassment at the unruly antics of her children in public. In
“Shopping Trip” (1953) she tries to control her children as they act up in a
department store. “I was beginning to be aware of a familiar and dreadful
feeling: that of being stared at by hordes of people—salesladies, floorwalkers,
mothers, immaculate children, and perhaps truant officers. ‘Come on,’ I said
nervously, and added just in time, ‘my dears’” (LS 458–59). Some of her
nondomestic stories read like exaggerated versions of things of this sort. In

“Like Mother Used to Make” (1949; L)—founded, apparently, on a genuine
incident experienced by one of her friends (O 102)—a man has invited a woman
in a neighboring apartment to a dinner he has taken great pains to make. While
they are there together, a male friend of the woman’s arrives, thinking it is her
apartment, and this unwanted intruder makes himself right at home. In fact, so
spineless and so afraid of causing (and suffering) embarrassment is the actual
owner of the apartment that he simply leaves, pretending that he is the guest. A
single paragraph etches his character: “David stood up. For a minute he thought
he was going to say something that might start, ‘Mr. Harris, I’ll thank you to….’
but what he actually said, finally, with both Marcia and Mr. Harris looking at
him, was, ‘Guess I better be getting along, Marcia’” (L 34). I suppose Jackson
can get away with being a misogynist: Marcia has made no effort to disabuse
Mr. Harris of the true state of affairs. A very similar story is “Trial by Combat”
(1944; L). A woman, Emily, finds small items missing from her apartment and
discovers that an old woman living in the downstairs apartment, Mrs. Allen, is
the culprit. But Mrs. Allen is so seemingly “nice” and harmless that Emily
cannot confront her on the matter. Jackson again encapsulates an entire life in a
paragraph: “Emily found that she was staring at the picture of Mrs. Allen’s
husband; such a thoughtful-looking man, she was thinking, they must have had
such a pleasant life together, and now she has a room like mine, with only two
handkerchiefs of her own in the drawer” (L 39).
“The Summer People” might also be worth considering from this
perspective, as the elderly couple cannot slough off their exterior of “good
behavior” and come to terms with the brutal treatment they are receiving at the
hands of the countryfolk. The conclusion finds the two of them cowering in the
dark, waiting for the dawn—or for the next piece of viciousness from their once-
friendly neighbors.
LANGUAGE, TRUTH, AND HORROR
Many of Jackson’s stories turn on the statements uttered by her characters:
is what they are saying true? What if, Jackson asks in a number of tales, there is
some sort of insane conspiracy to deceive a single individual? Such stories are
almost unclassifiable: we cannot know if the supernatural actually comes into
play because ambiguity is maintained to the end as to the truth of the matter.
Nevertheless, some of her most powerful tales revolve around simple utterances
by individual characters, which, when taken together, potentially suggest some
horrific and irrational victimization of an individual who is frequently somewhat
disturbed to begin with. The standard distinction between what might be called

interior and exterior supernaturalism (i.e., that occurring within the confines of
an individual’s mind and that occurring in the external world) seems to collapse
here, or even to fuse together. It is as if Jackson is suggesting that the
supernatural falls specifically upon those individuals whose hold on reality is
itself shaky.
The celebrated tale “The Daemon Lover” (1949; L) is one of the best of this
type. This story inaugurates a curious thread in the works in The Lottery (and
elsewhere) in which the figure of James Harris, the Daemon Lover, flits in and
out of stories, seemingly at random. To my mind, however, not much can be
made of this: The name Harris appears in several stories in the collection, and
sometimes he is specified as James or Jim Harris. But I do not think that in the
end it amounts to much save as a sort of in-joke that has no particular point.
Jackson herself admitted to being haunted by a demon lover, from as early as her
college years, and she describes it in a sketch as follows (she was in a
noncapitalization phase at this point): “but all i remember is that i met him
(somewhere where was it in the darkness in the light was it morning were there
trees flowers had i been born) and now when I think about him i only remember
that he was calling margaret, as in loneliness margaret margaret, and then (did i
speak to him did he look at me did we smile had we known each other once) i
went away and left him (calling to me after me) calling margaret margaret” (O
49). This is poignant enough, and the several stories she wrote about a demon
lover all have this same quality of bittersweet unreality. But the interconnections
she attempts to forge by dropping the name Harris in the Lottery collection do
not add up to a coherent whole.
But “The Daemon Lover” is an exquisite piece. It introduces us to the most
easily recognizable character type in all Jackson’s work: the lonely, weak-willed,
sensitive, overly imaginative, and possibly psychotic young woman who usually
ends her pitiable and meaningless existence in madness or suicide. This figure
recurs with such obsessive frequency in her stories that one is tempted to see in
it Jackson’s imaginative view of herself, however much or little it may have
coincided with the reality of her personality. In “The Daemon Lover” we
encounter such a figure in Margaret, who awakes one morning in her shabby
one-room apartment awaiting the arrival of James Harris, to whom she is to be
married. We are already a little uneasy, since we learn that she has known Harris
only for a month; and our fears seem confirmed when he fails to show up at her
apartment at the appointed time. She begins to look for him, reaching the
building where he had borrowed the apartment of a Mr. and Mrs. Royster for the
last month. Finding the Roysters, who have just returned, she asks about James.
Mrs. Royster’s reaction is not reassuring: “‘O Lord… What’d he do?’” (L 18).

At least this appears to confirm Harris’s existence, however tenuously. But the
Roysters do not really know him—he was a friend of a friend. Margaret begins
to ask the neighborhood shopowners whether they have seen a man answering
Harris’s description. No one has. Finally she so pesters a newsagent that he
confesses to have seen him:
“Now I don’t know for sure, mind you, but there might have been
someone like your gentleman friend coming by this morning.”
“About ten?”
“About ten,” the newsdealer agreed. “Tall fellow, blue suit. I wouldn’t
be at all surprised.”
“Which way did he go?” she said eagerly. “Uptown?”
“Uptown,” the newsdealer said, nodding. “He went uptown. That’s
just exactly it. What can I do for you, sir?” [L 21].
This is the critical point of the story: is the man admitting to having seen
Harris only to get rid of the pestiferous Margaret? Why does he agree with such
alacrity to having seen him at the time and place she insists he must have seen
him? From this point the tale devolves into either a paranoid fantasy or an evil
conspiracy, or perhaps both: the florist admits that Harris bought flowers
(wouldn’t a man going to his wedding buy flowers for his bride?); the shoeshine
man admits he shined Harris’s shoes (a natural thing for a bridegroom to do),
and he directs Margaret to a street (not hers) where he says he saw Harris go; a
boy at the corner says he saw Harris go in a building across the street. Margaret
goes in and hears voices behind a door. The tale ends inconclusively (as it must)
and agonizingly: “She knew there was someone inside the other apartment,
because she was sure she could hear low voices and sometimes laughter. She
came back many times, every day for the first week. She came on her way to
work, in the mornings; in the evenings, on her way to dinner alone, but no matter
how often or how firmly she knocked, no one ever came to the door” (L 26).
Have all these people lied to her? If so, why? Do they all hate her and wish to
torture her emotionally? Or are they simply cheerful sadists? This is the most
frightening prospect of the story, more frightening than the prospect that
Margaret has imagined much of her relationship with Harris: how can people be
so irresponsibly evil?
“The Daemon Lover” has an atmosphere of wistful pathos that somehow
works in tandem with the conte cruel horror of the tale; another, “The
Renegade” (1948; L), is pure conte cruel. A family from the city, the Walpoles,
have moved to a seemingly placid country town and appear to be settling in
nicely. Then Mrs. Walpole receives a call from a neighbor: the Walpoles’ dog
has been killing this person’s chickens; something must be done. Mrs. Walpole

cannot believe it of her gentle pet. Soon the story is all over the town (the phone
is on a party line), and everyone has a remedy for stopping a dog from killing
chickens. These remedies become more and more hideous: you can chain the
dog; you can tie a dead chicken around its neck until it rots, so that the dog hates
chickens; you can place it in a pen with some chicks and a mother hen who is
sure to scratch the dog’s eyes out; or you could put around the dog’s neck a
collar that has spikes on the inside, and when the dog approaches a chicken you
pull on a rope attached to the collar, and (as Mrs. Walpole’s own son notes with
glee), “The spikes cut her head off” (L 65). Which one is it to be?
In this tale it is a little clearer that the townspeople have conspired to tease
Mrs. Walpole mercilessly, although other questions remain unclear. Has the dog
actually killed chickens? It is true that the animal comes into the house with
blood on its legs—but what does this mean; has it been somehow framed? And
why have the townspeople ganged up on Mrs. Walpole? As to this, Mrs.
Walpole “wondered briefly if Mr. White had maliciously blamed Lady because
they were city folk, and then thought, No, no man around here would bear false
witness against a dog” (L 61). What Jackson has done in this story, and in others
of this type, is to make us doubt every single utterance made by every character
in the tale; at the same time, we are inexorably made to think the worst of all the
characters. In this instance, the townspeople are either liars or sadists or both.
And the worst part of it is, of course, that her own children are infected with this
blood-lust against a dog and happily imagine the many tortures one could inflict
upon it to cure it of its reprehensible habit.
The odd story “The Intoxicated” (1949; L) might perhaps be studied in this
context. Here a man who finds himself bored at a party wanders into the kitchen,
meeting the hostess’ daughter Eileen, a girl of 17. She is writing a paper about
the future of the world; but she doesn’t think the world has much of a future.
Rather harrowingly, she chronicles the destruction of civilization—or, at least,
this phase of it:
“Somehow I think of the churches as going first, before even the
Empire State building. And then all the big apartment houses by the river,
slipping down slowly into the water with the people inside. And the
schools, in the middle of Latin class maybe, while we’re reading Caesar.”
She brought her eyes to his face, looking at him in numb excitement. “Each
time we begin a chapter in Caesar, I wonder if this won’t be the one we
never finish. Maybe we in our Latin class will be the last people who ever
read Caesar” [L 11].
The worst thing about it is that she seems so certain of it, and this raises the
query: what if she is right? The tale is faintly reminiscent of Margaret St. Clair’s

famous story, “The Boy Who Predicted Earthquakes,” although there the boy is
undoubtedly clairvoyant and knows that the world will end. In “The Intoxicated”
we are left only with the unnerving thought that the girl is either right (in which
case the world will end) or that she is wrong (in which case she is insane) or that
she is having a little fun (in which case she is a sadist). None of these is very
reassuring. Here again Jackson is simply trying to jolt us out of our conventional
ways of thinking, and a tiresome party is the perfect backdrop for such an
enterprise.
Jackson’s one genuine science fiction (or at least futuristic) story,
“Bulletin” (1954),9 might be studied here, for it not only follows up on the theme
of “The Intoxicated” (the future of civilization) but indirectly exemplifies the
same issues of language, truth, and horror as the other stories I have been
discussing. This very brief tale is surprisingly difficult to interpret. Let us bypass
the very crude mechanics of the story: a clumsy editor’s note informing us that
certain documents have come back in a time machine that was sent into the early
twenty-second century, although the scientist who went in the machine did not
return.
The first document we find is a fragment of a newspaper dating from May
8, 2123; this indicates little save that the people of that time were given to
pompous and empty circumlocution (hardly a unique trait!). A letter from a boy
to his parents has the spellings “haveing,” “cokies” (for cookies), “loveing,” and
the like, implying either that the boy was illiterate (and perhaps, by extension,
the rest of the society?) or that these spellings had by then become standard. The
most interesting and problematical document is a high-school or college history
exam. Here we find that the twenty-second century has fallen into irremediable
confusion about the past, citing such figures as “George Washingham,” “Sinclair
(Joe) Lewis,” and “Sergeant Cuff” (as if he were a real individual). Then there
are a series of statements that one is to mark either true or false, and this is where
things get complicated. Take this statement: “The aboriginal Americans lived
above-ground and drank water.” This is obviously true, but carries the
suggestion that the people of the twenty-second century do not live above-
ground or drink water: in a single sentence an entire mode of future existence is
potently suggested. But consider this statement: “The hero Jackie Robinson is
chiefly known for his voyage to obtain the golden fleece.” The point is not
whether this is true or false; the point is: what if the people of the future think it
to be true? Given their other errors, this is entirely conceivable. Even if the
future society knows this to be false, the very manner in which the statement is
framed suggests that Jackie Robinson is now regarded as some sort of hero,
perhaps in some religious fashion. Other statements carry similarly disturbing

implications. But the clincher is at the end. The final document is a card giving
someone’s weight (presumably the scientist’s) and a meaningless machine-
generated fortune. But the editor of these documents professes to find this silly
thing “of great significance.” And it suddenly becomes clear that the time
machine was not sent forward from our time into the future but backward from
an infinitely farther future, in which people’s grasp of the events of our time and
before must be even poorer than people’s in the twenty-second century’s if they
cannot correctly identify an insignificant weight and fortune card.

LONELINESS
Shirley Jackson once wrote that she took to writing out of loneliness:
when i first used to write stories and hide them away in my desk i used
to think that no one had ever been so lonely as i was and i used to write
about people all alone. once i started a novel … but i never finished because
i found out about insanity about then and i used to write about lunatics after
that. i thought i was insane and i would write about how the only sane
people are the ones who are condemned as mad and how the whole world is
cruel and foolish and afraid of people who are different [O 40].
It is conceivable that this single utterance encompasses nearly the whole of
her fiction, and loneliness may be the single most dominant theme in her work.
But note again what a contrast the domestic fiction presents: in that body of
work she herself is not lonely because she has her lively and energetic children (I
have already noted how infrequently her husband appears in these works). And
although she and her family may be isolated from the rest of the community (as
in reality they were because of their intellectualism and, it must be admitted,
Jackson’s snobbishness [O 183– 84]), they still participate with gusto in such
social rituals as shopping, moving, celebrating Christmas, and participating in
sports. If the domestic fiction therefore benignly papers over the true loneliness
of Jackson and her family, her other fiction scathingly lays it bare with such
force that the tales become genuinely horrific.
Loneliness appears to be manifested in these stories in two parallel ways, as
in the domestic fiction: 1) the loneliness of an individual within a wider group
(whether that be a family, a community, or the world); and 2) the loneliness of a
family within a wider group. In both categories we find some of Jackson’s most
memorable and terrifying work.
We have already noted individual loneliness in a number of tales—the
partygoer in “The Intoxicated,” Margaret in “The Daemon Lover,” the niece in
“The Little House.” The opening paragraph of “The Intoxicated” encapsulates
the idea perfectly:
He was just tight enough and just familiar enough with the house to be
able to go out into the kitchen alone, apparently to get ice, but actually to
sober up a little; he was not quite enough of a friend of the family to pass
out on the living-room couch. He left the party behind without reluctance,
the group by the piano singing “Stardust,” his hostess talking earnestly to a
young man with thin clean glasses and a sullen mouth; he walked guardedly

through the dining-room, where a little group of four or five people sat on
the stiff chairs reasoning something out carefully among themselves … [L
9].
By implication, the man’s loneliness is a product both of his own volition
(he does not want to join the singers) and of rebuffs by others (the hostess
clearly does not wish to be interrupted in her tête-à-tête with the young man; the
people in the dining room are discussing something “among themselves,”
leaving no room for anyone else). We will find this sort of dichotomy frequently
in Jackson. A surprising number of individuals or families will withdraw
themselves from society, washing their hands of it entirely. This tendency
reaches its apex in We Have Always Lived in the Castle (1962). But can we truly
be certain that this self-imposed hermitry is solely a result of misanthropy?
Might it perhaps not conceal a longing for acceptance that has finally turned to
what Lovecraft called the “bitterness of alienage”?10
I am not at all certain that “The Lottery” (1948; L) ought to be considered
in this precise context, but we may as well do so here as anywhere. Whereas this
tale seems generally to convey the notion of a community that willfully isolates
an individual within it, Jackson herself appears to have had different ideas. Judy
Oppenheimer writes: “She always refused to answer the question put to her by
thousands of readers, ‘What is “The Lottery” really about?’—but to a good
friend she confided very matter-of-factly that it had, of course, been about the
Jews” (O 72). Respectful as I generally am to authors’ statements about their
own work, in this case I must frankly declare Jackson to be mistaken. “The
Lottery” cannot be about anti–Semitism because of the fundamental randomness
of the procedure by which an individual from the community is selected to die.
In any case, the community depicted in the story appears racially and culturally
homogeneous, and the individual chosen for death—Mrs. Hutchinson—differs in
no appreciable way from the other citizens. Indeed, it is exactly this randomness
that is the source of horror in the story. Another comment by Jackson seems a
little more on target: “I suppose I hoped, by setting a particularly brutal rite in
the present and in my own village, to shock the readers with a graphic
dramatization of the pointless violence and general inhumanity of their own
lives” (O 131). Even this I am not inclined to accept wholly, and in fact
Jackson’s best commentary on her story may be a stray remark in Hangsaman:
“Another instance … of ritual gone to seed” (H 62).
For ritual is at the heart of the story—a meaningless, stupid ritual whose
original rationale, whatever it may have been, has now been entirely forgotten.
This is made clear by an elderly person’s statement that the neighboring town
wants to give up the lottery (the implication, obviously, is that the lottery is a

widespread if not universal phenomenon):
Old Man Warner snorted. “Pack of crazy fools,” he said. “Listening to
the young folks, nothing’s good enough for them. Next thing you know,
they’ll be wanting to go back to living in caves, nobody work any more,
live that way for a while. Used to be a saying about ‘Lottery in June, corn
be heavy soon.’ First thing you know, we’d all be eating stewed chickweed
and acorns. There’s always been a lottery,” he added petulantly [L 215].
The lottery has become so inveterate that it has given rise to an axiom. This
axiom, “Lottery in June, corn be heavy soon,” suggests that the original purpose
of the lottery was as a fertility rite, something akin to what Thomas Tryon
described at the conclusion of Harvest Home (1973). But the need for bountiful
crops must have long passed, and yet the lottery continues, much as we might
say “Bless you!” when someone sneezes, even though we have entirely forgotten
and presumably would no longer even believe in what the expression really
means (one must be blessed lest one expel one’s soul while sneezing). It is
“ritual gone to seed.” And it is the young people of the neighboring town who
wish to give up the lottery: they are less under the sway of mindless convention
than the old people. Indeed, when Old Man Warner remarks at the end, “It’s not
the way it used to be…. People ain’t the way they used to be” (L 218), he means
that now some people are actually taking pity on the victim or, at least, are no
longer taking pride in having the victim chosen from their own families (the
remark previous to his is: “A girl whispered, ‘I hope it’s not Nancy’” [L 218]).
The artistry of “The Lottery” is indeed remarkable, although there is some
justice to some readers’ complaints of authorial deceit. One reader wrote to the
New Yorker, “I resent being tricked into reading perverted stories like ‘The
Lottery’” (C 231). However naive and conventional this response may be, it
underscores the fact that Jackson goes out of her way to conceal the climax by a
narrative tone that at the outset is placid, benign, and innocuous almost to
excess. Subtle little points throughout the narrative cause unease, however, in
particular the matter of why the family that has apparently won the first part of
the lottery seems unhappy about being chosen. If they have won a lottery,
shouldn’t they be pleased? In fact, the person to be killed will be chosen from
that family. And it is only one more of Jackson’s perversions of domestic bliss
that the children of the town take the greatest glee in stoning the victim to death.
I have stated that “The Lottery” is nonsupernatural, and of course the actual
events are indeed so. But in a strange way this tale may be weird without being
supernatural, by merely postulating the existence of the lottery in this town and
in at least several others. There are, of course, no lotteries of this sort and never
have been. In this sense the story embodies in the most literal way a trait I have

described in the weird tale: the refashioning of reality. “The Lottery” is clearly
set in the present day and in a world we are all seemingly familiar with; but the
mere existence of the lottery, and the clear implication that it has been in practice
for decades or centuries, depict Lovecraft’s “violation of natural law” in the
simple sense of portraying the real world as other than we know it in this one
regard.
The central theme of The Haunting of Hill House also appears to be
individual loneliness, although it could be studied from a number of other
perspectives. The focus of this rich, complex, poignant, and atmospheric work—
at once the greatest of Jackson’s novels and her greatest contribution to weird
fiction—is Eleanor Vance, perhaps Jackson’s most delicately etched portrait of
the weak-willed, love-starved woman. Eleanor has been chosen—along with
Luke Sanderson and Theodora (she claims to have no last name)—by Dr. John
Montague, an avowed investigator of “supernatural phenomena” (HH 5), to
explore Hill House because of her apparent sensitivity to the weird or occult:
when younger she had evidently experienced some poltergeist phenomena. Her
previous life (she is 32) has been wretched. Up to a few months before coming
to Hill House she had to take care of her sick mother, and she now suffers guilt
because she thinks she may have contributed to her death by being negligent.
She does not get along with her married sister (indeed, it is stated at the outset
that she “hated” [HH 7] her) and is forced covertly to take the car they jointly
own when the sister refuses to allow her to use it to drive to Hill House.
At the moment I am not interested in many of the supernatural phenomena
recounted in the novel. I wish to clarify here not merely Eleanor’s loneliness
(she admits this herself: “‘I am always afraid of being alone’” [HH 113]) but her
low estimation of herself:
Eleanor found herself unexpectedly admiring her own feet. Theodora
dreamed over the fire just beyond the tips of her toes, and Eleanor thought
with deep satisfaction that her feet were handsome in their red sandals;
what a complete and separate thing I am, she thought, going from my red
toes to the top of my head, individually an I, possessed of attributes
belonging only to me. I have red shoes, she thought—that goes with being
Eleanor; I dislike lobster and sleep on my left side and crack my knuckles
when I am nervous and save buttons. I am holding a brandy glass which is
mine because I am here and I am using it and I will have a place in this
room. I have red shoes and tomorrow I will wake up and I will still be here
[HH 59].
This is all a little harried: she is seizing upon anything she can find to
validate her existence. Has Eleanor only really begun to live—to lead a full,

emotionally satisfying life—since coming to Hill House? Such is surely the
implication of the following:
Suddenly, without reason, laughter trembled inside Eleanor; she
wanted to run to the head of the table and hug the doctor, she wanted to
reel, chanting, across the stretches of the lawn, she wanted to sing and to
shout and to fling her arms and move in great, emphatic, possessing circles
around the rooms of Hill House; I am here, I am here, she thought. She shut
her eyes quickly in delight and then said demurely to the doctor, “And what
do we do today?” [HH 100–1].
What this passage also suggests is her growing identification with Hill
House—she is possessing it or it is possessing her. Early on the doctor says:
“‘Hill House has a reputation for insistent hospitality; it seemingly dislikes
letting its guests get away’” (HH 48–49). Eleanor ominously echoes this idea
when she says, “‘I don’t think we could leave now if we wanted to’” (HH 54).
The Shakespearean tag “Journeys end in lovers meeting” glides through this
novel like an elusive ritornello, but what is its true implication? If it is Eleanor’s
journey that is at an end here (and this is clearly the case, as at the beginning we
experience the long trip to Hill House through her eyes), who is her lover? Is it
Theodora, with whom she becomes very close—to the point that Theodora must
wear Eleanor’s clothes when her own are found covered with red paint like
blood? Is it Luke, who seems to be dallying with both women? Or is it the house
itself? Perhaps it is all three. Toward the end it becomes clear that Luke, finding
Eleanor’s behavior increasingly odd, prefers the company of Theodora. Is
Eleanor jealous of Theodora? Why else is she suddenly filled with an
“uncontrollable loathing” (HH 112) of her?
It is here that some of the supernatural manifestations gain their importance.
At one point the guests find some crude writing on the wall: “HELP ELEANOR
COME HOME” (HH 103). The wording is significant: it is not “Help Eleanor go
home” or “get home”; the implication is that Eleanor is already home or on the
way home (at Hill House), and that some sort of spiritual transition must take
place so that she feels at home here. Other weird events also seem to single out
Eleanor, until finally she appears to begin cracking under the strain. One night
she leaves her bedroom to meander through the house. Her absence is noted by
the others and they look for her, but she refuses to reveal her whereabouts.
“Eleanor clung to the door and laughed until tears came into her eyes; what fools
they are, she thought; we trick them so easily” (HH 163). Who is the “we” but
she and Hill House? Journeys end in lovers meeting. When the others persuade
her to leave, she cries defiantly, “Hill House belongs to me” (HH 173), and as
she leaves the driveway she turns abruptly and smashes her car into a tree,

echoing the fate of the last occupant of Hill House 18 years before, whose “horse
bolted and crushed him against the big tree” (HH 49). What life would Eleanor
have had if she had left? “‘It’s the only time anything’s ever happened to me’”
(HH 171).
At this point it is worth studying the general supernaturalism of the novel.
In a lecture written a year prior to the publication of The Haunting of Hill House,
“Experience and Fiction” (C), Jackson discusses the research and composition of
the novel at length. This essay does not seem to be of any genuine help in
elucidating the work, although it contains some wry features, as when Jackson
notes coming down to her study one morning and finding the words “DEAD
DEAD” on a sheet of paper in her own handwriting (C 213), which she takes as
a sign that she was destined to write a ghost story. In any case, we learn both
from this essay and from the facts of her biography that Jackson had always had
an interest in the supernatural, and indeed both she herself and her children made
no secret of the fact that she actually believed in the supernatural (O 37, 125).
She had an extensive collection of books on witchcraft, and in preparation for
her novel she read much about hauntings, including papers by the Society for
Psychic Research.
And yet, it must be admitted that the supernatural manifestations in The
Haunting of Hill House in many cases seem random, unmotivated, and
unexplained. What is the significance of the cold spot in the hallway; of the
knocking heard intermittently at night on people’s doors; of “some animal like a
dog” (HH 95) seen by Dr. Montague? It is all very well for the doctor to say that
“‘psychic phenomena are subject to laws of a very particular sort’” (HH 48), but
those laws are never specified, nor are the psychic events actually experienced at
Hill House ever plausibly accounted for or harmonized within the overall
scheme of the novel. It appears that they are meant merely to enhance the
atmosphere of weirdness as a backdrop to the story of Eleanor Vance. It may
also have been a mistake for Jackson to introduce Montague’s obnoxious and
overbearing wife and her pompous and bumbling assistant toward the end;
considerable cheap satire is had at their expense, but the atmosphere of the novel
is close to being shattered by their obtrusive presence. Nevertheless, The
Haunting of Hill House remains a masterwork in the field, if only for exhibiting
some of the most meticulous character portrayal in weird fiction and for its
overwhelming sense of inevitable doom.
A final contribution to the individual loneliness theme is Jackson’s last
published story, “The Possibility of Evil” (1965). This story of an aristocratic old
woman who writes anonymous poison pen letters to other citizens so as to keep
her town “clean and sweet” is a trifle obvious, but is redeemed by its unrelenting

viciousness. In the end she is detected and someone repays her in kind by
destroying her cherished rose garden and writing an anonymous note: “LOOK
OUT AT WHAT USED TO BE YOUR ROSES.” Jackson’s biographer Judy
Oppenheimer believes, incredibly, that Jackson identified with the old woman:
“Shirley wanted to see herself … as a proper lady, sure of her place, who sent
forth her terrible messages to the world yet remained anonymously secure” (O
272). But surely we are meant to loathe the old woman for her spitefulness and
her injustice: “Miss Strangeworth never concerned herself with facts; her letters
all dealt with the more negotiable stuff of suspicion.” And the irony is a little
heavy-handed:
She had been writing her letters … for the past year. She never got any
answers, of course, because she never signed her name. If she had been
asked, she would have said that her name, Adela Strangeworth, a name
honored in the town for so many years, did not belong on such trash. The
town where she lived had to be kept clean and sweet, but people
everywhere were lustful and evil and degraded, and needed to be watched;
the world was so large, and there was only one Miss Strangeworth left in
it.11
The individual loneliness theme has given birth to an interesting offshoot
whereby, as I have suggested earlier, some of Jackson’s loners flee their
confining environment and, sometimes literally, transform themselves into new
individuals with new personalities. We have already seen this at work in The
Haunting of Hill House, where Eleanor Vance’s trip to Hill House symbolizes
the sloughing off of her old personality—as a weak, colorless, lonely woman—
in preparation for the donning of a new one. She can adopt this new personality
without fear of contradiction or ridicule, because none of the other guests at Hill
House know of her former life; indeed, at Hill House she is, at least at the outset,
vibrant, witty, and potentially an object of a man’s (and woman’s)12 affections.
Several stories, early and late, also exemplify this trend. I have noted how,
in “Like Mother Used to Make,” the woman appears as a guest in her neighbor’s
apartment, then takes on the persona of the legitimate occupant of the place
when a second guest arrives. Similarly, “The Villager” (1944; L) is the subtly
disturbing story of a woman, Hilda Clarence, who comes to an apartment of
someone selling furniture, finds the occupant gone, and wanders in. Another
individual (the ubiquitous Mr. Harris) comes in, and Hilda passes herself off—
not through any explicit statement, but merely by omitting to state the contrary
—as the occupant. The scenario allows her to create a new life for herself: she
and her husband (she is in fact unmarried) are going to Paris and must sell the

furniture; she herself is a dancer (in fact, the actual occupant of the apartment is
a dancer; Hilda had wanted to be one [L 40] but is now a private secretary).
Harris leaves without buying any furniture; Hilda leaves shortly thereafter. That
is all there is to the story, but in a few pages Jackson portrays vividly a woman’s
loss of her dreams in the mundane realities of life and the ease with which she
can indulge in wish-fulfillment fantasies of what she might have been.
The Bird’s Nest might be studied here, even though it is the least successful
of Jackson’s novels. This work might have been a powerful vehicle for the study
of loneliness and the concomitant desire to refashion oneself—for who can be
lonelier than a person with multiple personalities?—but the execution is severely
flawed. It is about Elizabeth Richmond, who is diagnosed as having four
separate personalities: Elizabeth (timid and colorless); Beth (sweet but fragile);
Betsy (childishly petulant and potentially violent); and Bess (the most evil of all,
a frightening megalomaniac). But the story is marred by structural clumsiness,
poor writing, and a feeble conclusion. Jackson makes several mistakes of
judgment. Each of the five long chapters is narrated from a different point of
view: the first chapter is omniscient; the second and fourth are from the
perspective of the psychiatrist brought in to treat Elizabeth; the third (most
interestingly) is through Betsy’s eyes; and the fifth is from the point of view of
Elizabeth’s Aunt Morgen. The psychiatrist’s narrative tone—flippant,
pretentious, cheaply ironic—seriously impedes the progress of the novel, which
in any case (as with all Jackson’s novels save the last two) tends to meander and
digress. In chapter two the reproduction of the psychiatrist’s transcript of a
discussion with Elizabeth and her various personalities sounds excessively
clinical, robbing the scene of the emotive power it might have had if it had been
presented more novelistically. And the lame conclusion, in which Elizabeth is
magically cured and her personalities integrated, is a woeful anticlimax. Indeed,
toward the end the atmosphere changes almost in spite of Jackson’s wishes from
grim intensity to farce as we watch Elizabeth’s four personalities successively
assert themselves and take four baths consecutively (B 335–37).
Eventually we are led to understand the origin of the entire personality split:
Elizabeth, jealous of her mother’s lover (who hates her [B 236]), has caused her
mother’s death in an altercation and is now suppressing the memory. Jackson
may have erred here also on the side of vagueness, as the background is sketched
hazily and fragmentarily, so that the connection between Elizabeth’s relationship
with her mother and her split personality is never adequately clarified.
Jackson’s incomplete novel, Come Along with Me (1965; C), is the most
forthright example of a character leaving the past behind. A middle-aged woman
whose husband has died decides to unburden herself of all the impedimenta of

her prior existence and start afresh. “So that was how I started out. I’d thought
about it for a long time of course—not that I positively expected I was going to
have to bury Hughie, but he had a good life—and everything went the way I
used to figure it would. I sold the house, I auctioned off the furniture, I put all
the paintings and boxes in the barn, I erased my old name and took my initials
off everything, and I got on the train and left” (C 12). She takes up a new name,
Angela Motorman, almost at random, and, in response to her landlady’s query as
to her occupation, she remarks: “‘I dabble in the supernatural’” (C 18). What this
means, apparently, is that from the age of 12 she has heard voices from the dead
(C 24–26). The fragment ends after Angela gives a rather inconclusive and
unsatisfying séance. I have no idea where this novel was going to go—even what
we have seems a little disjointed and unfocused—or whether the supernatural
would actually have come into play, but Come Along with Me might for once
have portrayed a strong, self-controlled figure rather than the birdlike victims so
characteristic of Jackson’s other work.
The tales that focus on the loneliness or isolation of a family within a
community do not differ appreciably in tone from those involving individual
loneliness. It might be thought that these tales would be tempered somewhat
with hope, in the sense that the family members at least have the comfort of each
other’s company even if the rest of the world rejects them, whereas the lonely
individuals have no one to turn to in their isolation. But in fact these tales can be
even grimmer than the others, and several of them represent Jackson’s most
pungent excursions into satire and misanthropy. This is either because the family
unit cannot provide any significant comfort to its members in the face of the
overwhelming hostility of the outside world, or because the family itself is torn
by tragedy and infighting, so that individuals may feel an added layer of
loneliness—both within the family and without.
Consider “The Renegade.” The horror of this story lies not merely in the
implication that an entire community has, with gleeful vindictiveness, turned
against a household because of its supposed chicken-killing dog, but that the
family is now being destroyed from within as the children embrace the prospect
of killing the dog:
Mrs. Walpole looked at them, at her two children with their hard hands
and their sunburned faces laughing together, their dog with blood still on
her legs laughing with them. She went to the kitchen doorway to look
outside at the cool green hills, the motion of the apple tree in the soft
afternoon breeze.
“Cut your head right off,” Jack was saying [L 65].
“Strangers in Town” (1959) is Jackson’s vendetta against the townsfolk

who ostracized her when she accused a favorite grade-school teacher of beating
her children (see O 213–15). This crude and obvious story is fueled by nothing
but hatred, to the point that Jackson’s artistry completely forsakes her. Told from
the point of view of small-minded neighbors who cannot tolerate a strange
family’s unconventional ways (they don’t seem to do any cooking; they dance
the night away), this story is simply void of subtlety:
“Foreign ways!” I said. “You’re heathen, wicked people, with your
dancing and your maid, and the sooner you leave this town, the better it’s
going to be for you. Because I might as well tell you”—and I shook my
finger right at her–“that certain people in this town aren’t going to put up
with your fancy ways much longer, and you would be well advised—very
well advised, I say—to pack up your furniture and your curtains and your
maid and cat and get out of our town before we put you out.”13
“‘All She Said Was “Yes”’” (1962) is much superior, speaking poignantly
of a curious young girl whose parents have been killed in an auto accident. It
bears similarities to “The Intoxicated” in that it suggests that the girl is
clairvoyant; and like that story, it is told from the point of view of an individual
who fails to perceive the girl’s powers. This tale is also a little obvious (there is
no ambiguity, as in “The Intoxicated,” about whether the girl really can see into
the future). And a predictable ending does not help matters— the girl tells her
neighbor repeatedly not to go on a boat, but the neighbor pays no attention and
the story concludes: “we’re all going to go on a cruise.” But the delicate
portrayal of the central figure—an unattractive, tight-lipped, morose girl who
knew that her parents would die and is accordingly not shocked but merely
saddened and stupefied, and now totally alone in the world—makes this one of
Jackson’s later triumphs.
The Sundial may be mentioned here, although I wish to study it more
extensively elsewhere. This mad and disturbing tale of the large and wealthy
Halloran family convinced that the external world will shortly come to an end,
with only its house preserved, displays at once their isolation and the internal
dissensions that cause them to be a microcosm of the unruly outside world they
are purportedly leaving behind. The Hallorans’ withdrawal from the world, even
before they take up their insane view of imminent global destruction, is entirely
self-generated:
The character of the house is perhaps of interest. It stood upon a small
rise in ground, and all the land it surveyed belonged to the Halloran family.
The Halloran land was distinguished from the rest of the world by a stone
wall, which went completely around the estate, so that all inside the wall
was Halloran, all outside was not. The first Mr. Halloran … was a man

who, in the astonishment of finding himself suddenly extremely wealthy,
could think of nothing better to do with his money than set up his own
world. His belief about the house … was that it should contain everything.
The other world, the one the Hallorans were leaving behind, was to be
plundered ruthlessly for objects of beauty to go in and around Mr.
Halloran’s house; infinite were the delights to be prepared for its
inhabitants [S 11].
But this isolation fails to weed out the disharmonies of the world, as we
shall see elsewhere. Much of the effectiveness of this book lies in how Jackson
totally ignores the outside world, as if it has already ceased to exist. Everything
is focused on the house and its occupants; even when some of those occupants
have come from that outside world, it is completely forgotten once they enter the
house. Background information on the characters is deliberately lacking, as if
they had no prior existence before coming there. In the one instance where a
character—Maryjane, the daughter-in-law of the domineering Mrs. Halloran—
attempts to escape, the scene is depicted in so bizarre a manner that we are
uncertain of its reality. And Maryjane, bootlessly trying to flee to the nearby
town on foot, finds that she has unwittingly returned to the very house she
sought to leave. It is needless to remark that Jackson wisely ends the novel
without resolving the issue of whether the world will in fact end.
We Have Always Lived in the Castle is Jackson’s grimmest and nastiest
portrayal of family isolation. The Blackwood family has been shattered by
tragedy: all but three members of the household died by poisoning six years
prior to the novel’s opening, and one of the survivors, Constance Blackwood, is
blamed by the townspeople for the murders even though she was tried and found
innocent. She now lives in her spectral house with her younger cousin Mary
Katherine (called Merricat) and her uncle Julian, himself crippled from the
effects of the poison. Next to the Hallorans in The Sundial, this is Jackson’s
weirdest family. Merricat is the focus of the tale: she alone ventures to the town
for groceries and other household needs, enduring the taunts of the townsfolk but
in turn hating and despising them. It is clear that we are meant to sympathize
wholeheartedly with the Blackwoods and to hate the townspeople as they hate
them, and as they are hated in turn by them. But what are we to make of the
family’s snobbishness?
Anyone who came to see us, properly invited, came up the main drive
which led straight from the gateposts on the highway up to our front door.
When I was small I used to lie in my bedroom at the back of the house and
imagine the driveway and the path as a crossroad meeting before our front
door, and up and down the driveway went the good people, the clean and

rich ones dressed in satin and lace, who came rightfully to visit, and back
and forth along the path, sneaking and weaving and sidestepping servilely,
went the people from the village [W 27–28].
One might be inclined to say that Jackson is introducing a significant
ambiguity in suggesting that the Blackwoods and the townspeople are both
blameworthy for the ostracism they inflict upon each other, but this does not
appear to be the case. We have already seen that Jackson herself looked down
upon the townsfolk of Bennington, and her views are identical to Merricat’s. She
is clearly portraying the attitude here as entirely admirable (it in fact connects
with what happens later in the novel), and it is unfortunate that Jackson could
not predict the disapproval that later generations would have of this sort of
snobbishness. In any case, the rest of the novel compels us to find the
townspeople wholly responsible for the events that follow, in particular when
they, in a fit of irrational anger, destroy much of the house while putting out a
fire that has started inside it. It is at this point that we learn a truth that scarcely
any reader could have failed to guess, although Jackson evidently intends it as a
stunning surprise: Merricat was the poisoner of her family.
The novel does not end here, however. In what is both a horrific and a
heartrending twist of Jackson’s domestic fiction, the two cousins (Julian has now
died) continue in their quiet defiance of the townsfolk by trying to resume their
lives even when most of their property—furniture, clothes, utensils, food, even
much of the house itself—has been devastated. When Constance, successfully
locating two teacups with their handles intact, remarks, “We will take our meals
like ladies … using cups with handles” (W 144), we are evidently to regard this
as a reaffirmation of the “good breeding” the women have received, a wholly
admirable attempt to preserve one’s dignity in the face of disaster.
There is, of course, nothing supernatural about We Have Always Lived in
the Castle. If anything, it is a mystery story, although the mystery is not very
cleverly executed and is by no means the focus of the novel. By any normal
criteria it cannot be considered a weird tale, even though it manipulates after a
fashion the topos of the haunted house, doing so from the unique perspective of
the inhabitants of the house rather than of outsiders seeking to penetrate its
mysteries. There is, however, a rather odd way in which perhaps the weird does
enter into this novel, and it is this that I now wish to consider.

MISANTHROPY
“Nothing has the power to hurt which doesn’t have the power to frighten”
(O 42): this single utterance by Shirley Jackson may be all the justification we
need to consider some of her darkest and most vicious work, otherwise wholly
nonsupernatural, as anomalous contributions to the weird tale. Maurice Lévy
remarked of Ambrose Bierce that “One is almost tempted to believe that one day
he decided to instill fear into his contemporaries by hatred, to gain revenge on
them,”14 and Jackson seems very frequently inspired by the same motivation.
Indeed, from this perspective it is possible to consider a very wide array of
works—from Juvenal (notably the fifteenth satire, on cannibalism in Egypt) to
Swift15 to Evelyn Waugh’s A Handful of Dust (1934)16—as quasi-weird,
because they are all driven by such demonic misanthropy that they not only hurt
but frighten. Perhaps it is this feature that will allow us to sneak in We Have
Always Lived in the Castle through the back door of the weird.
It is interesting that The Sundial seems to have been singled out by
reviewers for its misanthropy. Harvey Swados snorted: “While Miss Jackson is
an intelligent and clever writer, there rises from her pages the cold fishy gleam
of a calculated and carefully expressed contempt for the human race” (O 218).
There are two problems with this assertion: one, the whole of Jackson’s work is
refreshingly misanthropic; two, the assumption here (as I have noted in
connection with Bierce) is that there is something necessarily wrong with
misanthropy. I do not know that Jackson anywhere offers an explicit
philosophical defense of misanthropy, but perhaps she need not have done so:
her work makes it obvious that she had little patience for the stupid, the arrogant,
the pompous, the complacently bourgeois, the narrow-minded, and the spiteful—
in other words, she hated all those people whom there is every good reason to
hate. Since, therefore, I do not acknowledge any prejudice against misanthropy, I
can only relish the exquisite nastiness with which Jackson ordinarily displays it.
Such a tale as “Strangers in Town” is to be criticized not because it is
misanthropic but because in this instance Jackson’s blind hatred has resulted in a
failure of artistry and subtlety otherwise uniformly evident in the rest of her
work.
It may be worth discussing the celebrated “One Ordinary Day, with
Peanuts” here. This spectacularly nasty story has, in its quiet way, some
stupendous implications. A man leaves home in the morning and seems intent on
accomplishing nothing but good: he keeps an eye on a boy while his mother runs

an errand; he advises a man looking for an apartment that he has just seen one
that is available; he gives a cab driver money and advice for betting on horses.
Most remarkably of all, he intentionally stops a young man and a young woman
on the street, introduces them to each other, and gives them money to take the
day off and have a good time. He is benevolence itself. He comes home, meets
his wife, and tells her how his day went. She tells him about hers. “‘I had a little
nap this afternoon, took it easy most of the day. Went into a department store
this morning and accused the woman next to me of shoplifting, and had the store
detective pick her up. Sent three dogs to the pound—you know, the usual
thing.’” They plan the next day:
“Fine,” said Mr. Johnson. “But you do look tired. Want to change over
tomorrow?”
“I would like to,” she said. “I could do with a change.”
“Right,” said Mr. Johnson.17
With such ease can people be by turns sadistically mean and superhumanly
philanthropic! The one seems as good a way of passing the time as the other. But
the true message of the story, beyond the implication that misanthropy and
benevolence can be sloughed off and put on like a cloak, is the idea of
manipulation: both misanthropy and benevolence involve a fascistic
manipulation of human beings as if they were puppets. And perhaps Jackson’s
real misanthropy is directed here not at the couple but at the spineless and stupid
people who allow the couple to do their dirty or good work with such
insouciance.
Manipulation of this sort is what Mrs. Orianna Halloran attempts in The
Sundial. There may perhaps be some justification in singling out this novel for
its misanthropy, since here there are no admirable or likeable characters at all,
and each of them is portrayed in the most vitriolic manner: Mrs. Halloran,
domineering, arrogant, and possibly the murder of her own son so that no one
could stand in the way of her control of the household; Mr. Halloran, her
husband, broken, feeble-minded, lost in dreams of the past; Aunt Fanny, flighty
and confused but startlingly bucking Orianna’s authority at unexpected
moments; Maryjane, an airhead who only wants control of the house and
property for herself; Miss Ogilvie, an utterly ineffectual longtime family
retainer; Essex, a sycophant who seeks only to forward his own cause; Augusta
Willow, a blowsy matron who wants nothing more than to marry off her two
sullen daughters, Julia and Arabella; Gloria, a possibly disturbed young woman
with apparently precognitive powers; even little Fancy, Maryjane’s young
daughter, whose sweet exterior hides a lust for power and control scarcely less
intense than that of Mrs. Halloran.

This is the eccentric group Jackson gathers for her pseudoapocalyptic tale.
And it can scarcely be doubted that, if nothing else, it represents the most
extreme contrast possible with the love, warmth, and unity of her own family as
recorded (with perhaps no little exaggeration) in her domestic fiction. The ease
with which everyone is convinced—or claims to be convinced—of Aunt Fanny’s
notion that the world will end (she claims to have heard it from the spirit of her
dead father) is certainly meant as a testament to human stupidity. It is
conceivable, however, that Mrs. Halloran only goes along with the idea as a
means of maintaining control of the household, since she immediately begins
laying down orders on preparing for the disaster and makes it abundantly clear
that she will be the queen of the new civilization that the family will have to
found once all the other people in the world are eliminated.
We Have Always Lived in the Castle is Jackson’s most unrestrainedly
misanthropic work. Here hatred is everywhere: “The people of the village have
always hated us” (W 11); “I wished they were dead” (W 15); “our father said
they [the villagers] were trash” (W 17). Let us hear what Merricat feels for the
townsfolk:
I wish you were all dead, I thought, and longed to say it out loud.
Constance said, “Never let them see that you care,” and “If you pay any
attention they’ll only get worse,” and probably it was true, but I wished
they were dead. I would have liked to come into the grocery some morning
and see them all, even the Elberts and the children, lying there crying with
the pain and dying. I would then help myself to groceries, I thought,
stepping over their bodies, taking whatever I fancied from the shelves, and
go home, with perhaps a kick for Mrs. Donell while she lay there. I was
never sorry when I had thoughts like this; I only wished they would come
true. “It’s wrong to hate them,” Constance said, “it only weakens you,” but
I hated them anyway, and wondered why it had been worth while creating
them in the first place [W 15–16].
That last sentence rather reminds me of Lucretius’ celebrated comment
against the argument from design: Quidve mali fuerat nobis non esse creatis?
(“What harm would it have been had we never been created?”) (De Rerum
Natura 5.174). In any case, I actually believe we are meant to agree with
Merricat’s sentiments here, outrageous as they seem: note that when Constance
chides her for hating the townsfolk, it is not because such a hatred is abstractly
immoral but because “it only weakens you.” Constance is recommending a sort
of bland indifference as an even purer form of misanthropy than active hatred.
The whole novel, in any event, asks us to sympathize with the Blackwoods and
not the townsfolk.

The downfall of the Blackwood family is triggered by the arrival of a
cousin Charles, who is portrayed with withering scorn as a small-minded,
conventional man interested in returning the family to “normality” (as if that is
what Constance or Merricat wants) and in making use of the large amount of
money that is carelessly hidden in the house. Even after the destruction and
burning of the place, Charles returns only because of the money:
“See?” Charles said, outside, at the foot of our steps. “There’s the
house, just like I said. It doesn’t look as bad as it did, now the vines have
grown so. But the roof’s been burned away, and the place was gutted
inside.”
“Are the ladies in there?”
“Sure.” Charles laughed, and I remembered his laughter and his big
staring white face and from inside the door I wished him dead. “They’re in
there all right,” he said. “And so is a whole damn fortune.”
“You know that?”
“They’ve got money in there’s never even been counted. They’ve got
it buried all over, and a safe full, and God knows where else they’ve hidden
it. They never come out, just hide away inside with all that money” [W
168].
Constance and Merricat don’t let him in, and he goes off, never to be heard
from again.

HOUSES
Anyone who has written works with such titles as “The Lovely House,”
“The House,” “Louisa, Please Come Home,” “The Little House,” “Home,” The
Haunting of Hill House, and We Have Always Lived in the Castle must find great
inspiration from dwellings. These tales by no means exhaust the catalogue of
“house” stories in Jackson’s work, and we must add at least The Sundial and,
indeed, both volumes of domestic fiction to the list.
Those domestic volumes are again the logical starting point for the analysis
of the house theme in Jackson. It is not simply that the house functions benignly
in these books whereas it is sinister, evil, confining, and inhibiting in her other
work; the relation is again more complex than that. Recall our discussion of
“The House” (1952), the quasi-supernatural tale whose first section alone was
included at the very beginning of Life among the Savages. It is no surprise that
the supernatural component of the story would be excised in its new setting; but
the mere context has robbed the house in the story of its subtly evil character.
The narrative of moving into this imposing but ramshackle house takes on a
seriocomic quality, as in the book Jackson’s children play a greater role,
dispersing the potentially chilling atmosphere with their boisterous high spirits.
The message is clear: in the domestic fiction a house is not in itself a cheering
and heartwarming environment, but becomes so through the love and closeness
of the family occupying it. It is exactly these emotions that are lacking in
Jackson’s other work, whether it be in such a nonsupernatural satire as The Road
through the Wall or in a quasi-supernatural one as The Sundial. In both these
instances the house becomes cold and unwelcoming only because the inhabitants
themselves exhibit these same feelings toward each other.
Even in those stories in which the house itself remains relatively passive,
the hostility of its occupants or of the outside community render the house
something akin to a prison. Neither “The Summer People” nor “The Little
House” focuses upon the house as such, but it takes on foreboding qualities in
both. In the former tale, the elderly couple’s summer house becomes a virtual
tomb when they decide to extend their stay beyond Labor Day. In the latter, the
spitefulness of elderly neighbors causes a perfectly innocuous house to appear a
deathtrap to its new owner, who flees in terror.
And yet, to Jackson’s mind—simultaneously conditioned to the domestic
pieties of the 1950s and rebelling against them—the house is an unavoidable
fixture regardless of what dire qualities it takes on. Even at the beginning of We

Have Always Lived in the Castle Constance is afraid of leaving the house (W
29), although it has become, for all practical purposes, a grave for her. Her life
after the poisoning of her family has been reduced to its walls—with, perhaps,
fleeting moments on the grounds—but she regards it at least as a haven against
the scorn of the townspeople. And even after much of the house is burned and
rendered uninhabitable, Constance and Merricat choose to remain there, calmly
and even whimsically reshaping their lives to within an even smaller compass.
We Have Always Lived in the Castle is Jackson’s most searing parody of
domesticity: all the things that made the domestic stories so wholesome and
touching—love between the family members; the antics of children; the comical
excess of furniture, toys, and food; the sense of belonging to a community—
have here been perverted. And yet, Constance and Merricat seem strangely
content with their impoverished circumstances. And indeed, is it really so bad?
They at least have each other.
In The Sundial even this comfort is lacking. Each member of this lunatic
household clings, like Constance and Merricat, to the belief that the house alone
will represent safety and sanctuary even when the rest of the world is destroyed.
But among the occupants themselves there is no harmony, only struggles for
supremacy, covert affairs, and bungled attempts to escape. Because the outside
world so rarely figures in this novel, the house itself becomes the world—it is as
if there really is nothing beyond it. Is Jackson saying that the rest of the world
functions as the Halloran household does? Is there no harmony or love to be
found anywhere?
The Haunting of Hill House is Jackson’s most profound and searching
treatment of the house theme. Its opening paragraph sets the tone, and I cannot
resist quoting it in spite of its celebrity:
No live organism can continue for long to exist sanely under
conditions of absolute reality; even larks and katydids are supposed, by
some, to dream: Hill House, not sane, stood by itself against its hills,
holding darkness within; it had stood so for eighty years and might stand
for eighty more. Within, walls continued upright, bricks met neatly, floors
were firm, and doors were sensibly shut; silence lay steadily against the
wood and stone of Hill House, and whatever walked there, walked alone
[HH 5].
I confess, however, to an uncertainty as to what this is exactly supposed to
mean. It is interesting that here insanity is linked to the perception of “absolute
reality”: I am not so much concerned with quoting T. S. Eliot (“Human kind
cannot bear very much reality”) as with ascertaining the precise applicability of
the remark. Hill House is a place where the superficial masks and deceptions of

life are stripped off: it is where Eleanor comes to terms with the wretchedness of
her prior life, sees through the sham of Luke’s and Theodora’s arch
lightheartedness, and realizes that she belongs here—because, in fact, she
belongs nowhere. A later passage might shed further light on this enigmatic
opening:
This house, which seemed somehow to have formed itself, flying
together into its own powerful pattern under the hands of its builders, fitting
itself into its own construction of lines and angles, reared its great head
back against the sky without concession to humanity. It was a house
without kindness, never meant to be lived in, not a fit place for people or
for love or for hope. Exorcism cannot alter the countenance of a house; Hill
House would stay as it was until it was destroyed [HH 26].
Curiously, the remark that the house “was not a fit place for … love” is
perhaps contradicted by the denouement, for in its twisted way Hill House loves
Eleanor—it wants her, it won’t let her leave, it perhaps kills her when she tries.
But if whatever walks in Hill House walks alone, are we not to see in this
Jackson’s ultimate metaphor for loneliness? A house should represent safety,
comfort, welcome. But in this house, as Dr. Montague notes, “‘the intention is,
somehow, to separate us’” (HH 96)—to render each person alone and lonely. If
Jackson sees togetherness as the natural and desirable state for human beings,
then Hill House, which causes loneliness, is an abomination and even a paradox.
If it makes no “concession to humanity,” then it has defied the very beings who
have created it and inverts the purposes for which it was built.

CONCLUSION
What are we to make of Shirley Jackson? Is she a weird writer even in part?
That second question I am still unable to answer in any definitive way, save to
note the obvious supernaturalism in a fairly representative core of her work. If
The Haunting of Hill House is one of the greatest haunted house novels ever
written, if “The Lottery” is among the cruelest nonsupernatural horror stories
ever written, what do we do with something so nebulous as The Sundial or “The
Lovely House”? I hope, at any rate, to have suggested the tightly knit unity of
Jackson’s work, its constant reworking of the interlocking themes of domesticity
and loneliness, love and hate, madness and sanity, society and the individual.
And I hope we can now see how each of these threads is pursued successively in
tales that, from the point of view of genre, might be termed supernatural,
nonsupernatural, mainstream, or autobiographical. It is true that Jackson, even in
her avowedly supernatural work, presents no coherent metaphysics: her
supernatural manifestations fail to suggest any putative reordering of the
cosmos. But if she lacks the cosmic perspective of a Lovecraft, a Blackwood, or
a Dunsany (or, indeed, of Ramsey Campbell or T. E. D. Klein), if her focus is
solely on human characters and human relationships, with even the supernatural
phenomena subservient to or symbols for these relationships, then she at least
distinguishes herself by the intensity, accuracy, and subtlety of her portrayal of
human concerns. As with Bierce, her pitiless and sardonic exposing of human
weakness makes her a horrific satirist who does not require the supernatural to
arouse fear and horror. Her icy prose, clinical detachment, and utterly refreshing
glee at the exhibition of human greed, misery, and evil ought to give her a high
rank in general literature. That she chose to devote even a part of her talents to
the weird is something for which we all ought to be grateful.

 
II. THE PERSISTENCE OF SUPERNATURALISM
WILLIAM PETER BLATTY: THE CATHOLIC WEIRD TALE
The career of William Peter Blatty (b. 1928) is most peculiar. His first
book, Which Way to Mecca, Jack? (1960), is a humorous account of his years
spent with the United States Information Agency in Lebanon. There followed
several comic novels—John Goldfarb, Please Come Home! (1963), I, Billy
Shakespeare! (1965), and Twinkle, Twinkle, “Killer” Kane! (1966)—which
achieved little or no critical or commercial success. Then, in 1971, Blatty
published The Exorcist, and not only his literary career but the fortunes of the
entire field of weird fiction were changed forever. Coming out in the same year
as Thomas Tryon’s The Other, Blatty’s novel helped to usher in the tremendous
popularity of the supernatural novel over the next two decades. It is no surprise
that Stephen King once came up to Blatty and said, “You know, in a way, you’re
my father” (FF 39). But if Blatty’s role in the propagation of horror fiction is
clear, it was not so clear how his subsequent career was to progress.
As if overwhelmed by the success of The Exorcist, Blatty has failed to
produce a work that measures up to that novel either as a popular success or
even as the modest critical success it was. His next book, I’ll Tell Them I
Remember You (1973), is an account of his Arabian-born mother, and toward the
end Blatty—a committed Roman Catholic—manages to convince himself that
her spirit has somehow survived the death of her body. The Ninth Configuration
(1978) is a rewriting of Twinkle, Twinkle, “Killer” Kane, and it is not clear that
the original has been improved. Legion (1983), the long-awaited sequel to The
Exorcist, is disappointing for more than one reason, and Blatty has yet to issue
the new novel that he has evidently been working on for years. Douglas E.
Winter has described it as “a suspense thriller with a theological theme” (FF 46),
and Blatty himself has labeled it “much bigger in scope and size than either [The
Exorcist or Legion]” (FF 46–47).
I am under a severe handicap in discussing William Peter Blatty, for as an
atheist I find his brand of tortured Catholicism nearly incomprehensible. It is
difficult for me to be impartial in dealing with a theology or philosophy that I
find so entirely misguided. Although theological discussion does not seem to
figure seriously in his work prior to “Killer” Kane, it is prevalent to the point of
obtrusiveness in everything he has written since. Blatty is not merely a writer
who happens to be Catholic; he is, like Arthur Machen, ardently striving to

convert his readers to Catholicism and rid them of the godless secularism that he
feels is undermining modern society. His novels are platforms from which he
openly debates (through characters who are transparent vehicles for the views he
is advocating or disputing) the existence of God, the soul, and the afterlife, and
the nature of good and evil. Blatty is, however, neither a sufficiently competent
philosopher to discuss these matters with any depth or persuasiveness, nor a
sufficiently adept storyteller to integrate these discussions adequately into the
fabric of his works.
I do not wish to be accused either of a lack of sympathy for Blatty’s
opinions or of inconsistency in my general notion of weird fiction as a vehicle
for the conveying of a world view. In the first place, it is true that I do not share
Blatty’s religious or philosophical outlook, but it is also true that it takes very
little effort to find the most elementary errors of philosophical reasoning and a
grievous ignorance of the facts of science in Blatty’s disquisitions, as it does in
the case of the mystic Algernon Blackwood. In the second place, my objection to
Blatty—as with Machen in some of his fiction—is not that he is trying to convey
a world view but that he is doing so ineptly or inappropriately. Blatty’s set
pieces, in which characters simply stop the flow of action and dispute
theological issues, seriously mar the unity and coherence of his novels. It is as if
he does not trust his readers to understand his message merely from the logic of
the story, but feels the need to insert these clumsy signposts of what his novels
are really all about. There is also the clear intent to convert: Blatty is not merely
expressing a Catholic world view, but wants his readers to adopt it also or,
rather, writes in such a fashion that only spiritually confused Catholics like
himself can truly empathize with his work. Lovecraft’s and Dunsany’s work is, I
believe, motivated by an equally strong atheistic world view, but I never get the
impression of being preached at by them as I do with Blatty. Indeed, it is only
because The Exorcist has relatively less of this sort of moralizing that it is at
least a partial success.
In a sensitive essay on him, Scott D. Briggs has identified four of Blatty’s
works as weird: Twinkle, Twinkle, “Killer” Kane!; The Exorcist; The Ninth
Configuration; and Legion.1 But although “Killer” Kane and The Ninth
Configuration have a certain bizarrerie to them (Briggs refers to them, and to
Blatty’s work as a whole, as psychological horror), they are not supernatural at
all and, to my mind, are not genuinely weird, and I shall study them here only
tangentially. Both deal with a madhouse where some highly distinguished
soldiers and astronauts have been confined for observation. A supposed
psychiatrist, “Killer” Kane (Hudson L. Kane in the first novel; Vincent Kane in
the second), is brought in to ascertain whether they are actually afflicted with

madness or are only feigning it. But this is merely the vehicle for a series of
discussions between Kane and his principal adversary, the astronaut Manfred
Cutshaw, on the nature of God. In a prefatory note to The Ninth Configuration
Blatty states that he wrote “Killer” Kane “when I was young and worked very
hastily and from need”; but there is much reason for preferring the zany
surrealism of the earlier work (it is fundamentally a comic novel, rather like One
Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest) than its dour revision. In both novels, however,
Blatty raises questions that would provide the intellectual backbone of his weird
work, in particular the pointed query: “How can there be evil coexistent with a
good God?” (T 67). This single utterance could serve as the hallmark for Blatty’s
entire work. It of course never occurs to him to define what “evil” actually is or
to believe that it may be entirely a result of the conflicts inherent in human
society.
“Killer” Kane is so full of preposterous theological arguments that a single
example will suffice to destroy forever any standing Blatty might be thought to
have as a moral or religious philosopher. Consider Kane’s case for the existence
of an afterlife:
“…every man who has ever lived has been born with desire for perfect
happiness. But unless there is an afterlife, fulfillment of this desire is a
patent impossibility. Perfect happiness, in order to be perfect, must carry
with it the assurance that the happiness won’t cease; that it will not be
snatched away. But no one has ever had such assurance; the mere fact of
death serves to contradict it. Yet why should Nature implant—universally
—desire for something that isn’t attainable? I can think of no more than two
answers: either Nature is consistently mad and perverse, or after this life
there’s another; a life where this universal desire for perfect happiness can
be fulfilled. But nowhere else in creation does Nature exhibit this kind of
perversity; not when it comes to a basic drive. An eye is always for seeing
and an ear is always for hearing. And any universal craving—that is, a
craving without exception—has to be capable of fulfillment. It can’t be
fulfilled here; so it’s fulfilled, I think, somewhere else, sometime else” [T
137].
This really does seem to be Blatty’s own view, since he repeats it (in the
mouth of Lieutenant Kinderman) in Legion (L 196–97). We are therefore robbed
of the faint hope that this is merely meant as an example of Kane’s utter fatuity.
It is difficult to enumerate all the philosophical mistakes in this passage. In the
first place, the desire for perfect happiness (whatever that is) is not universal but
only exists, apparently, in those who have been mentally crippled by millennia
of religious wishful thinking. Secondly, Blatty has illegitimately personified

Nature (note the sophistical use of the capital N), regarding it as a sort of
conscious entity rather than merely the sum total of all existence. Thirdly, it is
false to equate this desire for perfect happiness with such a “basic drive” as sight
or hearing: the desire has so obviously been socially conditioned that it cannot
be considered on the same metaphysical or epistemological level as basic
instincts. In “Killer” Kane, as in other works, Blatty resembles Plato in not
allowing his philosophical opponents (here Cutshaw) sufficient intelligence to
refute such obviously false or improbable opinions. Perhaps Blatty could not do
so himself.
But “Killer” Kane is more interesting for its being, although entirely
nonsupernatural, a manifest anticipation of themes, characters, and scenarios
found in The Exorcist. Kane himself—a self-confessed “confused” Catholic (T
66)—is clearly the model for Father Damien Karras, the angst-ridden priest who
confronts the demon in The Exorcist. Indeed, at one point Kane has a dream in
which Cutshaw pleads with him to perform an exorcism on another inmate (T
135). Later there is an extended discussion of black magic, exorcism, and the
like; a book on exorcism is referred to by Kane as “‘Better than horror films on
The Late Show’” (T 154). Finally, at the very end of the novel another priest
reports one of Kane’s apophthegms: “‘He said that evil doesn’t spring out of
madness—that it’s the other way around’” (T 183).
I believe this final remark is the foundation for The Exorcist. Let us
consider one of the epigraphs Blatty has affixed to this novel, from Dr. Tom
Dooley: “There’s no other explanation for some of the things the Communists
did. Like the priest who had eight nails driven into his skull…. And there were
the seven little boys and their teacher. One soldier whipped out his bayonet and
sliced off the teacher’s tongue. The other took chopsticks and drove them into
the ears of the seven little boys. How do you treat cases like that?” The only
“explanation” for evils like this, Blatty is suggesting, is the influence of Satan or
some other transcendent evil. The Exorcist is loosely based upon an actual case
of exorcism performed in 1949. Blatty investigated it thoroughly and also read
voluminously on the literature pertaining to exorcism. He became convinced that
the exorcism was a highly significant event theologically. “…I thought, ‘Oh, my
God. At last, proof of transcendence, or at least of the reality of spiritual forces.’
I mean, intelligent, discarnate entities—demons, devils, whatever. It seemed a
validation of what we were being taught as Catholics, and certainly a validation
of our hopes for immortality. Because if there were evil spirits, why not good?
Why not a soul? Why not life everlasting?” (FF 41). I hardly know how to react
to this. Firstly, Blatty has assumed, merely from the testimony of the priest
involved in the case (hardly an impartial witness!), that the exorcism actually

revealed the existence of transcendent forces. Secondly, he has then inferred,
illogically, that the existence of evil forces necessitates the existence of good
ones (an entirely false corollary, especially as several religions and philosophies
have consistently postulated only the existence of transcendent evil, with no
corresponding good); thirdly, he leaps from the existence of transcendent evil to
the existence of a soul and afterlife by a series of logical somersaults that
escapes me utterly. But let it pass. The end result is that Blatty wishes to see The
Exorcist as a work that indirectly affirms the existence of good by the portrayal
of the existence of evil. Everything in the novel is tailored to lead to this
conclusion. It is, as a result, somewhat problematical to call it a weird tale at all,
for all the weird phenomena are merely props to convey this religious message
and are not intended to be of interest in themselves.
This is perhaps why the actual nature of the supernatural entity in the novel
—the demon Pazuzu (E 7)—is so nebulously defined: it does not matter who or
what he is, for his sole function is merely to exist and thereby to confirm the
existence of a transcendent evil that makes the existence of transcendent good
theoretically possible. This is also why it takes rather a long time for the
confrontation between the demon and the exorcist to occur: much of the novel
must necessarily be spent in exhausting the natural explanations for the odd
behavior of the little girl Regan MacNeil, so that in the end only the supernatural
explanation (demonic possession) remains.
Initially, once Regan begins exhibiting uncharacteristic traits, she is taken
to a psychiatrist, that modern replacement for a priest. Some drugs are
prescribed, but they have little effect, and her behavior becomes more and more
bizarre. One especially harrowing incident occurs at a party, when Regan walks
into the room and states bluntly to an astronaut, “‘You’re going to die up there’”
(E 73). I wonder if we can relate this to “Killer” Kane. When Cutshaw finally
gives his true reasons for not wanting to go to the moon, he states that it is a
result of his fear of dying alone—“‘especially if there’s no God; that makes it
even more horribly lonely’” (T 172). In any event, even when a seemingly
supernatural event occurs—the bed on which Regan is lying begins to shake
violently (E 79)—it too is explained away naturalistically, if somewhat
implausibly. There then ensues a series of tests to trace some known medical
cause for Regan’s symptoms. The novel drags a bit at this point, but it is all vital
to Blatty’s purpose in showing that no rationale known to science can account
for all the strange phenomena of the case.
Even when the matter of demonic possession and exorcism is first raised, it
is done so in a quasi-psychological way. A doctor tells Regan’s mother: “‘We
call it somnambuliform possession. Quite frankly, we don’t know much about it

except that it starts with some conflict or guilt that eventually leads to the
patient’s delusion that his body’s been invaded by an alien intelligence; a spirit,
if you will. In times gone by, when belief in the devil was fairly strong, the
possessing entity was usually a demon’” (E 166). Note Blatty’s circumspection:
in order to convince the modern (and presumably atheistic, or at the very least
skeptical and nonorthodox) reader of the reality of the demon and the need for
exorcism, he must begin by postulating a psychological account of demonic
possession and, later, even a psychological motive for the use of the rite of
exorcism.
“…[there is a] stylized ritual now out of date in which rabbis and
priests tried to drive out the spirit. It’s only the Catholics who haven’t
discarded it yet, but they keep it pretty much in the closet as sort of an
embarrassment, I think. But to someone who thinks that he’s really
possessed, I would say that the ritual’s rather impressive. It used to work, in
fact, although not for the reason they thought, of course; it was purely the
force of suggestion” [E 169].
Here is the rationalist account of the entire matter. Regan only believes (if
subconsciously) that she is possessed; therefore, since all other remedies
(medical and psychological) have failed, an exorcism might work—but only as a
result of “autosuggestion” (E 169). Exorcism is, after all, a bit primitive
nowadays—even Karras tells Regan’s mother, when she asks about it, that “‘it
just doesn’t happen anymore’” (E 199). But in the end we are led to believe that
this rationalistic explanation simply cannot account for the facts of the case.
Ergo, there must really have been demonic possession and the rite of exorcism
must really have worked! There is a God (there must be, if there is a demon),
and Catholicism is the one true religion.
In this entire scenario Regan’s mother, the successful actress Chris
MacNeil, plays an integral role—not as a character in her own right but as a
vehicle for convincing the unbelieving reader. She is an atheist (E 43) who has
serious doubts as to the afterlife (E 22): if she can come to believe that only a
genuine act of exorcism can cure her daughter, then how can even the most
irreligious of us think otherwise? It is she who pleads with Karras to perform the
rite; it is she who overcomes his grave reservations.
The conclusion of the tale appears ambiguous (it is more so in the film
version) but a careful reading of the text will both explicate it and reveal the
optimism with which Blatty wishes us to leave his work. It is vital for Blatty to
portray both Karras’s spiritual doubts about God (“‘Ah, my God, let me see You!
Let me know! Come in dreams!’” [E 49]) and the sense of aimlessness he feels.
The death of his mother—perhaps the most powerful and moving segment of the

entire novel—fills him with grief and remorse, and he feels adrift in a world that
seems to lack the guidance of any spiritual entity. He gains some small comfort
when he, himself a psychiatrist, briefly brightens the life of a lonely young
priest, but later he wonders what he has actually accomplished: “The psychiatrist
grew weary; found himself drifting into private sorrow. He glanced at a plaque
that someone had given him the previous Christmas. MY BROTHER HURTS. I
SHARE HIS PAIN. I MEET GOD IN HIM, it read. A failed encounter. He
blamed himself. He had mapped the streets of his brother’s torment, yet never
had walked them; or so he believed. He thought that the pain which he felt was
his own” (E 88–89). But the exorcism allows him genuinely to share someone
else’s pain and so to meet God, even if it also means his death. Enraged by the
demon’s having caused the death of an old priest, Father Merrin, whom Karras
had brought in to aid in his exorcism, he turns upon the demon in fury and cries:
“‘Come on! Come on, loser! Try me! Leave the girl and take me! Take me!’” (E
328). The demon enters his body, and Karras promptly leaps out of the bedroom
window and down to his death on the stairs below. Father Joseph Dyer, Karras’s
friend, comes to him just as he is dying: “He pulled back his head and saw the
eyes filled with peace; and with something else: something mysteriously like joy
at the end of heart’s longing. The eyes were still staring. But at nothing in this
world. Nothing here” (E 331).
The death of “Killer” Kane appears to be the model for Karras’s self-
destruction. In Twinkle, Twinkle, “Killer” Kane!, however, that death (by
suicide) is singularly ambiguous. Is it that Kane, having cured Cutshaw of his
“madness” (actually, his spiritual loneliness), now senses no further purpose to
his existence? Is suicide his way of seeking redemption for all the enemy
soldiers he has killed in battle? The conclusion of The Ninth Configuration is no
less puzzling. Kane and Cutshaw have been subjected to vicious brutalization
and humiliation by a gang of motorcycle punks, but Kane revives and kills four
of them with his bare hands. (I am not sure how Christian this is, since, as
Kinderman notes in Legion, “When I read, ‘Love your enemy,’ I tingle, I go
crazy, and inside of my chest I can feel something floating, something that feels
like it was there the whole time” [L 98].) Later Kane is found with a fatal knife
wound in his stomach: was this self-inflicted or did he receive the injury from
one of the punks? An officer first remarks, “‘He’s killed himself,’” then quickly
amends the statement: “‘He gave up his life’” (N 128). The distinction intended
here is, apparently, that Kane has performed some kind of necessary self-
sacrifice. His death—and, one imagines, the spiritual tranquility he has achieved
through it—is the model for Karras’s.
The death of Damien Karras, poignant as it is, only briefly distracts us from

an issue that has troubled us all along: why has this demon, an apparently
supernatural being, possessed this little girl in Georgetown? What could such an
act possibly accomplish? Surely the demon is capable of greater things than
merely causing a little girl a certain amount of discomfort. Blatty addresses the
issue at one point in the novel when Merrin says to Karras:
“Yet I think the demon’s target is not the possessed; it is us … the
observers … every person in this house. And I think—I think the point is to
make us despair; to reject our own humanity, Damien: to see ourselves as
ultimately bestial; as ultimately vile and putrescent; without dignity; ugly;
unworthy. And there lies the heart of it, perhaps: in unworthiness. For I
think belief in God is not a matter of reason at all; I think it finally is a
matter of love; of accepting the possibility that God could love us” [E 311].
This is all rather dismaying. Is a loving God required to make us feel other
than “bestial”? Does the absence of God rob us of dignity? In any case, this
appears to be the rationale Blatty provides for the entire novel. In the death of
Karras we are to see redemption, not despair: his death was the only way to
banish or suppress the horror, and it is also a symbol for the renewed belief in
God he has attained and the fulfilling of his mission of sharing another’s pain
and making it his own.
Twelve years passed before Blatty published Legion, a loose sequel to The
Exorcist. And it has become clear that his hostility to the modern-day lack of
spirituality increasingly troubles him, to the point that he must hector his readers
with long, tiresome, and aesthetically disastrous theological diatribes. Already in
The Exorcist we hear Lieutenant Kinderman tell his wife, “‘Mary, the entire
world—the entire world—is having a massive nervous breakdown’” (E 133);
and when Kinderman in the early parts of Legion thinks to himself that “the
materialist universe was the greatest superstition of his age” (L 13), we can
already see the direction this novel is going to take. More than any other of his
works, Legion is hamstrung by vacuous and pompous philosophizing that simply
halts the flow of action and bears little relation to the actual outcome of events.
Perhaps Blatty was irritated that (as we shall shortly see) the moral message of
The Exorcist was so universally overlooked; in Legion he is determined that no
reader will make that mistake. The result is a potentially dynamic and
suspenseful story that flounders in a morass of theological speculation before the
writer actually gets down to the business of telling it.
William F. Kinderman has now suddenly taken on the role of Kane and
Karras, even though he showed little interest in religion in his fleeting
appearances in The Exorcist. But Blatty must have his mouthpiece for the
expression of his writhing reflections on God. Other characters in Legion are still

less important in their own right than in other of Blatty’s works. In one
especially ludicrous digression a neurologist, Vincent Amfortas, writes a letter to
Father Dyer telling of his experiments in trying to tape record voices from
beyond the grave. He claims success in the effort, and we are evidently to
conclude that the question of life after death is now solved once and for all. (I
am rather more saddened and disturbed that Blatty himself has made such
experiments [FF 48–49]).
When the novel finally pays attention to its purported subject—the apparent
revival of the so-called “Gemini murders,” even though the murderer was
presumably killed 20 years ago—it becomes highly compelling. Kinderman
eventually finds the link between the gruesome crimes: all the victims were
somehow related to the exorcism of 1971. The demon in Karras’s body did not
die with him. And, in sardonic irony, he actually revives the priest’s corpse and
causes it to escape from its coffin just prior to burial. Although it is now
confined in a psychiatric ward, he compels it to continue committing his murders
by possessing the minds of other inmates and having them do the killing. Legion
would be, without its theological baggage, a powerful supernatural detective
story. As it is, the core of the plot (which, Blatty’s worries to the contrary
notwithstanding, would have been sufficient to convey his theological message
to intelligent readers) is simply not given adequate attention or related as adeptly
as it could have been. The film version of this novel, titled The Exorcist III, was
written and directed by Blatty, and it is far superior to the novel. As an
experienced scenarist, he knows much about the pacing of films, and in this one
he has removed much of the theology of the book and focused his attention on
the actual storyline. As a result, a tense but surprisingly restrained horror film
has been produced. Even the confrontations between Kinderman and the demon
in the psychiatric ward gain power through crisp dialogue and dramatic lighting
effects. And the ending of the film is far more potently cataclysmic than the
novel’s. I wish Blatty would import some of the good sense he brings to
filmmaking into his novels.
Blatty concludes Legion with the following words of wisdom from
Kinderman:
“The physicists now are all certain,” he said, “that all the known
processes in nature were once part of a single, unified force.” Kinderman
paused and then spoke more quietly. “I believe that this force was a person
who long ago tore himself into pieces because of his longing to shape his
own being. That was the Fall,” he said, “the ‘Big Bang’: the beginning of
time and the material universe when the one became many—legion. And
that is why God cannot interfere: evolution is this person growing back into

himself” [L 269].
Incredibly, Blatty remarks of this farrago of bad science, incomprehensible
theology, and naive optimism that “I had finally had the answer—a really
satisfactory answer to the problem of evil. That is to say, if you grant its
assumptions, there is not a loophole or a flaw to be found in it” (FF 47). Well, I
suppose if one grants the assumption that the earth is flat, then there is no flaw in
believing that one may fall off the edge of the earth.
The singular—and, for Blatty, bitter—irony in all this is that in his work,
especially The Exorcist (both the book and the film), there is such a compound
of gruesome horror, sex, violence, and sacrilege that it becomes very easy to
bypass his preaching and relish his work for the pleasant shudders it provides.
This is, indeed, exactly what has happened with The Exorcist. And Blatty is right
to complain that the film only augmented this effect: “Let’s face it—the message
was adroitly snipped out of the film. It wasn’t there” (FF 43). In spite of the
oceans of blood and gore that have been spilled in books and movies in the last
two decades, there are portions of The Exorcist that retain their power to shock:
Chris plunged down the hall and burst into the bedroom, gasped, stood
rooted in paralyzing shock as the rappings boomed massively, shivering
through walls; as Karl lay unconscious on the floor near the bureau; as
Regan, her legs propped up and spread wide on a bed that was violently
bouncing and shaking, clutched the bone-white crucifix in raw-knuckled
hands, the bone-white crucifix poised at her vagina, the bone-white crucifix
she stared at with terror, eyes bulging in a face that was bloodied from the
nose, the nasogastric tubing ripped out.
“Oh, please! Oh, no, please!” she was shrieking as her hands brought
the crucifix closer; as she seemed to be straining to push it away.
“You’ll do as I tell you, filth! You’ll do it!”
The threatening bellow, the words, came from Regan, her voice coarse
and guttural, bristling with venom, while in an instaneous flash her
expression and features were hideously transmuted into those of the feral,
demonic personality that had appeared in the course of hypnosis. And now
faces and voices, as Chris watched stunned, interchanged with rapidity:
“No!”
“You’ll do it!”
“Please!”
“You will, you bitch, or I’ll kill you!”
“Please!”
“Yes, you’re going to let Jesus fuck you, fuck you, f—”
Regan now, eyes wide and staring, flinching from the rush of some

hideous finality, mouth agape shrieking at the dread of some ending. Then
abruptly the demonic face once more possessed her, now filled her, the
room choking suddenly with a stench in the nostrils, with an icy cold that
seeped from the walls as the rappings ended and Regan’s piercing cry of
terror turned to a guttural, yelping laugh of malevolent spite and rage
triumphant while she thrust down the crucifix into her vagina and began to
masturbate ferociously, roaring in that deep, coarse, deafening voice, “Now
you’re mine, now you’re mine, you stinking cow! You bitch! Let Jesus fuck
you, fuck you!” [E 189–90].
It would be difficult to find passages more arresting than this even in the so-
called splatterpunk writers, whose sensibilities are, of course, very different from
Blatty’s. But Blatty must nevertheless acknowledge, however grudgingly, that he
is indeed the “father” of Stephen King and modern weird writers generally. The
Exorcist was one of the first bestselling novels to use explicit profanity in this
fashion, and I distinctly recall being stunned by it when I read the novel as a
youth; the film, of course, has already achieved the status of an icon in popular
culture. All this is, as we can see, profoundly contrary to Blatty’s moral purpose,
but he must still bear some of the credit—or blame—for it. If his gruesome
passages had not been written so vividly and so accessibly, with a deliberate
effort to offend his readers’ (and his own) religious sensibilities, then his novel
would not have achieved its bestseller status.
I can imagine two general objections to my treatment of William Peter
Blatty. First, it might be thought that it is the very essence of supernatural fiction
to postulate the existence of transcendent forces, so that Blatty should not be
criticized for basing his work on the existence of God and the Devil. Second, it
is to be wondered whether it is right for a critic to take an author to task for the
world view that informs his work rather than merely assessing the success or
failure of that work as an aesthetic entity independent of its philosophical or
religious orientation.
The first objection is easier to deal with than the second. The postulation of
supernatural forces in weird fiction is, generally, done on an aesthetic, not
metaphysical, plane: Lovecraft does not believe in the literal reality of Cthulhu;
Dunsany does not believe in the actual existence of Pegana. In both cases, these
imaginary entities or realms serve as symbols: in the first instance, a symbol for
an infinite, unknowable cosmos in which human beings count as nothing; in the
second instance, a symbol for the imagination that cannot find beauty in the
prosiness of the contemporary world. Blatty, however, really believes in the
existence of God and the Devil, and he wishes us to believe in them also; it is
this significant divergence of attitude that makes it problematical to classify his

work as within the realm of the weird at all, since its motivations are antipodal to
those of most writing in this field. In this sense, Blatty is more similar to certain
eccentric or occultist writers—Charles Fort, Ignatius Donnelly, Erich von
Däniken—than he is to Lovecraft, Blackwood, or Dunsany. Donnelly really
wants us to believe in his Atlantis; Dunsany knows, and knows that we know,
that his Pegana is only figurative.
As for the second objection, Blatty is again an unusual case. I know of few
writers, especially in this realm, who are so desperate to convert their readers to
religious orthodoxy. Blatty may like to imagine himself a modern-day
Dostoevsky, wrestling torturously with problems of faith and belief, but his
theological reflections lack both the intellectual substance and the aesthetic
integration that is found in the best work of this kind. In any case, the whole idea
of not taking a stand on a writer’s philosophical position strikes me as critically
pusillanimous, especially when Blatty so insistently pushes his theology in our
faces. I cannot see how it is possible for anyone to contemplate Blatty’s work in
a purely aesthetic way; indeed, Blatty would be the first to urge us against such a
practice. Accordingly, I offer no apologies for criticizing not merely the manner
but the content of Blatty’s work: there is, surely, a real problem in founding
one’s entire work upon a religion that is very likely to be false. Blatty does not,
like Dante or Milton or even the later Evelyn Waugh, have enough other literary
virtues to survive the destruction of the religious underpinnings of his work: the
sole function of his writing is to reconcile us to Catholicism, and if he fails in
that task, his writing as a whole fails. As it is, William Peter Blatty occupies his
humble niche in the realm of supernatural horror because a sufficient number of
readers, religious and nonreligious alike, are willing to ignore his windy
theologizing and appreciate his work for its occasional moments of terror and
grue.
STEPHEN KING: THE KING’S NEW CLOTHES
Stephen King (b. 1947) is the most remarkable publishing phenomenon in
modern literature. To say this, however, is not in any sense to say that he is the
most remarkable literary phenomenon in modern literature or even in the narrow
confines of weird fiction. King is remarkable principally in the quantity of books
he has sold over the past 25 years. And before I consider his work on its actual
literary merits (which is my chief interest here), it may be worth giving brief
attention to the possible sources of his tremendous popular success. Three
factors seem paramount.
First is the popularity of the film adaptations of King’s work. It should be

recalled that King’s first novel, Carrie (1974), was not a bestseller until the
movie version appeared the following year. And subsequent films—which in
terms of their actual merits as films range from the moderately successful (The
Dead Zone, Stand by Me, Misery) to the spectacularly wretched (Children of the
Corn, It)—have in many cases done little save serve as publicity for the author.
The second is King’s relentless prolificity, a factor that has perhaps not
been given much attention. Unlike former titans of the bestseller lists such as
Harold Robbins and Irving Wallace (remember them?), who wrote for only
about two decades before lapsing into a merciful silence, King has been writing
since the late 1960s—he began his career by publishing short stories either in
genre magazines (Startling Mystery Stories) or in men’s magazines (Cavalier,
Penthouse), and these were eventually collected in Night Shift (1978) and
Skeleton Crew (1985)—and he has issued at least one book a year since 1974
with no signs of surcease.
The third factor in his success is the aggressive marketing of his work by
his publishers. King benefited by the tendency in commercial publishing—
clearly evidenced from the early 1980s to the present day—of spending a
majority of the advertising budget on the vigorous promotion of a small number
of preordained “bestsellers” at the expense of the now nearly vanished midlist.
King, in effect, became less an author than a brand name and was marketed as
such. The result was inevitable. It is certainly not the case that those works of his
which (even in the view of King’s supporters) are lower on the literary scale than
others sold more poorly than those which are higher.
As for the overriding question of why readers lapped up horror fiction at
this exact time, I have stated earlier that I am not prepared to make any
conjectures. Certainly, the type of horror fiction King wrote has much to do with
his commercial success. He chose horror fiction, to be sure, because in youth he
absorbed a great deal of it in literature, films, television, and comic books, but
his particular approach to the field is not at all that of an innovator—he has, as
far as I can tell, come up with not a single original weird conception or original
treatment of a preexisting weird conception—but that of a writer who has
purportedly “humanized” the weird tale by enmeshing it in the everyday lives of
ordinary people. As King himself has remarked in an interview, “my idea of
what a horror story should be [is that] the monster shouldn’t be in a graveyard in
decadent old Europe, but in the house down the street” (UM 94). King
maintains, correctly enough, that this notion was evolving in the generation just
prior to his, with such writers as Ray Bradbury, Shirley Jackson, and Richard
Matheson. All these writers (and many others one could name) handle the
human element with vastly greater literary skill than King. What we find in

King’s own works is an array of supposedly “real” human characters
encountering conventionalized weird scenarios, augmented by the dropping in of
a great many surface objects of our contemporary material civilization
(frequently in the form of brand names) to engender immediate, if superficial,
reader recognition.
King’s writing, considered abstractly, is a mixture of cheap sentiment,
naive moral polarizations between valiant heroes and wooden villains,
hackneyed, implausible, and ill-explained supernatural phenomena, a plain,
bland, easy-to-read style with just the right number of scatological and sexual
profanities to titillate his middle-class audience, and a subscribing to the
conventional morality of common people. Whether King actually subscribes to
this morality or whether he has merely adopted it in a calculated attempt to
appeal to a wide and indiscriminate audience, only he can answer. I am willing
to give him the benefit of the doubt on the matter and assume his sincerity, if the
pathetic earnestness of his disquisitions on the subject is any gauge of his real
beliefs.
By the early 1980s King, now a perennial bestseller, became uncomfortable
with his typecasting as a supernatural horror writer. He first attempted to break
out of the mold with a disastrous nonsupernatural horror novel, Cujo (1981),
then with a collection of four mainstream novellas, Different Seasons (1982).
This latter work was received with a certain amused tolerance by the general
literary community, but most reviewers urged him to stick with horror, and for
the next decade he did so in spite of one further nonsupernatural novel, Misery
(1987). Some of his most recent works—It (1986), The Tommyknockers (1987),
The Dark Half (1989), Four Past Midnight (1990)—have met with almost
uniform condemnation from critics, largely on account of their staggering
prolixity, although that has not stopped them from mechanically achieving
bestseller status. Strangely enough, in the last few years he has not merely
returned to nonsupernaturalism (Gerald’s Game [1992], Dolores Claiborne
[1993]), but has apparently striven to shake free of the commonplace
expectations of his audience, writing works whose challenging morality have
made them relatively unpopular to his supporters precisely because they are in
such stark contrast to the saccharine sentimentality of his earlier output.
An interesting aspect of King’s work is a group of five novels written under
the pseudonym Richard Bachman. These novels, published between 1977 and
1985, are actually among his more literally successful works, even though only
one of them—Thinner (1985)—is genuinely weird (it is also by far the poorest
of the lot), while two others—The Long Walk (1981) and The Running Man
(1982)—can be classified as science fiction. The other two, Rage (1977) and

Roadwork (1981), are entirely mainstream. King makes a simple but revealing
statement about why he wrote under a pseudonym: “I think I did it … to do
something as someone other than Stephen King” (BB vii). The Bachman books
—written with verve, flair, and a bracing toughness of conception, setting, and
mood—are the best evidence possible that King could have been an able writer
had he not felt the need to cater to an undiscriminating public. Here he could
write under the persona of someone other than the megabucks publishing
superstar who was expected to dish up the same tired supernaturalism and sweet,
lovable, and unadventurous characters year in and year out.

BUNGLED SUPERNATURALISM
One wonders how King’s early short stories could have developed any sort
of following, for they are on the whole facile, mechanical, and implausible.
“Jerusalem’s Lot” (NS) is a longwinded and half-baked imitation of Lovecraft.
“The Mangler” (1972; NS) is, if one can imagine it, about a haunted ironer in an
industrial laundry. “Gray Matter” (1973) tells of a disease caused by bacteria in
beer that turns individuals into “‘a great big gray lump’” (NS 116); the influence
of Lovecraft’s “The Colour out of Space” and Machen’s “Novel of the White
Powder” is very obvious, and King’s tale reads like an unwitting parody of these
masterworks. “Battleground” (1972; NS) is about toy soldiers coming to life;
this is, of course, a very old idea, but the treatment here is at least somewhat
amusing. “Sometimes They Come Back” (1974; NS) may be of value only in
reflecting King’s own teaching experiences, for the premise—a schoolteacher
who summons a demon to despatch some punks who have come back from the
dead—makes one desperately but bootlessly wish the story were intended as a
parody. “Children of the Corn” (1977; NS)—not to be judged by the truly awful
film adaptation of it—is not a bad tale about the perversion of religion in a
remote Nebraska town, but it is too close in texture and conception to Tryon’s
Harvest Home (1973) to be considered meritorious in its own right.
These early stories already exhibit the utter commonplaceness of King’s
supernatural scenarios. Most have been much better utilized by his predecessors
and contemporaries, and all he has done is to thrust them into a modern, middle-
class setting in order to trigger reader identification and to milk as much cheap
emotion out of them as he can. Later stories are subject to the same defects.
“Gramma” (1984; SC) would have been an able tale of a boy left alone with his
aged, bedridden, and rather terrifying grandmother if King had not clumsily
dragged in some Lovecraftian elements at the end. “The Raft” (1982; SC) is the
foolish story of college youths stranded on a raft in a pond with some inky
monster menacing them; inevitably, no plausible account of this monster’s
existence or purpose is provided. “The Monkey” (1980; SC) asks us to believe
that people or animals die when a toy monkey claps the cymbals in its hands,
although why this should be so is anyone’s guess. King’s novels continue this
trend, containing supernatural notions that are so poorly thought out that they
collapse under the weight of their own improbability.
’Salem’s Lot (1975) could serve as a prototype for what is wrong with
King’s work. It is trite, conventional, sentimental, and poorly written. This novel

is a radical expansion of a short story, “One for the Road” (NS), which is just as
conventional in its treatment of the vampire theme and also entirely preposterous
in its failure to account plausibly for an entire town of vampires (how do they
subsist? how do they escape detection by the outside world?). Ben Mears comes
to the Maine hamlet of Jerusalem’s Lot, where he had grew up as a boy, in order
to write a book about a strange old house called the Marsten place, in which a
man murdered his wife and then committed suicide. Two mysterious individuals,
Richard Straker and Kurt Barlow, move into the establishment, and shortly
thereafter deaths occur with remarkable frequency. It becomes rapidly obvious
that these deaths are the product of vampires, and Straker and Barlow are the
clear suspects. What else can Mears do but gather together a stalwart band of
citizens and extirpate the monsters? Moreover, although people are dying like
flies all over town, Mears manages to have a sloppily sentimental love affair
with the fetching Susan Norton; regrettably, it is curtailed when she herself
becomes a vampire. After an action-packed series of violent deaths, the principal
vampires are finally dispatched, and the novel ends with Ben’s vow to rid the
rest of the town of vampires as well.
King has done absolutely nothing to enliven the worn-out vampire theme.
Indeed, he has confessed that the novel is nothing more than a sort of updating of
Dracula (DM 37–39; DS 519). King actually seems to relish reproducing the
vampire myth as unoriginally as he can (“‘I suspect [Barlow’s] origins may have
been Romanian or Magyar or Hungarian’” [SL 320]). It is particularly amusing
how King, although having launched a vicious attack on the Catholic church (“It
was the steady, dead, onrushing engine of the church, bearing down all petty sins
on its endless shuttle to heaven” [SL 149]) and having Barlow assert that he is
far older than Christianity (SL 354), nevertheless makes his principal heroes
soberly go through confession prior to their final encounter with the villain. Also
typical is a needlessly lengthy dwelling on the funeral of Danny Glick (SL 127–
30), a young boy who has succumbed to vampirism: King wrings as much
heartrending sentiment as he can out of this meaningless episode, even though
Glick is only one of dozens who have fallen victim to the vampires.
A number of King’s other novels have serious problems of conception,
especially in regard to the central supernatural phenomenon. Consider Christine
(1983). There seem to be two antecedents of this novel (about a car that
somehow comes to life) among King’s short stories. An early tale, “Trucks”
(1973; NS), is a ridiculous account of trucks that turn against human beings.
Rather better is “Uncle Otto’s Truck” (1983; SC): this tale of a truck avenging
the murder of its owner is effective because of the relative gradualness with
which the supernatural manifestation is introduced. In Christine the notion is

handled with extreme ineptitude. The problem facing King is to endow an object
whose origin, manufacture, and functioning are so thoroughly understood with
some sort of supernatural mystery—he can never quite turn the trick. Dennis
Quilter, a high school senior whose friend Arnie Cunningham has fallen under
the influence of the car, Christine, which he has bought from a mysterious old
man named Roland LeBay, ponders the matter: “This was a car, not a she but an
it, not really Christine at all but only a 1958 Plymouth Fury that had rolled off an
assembly line in Detroit along with about four hundred thousand others” (Ch
156). This incontrovertible truth makes the car’s supernaturalism implausible at
the very outset.2
It is then suggested that the car has somehow stored up the hate that fueled
the personality of LeBay, a man embittered at the world since youth. LeBay’s
brother remarks: “‘I do believe that emotions and events have a certain …
lingering resonance. It may be that emotions can even communicate themselves
in certain circumstances, if the circumstances are peculiar enough’” (Ch 106).
This idea, as we shall later see, had already been used in The Shining (1977), but
it is just as paradoxical here as there: if the car has somehow absorbed LeBay’s
hate and become animate, why have not other cars behaved like Christine? Is
LeBay the only car-owner who has been angry at the world? The much later
suggestion that LeBay was a changeling (Ch 432) is so preposterous and poorly
developed that it sounds like some sort of joke.
Then there are the actual supernatural manifestations. Christine is
purchased by Arnie, and LeBay dies shortly thereafter. At this point it appears
that either Arnie or the car itself or both become possessed by the spirit of
LeBay; but which is it to be? Not only that, LeBay is somehow bodily
resurrected in a manner that is never explained. On top of this, all Christine’s
victims are magically resurrected as decaying corpses after the car has
dispatched them. In effect, there is too much supernaturalism in this novel, all of
which seems designed merely to jolt the reader from time to time rather than to
harmonize into a coherent whole. Dennis thinks the matter over toward the end:
“What was it? Some sort of afreet? An ordinary car that had somehow become
the dangerous, sinking dwelling-place of a demon? A weird manifestation of
LeBay’s lingering personality, a hellish haunted house that rolled on Goodyear
rubber? I didn’t know” (Ch 414–15). Neither, apparently, does King.
Pet Sematary (1983) is also full of paradoxes and implausibilities. We are
asked to believe that there is a region near the rural town of Ludlow, Maine, that
the Indians have deemed a “magic place” (PS 117). This region has the power to
reanimate dead animals and human beings when they are buried there. This itself
is pretty remarkable, and we must simply accept King’s word on the matter,

since he provides absolutely no justification or account of how such a piece of
land could have gained this miraculous property. There are, in addition, some
other, lesser implausibilities (a man who dies in an accident comes back from the
dead to utter a prophetic warning; the protagonist’s daughter suddenly begins to
have precognitive dreams, even though she never possessed this trait before).
But the true failing of the novel is an utterly maudlin and dripping
sentimentality. This problem dogs nearly all King’s work, but here it is worse
than usual. King wants us to be intimately concerned with the fate of a nice,
wholesome, middle-class family—husband, wife, young daughter, and infant son
—as they move into this region and encounter the weird topography. But who
aside from other nice, wholesome, middle-class people could possibly care about
what happens to them? Consider the wife’s reaction when her son dies in a car
accident:
“I moved the couch while you were in Bangor … I thought running the
vacuum around would take my mind off … off things … and I found four
of his little Matchbox cars under there … as if they were waiting for him to
come back and … you know, play with them…” Her voice, already
wavering, now broke. Tears spilled down her cheeks. “And that’s when I
took the second Valium because I started crying again, the way I’m crying
now … oh what a fucking soap opera all of this is … hold me, Lou, will
you hold me?” [PS 262].
Can one imagine Robert Aickman writing something like this? If King’s
self-proclaimed virtue lies in bringing horror down to ordinary people, then
things like this are the best possible argument for believing that horror has no
business with ordinary people.
Then there is Thinner (1985), one of the poorest excuses for a novel in the
history of weird fiction. This, the last and worst of the Richard Bachman books,
is the fatuous tale of a man, Bill Halleck, who kills an aged Gypsy woman in a
car accident and is cursed by her father so that he inexorably loses weight day by
day. This novel is severely flawed in its very conception: since the
supernaturalism of Halleck’s weight loss is made transparently obvious at the
outset, the sole dramatic interest in the novel rests in watching what Halleck will
do about the situation. Will he plead with the dead Gypsy’s father? Will he kill
him? But we cannot possibly be interested in Halleck’s fate, as he is an utterly
unsympathetic character who is clearly guilty of killing the Gypsy by
negligence. King compounds the problem by asking us to sympathize with
Halleck when he hires a small-time hood to terrorize the Gypsy until he finally
lifts the curse. There is some attempt at social commentary—the Gypsies as
outcasts from the rarefied upper-class atmosphere of suburban Connecticut—but

the treatment is so crude as to seem a caricature. King evidently wrote this novel
as the secret of his Bachman pseudonym was coming out, so that he felt no need
to adopt the bold persona of Bachman, lapsing instead into his usual middle-
class sentimentality.
Another of King’s recent ventures into supernaturalism, Needful Things
(1991), received very hostile reviews, even from his supporters; but it is in some
ways superior to many of his recent works. The premise of this novel is
childishly simple: a strange individual, Leland Gaunt, opens a shop called
Needful Things, in which he sells rare commodities to the townspeople of Castle
Rock, Maine, and asks in return only that they play increasingly nasty tricks on
one another. But the execution of the story, although inevitably prolix, is deft.
What is perhaps most striking about Needful Things is its refreshingly bleak
view of humanity—the notion that greed for possessions is so inexorable that it
will cause human beings to violate the most fundamental moral norms in society
and in interpersonal behavior. As one character ruminates: “Everyone loves
something for nothing … even if it costs everything” (NF 628). After an endless
series of works in which King has paid lip service to conventional bourgeois
pieties, this dark vision is a tonic. And, in contrast to The Shining, the novel’s
supernaturalism augments rather than confounds this message: although Gaunt is
clearly a supernatural being, his prime function is only to set up a scenario
whereby one individual will wish to do harm to another. It is abundantly obvious
that most of the increasingly vicious actions on the part of the townspeople are,
after Gaunt’s initial urging, performed freely, willingly, and even with sadistic
glee. What King (in this novel, at any rate) sees as the basic motivating factors
of small-town life, and perhaps of American life generally, are greed, stupidity,
revenge, and arrogance.
There is no question that supernaturalism does indeed come into play in this
work, although in many cases it seems as if Gaunt achieves his purposes merely
through a kind of hypnosis. In the first place, Gaunt, even before getting to know
the townspeople, is familiar with each person’s most secret desire: a young boy
desperately wants a Sandy Koufax baseball card; a woman yearns for some
token of Elvis Presley; a man wants a fishing pole like the one his father had.
Gaunt appears to have all these items in his shop, but it is gradually revealed that
he has managed to cast some sort of hypnotic spell over individuals so that they
think they have become the owners of these cherished objects when in fact they
have not. Also, Gaunt has uncanny mind-reading capabilities, and he performs
other actions that clearly signal him to be superhuman.
What, then, is Gaunt? Is he the Devil? Almost nothing is told about him
until the very end: we hear only that his career began in the Middle Ages (NF

547). Finally it is revealed that Gaunt is only a demon, albeit a powerful one (NF
681). Even so, King has awkwardly painted himself into a corner: his desire for a
happy ending of sorts—in spite of the fact that the bulk of the town of Castle
Rock has gone up in flames and many of its citizens have perished—results in
absurdity and disappointment. Sheriff Alan Pangborn has finally grasped the fact
that Gaunt is the fount of all the troubles in his town, and in the end he confronts
him. But how is a mere human to deal with a demon? In some inexplicable and
ludicrous fashion, Pangborn momentarily develops supernatural powers of his
own and dispatches Gaunt with remarkable ease. It is, aside from verbosity, the
one significant drawback in an otherwise respectable novel.
One gains the impression that King wishes this novel to be a sardonic
commentary on the pettiness and hypocrisy of small-town life, as he folksily
writes at the beginning: “call it Peyton Place or Grover’s Corners or Castle
Rock, it’s just folks eatin pie and drinkin coffee and talkin about each other
behind their hands” (NF 6–7). The novel was criticized for its “unsympathetic”
treatment of its multifarious characters—no one aside from Pangborn, his
girlfriend Polly Chalmers, and a few other minor characters are portrayed in any
sort of favorable light. But what these criticisms overlook is that the novel is
primarily a satire: we are meant to feel scorn and contempt for these people, and
King seems to take a charming pleasure in killing them off one after the other.
The only drawback in all this is that so many characters are presented that their
deaths after a time lose emotional potency.
I am not entirely sure why King has felt the need to destroy the town where
so many of his novels and tales have been set. The dust jacket proclaims Needful
Things as “The Last Castle Rock Story,” although oddly enough this designation
appears nowhere in the book itself. Perhaps it is his way of calling an end to a
very heterogeneous and thematically unrelated cycle of works. In any event, I
enjoyed Needful Things for precisely the reason that many of King’s enthusiasts
did not: because it, like several of the Bachman books, outlines an unwonted but
challenging moral brutality in addition to, and working in tandem with, the
abundant physical brutality. As Gaunt smugly declares: “‘I know all about that
peculiar thing people call “pride of possession.” I have made it the cornerstone
of my career’” (NF 431).
Nevertheless, King’s supernaturalism in general fails to convince. There
are, aside from the hackneyed and paradox-riddled plots he has devised in many
of his works, two fundamental reasons for this: his much vaunted mundane
realism and his lifeless, working man’s prose. This is a fatal combination. King
spends so much time portraying his bland, middle-class characters going about
their bland, middle-class activities (and does so with a prose style as flat and

atmosphereless as any I have encountered in and out of weird fiction) that the
intrusion of the supernatural comes to seem utterly preposterous and extraneous.
When, in “The Mist” (1980; SC), tentacles suddenly appear at the loading
entrance of a supermarket, the spectacle is more comical than frightening. This
may be a general difficulty of the “mundane realists” of weird fiction as a whole
—so different from such topographical and psychological realists as Lovecraft
and Shirley Jackson—but it is a difficulty that King exemplifies most notably,
and catastrophically.

THE POWERS OF THE MIND
Many of King’s novels focus on the anomalous powers of the human mind.
Carrie (to be studied more extensively elsewhere) deals with this theme, but the
handling is unsatisfactory. The central phenomenon of telekinesis is here
presented in a science-fictional manner, but difficulties result from this
procedure. We are asked to believe that telekinesis is some sort of genetic trait: a
fictional document extensively cited by King in the novel, a book on the case
entitled The Shadow Exploded, speaks of a “TK gene” that is “more or less
assumed in the scientific community” (C 224). There is a double mistake here:
first, this wholly improbable pseudoscientific “explanation” causes the
supernatural component of the novel to be assumed as a given rather than
something to be accounted for plausibly; second, there must be thousands of
Carries in the world if this supposed capability were genetic, and one wonders
why we have not heard of them. Predictably enough, King suggests at the very
end that another individual has the same telekinetic ability as Carrie, so I
suppose we are to imagine another holocaust, like the one that concludes the
book, occurring sometime in the future.
In The Shining (1977) the focus is on a young boy, Danny Torrance, who
seems to be gifted with second sight. Once again, however, King has failed to
think through this conception satisfactorily. Danny appears to be able both to
read people’s minds and to see (dimly) into the future; but there are paradoxes in
King’s presentation of both these attributes. Danny comes to the Overlook Hotel
with his parents, Jack and Wendy Torrance, who will be tending the place while
it is vacant during the winter season. He encounters an elderly woman who is
leaving the hotel and whose bags are being stowed away by a handsome bellboy.
Danny reads her thoughts: “(i’d like to get into his pants)” (S 70). But he
misunderstands this: “Why would she want to get that man’s pants? Was she
cold, even with that long fur coat on?” (S 70). But what Danny is doing here is
not, apparently, reading the woman’s thoughts but—oddly—reading the
woman’s verbalization of her thoughts. This is an extremely peculiar method of
mind reading, especially since at a later point he is able to read a doctor’s
thoughts imagistically: “he tried to catch Edmonds’s thoughts or at least the
color of his mood. And suddenly he got an oddly comforting image in his head”
(S 139). Therefore, the appropriate vision he should have received in regard to
the woman is some picture of the woman going to bed with the man (and Danny
already knows something about sex [see S 83]). But King is forced into this

bizarre expedient because a critical plot element rests upon it: one of Danny’s
persistent images is the word “REDRUM,” which is finally explained (as if
anyone could have failed to guess it) as “MURDER” seen in a mirror. As for
Danny’s precognitive abilities, Dick Hallorann, an elderly man who has
befriended Danny and who has a limited capacity for precognition himself, tells
him: “‘Those things don’t always come true’” (S 86). Why not? How can they
be genuinely precognitive—rather than merely good guesses—if they don’t?
King again needs this escape valve in order that his characters can perform
certain actions that prevent the worst of these precognitive visions from
occurring.
The central supernatural scenario of The Shining is also poorly conceived.
Why do various weird phenomena (an elevator that moves of its own accord; the
ghost of an old woman that appears in the bathtub where she died; a bar whose
patrons seem to materialize at random moments) afflict Jack Torrance and his
family so relentlessly? The hotel certainly has a shady past, full of corruption
and Mafia-style murders, but what does this have to do with Torrance, who
seems especially victimized by the ghostly manifestations? These questions are
not adequately answered. At one point Jack says that the ghosts may be “‘like
the residues of the feelings of the people who have stayed here. Good things and
bad things. In that sense, I suppose that every big hotel has got its ghosts’” (S
264. But then why are other hotels not plagued with ghosts as this one is? We
have already seen that this same motivation is used, with equal implausibility, in
Christine. Still later it is said that “little by little a force had accrued” (S 420) in
the hotel—but how, and for what purpose?
Perhaps Danny’s precognitive power (called “shining”) is involved in some
way. He reports Hallorann telling him that “‘this was a bad place for people who
shine’” (S 248); Wendy wonders whether “in some unknown fashion it was
Danny’s shine that was powering” (S 371) the hotel. “Unknown” is certainly
right, for this idea is never developed or clarified. Then there is Jack’s increasing
sense of identification with the hotel: “He felt that he and it were simpático” (S
251). The ghost of Grady, the bartender, says to Jack in a hallucination or vision:
“‘You’re the caretaker, sir…. You’ve always been the caretaker’” (S 349). Is
Jack some sort of reincarnation of a previous employee of the hotel? And what
of the “huge dark shape” (S 437) seen floating out of the hotel as it is burning to
the ground? All these variegated supernatural accounts never solidify into a
whole, and in the end we are left completely at sea as to the exact cause of the
incidents at the Overlook Hotel.
Even the portrayal of Jack’s growing alienation from his family is bungled.
His pseudopossession by the spirit of the hotel is presumably meant to serve as a

symbol for his increasingly bad treatment of his wife and child, but several
passages in the novel explicitly repudiate such an interpretation. Wendy asks
Danny, “‘Is Jack … is he going to hurt us?’” to which Danny answers, “‘They’ll
try to make him’” (S 324)—“they” being, one imagines, the sum total of the
weird phenomena in the hotel. Jack is therefore absolved of any moral guilt in
the matter, since he is now under the control of outside forces. A later passage
confirms this view: “There was nothing of the real Jack in that howling,
maundering, petulant voice” (S 410). Hence, The Shining cannot even serve as
an effective metaphor for the breakup of a familial unit. Roadwork (1981),
written under the Richard Bachman pseudonym, is a much more telling and
unsentimentalized account of troubled family life.
The same supernatural phenomenon that caused a minor difficulty in The
Shining—Danny Torrance’s second sight—is a much greater problem in The
Dead Zone (1979), since it is the very foundation of the plot. In this novel John
Smith has had a slight precognitive ability ever since a boyhood accident in
which he injured his head: he has “hunches” (DZ 4) of what the future will
bring. This ability is augmented tremendously by a serious car accident in which
he nearly dies. He spends four and a half years in a coma, and when he emerges
from it he finds that mere contact with a human being enables him to visualize
that person’s past history, present circumstances, and future. In some cases,
however, these visions are either vague or entirely lacking. A doctor attempts to
account for this by the notion of a “dead zone”:
“A part of John Smith’s brain has been damaged beyond repair—a
very small part, but all parts of the brain may be vital. He calls this his
‘dead zone,’ and there, apparently, a number of trace memories were stored.
All of these wiped-out memories seem to be part of a ‘set’—that of street,
road, and highway designations. A subset of a larger overall set, that of
where is it. This is a small but total aphasia which seems to include both
language and visualization skills” [DZ 145].
The crux of the novel is Smith’s contact with Greg Stillson, a brash and
dangerous right-wing politician. When Smith shakes Stillson’s hand at a rally, he
sees visions of Stillson becoming president and, more vaguely, causing an
atomic holocaust through his rash and violent actions. Smith feels that the only
way to prevent this from happening is to kill Stillson. Although he fails in his
attempt, he manages to discredit Stillson so that his presidential ambitions are
permanently destroyed.
There is, however, a fatal paradox in this entire conception. All Smith’s
previous precognitive visions have in fact come true regardless of his own
actions in the matter—unfailingly so. Indeed, in a notebook Smith himself

confesses: “I have to do something about Stillson. I have to…. There is
absolutely no question in my mind. He is going to become president and he is
going to start a war—or cause one through simple mismanagement of the office,
which amounts to the same thing” (DZ 328). It is true that one of the impressions
Smith receives when touching Stillson is vague (he sees blue and yellow stripes
around him) but this is ultimately explained as the stripes of a child’s coat, as
Stillson holds the child up in front of him to prevent Smith from shooting him.
But the mere vagueness of an impression has never previously prevented it from
coming true in some fashion or other.
King is trying to have his cake and eat it, too. The whole dramatic tension
of the novel rests upon Smith’s heroic attempts to foil Stillson, but in order to
have this tension King has fallen into a Catch–22 situation. If the vision that
Smith sees is of the future, how can that future be altered by anyone’s actions? If
it can be altered, how could Smith have seen the vision to begin with? What is
the future, after all, but the sum total of all actions by every entity in the universe
from the present onwards? Smith’s own actions would presumably be part of the
sum total leading to the event he has visualized. King tries to get around this
difficulty by a previous episode, but this is equally paradoxical. Smith, touching
Chuck Chatsworth, a youth whom he has been tutoring, has a vision of a fire at
the restaurant where Chuck’s class is to celebrate its graduation that evening. He
frantically and successfully persuades Chuck not to go, and sure enough there is
a fire at the restaurant, in which many of Chuck’s schoolmates are killed. But
here again, if Chuck were among those who would perish in the fire, then this
event is fated to happen and Smith could do nothing about it (or, rather, any
actions Smith took would still lead to that result). If Chuck were—through
whoever’s actions—not among those who would perish, then Smith, by touching
him, could never have had a vision of the fire to begin with. He would have had
to touch some other person who was going to perish.
My whole point is that King has not thought through this entire supernatural
phenomenon so that it avoids insuperable paradoxes. There has never been any
indication, prior to the restaurant fire incident, that Smith’s or anyone else’s
actions could have any effect in altering the future, and even that incident is
fraught with conceptual difficulties. The “vagueness” of the vision, especially as
it relates to Stillson, is not a sufficient escape valve for King, for here the vision
has been completely negated, not merely altered in some insignificant way.
When Firestarter (1980) appeared, it was widely thought to be a rip-off of
the central idea in Carrie: here, instead of a girl endowed with telekinesis, we
have a little girl who has what King calls “pyrokinesis” (a singularly unfortunate
coinage),3 or the ability to start fires with her mind. She gained this power by

being the offspring of two individuals, Andy McGee and Vicky Tomlinson, who
were given some strange drug in a test administered by the Shop, a very secret
branch of the Department of Defense devoted to research on the use of mental
powers in warfare. Andy and Vicky themselves gain certain mildly anomalous
mental faculties (Vicky seems to have dim precognitive abilities, while Andy is
able to influence people’s thoughts and behavior with his mind) but it is their
child, Charlie, who has the greatest power. This idea is, I confess, a little hard to
swallow, and King has to rely on the unknown powers of the mind to suggest
that a mixture of relatively harmless mental faculties in two adults could produce
such a radically new faculty in a child. This faculty, indeed, makes one
individual think of Charlie “as a crack—a chink, if you like—in the very smelter
of creation” (F 306). It is stated on a number of occasions that the child, when
she grows up, might be able to crack the entire planet in two.
But, to be honest, the weird phenomenon in Firestarter is not conveyed
with any sort of plausibility; we must simply accept it when we see Charlie start
fires, large and small, at every turn. The novel is, in fact, largely a suspense story
involving a laborious chase of Andy and Charlie by the Shop (who have already
murdered Vicky) and, when they are finally captured, an equally laborious
attempt by the government to harness Charlie’s powers. As is so often the case,
King’s verbosity destroys whatever suspense this novel may have had. And,
ironically, his anomalously inadequate depiction of Vicky—who is seen only in
a series of flashbacks—causes her death to lack any emotive impact. There are,
besides, King’s usual platitudinous attacks on science (“Andy had no great faith
in Modern Science, which had given the world the H–bomb, napalm, and the
laser rifle” [F 30]) and the government (“The Shop, like the FBI and CIA, had a
long history of killing the money” [F 214]). The story culminates a big
shoot-’em-up scene in which Charlie torches everything in sight while agents try
to gun her down. In an unintentionally hilarious afterword King tries to justify
his “pyrokinesis” by appealing to that old charlatan Charles Fort and then gives
an owlish lecture on what his novel is all about. “If I mean to suggest anything, it
is only that the world, although well-lighted with fluorescent and incandescent
bulbs and neon, is still full of odd dark corners and unsettling nooks and
crannies” (F 402–3).

ADOLESCENCE
If King has any virtue as a writer, it is his really remarkable sense of
identification with adolescence, particularly with teenage boys. Some of his
more successful works—Rage (1977), Christine (1983), “Apt Pupil” and “The
Body” in Different Seasons (1982), to be studied elsewhere—deal with this
critical stage of human development. His portrayal of boys (and men) is much
more perceptive than his portrayal of girls (and women), the latter tending to be
depicted either sentimentally or with bizarre hostility. But when King is writing
about high-school-age boys, he appears to be on familiar turf.
Carrie is King’s first lengthy treatment of adolescent life; it is, however, a
failure in every way. This is the story of Carrie White, a high-school girl
endowed with the power of telekinesis. She is the daughter of Margaret White, a
fanatical fundamentalist Christian with a ferocious loathing of sex that causes
her to be psychotically overprotective of Carrie lest she succumb to the lure of
men. Carrie is the ugly duckling of her high school: she has no friends; she is
taunted at every turn; and, in an incident that opens the book, she is jeered at by
her classmates when she experiences her first menstrual period in the school
locker room and is unaware of what is happening. One student, furious at Carrie
because she has been banned from the school prom for her part in the locker
room incident, plans revenge by planting a booby trap for Carrie at the prom.
But the plan backfires, as Carrie unleashes her telekinetic powers and causes
mass destruction to the entire town. She finally dies herself.
This could have been an interesting work that probed many different issues
—the effect of religious fundamentalism upon people’s lives; the social
difficulties of high-school life; telekinesis as a metaphor for repressed anger and
anxiety—if King had had the ability to handle any of these elements well. But, at
this point in his career, he did not. The portrait of Margaret White is so broad
and ludicrous a caricature that she becomes preposterous and unbelievable. The
high school setting is also poorly developed, and none of the characters are
anything but hackneyed stereotypes. Structurally, the novel is very clumsy in
narration because of King’s unwise attempt at a documentary style. All sorts of
books and articles and court testimony produced after the events are quoted in an
attempt to create verisimilitude, but they are entirely unconvincing in their
pompous banality and produce a fragmented narration that fails to bring the
characters alive.
Curiously, one of King’s best works overall—and certainly his most telling

and perceptive account of adolescence—is Rage (1977), the first published
Richard Bachman novel. This is in no sense a weird tale, but a gripping and
psychologically acute narrative of a boy, Charlie Decker, who runs amok, kills
several teachers, and holds his high school class hostage for several hours with a
shotgun before finally giving up to the police.4 This simple incident becomes a
forum for the students to voice their personal and social hostilities and
resentments, and especially a means for Decker himself to provide a bitter
account of his past life, in particular his relationship with his parents and other
schoolmates. The entire novel (mercifully short by King’s standards) is told
crisply, and the potentially explosive situation creates a grim tension that is
scarcely relieved even at the end. King’s ability at character portrayal has rarely
been finer.
Susan Brooks was one of those girls who never say anything unless
called upon, the ones that teachers always have to ask to speak up, please.
A very studious, very serious girl. A rather pretty but not terribly bright girl
—the kind who isn’t allowed to give up and take the general or the
commercial courses, because she had a terribly bright older brother or older
sister, and teachers expect comparable things from her. In fine, one of those
girls who are holding the dirty end of the stick with as much good grace and
manners as they can muster. Usually they marry truck drivers and move to
the West Coast, where they have kitchen nooks with Formica counters—
and they write letters to the Folks Back East as seldom as they can get away
with. They make quiet, successful lives for themselves and grow prettier as
the shadow of the bright older brother or sister falls away from them [BB
39].
Why can’t King summon up the energy to write like this all the time? This
single passage points to the most noteworthy feature of this novel—its morally
challenging tone and, in contrast to the work written under his own name, its
utter disregard for conventional middle-class pieties. If he had written more
works of this kind, then there might be some small justification for giving him
some standing as a social commentator. Surely, in spite of the raucous pleas of
his supporters, he could never gain such standing on his work overall.
Christine (1983) is one of King’s abler treatments of adolescence—or, I
should say, part of it is. The first third of the novel is narrated in the first person
by Dennis Quilter, a senior in high school and the best friend of Arnie
Cunningham, whose love affair with a 1958 Plymouth Fury leads to his
downfall. This section is full of pungent and tellingly accurate reflections on
high school life—sports, teenage love, problems with parents—and, moreover, is
for once narrated wholly without the sugary sentiment and moral

commonplaceness so uniform in King’s work. Perhaps King felt that, under the
persona of another character, he could shrug off his usual tired conventionality.
But in the second part of the novel King’s own voice takes over in a third-person
narrative, bogging down in needless detail and windy verbosity. By this time the
bizarrerie of an animate automobile has already been well established, but King
cannot resist stringing out every incident to interminable length. When Quilter
resumes his narrative in the final third of the novel, the damage has already been
done and the novel never recovers. Still, the first third of Christine may embody
some of King’s most vibrant writing outside of his Bachman books.
It (1986), another novel largely about adolescence, cannot be regarded as
even a modest success; indeed, it may be one of the most spectacular fiascos in
modern literature. King, in the first place, should be ashamed of stealing the title
from a magnificent novelette by Theodore Sturgeon, just as he has ripped off
many particulars of the weird scenario from Ray Bradbury.5 This grotesquely
bloated novel (1150 pages long) is so crippled by inessential and superficial
character description that the actual horrific scenario has no chance to develop.
We encounter seven children, six boys and one girl, in the Maine town of Derry
in 1958. Aside from having to escape frequent pummelings from the school
bully, Henry Bowers, they each find themselves facing some loathsome entity
they can only label “It.” After about 700 pages pass, we finally learn that this
entity is a manitou or shapeshifter (I 674), which has the unique capacity of
presenting itself in the form most terrifying to its observer. Years pass. The
children grow up to become entirely undistinguished adults (one of whom, Bill
Denbrough, is another in a long line of Stephen King standins, being a
bestselling horror writer). It transpires that It reawakens in Derry every 27 years
or so to murder children or, indeed, anyone who has the misfortune to cross its
path. The children had taken a vow to return to Derry if It ever showed its face
again. So sure enough they come marching back from all across the country to
battle the evil thing and, naturally, conquer it. This entire scenario allows King
to go on at appalling length about both the youthful and the adult lives of his
utterly unremarkable characters. In the actual manifestation of the manitou,
however, he faces the same difficulty that Peter Straub encountered in Ghost
Story (1979), from which the central weird phenomenon was surely derived: the
manitou is a virtually eternal entity (see I 763), so how is one to dispatch it? But
in some utterly inexplicable fashion our courageous band manages to do so. This
novel indicates, more than any other of King’s works, how fond he has grown of
his own voice: it must be comforting to have the colossal arrogance to fancy that
readers will be willing to put up with more than a thousand pages of windy
maundering about characters as mundane as these. King himself has, through

one of his characters, delivered an apt verdict on the novel: “But if this is a story,
it’s not one of those classic screams by Lovecraft or Bradbury or Poe” (I 146).
For once he has understated the issue.

APOCALYPSE
Stephen King is worried about things to come. He sees all sorts of dreadful
things occurring in the rather near future, from nuclear holocaust to thought-
control, and his novels and tales return obsessively to these scenarios. In many
cases the government is to blame for these horrors in the offing, and this idea
also fills King with concern to the point of paranoia.
Some of King’s short stories anticipate his novels in the treatment of these
themes. “Night Surf” (1974; NS) might be thought of as a kind of synopsis of
The Stand, telling of a flu that has ravaged mankind, leaving a handful of youths
to lead an aimless, violent existence. This bitter and poignant tale, technically a
science fiction story, is narrated effectively in a series of impressionistic
vignettes. “The Mist” (1980; SC) is virtually a short novel, but not nearly as
effective as “Night Surf.” A strange cloud of mist comes over a small New
England town. It is apparently produced by some nuclear power plant, and for
some utterly mysterious reason it affects only insects, making them become huge
and threatening. This grotesquely implausible scenario (no doubt derived from
some comic book King read in his youth) is further weakened by his focusing
not on the weird phenomenon, which is left wholly unaccounted for, but on the
emotions of the individuals affected by it. King directs his attention to a group of
people caught in a supermarket and their efforts to come to terms with the mist
and the giant bugs and tentacles that menace them. But his characterization is, as
always, crude and melodramatic. Rod Serling wrote a far more compelling tale
on a roughly analogous premise (and in much shorter compass) in his gripping
tale “The Shelter.”
The Stand is the first of King’s apocalyptic novels. It was first published in
1978. In 1990, at the height of his marketability, the cuts made in the first
version—amounting to some 400 pages—were restored and a “complete and
uncut version” was published. King, in his 1990 preface to the novel, remarked
with a sobriety that borders upon deadpan humor: “After all, many critics …
regarded it bloated and overlong to begin with” (St x). I have had neither the
energy nor the inclination to make a collation between the two versions, so I
shall have to accept King’s word that the uncut edition “is not a brand-new,
entirely different version… You will not discover old characters behaving in
new ways, nor will the course of the tale branch off at some point from the old
narrative” (St ix); random references to George Bush and AIDS suggest that a
token amount of updating has been done. What we have, then, is a staggering,

1154-page novel in which every incident is elaborated at endless length,
characters’ past and present actions related in mind-numbing detail, and the pace
of the action so lumbering that one wonders where the novel is going at all. King
simply does not have the intensity of vision to carry a work of even a quarter of
this size. He himself has again unintentionally written the epitaph to this novel
when a character remarks: “‘It was a quest with no object in view at the end of
it’” (St 417).
A “superflu” has killed off nearly the entire population not merely of the
United States but of the world. It was caused by an “accident” (St 110) when the
U.S. government was experimenting with germ warfare. Random individuals
prove immune to the disease, and The Stand narrates their efforts to reconstruct
civilization after the decimation of the rest of the human race.
There are a number of oddities here. Let us consider the political
implications. King’s characters all seem fired with the notion that the
foundations of American government must be restored. They gather together in
Nebraska (no doubt because it is the center of the country) and immediately
reratify the U.S. constitution and the Bill of Rights—this in spite of the fact that
it is the government’s actions that caused the destruction of the world in the first
place. At one point there is a debate as to what to do about certain individuals
who have sabotaged the group. There is a lot of talk about summary execution,
but then one character intercedes: “‘We was Americans once!’ Whitney cried at
last. ‘This ain’t how Americans act. I wasn’t so much, I’ll tell you that, nothin
but a cook, but I know this ain’t how Americans act, listening to some murderin
freak in cowboy boots—’” (St 1081). King’s reading of American history must
be very selective, since vigilante justice has thrived during the length and
breadth of this country’s existence. His supporters like to speak of the “epic”
dimensions of The Stand, yet in reality it is curiously parochial in outlook: recall
that the entire world has been killed off, but there is no hint of what is going on
outside the borders of the United States. It is in this regard that the work suffers
most when compared to such a superb apocalyptic work as M. P. Shiel’s The
Purple Cloud (1901), which in a fifth of the length manages to convey
spectacularly and poignantly the desolation of the entire planet. Even Pat Frank’s
Alas, Babylon (1959) is a more interesting treatment of the same basic theme.
And what would a King book be without a cardboard villain? Randall
Flagg, a superhuman figure who has organized a competing band of people near
Las Vegas and seeks to exterminate the good folks in Nebraska, is described as
“‘the purest evil left in the world’” (St 514). Well, that settles that: all you can do
is kill him and his band. But the final conflict between good and evil takes
enormously long to develop, and the climax, when it finally arrives, proves to be

grotesquely absurd. We have no vast pitched battle between the Nebraskans and
the Nevadans; instead, four individuals are sent as scouts to Las Vegas, and, by
what appears to be a freak accident, an atomic explosion destroys Flagg’s camp.
This would itself be bad enough (I have rarely read of a nuclear warhead
detonated with less fanfare and less psychological preparation than this one), but
King then compounds the blunder by suggesting with apparent seriousness that it
was not the atom bomb but the hand of God (yes, really!) that caused Flagg’s
destruction (St 1084). Where was God when the superflu and its effects were
ravaging the world? On top of which, King concludes the novel by showing
Flagg somehow reemerging, with a threat to cause further havoc. An even more
horrifying threat to my mind is the prospect of a sequel to this novel sometime in
the future. (This pulling of Flagg out of a hat at the end is one of the dubious
additions to the uncut version of The Stand. In the original version he remained
mercifully dead.) Two Richard Bachman novels also deal with a future gone
wrong, The Long Walk (1979) and The Running Man (1982). Of these, the
former is much less substantial, but it still has several points of interest. The
Long Walk is set in the very near future (1989) and speaks of a time when the
national pastime has become a grueling, hundred-mile walk that teenage boys
are forced to undertake without stopping and under strict rules lest they be
summarily executed. In the end the last of the hundred contestants who remains
alive claims the prize, apparently a vast sum of money (BB 169). This scenario
certainly allows King to get in a number of telling jabs at the increasing
dominance of violent sports and of the media in our society. But he seems more
concerned (as in Rage) with the fluctuating emotions of the young competitors
under the pressure of this dire situation. Although many of the individual
characters are rendered crisply, the novel is a little too diffuse and unfocussed to
be truly successful.
Of The Running Man, however, no praise can be too high. It is far and away
King’s best work; on no account should one judge it from the entertaining but
insubstantial film adaptation. Here again we are dealing, a little implausibly,
with a relatively near future, the early twenty-first century, a time when the gap
between rich and poor has become so extreme that the lower classes are forced
to live in vast, filthy slums under the constant threat of disease and violence. The
government and television have united and formed an evil conspiracy to
preserve the power of the wealthy few. They have set up a hugely popular game
show in which an individual is shown on television, thrust into the world, and
must survive undetected for a month to claim an enormous sum of money, while
everyone in the country attempts to track him down and claim an equally
grandiose prize for his capture or death. It is difficult in a summary to convey the

clipped tension of this novel. Ben Richards, needing money to prevent his
daughter from succumbing to disease, is haunted by the prospect of sudden death
from every side and from every individual he meets, learning along the way that
the government is intentionally withholding protection from the deadly air
pollution of the cities in order to kill off its own citizens. But it is Richards’
isolation that is the most frightening aspect of this entire scenario. “Richards
hung up his jacket, slipped off his shoes, and lay down on the bed. He realized
how miserable and unknown and vulnerable he was in the world. The universe
seemed to shriek and clatter and roar around him like a huge and indifferent
jalopy rushing down a hill and toward the lip of a bottomless chasm. His lips
began to tremble, and then he cried a little” (BB 581). And the final
confrontation between Richards and the government agents who ultimately track
him down may be the single most intense and hypnotic episode in all King’s
work. The Running Man is, strictly speaking, a science-fiction novel, but it
certainly has enough horrific overtones to be classified well within the weird
tale.

KING AS MAINSTREAM WRITER
I have already noted that two of the Richard Bachman novels, Rage and
Roadwork, are purely mainstream without any suggestion of the weird. They are
among King’s abler works. Roadwork (1981) is the disturbing story of a man
who, faced with the demolition of both his house and his business by the
extension of a highway, runs quietly amok and seeks to sabotage the highway
rather than relocate. It is a tense and gripping tale, but I am not certain that the
protagonist’s psychological motivations have been satisfactorily clarified: is he
homesick; has his placid middle-class life become intolerable to him; is some
imp of the perverse guiding his actions? One never knows.
Several short stories are also purely mainstream. “The Woman in the
Room,” the final and best tale in Night Shift, is a lightly fictionalized account of
the death of King’s mother from cancer, and is full of a terseness and stinging
wit that King can only dream of now that he has babbled himself out in harmless
verbosity. “The Last Rung of the Ladder” (NS) is a touching story of a boy’s
increasing loss of emotional contact with his sister as he grows to manhood. It is
conceivable that King could have had moderate success as a mainstream writer,
but he chose to make his career in the horror field. And yet, he has been
uncomfortable with the simple label of “horror writer” and has repeatedly tried
to flex his muscles in the realm of mainstream fiction. Different Seasons (1982),
a collection of four long tales, is his most ambitious attempt in this regard.
The first and last of these tales can be dismissed immediately. “Rita
Hayworth and Shawshank Redemption” is a longwinded story about a man,
falsely convicted of murder, who spends 27 years digging a tunnel out of his cell
and escapes to live the remainder of his life in peace, contentment, and wealth in
Mexico. He supplies the handy moral to the story in a letter to an inmate friend:
“Remember that hope is a good thing, Red, maybe the best of things, and no
good thing ever dies” (DS 100). I fear that King’s treatment of this idea is not
sufficiently compelling to justify a tale as long as Lovecraft’s At the Mountains
of Madness. “The Breathing Method” is the mawkish story of an unmarried
woman in the 1930s who gets pregnant, decides to have the baby (King’s
characters don’t like abortion), but dies tragically in a car accident on the way to
the hospital. This tale is dedicated to Peter Straub, and it is a clear homage to
Straub’s Ghost Story in that it involves a club of men who meet to tell odd and
disturbing stories. (A roughly contemporaneous story, “The Man Who Would
Not Shake Hands” [1982; SC], reuses the club setting, although it is a weird tale

of a supernatural curse.) King’s greatest claims to respectability in Different
Seasons are two long, nearly novel-length stories, “Apt Pupil” and “The Body,”
both of which have been filmed (the latter as Stand by Me). Both are quite
noteworthy—they contain some of his best writing and most poignant scenarios
—but both are severely flawed. “Apt Pupil” tells of a teenage boy, Todd
Bowden, who develops a fascination for Nazi concentration camps and then
discovers that the commandant of one such camp, Patin, has escaped detection
and is living in his own southern California town under an assumed name.
Rather than expose the Nazi, Kurt Dussander, Todd forces him to speak
repeatedly of his experiences at the camp. A bizarre symbiotic relationship
develops between the boy and the now aged Nazi. To his parents and to the
townspeople in general it appears that Todd has merely befriended an old man
out of kindness and sympathy, but in fact Todd’s fascination for the horrors of
the camp has made him as much a monster as Dussander.
All this is handled quite well, if a little verbosely. But King errs in the area
of psychological motivation at one critical juncture. Todd, developing a love-
hate relationship with Dussander, wishes to sever his ties to him, by murder if
necessary. He cannot kill him, however, because the latter has told him (falsely)
that he has placed a letter telling of their relationship in a safety deposit box, to
be opened if Dussander were to die. This letter, speaking of Todd’s bland
acceptance of Dussander’s Nazi past, may destroy Todd’s future. In rage and
frustration, Todd takes to killing derelicts all over town. Curiously, Dussander
does the same, luring them into his house, dispatching them, and burying them in
his cellar. Why does Dussander do this? What psychological purpose is served
by this procedure? King compounds this anomaly by an implausible use of
coincidence. A Jewish man who had been at Patin happens to wind up in the
same hospital room as Dussander, who is recovering from a heart attack—this in
spite of the fact that the town is described as “‘a quiet little suburb’” (DS 282).
The Jew eventually recognizes Dussander and exposes him, leading to Todd’s
downfall as well. These failings mar an otherwise powerful and grim tale, one
that might nevertheless stand as one of King’s relative triumphs.
The problems with “The Body”—which otherwise contains some of King’s
freshest and most vibrant writing and imagery—relate not to psychological
motivation but to overall conception. This could have been an utterly delightful
novelette about four 12-year-old boys who undergo a rite of passage from
boyhood to incipient manhood when they find the body of a boy who has died
mysteriously in their town. But King spoils his delicate and empathic portrayal
of adolescence by becoming pretentious and inserting into the narrative two
wholly fatuous stories written later by one of the boys, Gordon Lachance. King

does this because his true but misguided purpose in this story is to depict the
Evolution of a Writer. Indeed, since it becomes obvious that Lachance is one
more standin for King (“I’ve since written seven books about people who can do
such exotic things as read minds and precognit [sic] the future” [DS 370]), what
“The Body” is really about is the Evolution of Stephen King the Writer. King
lets us know the real import of the story in a passage highlighted with self-
important italics: “The only reason anyone writes stories is so they can
understand the past and get ready for some future mortality; that’s why all the
verbs in stories have -ed endings … even the ones that sell millions of
paperbacks. The only two useful artforms are religion and stories” (DS 411).
You tell ’em, Steve.
If Different Seasons is only a middling success, then some more recent
nonsupernatural or mainstream works by King reveal a surprising competence
that may yet redeem him. He has by no means abandoned supernaturalism, but
his last several works clearly point to a change of focus or emphasis away from
comic-book scenarios and toward more serious issues dealing with individuals’
relations with themselves, with others, and with society.

AUTHORSHIP
It should by now be obvious that King has become obsessed with his own
role as author and the advantages and drawbacks of being a bestselling genre
writer. As early as Ben Mears in ’Salem’s Lot, he has populated his novels and
tales with transparently autobiographical figures. Both Bill Denbrough in It and
Roberta Anderson in The Tommyknockers write popular bestsellers (horror
novels and westerns, respectively), and both betray a violent resentment against
the mainstream community that refuses to take them seriously. “The Body” is, as
we have seen, one long meditation on King’s own literary development. Misery
(1987) and The Dark Half (1989) complete this pattern; in both novels King, and
King alone, is the subject.
Misery must, I suppose, be accorded one of King’s modest triumphs, if only
because of its brevity. This is a wholly nonsupernatural conte cruel about Paul
Sheldon, a bestselling writer of romance novels featuring Misery Chastain as
their heroine, whose car slides off the road in a remote area of Colorado and who
is rescued by Annie Wilkes, a crazed ex-nurse who is Sheldon’s “number-one
fan” (M 6). Wilkes keeps Sheldon prisoner, and—when she learns that Sheldon
has killed Misery off in his last novel—forces him to write another novel
bringing her back to life. Misery is wholly focused upon Sheldon’s attempts to
escape from Wilkes’s clutches.
Considered abstractly as a novel, Misery isn’t bad, although it is not as
good as King thinks it is. He seems to fancy that he has presented a powerful
psychological portrait of an insane serial killer (for Wilkes has murdered dozens
of people both before and during her career as a nurse), but the extreme hostility
of the portrayal robs it of subtlety and acuteness: she is, in the end, just another
in King’s long line of utterly evil villains. There is no attempt to probe her
mental state from within, as there is in Ramsey Campbell’s The Face That Must
Die (1979) or John Fowles’s The Collector (1963), a clear model for King’s
work and one to which he alludes (M 151). Misery is really nothing more than an
adventure story in which we are expected to sympathize entirely with Sheldon
and to loathe and despise Wilkes and wish for her death.
The novel is much more interesting in what it tells us about Stephen King.
From this perspective, it comes across as a hostile snarl against his own legions
of readers and against critics who treat him condescendingly, as well as a sort of
pitiable wish-fulfillment fantasy in which King fancies himself an unrecognized
literary master. Sheldon, we are told, “wrote novels of two kinds, good ones and

bestsellers” (M 6); unfortunately, no one reads the good novels and even critics
fail to accord them more than marginal notice (See M 41). The new novel
Sheldon has written—not a Misery novel—is one that he thinks has a chance of
winning the National Book Award! (M 14). Wilkes forces him to burn it because
it contains too many obscenities.
As for Sheldon’s hack work, Sheldon/King cannot bring himself to
condemn it entirely. Writing the Misery novels may have been “whoredom” (M
66), but they at least have the power to keep the reader turning those pages, more
so than his “real” work (M 224). Of the novel Wilkes forces him to write,
Sheldon thinks, “The story was hot, but the characters as stereotyped and
predictable as ever” (M 137); but, by gum, it “was still a goddam good yarn” (M
237). In a last-ditch attempt to escape Wilkes, Sheldon pretends to burn the
completed manuscript of the new Misery novel, but he has in fact hidden the
actual manuscript away and burns mere blank sheets. He cannot bring himself to
destroy his hack work, even if it may cost him his life.
All this is rather sad. Wilkes’s compelling Sheldon to write a Misery novel
is a transparent metaphor for King’s readers clamoring for a new horror
blockbuster every year. King feels fenced in, feels like a whore, feels unable to
devote his energies to his “real” work (which the critics don’t like anyway). He
comes extremely close to biting the hand that feeds him: does he imagine that all
his readers are Annie Wilkeses? At one point Sheldon thinks disdainfully, “She
was the embodiment of that Victorian archetype, Constant Reader” (M 57)—but
this is exactly the term that King would use ingratiatingly in the 1990 preface to
The Stand! (St xii). The afterword to Different Seasons, with its weirdly
defensive tone and manifest hostility toward his lukewarm critics, is also worth
reading in conjunction with Misery. What is finally amusing is that King is really
condemning his own work by attacking Wilkes’s inept fondness for Sheldon’s:
how can his work be any good if it is adored by the likes of her?
If, in my analysis of Misery, I have failed to appreciate the distinction
between author (King) and persona (Sheldon), it is because there does not seem
to be any. Sheldon’s Misery novel bears uncanny resemblances to King’s work,
with its melodramatic one-sentence paragraphs, frequent italicized passages
recording the thoughts of his narrators, ponderous repetition of significant
phrases, and other crude devices of popular bestsellerdom found throughout
King’s own novels. King may whine about being typecast as a genre writer, but
he is whining all the way to the bank. And on the basis of his actual mainstream
work, there does not seem to be much of a case for his being a “real” writer.
The Dark Half (1989), while definitely supernatural, is a sort of inversion of
both Misery and of King’s own life, but it is as self-obsessed as its predecessor.

Here we are to imagine that George Stark, the pseudonym of Thad Beaumont,
has somehow come to life after Beaumont has ceremonially “buried” him by
vowing to write no more bestselling crime novels under the Stark name and to
resume mainstream writing under his own name. An author’s note at the
beginning records King’s debt to the “late” Richard Bachman, and one can see
the novel as a neat reversal of the facts of King’s own life: it was the genre
novels under King’s own name that were the bestsellers, while the more
mainstream work of Bachman was relatively unsuccessful. Indeed, at the outset
The Dark Half is a lightly fictionalized account of how King was finally
compelled to acknowledge the Bachman pseudonym.
And yet, as a novel, The Dark Half is not entirely unsuccessful. The central
supernatural premise—a pseudonym coming to life—is, of course, entirely
preposterous and never adequately explained. King tries various methods—a
fleeting reference to Poe’s “William Wilson” (DH 124); a suggestion that
Beaumont, as a boy, had a peculiar operation in which an “eye, … part of a
nostril, three fingernails, and two teeth” (DH 9) were removed from his brain,
these being the remains of the twin whom Beaumont had consumed or absorbed
in the womb, but none of them work and the whole idea sticks in one’s craw like
a piece of meat. And yet, if one simply grants the premise, the working out of
the novel is rather entertaining. Stark viciously kills everyone involved with the
revelation of the pseudonym. Then he tries to compel Beaumont to revive him
by writing a new Stark novel, for he is “losing cohesion” (DH 266) and literally
falling apart because Beaumont is not using the pseudonym. Only toward the
end does The Dark Half become anything other than a ridiculous but amusing
adventure story, as King finally states openly the psychological relationship
between Beaumont and Stark:
Hadn’t there always been a part of him [Beaumont] in love with
George Stark’s simple, violent nature? Hadn’t part of him always admired
George, a man who didn’t stumble over things or bump into things, a man
who never looked weak or silly, a man who would never have to fear the
demons locked away in the liquor cabinet? A man with no wife or children
to consider, with no loves to bind him or slow him down? A man who had
never waded through a shitty student essay or agonized over a Budget
Committee meeting? A man who had a sharp, straight answer to all of life’s
more difficult questions? [DH 328].
The conclusion, in which King borrows the idea of birds as psychopomps
from Lovecraft’s “The Dunwich Horror,” is surprisingly powerful. The Dark
Half may be considered King’s answer to the growing number and popularity of
serial killer novels. It is as if he wished to show how this nonsupernatural form

could be melded into the supernatural horror novel. If he had only worked out
the supernatural premise of The Dark Half more convincingly, he would have
produced a very able and unique amalgam.

NONSUPERNATURALISM
Nonsupernatural horror has been an element of King’s work from the
beginning of his career. A number of short stories in Night Shift and Skeleton
Crew are really nothing more than contes cruels, many of them undistinguished
and too reliant on trick endings. “The Ledge” (1976; NS) is the suspenseful tale
of a wealthy man who dares another man to walk all the way around the narrow
ledge of his penthouse apartment. Less successful are “I Know What You Need”
(1976; NS), a maudlin story about a love triangle that leads to murder;
“Strawberry Spring” (1975; NS), about some gruesome murders at a small
college; and “The Man Who Loved Flowers” (1977; NS), a crude and superficial
portrayal of a man who becomes a mass murderer from an inability to accept the
death of his lover. Of King’s later nonsupernatural tales, “Nona” (1978; SC) is a
windy account of a homicidal maniac and “Survivor Type” (1982; SC) is a
rather nasty story in which a man, trapped on a desert island with no food, eats
parts of his own body to remain alive. Four of King’s novels are
nonsupernatural: Cujo (1981), Misery (1987), Gerald’s Game (1992), and
Dolores Claiborne (1993). Misery has already been examined, and it is time to
give consideration to the other three. The last two are among his most
provocative and successful works.
Cujo is, however, close to the nadir of King’s output. It was greeted with
much ridicule by the horror community because it was believed, correctly, to
signal the complete exhaustion of King’s imagination, coming so soon after
Firestarter, his self-plagiarism of Carrie. Cujo is about a huge Saint Bernard
who gets bitten by a bat, develops rabies, and rampages through the community
of Castle Rock, Maine. This does not sound like a very prepossessing premise
for a novel, and it isn’t. Cujo is wholly nonsupernatural (although with some
attempted shenanigans that I shall examine presently) and is in fact a long-
drawn-out soap opera about various people in the town whose paths the dog
crosses: Joe Camber, owner of the dog, a beer-swilling mechanic who mistreats
his wife Charity; Gary Pervier, his lush of a friend; and Vic Trenton, an
advertising executive whose wife Donna and son Tod have the misfortune to be
terrorized by the dog in their car in a remote part of town. King has, however,
not sufficiently vivified these white-trash characters to make any reader care
about their fate.
The problem with this novel is that the horrific element—a rabid dog
running amok—has absolutely no broader meaning or symbolism. King tries to

fill this void by dwelling at interminable length, and in his usual stereotypical
and sentimental fashion, on the personal problems of his characters—problems
that have nothing to do with the central situation. Vic’s advertising agency is in
serious trouble; Vic’s wife is cheating on him; Joe Camber doesn’t want to let
his wife and son visit his wife’s sister; Gary Pervier is embittered because one of
his testicles was blown off during World War II. King, I imagine, fancies all this
to be the stuff of life, but what of it? What connection does any of it have to the
dog?
As if realizing his poverty of conception in Cujo, King tries to infuse a
quasi-supernatural element into it, but the result is ineptitude and confusion. Tod
is terrified of a monster that may lurk in his bedroom closet. His parents dismiss
the idea, but King frequently suggests that there may be some linkage between it
and Cujo. At the end of the novel, however, this thread is simply dropped, as if
King had forgotten about it. Similarly, Vic dreams that his wife and child are
being attacked by some monstrous entity, but again it is never clarified whether
he is, as a result, somehow clairvoyant. Finally, Donna, trapped in her car, tries
to think of the situation rationally: “She did not believe in monsters from closets;
she believed in things she could see and touch. There was nothing supernatural
about the slobbering wreck of a Saint Bernard sitting in the shade of a barn; he
was merely a sick animal that had been bitten by a rabid fox or skunk or
something” (Cu 203). Shortly thereafter, however, she reverses herself: “In that
instant she knew—she did not feel or just think—she knew that the dog was
something more than just a dog” (Cu 207). But this is mere trickery, for in fact
the dog is simply a dog. The plight in which Donna finds herself is somewhat
analogous to those in the Bachman novels, which all focus upon the conflicting
emotions of an individual in a critical and life-threatening situation. But Donna’s
reflections are all hackneyed and stereotyped, and cannot match the intensity of
Charlie Decker’s in Rage or Ben Richards’ in The Running Man.
Of Gerald’s Game and Dolores Claiborne, the latter is virtually a
mainstream work, with scarcely any horror element in it at all. Both are
surprisingly creditable performances. Gerald’s Game was, like Needful Things,
not well received even among King’s own supporters, and yet it is far superior to
much of the rest of his output. One reviewer, sympathetic to King, called it
“something of a Bachman book,”6 and the tone of the remark suggests
disapproval or even a sort of disdain. The designation is exactly on target,
however, for like the best of the Bachman books this novel chooses as its focal
point a single, highly anomalous, and tension-filled moment and, by a series of
flashbacks, seeks to explain how things have come to such a pass.
It is possible that Gerald’s Game was disliked because of its very stark

premise: a woman whose husband was fond of sex games finds herself
handcuffed to a bed in a remote cabin in Maine after her husband has died of a
heart attack. The entire novel is concerned with her attempts to escape and her
harried reflections on how she has arrived—both literally and figuratively—at
this state. Jessie Burlingame spends two-thirds of the novel wearing nothing but
bikini briefs and handcuffed to the bed. Her husband—whom she kicked because
she was tired of the “game,” inducing his heart attack—lies on the floor and later
becomes food for a starving stray dog. In spite of this outrageous premise, the
novel is not at all gratuitous in its violence or cheaply titillating in its sexual
scenario. King’s writing here is crisp, deft, and suspenseful. A ten-page set piece
in which Jessie attempts to reach for a glass of water, finally succeeding after
she has given up the cause as hopeless, is as vivid a passage as any in his entire
work.
But there is much more to Gerald’s Game than merely witnessing a woman
escape from an appalling and life-threatening situation (she finally does escape
by cutting her wrists and using the blood as a lubricant to wriggle out of the
handcuffs). Since Jessie has caused her husband’s death by kicking him after he
refused to release her from the handcuffs, she understandably feels a certain
amount of guilt (“I never meant to kill him” [GG 30]), even wondering whether
she deserves her fate. Some have criticized King’s (and Jessie’s) failure to give
any account of her 17-year marriage to Gerald, but this silence is deliberate, for
it is clear that the marriage was emotionally empty and unfulfilling on both
sides. And Jessie finally comes to realize that her husband’s need to play
increasingly harsher bondage games with her (they had progressed from scarves
to ropes to handcuffs) merely to perform sexually is much more a reflection on
his inadequacies than hers.
As Jessie struggles to escape, she ponders on the course of her life. Some
harrowing incident involving her father occurred to her as a ten-year-old child
during a total eclipse of the sun in the summer of 1963, and she racks her brain
to recall it. Finally the incident is revealed in a long flashback: her father
molested her by masturbating while holding her on his lap. This entire lengthy
tableau is told with the utmost delicacy and emotive power, and it inevitably
leads Jessie to wonder: “How many of the choices she had made since that day
had been directly or indirectly influenced by what had happened during the final
minute or so she had spent on her Daddy’s lap…? And was her current situation
a result of what had happened during the eclipse?” (GG 179). There are no clear-
cut answers to these questions, but King has supplied enough background for
readers to come to their own conclusions.
The novel unfortunately suffers a letdown at the end. During and after her

escape, Jessie thinks she sees some shadowy figure (Death?) staring at her from
a dark corner of the room. The reader is naturally inclined to think this a mere
delusion, but King dwells on the episode in such a way as to suggest the actual—
and grotesquely implausible—incursion of the supernatural. This would be bad
enough, but then we are asked to believe that this figure was a real individual, a
man who committed a series of horrible sex murders. The entire latter third of
the novel deals with this matter, and concludes with Jessie writing an
interminable letter to an old roommate telling of her pursuit of the facts of the
case. This long digression seriously disfigures the unity of the novel, taking
interest away from Jessie’s plight and forcing the reader to dwell at needless
length upon the hideous practices of the crazed serial killer. In spite of this
blunder, Gerald’s Game ranks close to the pinnacle of King’s achievement. And
it may be a welcome sign that he is no longer slavishly paying lip service to
reader expectations and is beginning to write about tough, emotionally sensitive
issues uncompromisingly and unsentimentally.
Dolores Claiborne exhibits these same features somewhat less strikingly.
This is a very curious novel, at least formally. Written without chapter divisions,
it is a 300-page monologue by an ill-educated 63-year-old cleaning woman,
Dolores Claiborne St. George, who is giving her statement to the police in an
attempt to clear herself from accusations that she murdered a wealthy woman,
Vera Donovan, for whom she worked for decades, and who has conveniently left
her millions of dollars in her will. In the process she confesses to the decades-old
murder of her husband, Joe St. George, but presents a convincing case that she
did not murder Vera.
The novel is not, however, primarily a murder mystery, but rather a
character study. Dolores admits at the outset that “I’m just an old woman with a
foul temper and a fouler mouth, but that’s what happens, more often than not,
when you’ve had a foul life” (DC 5), and her account certainly verifies this
utterance. She married a slothful, beer-guzzling wretch; she has worked herself
to exhaustion taking care of the ageing and increasingly disoriented Vera; and, to
top it off, she killed her husband (during the same eclipse of 1963 that was the
focal point of Gerald’s Game) because he started sexually molesting his
daughter Selena. Dolores Claiborne is a convincing picture of lower-class life—
full of ignorance, coarseness, and filth—which is perfectly captured by
Dolores’s own ignorant, coarse, and filthy monologue. But King extends
sympathy both to her and the upper-class Vera, who, as we learn at the end, also
killed her husband many years ago, thereby establishing a bond that overcomes
class distinctions. I could have done without the coy and meaningless references
to Gerald’s Game (during the eclipse Dolores has visions of a little girl who is

clearly no other than ten-year-old Jessie) and an implausible happy ending
whereby Dolores is reconciled to her daughter and son. Otherwise, though,
Dolores Claiborne is another strong performance, and it is certainly not the sort
of novel one would have expected a writer like King to have produced.
It is, of course, more than the eclipse that unites Gerald’s Game and
Dolores Claiborne: it is the sensitive portrayal of women who, in their very
different ways, have been victimized by men but who struggle to establish their
identities as strong, competent individuals capable of triumphing over the most
daunting obstacles. King is perhaps reacting to frequent criticisms of his women
characters, who are either saintly or unimitigatedly evil. And, aside from a few
conventional diatribes of the “all men are beasts” variety, he has succeeded in
depicting well-rounded, courageous women who are no longer defined by the
men around them—their fathers, their husbands, their sons.
For me, however, the prime virtue of Gerald’s Game and Dolores
Claiborne is in their possibly revealing a new Stephen King. Is it conceivable
that King, now assured of bestseller status, is belatedly achieving an
independence of vision? Is he abandoning horror entirely and tackling difficult
personal and social issues without catering to the sentimental expectations of his
audience? Has perennial bestsellerdom paradoxically inculcated a sort of “art for
art’s sake” attitude in him, and is this (rather than the undeniable mediocrity of
his more recent horror work) the true cause of his somewhat decreasing sales? It
is too early to answer these questions, but one would like to think that there is
still hope for an author who has been long on popularity but short on literary
substance.

CONCLUSION
I have focused in this chapter on relatively basic, even mundane aspects of
King’s work—in particular, the plausibility of his supernatural conceptions—
because there does not seem to me much else to study. King himself has
admitted that he has nothing to offer as a prose stylist (“the literary equivalent of
a Big Mac and a large fries from McDonald’s” [DS 524]), and this makes one
doubly perplexed one as to his precise motivations for generating such
staggering excursions into logorrhea as in The Stand, It, and Four Past Midnight.
His resolutely pedestrian style, full of colloquialisms, profanities, and a
superficial attempt to imitate the thoughts and speech of average Joes, becomes
unutterably wearying after prolonged exposure: how many burgers and fries,
after all, can one eat? This is why such works as The Talisman (1984), written in
collaboration with Peter Straub, and The Eyes of the Dragon (1987) are such
colossal failures: in trying to capture the atmosphere of a fairy tale, these novels
are so handicapped by King’s abrasively modern style that they become totally
unconvincing. They sound like a Tolkien story narrated by a sportscaster.
Recently, as if perceiving the absurdity of vaunting King purely on the
basis of his supernatural conceptions, some of his supporters have attempted to
make a case for some kind of social significance in his work. Tony Magistrale
appears to be the leading flag-waver of this campaign,7 the idea being that King
has all sorts of insights into the lives of ordinary Americans. I cannot see much
in this argument. Can one really believe that King’s comic book plots, TV movie
dialogue, and soap opera sentimentality have any value as social commentary?
Consider this bit of wisdom from “Apt Pupil”: “More and more it seemed to Ed
that there was a vicious downside of American life, a greased skid of
opportunism, cut corners, easy drugs, easy sex, a morality that grew cloudier
each year” (DS 267). One would have to have been comatose for the last three
decades to come up with an observation less illuminating than this.
It is also of interest that King’s unswervingly middle-class vision has
nothing good to say about either the lower or the upper class. Nearly all of
King’s lower-class characters—Watson, the furnace tender in The Shining, Gary
Pervier in Cujo, Roland LeBay in Christine, Joe St. George of Dolores
Claiborne, to name only a few—are portrayed with a scornful satire bordering
upon caricature. They are ignorant, uncouth, racist, and irrationally violent.
Randall Flagg, the cosmic villain in The Stand, is an apotheosis of lower-class
savagery, as are Henry Bowers, whom the entity in It possesses to do its dirty

work, and George Stark, the vicious murderer in The Dark Half.
As for the upper class, consider this description of Regina Cunningham in
Christine: “Regina … was forty-five and handsome in a rather cold, semi-
aristocratic way—that is, she managed to look aristocratic even when she was
wearing bluejeans, which was most of the time” (Ch 18). This is doubly
interesting in that Regina is not an actual aristocrat but merely a college
professor: King is as suspicious of the intellectual aristocracy as he is of the
actual aristocracy (many of his sympathetic characters are indeed teachers, but
almost always at the high-school level). A number of King’s villains are also of
the upper class or ape upper-class mannerisms: Richard Straker in ’Salem’s Lot
inspires immediate suspicion and hostility by the hauteur and courtliness of his
speech and actions among the down-home farmers of the town. Thinner purports
to be a scathing satire on the hoity-toity airs of upper-middle-class yuppies in
Connecticut, but the treatment is too coarse and obvious to be effective.
What becomes tiresome in King’s work is not merely the mechanical
replication of a standardized nuclear family in novel after novel (husband, wife,
cute children) but the clear implication that this bourgeois lifestyle is self-
evidently the optimum state for human beings. In many of his works the weird
phenomena appear to have as their primary goal the destruction of this
wholesome familial unit, and this is what King sees (and what he expects his
readers to see) as genuinely horrifying, not the spectacular defiance of natural
law embodied by the mere existence of the supernatural. It is not enough to say
that King ignores the powerful metaphysical implications of his weird
conceptions; it is that he uses the supernatural as a makeshift prop for dwelling
upon the conventionalized emotions of his uninspiring characters. It is no
wonder that King has put so little thought into the logic of his supernatural
scenarios: they are not in fact the focus of his work at all. Strange as it may
sound, King is not primarily a supernaturalist but a sort of male Harlequin
romance writer.
It may be well to say a word about the proliferation of Stephen King
“criticism” in recent years. King’s purported scholars appear to divide generally
into three groups: first, the mere sycophants who hope to gain fame and fortune
by riding on King’s coattails; second, those who, through an ignorance either of
weird fiction or of mainstream fiction, vastly inflate King’s status and are
unaware of the degree to which his weird conceptions are stale, flawed, and
unimaginative and his work as a whole is flat, superficial, sentimental, and
uninsightful; and third, those so dazzled by King’s fame and reputation that they
fancy there must be something to the fellow (the hoary and fallacious argument
“Millions of readers can’t be wrong!”) or are simply afraid to speak out against

him. It would be invidious to name names; but when one scholar blithely
compares King to Hawthorne and Faulkner and another ranks him with
Dostoevsky without the faintest realization of the outrage to critical standards
they are effecting, they have surely destroyed whatever credibility they may
have had as analysts. These critics have fallen into a trap many of their academic
counterparts have stumbled into: the failure or inability to cast evaluative
judgments. The thinking is that because King writes about the same subjects as
Hawthorne, Faulkner, and Dostoevsky, he has some significant relationship to
them. No attempt is made to ascertain whether King’s treatment of these subjects
is anything but trite, jejune, and undistinctive. One might as well say that Judith
Krantz and Tolstoy are significantly related because they both write about love
and death. It is, indeed, a fact that King has more in common with Krantz,
Danielle Steel, Sidney Sheldon, and other purveyors to popular sentiment than
he does with Poe, Lovecraft, and Blackwood, let alone Hawthorne and Faulkner.
My general verdict on King is that his weird conceptions are unoriginal and
poorly conceived, his style plebeian and verbose, his morality conventional and
unadventurous, and his characterization hackneyed and sentimental. Only a few
of his books—Different Seasons, Christine, Misery, and Needful Things—are
even partial successes; his two Bachman novels, Rage and The Running Man,
along with Gerald’s Game and Dolores Claiborne, may actually be his greatest
achievements, in spite or because of their relative unpopularity. Juxtaposed to
these are some of the most stupendous failures in modern weird fiction—Carrie,
’Salem’s Lot, Cujo, Thinner, It, The Tommyknockers, The Stand, Four Past
Midnight—failures that would have caused any other writer to have been
laughed out of the field.
King’s domination of the bestseller lists over the last two decades has been
an unmitigated disaster for the weird tale. By being the chief exemplar of the
“banalization” of horror, he has caused an inferior strain of weird fiction
(commonplace, flabby, sentimental work full of “human interest” but entirely
lacking in originality of conception) to gain popular esteem. As a result,
genuinely artistic and dynamic work—the work of Robert Aickman, Ramsey
Campbell, T. E. D. Klein, and Thomas Ligotti—has been relegated to
comparative obscurity, while a whole phalanx of King imitators and wannabes
have attempted to churn out their own bulging blockbusters of middle-class folks
dauntlessly fighting to save their wholesome families and their suburban lifestyle
from evil monsters from the other side of the tracks.
But perhaps the tide is finally turning. King is no longer regarded by the
horror community with that mixture of envy and awe which he receives in his
earlier years, and several of his recent failures have met with uniform derision

both from the horror field and from mainstream reviewers. No doubt King will
continue to appear regularly on the bestseller lists for some time to come. But
one can confidently look to the day when he—like Marie Corelli, Robert W.
Chambers, and other bestselling authors of a prior day—is relegated to his
proper position as an insignificant footnote in literary history.
T. E. D. KLEIN: URBAN HORROR

THEORY AND PRACTICE
The lamentably small body of weird fiction by T. E. D. Klein (b. 1947) is
among the most distinguished in the field of the weird. Klein’s corpus comprises
less than a score of short stories and novelettes and one long novel, The
Ceremonies (1984), aside from stray reviews, essays, and poetry. Four long tales
were gathered in Dark Gods (1985), which ranks with Campbell’s Demons by
Daylight as one of the premier weird collections since the heyday of Lovecraft
and Blackwood. Klein has been working for years on a second novel, but it does
not appear close to completion. He also edited Twilight Zone magazine from its
inception in 1981 to 1985, and in that period it was the flagship journal of the
field.
Klein is a master of horrific technique: he knows just what hints,
suggestions, and allusions can allow the intelligent reader to sense the intrusion
of the supernatural. In his best work he so modulates the pace of a tale that it
grows cumulatively to a spectacular climax, but never with the least violence of
diction and with scarcely any visible horror at all. But perhaps his greatest feat is
a seamless blending of the mundane realism so prevalent in weird writing today
(Dziemianowicz’s “banalization” of horror) with the cosmic horror of Machen,
Blackwood, and Lovecraft. His eye for the telling detail can humanize his
characters and render them immediately recognizable. He can do in a paragraph
or sentence what Stephen King cannot do in any number of his plodding pages.
Of the central character of “Children of the Kingdom” (1980) it is said that
“there still hung about him a certain air of comedy, as if it was his doom to
provide the material for other people’s anecdotes” (DG 5). But while paying
meticulous attention to details of character and setting, he does not fail to paint a
broader mood picture that suggests the grim and pitiable lot of human beings in a
universe ruled by gods or forces that may be either cruelly indifferent or actually
hostile to human life. Dark Gods is a highly appropriate title for Klein’s best
book, for his view of the world is dark, bitter, and pessimistic—almost in spite
of himself.
What is strange about Klein is that in some of his nonfictional work he has
uttered opinions suggesting that he is, or wants to be, an optimist who yearns for
happy endings both in life and in literature. But his innate good sense as a writer
and thinker prevails in his actual fiction, so that it doggedly fails to succumb to
any Pollyanna-like resolutions. Klein has, indeed, acknowledged that he had no
religious upbringing (FF 126). With Lovecraft, he maintains that “religions, all

of them, the occult included, strike me as nonsense—pernicious nonsense, as
often as not,”8 and he goes on to claim that his view of the world is “pretty
bleak”: “I see it, really, as a crusher of dreams—a place where most living things
experience a lot more pain and fear than pleasure, and where most hopes and
ambitions are ultimately disappointed” (FF 133). But on the other side, in
speaking of his editorial preferences for Twilight Zone magazine, he states the
following: “I preferred tales of a milder, more sentimental sort to the mailbags
full of contes cruels, and remain to this day a sucker for happy endings” (RG
27). And elsewhere: “I’m a real sucker for sentimental stuff, stories that leave
me with a lump in my throat” (FF 131). It is as if Klein knows the world is a
pretty awful place, but finds literature appealing precisely when it papers the
awfulness over with homespun sentimentality.
Why, then, does Klein write horror stories? Surely they tend—at least in the
work of Lovecraft, Ramsey Campbell, and other writers whom Klein himself
acknowledges as his models—to paint the universe as a cold, hostile, and
perhaps evil place. But Klein the theorist apparently does not see it that way,
although Klein the fiction writer does. Klein has written two significant essays
on the aesthetics of weird fiction: the first a series of articles for Twilight Zone
published under the collective title “Dr. Van Helsing’s Handy Guide to Ghost
Stories” (1981); the second a booklet charmingly titled Raising Goosebumps for
Fun and Profit (1988), originally written for Writer’s Digest. The latter derives
much of its theoretical apparatus from the former, and the two taken together
form a virtual Poetics of weird fiction—its purpose, appeal, and philosophical
foundations. I am not at the moment concerned with assessing the merits of these
elegant and sensitively written disquisitions, although they are considerable; I
wish rather to emphasize how Klein’s notions on the function of weird literature
stand in antipodal contrast to his actual practice as a weird writer. We have
already noted Klein’s predilections for happy endings in literature. Now consider
the following: “… the ‘intended action’ that Elizabeth Bowen spoke of as
surviving death is, traditionally in ghost stories, an act of revenge, the fulfillment
of some furious dying curse. And in delineating its consequences, the ghost story
is capable of providing still another pleasure—the pleasure of returning to a
moral order” (RG 9). And again: “There’s another sort of comfort the horror tale
provides. Its vision of a world menaced by dark supernatural forces has, within
it, a happier corollary, one that may offer a further clue to the genre’s appeal.
The existence of a supernatural evil presupposes the existence—or at least the
possibility—of an equal force for good” (RG 8).
The first is nothing more than a restating of the “happy ending” idea, but
this time the notion is rendered explicitly philosophical and there is the

suggestion that a representative proportion of weird literature conforms to a
“moral order” wherein evil is defeated by good.9 Unfortunately, Klein’s fiction
is almost never of this sort. The second passage, with its naive and erroneous
metaphysics (there is no reason to imagine a balancing force of good in the
world if there is a force of evil, and several religions and philosophies have
conceived of only the latter), seems to me mere wishful thinking. We have
already seen it in the thought of the Catholic William Peter Blatty, where the
idea is propounded just as ridiculously as here. In any case, Klein, throughout
the Van Helsing articles, is keen on employing I. A. Richards’ distinction
between intellectual and emotional belief in order to get around the awkward
problem of unbelievers writing and reading about entities (ghosts, spirits, and the
like) in which they manifestly do not believe: it is emotional belief that allows us
to entertain the quasi-reality of these entities for the duration of the story, as we
do when watching a play. But now Klein unwittingly applies intellectual belief
to the ideas of the existence of life after death and of the triumph of good versus
evil— ideas that can, on his own principles, only elicit emotional belief. Surely
Klein cannot imagine that Lovecraft, thoroughgoing materialist that he was, is
somehow ascribing actual belief in the various undead creatures with which he
populates his tales.
Klein concludes that the real appeal of the weird tale is “vicarious fear”:
What we’re dealing with, after all, are not real horrors; they are, in
effect, defanged, to be enjoyed in a spirit of play. And the emotion they
inspire is not fear, but a kind of toothless substitute—vicarious fear, if you
will. It’s what Dr. Johnson called “terror without danger … a voluntary
agitation of the mind, that is permitted no longer than it pleases,” and what
Virginia Woolf was alluding to when she remarked upon “the strange
human craving for the pleasure of feeling afraid,” noting that “it is pleasant
to be afraid when we are conscious that we are in no kind of danger” [RG
5].
This is, as Klein’s citations of Samuel Johnson and Virginia Woolf attest,
an old and popular idea—we can always shut the book if we are too frightened!
—but Klein doesn’t seem to realize that it only applies to the innocuous
“Christmas supplement” ghost story that was never meant to probe very deeply
into the nature of the universe or the nature of human life. Of course we are in no
physical “danger” when we read a weird tale. But are its effects so easily
dispelled after we have finished it? And would any serious writer wish his work
to be so “defanged” that it would have no effect upon us after we put the book
aside? Do we not retain in our minds the notion of mankind’s insignificance
after we finish reading a tale by Lovecraft (or by Klein)?

All this signifies Klein’s evidently sincere desire to make weird fiction a
lighthearted amusement, although his own fiction is emphatically nothing of the
sort. He has actually admitted that “If I had my druthers, I suppose I’d be writing
light, humorous fiction with perhaps a touch of weirdness here and there.”10
Once again we see a sort of schizophrenic writer or, at the very least, a writer
torn between what he wants in life and literature and what he is somehow
compelled to do once he actually sits down to write a tale. Klein likes happy
endings in literature, but where are they in his own work? Only a single story
ends with the complete eradication of the horror, and this tale, “Hagendorn’s
House” (1987), is unconvincing precisely because the protagonist’s triumph over
the evil entity menacing him seems forced and contrived. Jeremy Freirs, the
central figure in The Ceremonies, manages to subdue the horror at the end and
get the girl in true sentimental romance fashion, but even he wonders whether
the creature is permanently dispensed with. The Ceremonies is an elaboration of
Klein’s early tale, “The Events at Poroth Farm” (1972). In that tale Jeremy
makes the remarkable assertion that “I remain, despite all that’s happened, an
optimist” (EP 3) (as Klein himself appears to be, or wishes he were) in spite of
the fact that he is clearly being pursued by the supernatural entity that dogged
him at Poroth Farm. Jeremy himself, like Klein, is a student of weird literature,
and one of his comments is very revealing:
Read some Shirley Jackson stories over breakfast, but got so turned off
at her view of humanity that I switched to old Aleister Crowley, who at
least keeps a sunny disposition. For her, people in the country are callous
and vicious, those in the city are callous and vicious, husbands are (of
course) callous and vicious, and children are merely sadistic. The only ones
with feelings are her put-upon middle-aged heroines, with whom she
obviously identifies. I guess if she didn’t write so well the stories wouldn’t
sting so [EP 23].
Who is speaking here, Jeremy or Klein? Perhaps both. What Klein appears
not to realize is the degree to which his own fiction mirrors the dark, dismal
world of Shirley Jackson.
Klein’s notions of a “moral order” supposedly affirmed by weird literature
may be of some relevance in the analysis of one of his most powerful tales,
“Nadelman’s God” (1985). This is the only one of Klein’s stories in which the
religious or philosophical orientation of the protagonist is sketched in detail. As
a young man Nadelman, raised in conventional belief in a benevolent God, finds
that the reality of the world does not tally with such a rosy view: too many
innocent people appear to have suffered harm and injustice. Nadelman then
attempts to find a sort of logic to it all:

By the time he’d reached high school, he’d discovered that, with a
little intellectual effort, he could justify damned near anything—and it
certainly helped stave off despair. Innocent people, it turned out, were in no
real danger; it was only the guilty who died. Did cigarette smokers cough
their lives away? They’d clearly brought it on themselves. Did some
alcoholic poet drink himself to death? It served him right. When a
planeload of nuns went down over the Andes, he told himself that this was
what happened to people who tried to jam their religion down other
people’s throats. Pious do-gooders! [DG 197].
But this sort of sophomoric rationalization fails to stand up to scrutiny: it is
simply impossible to blame certain obviously guiltless persons for the
misfortunes they suffered. Nadelman revises his theology:
He himself had reached a somewhat more reasonable conclusion:
rather than worshiping God as a divine and highly arbitrary executioner, it
made more sense to see the position as vacant. There was no one in control
up there. The office was empty. Nobody home.
Or maybe … there was simply another god in charge, deranged and
malign, delighting in cruelty and mischief [DG 198].
This seems to be simply cheap (and scarcely original) cynicism, but in any
event this world view serves as the basis for a long poem Nadelman writes in
college and publishes in the school literary magazine. To his surprise, the poem
is set to music years later by a heavy metal rock band, and so comes to the
attention of a half-deranged individual, Arlen Huntoon, who sets about creating
a “servant” to worship Nadelman’s god, a servant “in this new god’s image”
(DG 189). At this point Nadelman seems to be concerned only with a lunatic.
But, through the subtlest of implications, it is suggested that Huntoon’s servant,
made—as Nadelman’s poem dictated—of garbage (the symbolism of which
scarcely requires elucidation), has actually come to life. Does this mean that
Nadelman was right in thinking that there is a malign god ruling the universe?
Harried (so he believes) by the garbage creature, he thinks back to a childhood
vision he had of seeing a vast, leering face in the sky. “Just as the sky darkened,
beneath the glare of eyes as big as galaxies, he had felt his foot slide, then sink
into a hollow in the sand. And the sand had opened beneath him, then pressed in
upon him, clutched him, tried to draw him in. As if the earth were yearning to
crush him, smother him, blot out the very memory of him. As if the planet, all
nature, all creation, the very fabric of reality, were inimical to breeds such as
his” (DG 247).
I shall return to this tale elsewhere. Here I can point out what a bleak,
nihilistic picture of the cosmos Klein has painted in this masterful tale. If there is

any “moral order,” it is “inimical to breeds such as his.” Nadelman, walking
along the seashore, sees some lonely old men staring at the vacant sea—“he
wished he could conjure up a ship for them to watch, or even a small fishing
boat” (DG 244)—but he can only conjure up an evil god and a servitor of
garbage. And Nadelman the atheist can find little comfort at the end as he crawls
into a synagogue and waits cowering for the dawn, hoping that his pursuer will
be gone but knowing all too well that optimism of this sort is pathetically futile.

NEW YORK AND ENVIRONS
As a lifelong New Yorker (aside from four years spent at Brown University
and one year teaching high school in Maine) and a self-confessed “quintessential
urban man” (FF 129), Klein has understandably been drawn to New York City
as the source of both horror and fascination. Nearly every one of his tales is
defined by its relation to New York: some are actually set there (“Children of the
Kingdom,” “Nadelman’s God,” “Black Man with a Horn” in part), others are set
in locales physically close to but topographically and psychologically far from
the metropolis (“The Events at Poroth Farm,” “Petey,” The Ceremonies).11 It is
as if New York City were a touchstone both for his life and for his work. Just as
Klein himself seeks to escape the grinding strain of city life with brief jaunts to
the country (he owns a cottage in a rural region well north of the city) but finds
himself inexorably drawn back to the throbbing vitality of the urban milieu, so
his fiction portrays New York as the locus of all horror; but the placid
countryside presents only a spurious safety and proves to be as infested with the
monstrous as the city.
“Children of the Kingdom” (1980) is a tale of cosmic horror that plays upon
and inverts the racial tensions that have recently torn the city apart. The first-
person narrator reflects the standard white New Yorker’s fear of people of color
(“Except for my reflection, I saw not one white face” [DG 3]) and a distaste for
the decline of a neighborhood. But the true center of the story is the narrator’s
grandfather, Herman Lauterbach, who, although feisty and full of life, has
reached the stage where he must be put in a nursing home. One is found for him
in the Upper West Side, and this drab and dispiriting building serves as the
setting for a tale that transmogrifies the daily horror of life in the city. The locus
of horror in this tale is the basement (specifically the laundry room) of the
nursing home. Klein sets the stage brilliantly by subtly altering his description of
the home from the wry to the sinister when this critical location is reached:
Our tour ended with the laundry room in the basement. It was hot and
uncomfortable and throbbed with the echoes of heavy machinery, like the
engine room of a freighter; you could almost feel the weight of the building
pressing down on you. The air seemed thick, as if clogged with soapsuds,
and moisture dripped from a network of flaking steam pipes suspended
from the ceiling. Against one side stood four coin-operated dryers, staring
balefully at four squat Maytag washers ranged along the opposite wall [DG
11].

The weird is introduced with Klein’s characteristic deftness. Lauterbach
collects a motley band of friends from the neighborhood, including an aged
black woman, Coralette, and a Costa Rican priest whom he nicknames Father
Pistachio. Coralette tells the strange tale of a black woman who finds an intruder
in her bedroom “just a lookin’ down at her and doin’ somethin’ evil to hisself”
(DG 25). But this intruder turns out to be a “white boy” (DG 25). Later we hear
of another black girl who is found dead in her room, an apparent suicide.
Coralette finishes her tale laconically.“‘I guess that boy of hers done left her all
alone.’ Coralette shook her head sorrowfully. ‘Seems a shame when you think of
it, leavin’ her like that, ’specially ’cause I recollect how proud she been. Say he
was the first white boyfrien’ she ever had’” (DG 43).
It is at this point that Father Pistachio tells the bizarre tale of his researches
into an ancient and hideous race of beings who preyed upon the Indians of
central America until, as the legend goes, God first cursed them by making their
women sterile and then—when the creatures resorted to mating with human
women—by causing the males’ penises to fall off. Pistachio affirms that this
loathsome race died long ago—but did it? And what relevance does this wild
tale have to the increasingly strange occurrences in modern New York? The
connection is made when the narrator, surveying a room of the nursing home in
which an old woman was attacked by some man, sees a strange mark on the door
—“the outline of a crude, five-pointed holly leaf scratched lightly in the wood”
(DG 53). He thinks of some pictures Pistachio had shown him:
They say the night remembers what the day forgets. Pulling out the
crudely bound orange book, I opened it to one of the drawings. There it
was, that shape again, in the outline of the flipperlike gauntlets which
Pistachio claimed his usurpadores had worn.
I got up and made myself some tea, then returned to the living room.
Karen was still at her Wednesday evening class, and would not be back till
nearly ten. For a long time I sat very still, with the book open on my lap,
listening to the comforting rattle of the air conditioner as it shielded me
against the night. One memory kept intruding: how, as a child, I liked to
take a pencil and trace around the edges of my hand. This shape, I knew, is
one that every child learns to draw.
I wondered what it would look like if the child’s hands were webbed
[DG 54].
This is one of the absolute high points in modern weird fiction, and
prototypical of what may, perhaps not entirely accurately, be termed “quiet
horror.” Note that there is no explicit horror here, merely hideous suggestion.
Note also that the horror is entirely mental and comes to the narrator in the

relative security of his own apartment. As with Lovecraft, it is not what the
horrors do that is so awful, but the mere fact that they exist: they suddenly render
our rulership of the earth very tenuous. And yet, even this moment may be
excelled by the gripping conclusion where the narrator, during the 1977
blackout, must descend the pitch-black stairs of the nursing home to the
basement, where he encounters the monsters. “The door exploded in my face. I
went down beneath a mob of twisting bodies pouring through the doorway,
tumbling out upon me like a wave. I was kicked, tripped over, stepped on; I
struggled to rise, and felt, in the darkness, the touch of naked limbs, smooth,
rubbery flesh, hands that scuttled over me like starfish. In seconds the mob had
swept past me and was gone; I heard them padding lightly up the hall, heading
toward the stairs” (DG 59–60).
But a plot outline cannot begin to convey the atmospheric richness of this
tale, with its crisp character portrayal, cumulative suspense, and most of all the
“hints and portents” (as Steven J. Mariconda has termed it12) that typify Klein’s
horrific technique. Once again, however, I cannot resist drawing attention to a
glaring contradiction between Klein’s theory and his practice. In Raising
Goosebumps he writes: “The world, with its troubles, is indeed too much with
us, and the horrors it lays before us each day are all too real, ranging from the
petty to the monstrous to the nearly unthinkable. Horror fiction offers us a means
of keeping these realities at bay” (RG 1–2). The idea is, apparently, that
imaginary horrors can somehow make us forget about the real horrors of life.
But surely the reverse is the case in “Children of the Kingdom,” which makes
the horrors of city life more real than they were before. I am not merely referring
to Klein’s searing portrayal of the breakdown of the social fabric of the city in
the blackout; rather, his loathsome white monsters who prowl maggotlike in the
bowels of Manhattan are clear metaphors for the horrors of robbery, rape,
murder, and other terrors that have made city life a sort of ongoing pitched battle
in many of the metropolises of the world. There is no comfort in the existence of
an added horror on top of (or, rather, beneath) the daily horrors of the city. And
is there a political message here as well? Do the monsters who live underground,
like the homeless people who actually live in the tunnels beneath Grand Central
Station, symbolize the underclass that threatens to topple a city that has deprived
them of the sustenance they require for a normal life?
“Petey” (1979) is another enormously skillful tale in which social satire and
horror again go hand in hand. Here we are taken out of the city into the
seemingly idyllic wilds of Connecticut, where a man has bought a large estate
for what he admits was a virtual steal. “‘I have to keep reminding myself how
near we are to the city’” (DG 84), one character notes, compactly conveying

both how near (literally) and how far (figuratively) this rural domain is to New
York, which now seems a haven of civilization in contrast to the dark woods of
the Connecticut interior. The entire story is nothing but a series of vignettes
about a housewarming party held by the new owners for their city friends; and
what seems on the surface to be relatively innocuous satire directed at the
various foibles of the guests is in fact a vehicle for conveying with consummate
subtlety hints of the menace lurking nearby. These hints accumulate slowly: the
place “stank like a sewer” (DG 92) (from what?) when the owner, George Kurtz,
first moved in; Kurtz got the house so cheaply because the previous owner went
mad (DG 84) (how?); the house has a nursery, but the previous owner had no
children (DG 109–10); the man “‘may have had a dog or something [my italics]
to keep him company’” (DG 93); the metal legs of the bed in the master
bedroom looked “chewed” (DG 93) (by what?); similarly, a department store
mannequin that the previous owner had looks “pretty chewed up” (DG 94). All
this makes us now think twice about some earlier incidents, as when one of the
guests drove up in the dark and nearly hit some creature like a bear (DG 81–82),
or when someone gets lost on the road, comes upon a little cabin near the house,
and hears “something lumbering in the bushes” (DG 83). I shall study the nature
of this entity in a later section; here it will suffice to point out that this seemingly
rambling tale of a chaotic and rather boring party of protoyuppies in fact
contains not a single wasted word. As in “Children of the Kingdom” and all
Klein’s best work, deft character portrayal and an abundance of dialogue do not
compromise the gradual build-up of the horrific atmosphere (as they so often do
in the work of Stephen King and other lesser writers) but rather augment it. The
tale has perhaps a single flaw, and that is in the critical issue of why the entity—
raised by the original owner—chooses to attack the new occupants. We learn
that Kurtz gained the property in part through illegal collusion with a
government official (DG 107). But, in a series of interludes in which we meet
the original owner, now confined to a madhouse, we are led to believe that he is
concerned that his monstrous pet is merely hungry (DG 110, 118),13 and there is
no suggestion that this man is trying to gain revenge on Kurtz for being ousted
from his own house. So is Kurtz morally guilty and therefore deserving of being
set upon by a hideous creature, or isn’t he? This question is never satisfactorily
resolved, so that the broader rationale for the events of the tale remains
perpetually clouded.
I wish to study The Ceremonies here, because I believe that in Klein’s
miraculous transformation of a 40-page novelette into a 500-page novel the work
has undergone a considerable change of focus. This is not to say that either work
is superior to the other: that question is now unanswerable, for the two have

become entirely different entities, having nothing in common but the skeleton of
the plot. “The Events at Poroth Farm” involved merely some strange goings-on
in an obscure New Jersey community, and was primarily a masterful exercise in
subtle suggestion and atmosphere. The novel has, as it were, cosmicized the idea
to suggest a threat to the world at large, something only implicit in the novelette.
The novel takes a considerable time gathering steam, but once it does it becomes
hypnotic and compelling as few other weird novels of recent years. Once again
we must admit that, while bulky, The Ceremonies contains very few extraneous
words.
The entire novel rests upon the idea of manipulation. The Old One is an
entity from the depths of space who, after thousands of years, possesses the body
of a boy, Absolom Troet, in the late nineteenth century. He grows up and
becomes a harmless-seeming old man, Mr. Rosebottom, who stage-manages the
entire scenario: he has arranged for Jeremy Freirs to see the Poroths’
advertisement for a summer guest; he has arranged for Carol Conklin to get a job
at a library where she will meet Freirs; and he has even contrived it so that the
Poroths take in a stray cat, Bwada, who serves a critical function in the fulfilling
of the Ceremonies that the Old One must enact to bring about the destruction of
the world. Jeremy mirrors Rosebottom in a bungling way by trying to
manipulate Carol into sleeping with him. He fails in this attempt both through
his own ineptness and through Rosebottom’s timely interventions: he must keep
Carol pure (she is a virgin) until the culmination of the Ceremonies.
Although Rosebottom’s manipulation of the naive Carol (under the guise of
using her as a research assistant in his study of ancient rituals) is one of the most
chilling aspects of the novel, I think we could have done without the routine
portrayals of the Old One’s hatred of humanity:
Once he had something in common with the figures crowding past him
on the sidewalk; once, more than a century ago, he was one of them, part of
the loathsome race that swarms over this planet. Now only the semblance
remains, the organs, bones, and flesh. He has been washed clean of
humanity; he feels no trace of kinship for these odious doomed beings, only
a cold and unremitting hatred. As he passes down the avenue they part
before him like stalks of corn [C 40].
This is textbook misanthropy, and it assumes that we will find these
sentiments dreadful and reprehensible—as if human beings, by their mere
existence, are worthy of benevolence. Half-hearted writing like this makes us
long for the genuine misanthropy of Bierce or Shirley Jackson. Two other flaws
that do not appreciably affect the novel’s general excellence can be pointed out
here: the curious introduction of Sarr Poroth’s mother as a force of good, even

though in the end she has little to do with the suppression of the horror; and the
remarkably quick recovery, both physical and psychological, that Carol makes at
the end after being loathsomely raped by an extraterrestrial. These things must
be acknowledged and forgiven, for The Ceremonies remains in spite of them one
of the landmarks of modern weird fiction.
The city-country dichotomy is played up much more in this work than in
“The Events at Poroth Farm.” It is not only that the novel (narrated in the
omniscient third person rather than, as in the novelette, the first-person voice of
Jeremy) continually shuttles between Freirs in New Jersey and Carol in New
York; it is that the seemingly placid countryside becomes increasingly sinister
and subject to incursions of the supernatural, and the city paradoxically becomes
a haven of safety in spite of its well-known hazards. It is no surprise that Jeremy
says at the outset in wonderment, “‘Boy … I feel as if New York’s a thousand
miles away’“ (C 31). But it is noteworthy that much later we find he “was
surprised how much he’d begun to miss the Times” (C 374), especially since
exactly the opposite sentiment was expressed in the novelette (“‘…it’s strange
how, after a week or two, you no longer miss it’” [EP 21]). Jeremy even seeks to
leave Poroth Farm well before the summer is over; various events conspire to
keep him there, however, which is just as well, or else he could not have played
the hero and triumphed over the Old One just before (or, it is harrowingly
suggested, just after) the Ceremonies are completed.
One of the most engaging aspects of The Ceremonies is its adaptation of
certain basic themes from Arthur Machen’s “The White People.” Klein himself
has admitted that the novel was an “attempt to update Arthur Machen” (FF 134);
but in reality it is not so much an updating as an elaboration—a sort of partial
clarification of the hints that Machen left perhaps too vague. It should be noted
at this point that Klein is one of the most well-read figures in the field. As
opposed to the off-the-cuff and frequently erroneous remarks that made Stephen
King’s Danse Macabre an embarrassment, Klein has written a comprehensive if
discursive honors thesis on Lord Dunsany’s influence on Lovecraft, a landmark
appreciation of Ramsey Campbell, two sensitive introductions to books by
Lovecraft, and reviews that are unfailingly acute. He has accordingly taken the
basic framework of “The White People”—the initiation of an innocent young
girl into the witch cult—and made it his own, a reconstructive task scarcely less
impressive than the expansion of his original novelette (which bore far fewer
Machenian parallels) into a novel. Rosebottom takes the place of the evil nurse
who instructs Machen’s little girl into loathsome but strangely alluring acts of
sacrilege and perverted sex. Like the nurse who teaches the girl “the old
language,”14 Rosebottom claims to be initiating Carol into the “study of Agon

di-Gatuan, the so-called ‘Old Language’” (C 76). When, in “The White People,”
the girl remarks, “Besides these, I have the dances” (M 125), we suddenly
understand Rosebottom’s patient but insistent tutoring of Carol in archaic and
vaguely hideous dances that have a bearing on the ceremonies to come—what
Machen’s little girl merely cites, with tantalising vagueness, as “the White
Ceremonies, and the Green Ceremonies, and the Scarlet Ceremonies” (M 125).
After reading Klein we know what these ceremonies really are. When Machen’s
little girl says, “The Scarlet Ceremonies are the best, but there is only one place
where they can be performed properly” (M 125), it becomes clear why the Old
One must make such elaborate contrivances to have his Scarlet Ceremony take
place in the exact spot where he came to earth millennia ago. The Ceremonies is
a textbook for creative and imaginative pastiche. The result is a vital and
independent work that nonetheless draws strength and texture from previous
work in the field.

WORDS AND THINGS
A curious subtheme, working entirely independently of the city-country
idea, is evident from the beginning to the end of Klein’s work. Put very simply,
it could be termed the relation of words and things, of language and reality. To
what degree does language govern reality? Is it conceivable that words can, in
some direct way, affect the course of events? Considered in the abstract, these
questions must clearly be answered in the affirmative, and they seem to involve
nothing especially remarkable. But Klein poses the question in such a way that
we may no longer think of words as harmless little spots on a page. The most
clear-cut instance of the interrelation between words and things occurs in a
recent story, “Ladder” (1990).
This deceptively simple tale has potentially stupefying implications. We are
here introduced to a Scotsman reflecting upon his tragedy-scarred life. The
lesson he has learnt is seemingly a grim one: “you live, you struggle, you learn
and grow and suffer, and you realize, after nearly seventy years of searching,
that your life has been nothing but a metaphor” (L 188). What does this mean?
The Scotsman has concluded that God works by a “ladder,” the game in which
one word can be changed into another by the successive substitution of a single
letter (dog can become cat by progressing from dog to cog to cot to cat). His
own life has progressed with the ladder of birth to firth to forth to forts to ports
to posts to costs to coats to boats to beats to heats to heath. Along the way
various awful things happen to ensure that this ladder is maintained (e.g., a crate
of coats falls seemingly at random upon the man’s friend). And only at this point
do we realize that each segment of the story begins with the word that governs
that stage of the man’s life.
There are, I suppose, two interpretations of this story: either the man is mad
or the world actually operates by the “ladder” device. I believe that the
implication of the story, if not explicitly the latter, is at least meant to make us
wonder harriedly: What if God’s ladder is a reality? What if the fabric of the
universe really is governed by words? This carries an added implication:
Nothing happens by accident; what looks haphazard or serendipitous is in fact
the secret workings of the “ladder” that rules and shapes all our lives. This story
might be dismissed as a trick (it might, in fact, be called a kind of prose
acrostic), but the “trick” is a singularly compelling and haunting one. It is only
one of several Klein stories that ruminate on the power of words in human life.
Consider “Petey.” If “Ladder” is based on a trick, this novelette is based

upon a pun—and in two languages. When the mad owner of the house cries,
“Petey!” it is thought that he is calling out to his son (DG 108); but the man has
no son. He is crying not “Petey” but “P.D.,” or “Petit Diable,” or “Little
Devil”—in other words, the lumbering bearlike entity that makes so dramatic an
entrance at the end of the tale. Klein’s concealment of this denouement is almost
of the nature of a puzzle. We are first introduced to the term “Little Devil” (DG
111), then to a strange jar labeled “P.D. #14” (DG 113), and finally to the term
“Petit Diable” (DG 121). But all this is buried under such a wealth of seemingly
irrelevant description of the house party that one might be excused for not
catching on to it until the end. I do not know that “Petey” has such staggering
implications as “Ladder,” at least in regard to the words-and-things issue, but it
demonstrates how language can first mask and then reveal the horrors that lurk
in the dark corners of life.
“Black Man with a Horn” (1980) may be considered in this context, for it
too plays upon the possibility of words actually creating horror. This consciously
Lovecraftian tale, written for Ramsey Campbell’s New Tales of the Cthulhu
Mythos, centers around a man clearly based upon Frank Belknap Long, an aged
member of the “Lovecraft Circle” now remembered almost solely for his
association with Lovecraft and not for his own voluminous but sadly mediocre
fiction. The opening of the story is itself a play upon literary convention: “There
is something inherently comforting about the first-person past tense. It conjures
up visions of some deskbound narrator puffing contemplatively upon a pipe
amid the safety of his study, lost in tranquil recollection, seasoned but essentially
unscathed by whatever experience he’s about to relate. It’s a tense that says, ‘I
am here to tell the tale. I lived through it’” (DG 131). In this case, the first-
person past tense is far from reassuring because this single individual’s “safety”
is the least of his own concerns. He may have “lived through it,” but he is aware
that it is not his own fate but the world’s that is at stake. The narrator comes
across a harrowing instance of words blending insidiously into reality when, in a
museum, he sees a display of ancient Malayan figures to which the catalogue
applies the term “Tcho-tcho.” The narrator knows of the term only through
Lovecraft’s reference to “the wholly abominable Tcho-Tchos,” and had always
fancied that Lovecraft had invented the term in a spirit of fun. Now he finds that
the entities to which the term refers are, in some sense, real. “I’d been put in the
uncomfortable position of living out another man’s horror stories” (DG 151).
This piquant expression is not meant entirely literally (the idea, of course, is that
what one once thought to be fiction may have a reality of a sort) but it again
suggests that insidious mingling of words and things which we have seen
elsewhere. And I cannot resist quoting a later passage describing the entity

introduced in this tale, where a Malay boy is interviewed by a filmmaker:
INT: This Malay youth has sketched a picture of a demon he calls
Shoo Goron. (To Boy) I wonder if you can tell me something about the
instrument he’s blowing out of it. It looks like the Jewish shofar, or ram’s
horn. (Again to Boy) That’s all right. No need to be frightened.
BOY: He not blow out. Blow in.
INT: I see—he draws air in through the horn, is that right?
BOY: No horn. Is no horn. (Weeps) Is him [DG 162–63].
This too is one of the most shuddersome moments in modern weird fiction
—rarely have two words packed such a concentrated dose of loathsome
implication.
“Nadelman’s God” more explicitly foreshadows the theme of “Ladder.” It
is bad enough that the crazed Huntoon has created the servitor in accordance
with the instructions embedded in Nadelman’s poem, which was, of course,
written in a spirit of iconoclastic satire. What is worse is that “Huntoon had all
but suggested not only that the god was a reality, but that Nadelman himself was
responsible for its existence” (DG 241). This is because Huntoon refers to the
god as The Hungerer, a term not found in the published version of Nadelman’s
poem but only in his original draft, which Huntoon could not possibly have seen.
It is this occurrence that really transforms the tale from one of mere paranoia
(Nadelman pursued by a lunatic) to one of supernatural horror. Nadelman
reflects:
Was it possible?—that, in some latter-day Naming of Names, he had
given the god life in the very act of naming it, and given its flesh substance
with every new line of his poem?
How weird that would be: the notion that the universe might in fact be
listening to him, waiting upon his decisions, his carefully chosen words,
responding to his commands. How had that line from the poem gone? “‘I’ll
create Me a Creator,’ He would say”—a god made to order?
But what a dreadful responsibility to contemplate! For it meant that he
might in some way be the original cause of the very things that had always
appalled and horrified him, all the work of the dark god he’d invented: the
fathers stabbed, the mothers raped, the children left to starve [DG 241–42].
To this little need be added. If an undistinguished and insignificant person
like Nadelman can create an evil god out of words, then our life on this planet
may be one long series of miseries. Here again, as in “Ladder,” nothing happens
at random: all the evil in the world is the product of an idiot god created by the
cheap cynicism of a sophomore.
It is now time to return to “The Events at Poroth Farm.” The premise of the

novelette is the arrival of Jeremy at Poroth Farm for the summer so that he can
bone up on a class on supernatural fiction that he will be teaching in the fall
semester. Jeremy spends much of his time reading the classics of weird fiction
(more here than in the novel), and indeed he admits that he is “bookish” (EP 27).
It is possible, therefore, to interpret the tale (as I have done in an earlier article15)
as centering around the disjunction between words and things, literature and
reality: Jeremy is so wrapped up in books and, more generally, accustomed to
reacting to “real” events in a self-consciously literary way, that he is doubly
shattered when actual horror breaks loose upon him. For Jeremy, horrors ought
to be confined to the printed page, and he is woefully inadequate in dealing with
them when they occur to him in reality.
Jeremy both plays upon and flouts literary convention—or, at any rate, the
conventions of the standard horror novel or film. In clearing his rented room (a
converted chicken coop) of the many bugs, especially spiders, that infest it, he
likens himself to the victim of a trite horror film who suffers the revenge of the
spiders (EP 7). And yet, he remarks at the outset, “Rural townspeople are not so
reticent as the writers would have us believe” (EP 4), indicating a sophisticated
awareness of how misleading certain literary stereotypes can be. Later, when he
hears something strange outside his room, he declares: “I had no intention of
going out there with my flashlight in search of the intruder—that’s for guys in
stories. I’m much too chicken” (EP 20). But he can still long for the “happy
ending” (EP 19) that he notes with satisfaction in Wilhelm Meinhold’s The
Amber Witch: why can’t life turn out that way? I have already noted how Jeremy
sees himself as an “optimist” even after all the horrible events of the tale, and
with the prospect of worse to come. He presents himself to us, then, as a strange
combination of naiveté and sophistication: naive about life, but sophisticated
about literature.
Is this his failing? Is it that he cannot comprehend how real life can turn
into a horror tale? Certain passages toward the end suggest this. Jeremy has
written a diary throughout his stay at Poroth Farm, and he is now presenting it to
us, although in an artfully edited form. (This itself, as he well knows, is an old
literary convention, and it creates exactly the sort of narrative within narrative
that he ridicules in Charles Robert Maturin’s Melmoth the Wanderer [EP 10],
although his interior narrative is much more integrated into the overall tale than
Maturin’s.) But toward the end, when the real horror finally emerges and he
flees the farm, he notes tellingly: “Here my journal ends. Until today, almost a
week later, I have not cared to set down any of the events that followed” (EP
35). In other words, he finds that his literary reactions are simply inadequate to
encompass what he has actually experienced. In a sense Jeremy’s diary has been

a shield against the horrors that increasingly impinge upon him: by setting them
down on paper he has partially exorcised them. But the concluding horror is so
overwhelming that this method of rationalization is denied him; the written word
is insufficient to negate it. Later he remarks: “Lord, this heat is sweltering. My
shirt is sticking to my skin, and droplets of sweat are rolling down my face
dripping onto this page, making the ink run. My hand is tired from writing…”
(EP 40). The symbolism here is very telling: the ink runs because what Jeremy
has experienced is literally “ineffable”—it cannot be told. He is tired of writing
because the vicarious emotions inspired by literature are pathetically inadequate
in the face of real horror. By referring so constantly to literature and writing, and
by implying how secondary and inadequate they are, Klein augments the sense
of the reality of what Jeremy has experienced.
This interpretation—the inadequacy of language to express reality—can, I
believe, be derived quite plausibly from “The Events at Poroth Farm.” But I now
wish to present an entirely different interpretation, one that may link the story
more closely to such tales as “Nadelman’s God” and “Ladder” with their notions
of the power of words to create a reality out of whole cloth. Is it conceivable that
all the works of horror literature Jeremy reads while at Poroth Farm in some way
affect or even shape the events that occur there? Whereas in “Nadelman’s God”
the mere act of writing seems to have engendered a horrific god, does the act of
reading actually cause the events at Poroth Farm?
Such a formulation may perhaps be too strong, but it is possible to see in
Jeremy’s readings a sort of symbolic echo—or, in some cases, anticipation—of
the increasingly disturbing manifestations that take place around him. His
readings generally progress in a chronological sequence, from the Gothic novels
of the late eighteenth century to selected works of the middle twentieth century.
His reaction to the Gothic novels—The Mysteries of Udolpho, Melmoth the
Wanderer, The Castle of Otranto, The Monk—are what one might expect of a
sophisticated twentieth-century reader: they are too long, the events they depict
are implausible, they are structurally flawed. Taken together, these comments
may well be a metafictional hint of what Klein himself does not want to do: his
tale will be compact; it will be grimly realistic by capturing the minutiae not
only of setting and mood but also of character; and the incorporation of the diary
will result not in structural confusion but in a smooth-flowing narrative. A
further comment by Jeremy on Udolpho may have some bearing on the
psychology of the tale. In remarking on its length, He tries to compensate by
putting himself into the frame of mind of an eighteenth-century reader with
“plenty of time on his hands.” The result: “It works, too—I do have plenty of
time out here, and already I can feel myself beginning to unwind. What New

York does to people…” (EP 8). This proves to be a short-lived attempt by
Jeremy to adjust his city mentality to the pace of country life. It is interesting
that when he later tries to read Walden as a break from his diet of literary horror,
he finds himself unable to do so—on account of his watery eyes, he claims (EP
20), but also, perhaps, because he is increasingly coming to believe that the
country is not the haven of repose he initially fancied.
Two interruptions in the chronological sequence of Jeremy’s Gothic
readings are of great importance. He first reads Machen’s “The White People.”
A clearer tip of the hat to the literary influence that governs this tale would be
harder to find, the influence primarily being in the device of the diary and in the
notion of dark secrets concealed in the untamed wilderness. (As we have noted,
The Ceremonies owes much more to the Machen story than does “The Events at
Poroth Farm.”) Shortly thereafter he reads Algernon Blackwood’s “Ancient
Sorceries,” which he describes as a “witch/cat story” (EP 11). The significance
of this detail is also obvious, as the cat Bwada plays a central role in the
unfolding of the horrific scenario.
Jeremy then reads Dracula, which, like “Ancient Sorceries,” at least
suggests the theme of psychic possession, the dominant motif in “The Events at
Poroth Farm.” Later comes LeFanu, and Jeremy’s comment is of interest: “Read
some LeFanu. ‘Green Tea,’ about the phantom monkey with eyes that glow, and
‘The Familiar,’ about the little staring man who drives the hero mad. Not the
smartest choices right now, the way I feel, because for all the time that fat grey
cat purrs over the Poroths, it just stares at me” (EP 18). These stories do not
simply disturb Jeremy’s equilibrium, both tales, in addition, are a sort of
commentary on what has happened (we are dealing here not with a phantom
monkey but, virtually, a phantom cat—one that is possessed by the baleful entity
of the tale) or what will happen (one of the entity’s failings, as Sarr notes toward
the end, is that “Sometimes we forget to blink” [EP 38], so that it just stares and
stares).
It is at this point that Jeremy reads Shirley Jackson, with her bleak and
misanthropic world view. Is he simply too naive to acknowledge the truth of
what Jackson writes, or is it that her tales of unhappy husbands and wives point
chillingly to the impending dissolution of the Poroths’ marriage in horror and
death? Worse, Jeremy then reads Ruthven Todd’s Lost Traveller, which he
describes as “Merely the narrative of a dream turned to nightmare, and illogical
as hell” (EP 27). But has not Jeremy’s dream of a summer full of pleasantly
shuddersome reading in the tranquil countryside turned into a nightmare? And
the events he has experienced over the last several days are certainly illogical as
hell—at least to him, who cannot see the overall pattern of possession as the

entity leaps from one being to another, perhaps ad infinitum.
It is, perhaps, not possible to juxtapose all Jeremy’s readings with the
events at Poroth Farm, but a representative number of them seem to be clear
reflections or foreshadowings of what is going on around him. Words are again
intimately interconnected with things. I do not think that the two interpretations I
have put forth for this tale are mutually exclusive; they could well work in
tandem. Indeed, I wish to draw attention to one passage in particular which
could be said to harmonize with both interpretations. As the horror is reaching a
climax, Jeremy remarks plaintively: “What if some horror stories aren’t really
fiction? If Machen sometimes told the truth? If there are White People,
malevolent little faces peering out of the moonlight? Whispers in the grass?
Poisonous things in the woods? Perfect hate and evil in the world?” (EP 31). On
one level, this passage could be taken as another instance of Jeremy’s naiveté
about life, but, conversely, it could be a summation of what has actually
transpired in the tale. In other words, Jeremy is right. It should be noted that the
final sentence has been altered in the latest version of the story: the word
“perfect” has been added (just as the word “unsuspected” was added when this
passage appeared in The Ceremonies [C 439]). This addition may be of
significance: whereas the query as to whether there is “hate and evil in the
world” might lead one to dismiss Jeremy as hopelessly naive (of course there is
hate and evil in the world), the revised sentence points to a supernatural or
transcendent hatred and evil that no amount of sophistication could anticipate.
Just as, I believe, Klein wishes us to think that the battered Scotsman of
“Ladder” is correct in his theology, so here we are to take Jeremy absolutely at
his word: he is uttering nothing but the harrowing truth.
“The Events at Poroth Farm” ranks with the best of Klein’s novelettes and
has in no way been superseded by The Ceremonies, impressive as that novel is.
If the tale is a sort of hundred-yard dash, the novel is a marathon: the former
must be consumed in a sitting; the latter lived with for days to absorb its
cumulative effect. The cosmic scope of the novel is only tangentially evident in
the novelette, but the latter is nevertheless a masterwork of indirection and
subtlety, fit to take its place with “Nadelman’s God,” “Children of the
Kingdom,” and “Petey” at the very pinnacle of Klein’s shorter work.
In close to 25 years of writing Klein has only two books and a handful of
scattered tales to his credit, and yet his achievement towers gigantically over that
of his more prolific contemporaries. There is, indeed, a virtue to such
compactness—let us recall that Lovecraft’s collected fiction, also the work of
two decades, fits comfortably into only three substantial volumes. But Klein’s
many readers are left in a perpetual state of frustration over the paucity of his

output. He blithely promised us his second novel by 1986 (FF 135), but there is
now no telling when or if this is likely to appear. Even his short fiction is not
abundant. Several early tales—“Magic Carpet,” “Renaissance Man,” “Camera
Shy”—have already found the oblivion they deserve, and he has written very
few stories since Dark Gods.
We have already noted Klein’s greatest accomplishment in weird fiction:
his melding of the cosmic horror of Lovecraft and Blackwood with the
psychological realism of the modern weird movement. In this he is rivaled
perhaps only by Ramsey Campbell. But where in Campbell this melding is
achieved through an enhanced emphasis on a disturbed psyche, Klein effects the
union more harmoniously, so that there is an exquisite balance between external
and internal horror—the horror of a hostile cosmos and the horror of a possibly
deranged mentality. In wielding a prose style of great suppleness but also of
quiet strength, in being a master technician of the weird short story, in
delineating character and setting with both humor and piquancy, in painting
mood and atmosphere with seemingly effortless ease, Klein so far outdistances
his colleagues in weird fiction that he ought to achieve significant recognition in
general literature. One simply wishes that his pen flowed a little more freely.
CLIVE BARKER: SEX, DEATH, AND FANTASY
When Clive Barker’s Books of Blood were published by Sphere Books in
London in 1984–85, the world took notice. Hitherto known only as a dramatist
whose plays had been performed but not published, Barker (b. 1952)
accomplished a feat almost unheard of in publishing by having not one but six
paperback volumes of his short stories issued by a major firm. At a time when
even established authors in the field had difficulty in publishing collections of
short fiction, Barker’s achievement was more than unusual. Barker has now
issued a novel, The Damnation Game (1985), a novella, “The Hellbound Heart”
(1986), and three more novels, Weaveworld (1987), The Great and Secret Show
(1989), and Imajica (1991), along with a short novel, Cabal (1988), a young
adult novel, The Thief of Always (1992), and random other short stories. The
Great and Secret Show, subtitled “The First Book of The Art,” was the first in a
projected series of four or five novels. Barker has also attempted to write and
direct films, with middling success, and has allowed his work to be adapted into
comic books (or “graphic novels,” as they are pretentiously called), although he
himself has had little to do with their conception or execution.
Early in his career Barker was lauded by Stephen King with the now
famous tag, “I have seen the future of horror … and it is named Clive Barker.”

In consequence, not only has Barker received generally more favorable reviews
in the mainstream press, but higher expectations have been generated for his
work than for popular bestseller material such as King’s. And it is reasonable to
demand greater literary substance from Barker, especially as he himself is not
shy about claiming such substance for himself. But whether he belongs in the
class of Blackwood, Dunsany, and Lovecraft (or of Shirley Jackson and Ramsey
Campbell) is far from clear.
The keynote of Barker’s early work is a frenetic mix of gruesome physical
horror, rather conventional supernaturalism, and explicit sex. It would be untrue
to say that Barker is aiming purely at shock value in all this, but it is also untrue
to believe that he has the literary skill to raise this subject matter very much
above the level of sensationalism. Barker is a writer of considerable imagination
but extraordinarily slipshod style, conception, and execution. Like many writers,
he has already written (or published) too much. It would not be an exaggeration
to say that, of his voluminous work, perhaps only five or six stories from the
Books of Blood and The Damnation Game are all that are worth reading.
What I find most interesting about Barker is his place in the history of
weird fiction. He is in many ways a herald of the complete and possibly
irremediable decadence of the field. He is the prototypical example of the
tendency I have noted in my introduction: the failure to give a plausible account
of supernatural phenomena. Everything in Barker is directed toward the level of
pure sensation.
Let us consider “Sex, Death and Starshine.” Here we are asked to believe
that ghosts of old actors are presiding over the final performance of a
Shakespeare play at an old theatre about to be demolished. But Barker provides
no rationale (not even one acceptable on supernatural grounds) for how the
bodies of those old actors, and the living actors whom they kill, simply come
back to life for this final curtain call. Consider the resurrection of Tallulah, an
aged employee who has been at the theatre since its heyday 50 years before. She
is killed by Lichfield, the leader of the band of deceased actors, but this is of no
consequence: “She’d cool easily in the chill of the room, and be up and about
again by the time the audience arrived” (BB1, 156). This single sentence
encapsulates what might be called the fossilization of weird fiction: its
transformation from an outgrowth of a philosophical position to a
conventionalized genre in which certain events have become standardized
because they have been used so often. Barker has no doubt encountered so many
instances of the resurrection of the dead (in stories, novels, movies, and comic
books) that he no longer feels the need to explain it—it simply provides an
excuse for a certain type of frisson that is to be experienced as such without any

thought of its plausibility or its philosophical or aesthetic purpose. In this case,
we are evidently to be entertained at the prospect of witnessing a dead actress
giving a still living director a blow job (he is amazed that she does not breathe
during the process). It never seems to occur to Barker to wonder, if these
particular corpses can be reanimated so effortlessly, why all corpses do not
behave this way.
This identical problem mars another, later work, Cabal, and in such a way
as to suggest that the absence of a rationale for the supernatural is not merely a
technical failing on Barker’s part but something that he feels is simply not
necessary in a tale of this sort. Cabal rests upon the presupposition that there
exists a place called Midian where only “monsters” (i.e., those who have
apparently committed heinous crimes) are welcome. In fact, these monsters are
simply the resurrected dead. How did this happen? A desperate man who thinks
he has committed a series of murders seeks out Midian. Although he discovers
that it is not on any map (C 32), he and other characters end up finding it
relatively easily in the north of Canada. He is eventually gunned down by a
pursuing posse of police but calmly walks out of the morgue for further
adventures. Only toward the end of the novel do we get a faint rationale for how
this could have occurred: he was previously bitten by one of the undead and was
therefore “infected” (C 154). But this only pushes the question back one step
further: how did the undead become “infected”? Is there something about
criminals that causes them to come back from the dead? It is all entirely
unaccounted for, and this short novel simply collapses from its own absurdity.
Other stories in the Books of Blood also suffer from serious conceptual
difficulties. “The Midnight Meat Train” is riddled with implausibilities of plot.
Although Barker now spends much of his time in New York, it is painfully
obvious that he had not been there at the time he wrote this story, since its
account of horrors on the subway is full of transparent mistakes (there is no
“Avenue of the Americas” line; one cannot hear conversation from one subway
car to the next). These implausibilities, however, could have been acceptable if
Barker had restricted the story to one of suspense in which a man going home
late at night on the subway is attempting to escape a serial killer in the next car.
But the story rapidly becomes preposterous when we are asked, with apparent
seriousness, to believe that the serial killer is really feeding the bodies he kills to
the “City fathers” (BB1, 47) who live in the bowels of the subway. Here again
we are presented with the ludicrous proposition that these City fathers must eat
human flesh to remain alive (BB1, 46)—why should this be the case?
The height of absurdity is reached when, at what is presumably meant to be
the grand horrific climax, we encounter “the original American” (BB1, 48) who

rules this band of cannibals. “It was a giant. Without head or limb. Without a
feature that was analogous to human, without an organ that made sense, or
senses. If it was like anything, it was like a shoal of fish. A thousand snouts all
moving in unison, budding, blossoming and withering rhythmically. It was
iridescent, like mother of pearl, but it was sometimes deeper than any color
Kaufman knew, or could put a name to” (BB1, 49). But Barker has failed to
think out this conception adequately. What significance, political or otherwise, is
intended here? Evidently the only object of this “original American” is to inspire
physical disgust at its repulsive appearance. Barker is saying nothing of
importance about the horror and decadence of the city, or of their causes.
Even some of Barker’s better tales have flaws in conception, especially on
the key issue of where and how the supernatural enters into the matter. “Son of
Celluloid” is a powerful tale of a criminal who dies behind the screen of an old
movie theatre and in some fashion causes the revival of the famous actors and
actresses who enlivened that screen, but again the critical issue of how this is
actually accomplished is not carefully worked out. Here is Barker’s account:
The space however, like the air itself, had lived a life of its own in that
fifty years. Like a reservoir, it had received the electric stares of thousands
of eyes, of tens of thousands of eyes. Half a century of movie goers had
lived vicariously through the screen of the Movie Palace, pressing their
sympathies and their passions on to the flickering illusion, the energy of
their emotions gathering strength like a neglected cognac in that hidden
passage of air. Sooner or later, it must discharge itself. All it lacked was a
catalyst.
Until Barberio’s cancer [BB3, 8].
Cancer, I suppose, is one of the great horrors of our time, but that it makes
the resurrection of Marilyn Monroe possible might strain anyone’s credulity.
The imagery and atmosphere of the story are highly effective, but, like so much
of Barker, the tale is crippled by its ludicrous premise.
“Rawhead Rex” is the moderately entertaining story of a huge, nine-foot-
tall creature who crawls out from under a rock in a field and rampages through
the countryside; but the only account we get of the entity is from a human who
has fallen under its influence: “‘There were things that owned this land. Before
Christ. Before civilization. Most of them didn’t survive the destruction of their
natural habitat: too primitive I suppose. But strong. Not like us; not human.
Something else altogether’” (BB3, 57). Barker evidently feels that this half-
baked anthropology is sufficient. It is clear that the true aim of the story is
simply to inspire disgust at the creature on account of its penchant for munching
on innocent children:

It was half past eleven at night. Rawhead Rex lay under the moon in
one of the harvested fields to the southwest of the Nicholson Farm. The
stubble was darkening now, and there was a tantalizing smell of rotting
vegetable matter off the earth. Beside him lay his dinner, Ian Ronald
Milton, face up on the field, his midriff torn open. Occasionally the beast
would lean up on one elbow and paddle its fingers in the cooling soup of
the boy child’s body, fishing for a delicacy.
Here, under the full moon, bathing in silver, stretching his limbs and
eating the flesh of human kind, he felt irresistible. His fingers drew a
kidney off the plate beside him and he swallowed it whole.
Sweet [BB3, 80].
One winces at this—not at what is being described but at Barker’s fatuity in
believing that such ham-fisted sadism can genuinely affect an adult reader.
It is already evident that much of Barker’s work contains an element of
political or social criticism, but it is equally evident that much of this is
superficial in the extreme. “In the Hills, the Cities” contains, as Ramsey
Campbell states in his introduction to the Books of Blood (BB1, xii), one of the
more original monsters in horror fiction: a huge figure made up of thousands of
human beings who practice for years to perfect the motions suitable for their
respective places in the entity’s anatomy. But the whole conception becomes
trivialized by being used as a facile satire on the collectivist state: we are behind
the Iron Curtain, where the “illusion of petty individuality was swept away in an
irresistible tide of collective feeling” (BB1, 197). As if this passage, and others
like it, were not enough, Barker feels the need to editorialize bluntly in order to
convey his message to even the least astute reader: “Locked in their positions,
strapped, roped and harnessed to each other in a living system that allowed for
no single voice to be louder than any other, nor any back to labor less than its
neighbor’s, they let an insane consensus replace the tranquil voice of reason.
They were convulsed into one mind, one thought, one ambition. They became, in
the space of a few moments, the singleminded giant whose image they had so
brilliantly recreated” (BB1, 196–97).
“Babel’s Children” is an exercise in cheap political satire. It is a tale of a
young woman traveling on an island off the coast of Greece and stumbling upon
a group of aged individuals who are actually governing the world because
elected heads of state are too stupid to do so. “‘We run the world. It wasn’t
meant to be that way, but as I said, systems decay. As time went by the
potentates—knowing they had us to make critical decisions for them—
concerned themselves more and more with the pleasures of high office and less
and less with thinking. Within five years we were no longer advisors, but

surrogate overlords, juggling nations’” (BB5, 89). After a time these people no
longer rule the world by reason but merely by playing games of chance to
determine the resolution of events. And when all but one of them die in an
escape attempt, the woman is forced to take over their position. All this is
presented in a somewhat lighthearted manner, but it cannot conceal the poverty
of genuine and penetrating political insight that a story like this must offer.
“The Forbidden” is the one story in Barker’s work that seems to promise a
somewhat more interesting and subtle social commentary. Here a middle-class
woman working on a thesis on graffiti enters a ghetto seeking source material.
Instead, she encounters vague rumors of a horrible murder that took place there
recently. She has trouble verifying the account, and her friends scoff at her and
think she has been taken in by a hoax or fabrication. But as the woman becomes
more and more acclimated to her ghetto surroundings, she comes to find her
friends effete and smart-alecky. She has undergone a slow cultural
transformation. “Nor was it simply the presence of so many people that
reassured her; she was, she conceded to herself, happy to be back here in Spector
Street. The quadrangles, with their stunted saplings and their grey grass, were
more real to her than the carpeted corridors she was used to walking; the
anonymous faces on the balconies and streets meant more than her colleagues at
the University. In a word, she felt home” (BB5, 29). She meets the Candyman, a
figure who embodies the rumors that come out of the ghetto. Eventually she
succumbs, in a scene that poignantly combines horror, pathos, and bitter
cynicism:
Perhaps they would remember her, as he had said they might, finding
her cracked skull in tomorrow’s ashes. Perhaps she might become, in time,
a story with which to frighten children. She had lied, saying she preferred
death to such questionable fame; she did not. As to her seducer, he laughed
as the conflagration sniffed them out. There was no permanence for him in
this night’s death. His deeds were on a hundred walls and ten thousand lips,
and should he be doubted again his congregation could summon him with
sweetness. He had reason to laugh [BB5, 37].
The story continually wavers between mundane fear (fear of rape or
murder) and metaphysical fear. It is one of Barker’s few early successes.
From a slightly different perspective, sociopolitical considerations enter
indirectly through the dismal, grim, and generally lower-class settings and
characters of the majority of his tales. Is Barker saying that horror only affects
such areas and such figures? This presupposition is very strong. As he writes in
The Damnation Game:
Hell is reimagined by each generation. Its terrain is surveyed for

absurdities and remade in a fresher mold; its terrors are scrutinized and, if
necessary, reinvented to suit the current climate of atrocity; its architecture
is redesigned to appall the eye of the modern damned. In an earlier age
Pandemonium—the first city of Hell—stood on a lava mountain while
lightning tore the clouds above it and beacons burned on its walls to
summon the fallen angels. Now, such spectacle belongs to Hollywood. Hell
stands transposed. No lightning, no pits of fire.
In a wasteland a few hundred yards from a highway overpass it finds a
new incarnation: shabby, degenerate, forsaken. But here, where fumes
thicken the atmosphere, minor terrors take on a new brutality. Heaven, by
night, would have all the configurations of Hell [DG 327].
Accordingly, Barker’s settings include prisons (“Pig Blood Blues,” “In the
Flesh,” “The Body Politic” in part), seedy hotels (“Revelations”), and the ghetto
(“The Forbidden”). Among his characters are sadists (“Dread”), ignorant and
uncouth townspeople (“The Skins of the Fathers”), criminals (“Son of
Celluloid”), pornographers (“Confession of a (Pornographer’s) Shroud”),
prostitutes both female (“Jacqueline Ess: Her Will and Testament”) and male
(“Human Remains”), young thugs (“The Inhuman Condition”), oily
fundamentalist preachers (“Revelations”), and the like.
But it would be too comforting to imagine that horror never strays beyond
the prison or the ghetto, and some of Barker’s most powerful tales are those in
which middle-class characters are drawn inexorably into what Bruce Springsteen
has called the “darkness on the edge of town.” We have already seen this
mingling of class in “The Forbidden.” “Confession of a (Pornographer’s)
Shroud” also effects this union, involving an accountant who unwittingly works
for a group of pornographers and loses his wife, children, and ultimately his life
as a result. This is, however, not the end but the beginning of the story: in some
unexplained fashion the accountant’s spirit remains alive (Barker’s offhand
comment that “There was still a will to revenge in him” [BB3, 99] is wholly
useless as a plausible rationale) and actually animates his shroud into a human
form. The influence of M. R. James’s “‘Oh, Whistle, and I’ll Come to You, My
Lad’” is very obvious, and Barker makes no secret of it: his remark that “He’d
seen what freak creases could do, making faces appear in a crumpled pillow”
(BB3, 104), precisely echoes James’s climactic statement whereby the invisible
entity in his story reveals a “face of crumpled linen.”16 Nevertheless, the story,
although merely a tale of revenge, is effectively grim. We will see later, in The
Damnation Game, that even the wealthiest of us are not immune from the
intrusion of horror emerging from the depths of history and of the underclass.
As it is, one of the most interesting features of Barker’s work is a powerful

mix of sex and death in such a way that the one leads to the other, and vice
versa. In Barker there is an intimate connection between sex, violence, and
death. As he wrote with some pungency in The Damnation Game: “It wasn’t
difficult to smudge sexuality into violence, turn sighs into screams, thrusts into
convulsions. The grammar was the same; only the punctuation differed” (DG
153). It is interesting that one of the most wholesome sexual passages in all his
work occurs toward the opening of “In the Hills, the Cities,” in which we are
given a lengthy, explicit, and powerful vignette of homosexual love between two
male companions. The heterosexuals in Barker’s tales rarely act with such
honesty and purity.
“The Age of Desire” is perhaps Barker’s most powerful story. Here a man
is given a drug that so stimulates his sexual desire that everything becomes
seductive:
Aroused beyond control, he turned to the wall he had been leaning
against. The sun had fallen upon it, and it was warm: the bricks smelt
ambrosial. He laid kisses on their gritty faces, his hands exploring every
nook and cranny. Murmuring sweet nothings, he unzipped himself, found
and accommodating niche, and filled it. His mind was running with liquid
pictures: mingled anatomies, female and male in one undistinguishable
congress. Above him, even the clouds had caught fire; enthralled by their
burning heads he felt the moment rise in his gristle. Breath was short now.
But the ecstasy?; surely that would go on forever [BB4, 132].
The sociological message here is clear—a commentary on the complete
sexualization of our minds and our age. As one character remarks, “‘All our so-
called higher concerns become secondary to the pursuit [of sex]. For a short time
sex makes us obsessive; we can perform, or at least we think we can perform,
what with hindsight may seem extraordinary feats’” (BB5, 136). Later it is said
of the drugged patient: “His back ached, his balls ached: but what was his body
now?; just a plinth for that singular monument, his prick. Head was nothing;
mind was nothing” (BB5, 140–41). It is clear what we have become: “The world
had seen so many Ages. The Age of Enlightenment; of Reformation; of Reason.
Now, at last, the Age of Desire. And after this, an end to Ages; an end, perhaps,
to everything. For the fires that were being stoked now were fiercer than the
innocent world suspected. They were terrible fires, fires without end, which
would illuminate the world in one last, fierce light” (BB5, 136).
Other stories on this theme are rather less successful. Two are feminist in
their suggestion that men are useless encumbrances in the entire process of birth,
life, and death. In “The Skins of the Fathers” we encounter bizarre monsters who
have impregnated a woman in a small desert community. The intimation is that

these creatures have created all earth life: “The creatures who were his fathers
were also men’s fathers; and the marriage of semen in Lucy’s body was the same
mix that made the first males. Women had always existed: they had lived, a
species to themselves, with the demons. But they had wanted playmates: and
together they had made men” (BB2, 147). But this transparent reversal of the
myth of Eve’s creation from Adam is presented too bluntly to be effective, and
the story rapidly devolves into an exercise in bloodletting. Somewhat better is
“The Madonna,” in which a loathsome monster called the Madonna, the “Virgin
Mother” (BB5, 66), is shown to give birth without the need of men. A male
character who has had intercourse with her wakes up one day to find that he has
become a woman. But what is the true point of the story? It is never made clear.
“Jacqueline Ess: Her Will and Testament” (BB2) may be mentioned in this
connection, as it deals with a woman who, purely through the power of her will,
is capable of physically destroying human beings, usually men. If anything, the
story hints at the superior strength of women, but beyond this it seems to lack
direction and focus.
“Dread” is less obviously sexual, but, as Barker’s most effective
nonsupernatural story, it carries a clear message about men’s habitual abuse of
women. A philosophy professor decides to carry out an experiment on a bright
young female student whom he perhaps considers too challenging to his
intellectual supremacy: he subjects her to hideous torture whereby she, a
vegetarian, is locked in a room with a gradually rotting piece of meat as her only
means of sustenance. She eventually succumbs and eats the rancid flesh.
Powerful as this conte cruel is, it is ultimately no more than a tale of vengeance,
as a man on whom the professor attempts a similar torture comes back to kill
him. The story aims at profundity by means of pseudophilosophical discussions
on the nature of fear, but these in the end don’t amount to much.
“The Hellbound Heart” also attempts a union of sex and death, but the
result is clumsy and superficial. Frank, a jaded and unruly wastrel, stumbles
upon a curious box (“How had he first heard about Lemarchand’s box? He
couldn’t remember. In a bar maybe, or a gutter, from the lips of a fellow
derelict” [NV 218]). This box summons up mysterious creatures called
Cenobites who promise him unheard-of pleasures. But Frank, in his limited way,
conceives of these pleasures purely sexually. He pays for his misconception,
suffering a nameless fate that nearly obliterates his body. He survives, after a
fashion, only because he spilled his semen in the room he was occupying: “Dead
sperm was a meager keepsake of his essential self, but enough” (NV 220). When
Julia, married to Frank’s brother Rory but secretly in love with Frank, moves
into the house Frank occupied, she eventually detects his presence. She finds that

he requires copious amounts of blood to reanimate himself, and promptly poses
as a prostitute to lure unwitting johns into her house so that she can kill them and
feed their blood to Frank, who gradually dons bone, flesh, and skin once more.
All this is an entertaining mix of sex and death (rather more effective in the film
version directed by Barker, Hellraiser, with its fine special effects), but
ultimately no broader conclusions are drawn. Is sex our destroyer or our
salvation? What significance does Julia’s pseudoprostitution have? Once again
the tale lapses into a story of adventure and revenge, as the Cenobites exact
punishment upon Frank for trying to escape their clutches.
A serious deficiency in Barker’s work is a very naive good versus evil
morality that renders many of his characters one-dimensional. He makes many
pretensions toward mainstream writing by elaborate character portrayal, and this
occurs even in his Books of Blood: most of these tales are not so much short
stories as novellas, which might, at least in theory, allow for such
characterization. But both his heroes and villains are flat and wooden. He has a
penchant for depicting vengeful small-town policemen (“The Skins of the
Fathers,” Cabal), amoral criminals (“Cleve knew in his heart he was a leopard
born and bred. Crime was easy, work was not”—“In the Flesh” [BB5, 104]), and
diseased psychopaths (“The Life of Death”). And those evil Europeans who have
come to disturb the peace-loving natives in the Amazon in “How Spoilers
Breed” are marked for destruction from the beginning. Les Daniels has rightly
referred to this sort of scenario not as tragedy but as melodrama:17 this is not
what adults want to read. In other cases, Barker’s attempts at fleshing out his
characters in a short story or novelette seriously disfigure the unity of the work:
the meandering interludes depicting the sorry state of Jerry Coloqhoun’s love
life in “The Madonna” are entirely irrelevant to the central plot of the story.
Miraculously, however, all this changes in The Damnation Game. In some
fashion or other, Barker has here produced a sparklingly flawless weird novel
that redeems all the absurdities of his earlier Books of Blood and all the verbosity
of his later novels. What is more, it fulfills the conditions of an actual weird
novel, or at least avoids Thomas Ligotti’s criticism of the average weird novel as
merely a mystery or suspense tale with horrific or supernatural interludes. The
Damnation Game has indeed been conceived as a weird novel, and the
supernatural manifestations are of such a sort as to require novel length for their
proper realization.
The first thing that strikes us about this work is the pervasiveness of the
game motif. We have already seen indications of its fascination for Barker in
“The Inhuman Condition” (the knots whose resolution releases the horror), and
we shall see it later in “The Hellbound Heart” with its mysterious box that must

be decoded to unleash the Cenobites. Here, however, it structures the entire
novel. Joseph Whitehead, a petty thief and gambler preying upon the ruins of
postwar Warsaw, hears of a mysterious figure, Mamoulian, who has never lost at
cards. Moreover, those who play against him and lose often meet hideous deaths.
Whitehead, his curiosity piqued (and also perhaps offended by this challenge to
his own prowess at games of chance), seeks out Mamoulian (or is perhaps led to
him), challenges him to a game of cards, and wins (or is perhaps allowed to
win). Years pass, and Whitehead returns to England. It transpires that, as a result
of his victory over Mamoulian, he has gained spectacular wealth, power, and
prestige. But now he increasingly senses that Mamoulian is after him in order to
exact some sort of revenge, the purpose of which Whitehead cannot clearly
ascertain.
The crucial point in the novel is the exact nature of the “game” that
Whitehead “won” from Mamoulian. Marty Strauss—who, although merely an
ex-convict hired by Whitehead to be his bodyguard, becomes the focal character
of the novel—is made aware of the means by which Whitehead accumulated his
fortune:
Life was a random business. Whitehead had learned that lesson years
ago, at the hands of a master, and he had never forgotten it. Whether you
were rewarded for your good works or skinned alive, it was all down to
chance. No use to cleave to some system of numbers or divinities; they all
crumbled in the end. Fortune belonged to the man who was willing to risk
everything on a single throw.
He’d done that. Not once, but many times at the beginning of his
career, when he was laying the foundations of his empire. And thanks to
that extraordinary sixth sense he possessed, the ability to preempt the roll of
the dice, the risks had almost always paid off…. When it came to knowing
the moment, for sensing the collision of time and opportunity that made a
good decision into a great one, a commonplace takeover into a coup,
nobody was Old Man Whitehead’s superior… [DG 48].
This is not mere rhetorical praise for a business genius; it is all meant
literally, as Strauss begins to sense. “Suppose Whitehead could put his finger on
the wheel anytime he wanted to, so that even the petty chance of a fox running to
the right or left was available to him? Could he know the future before it
happened—was that why the chips tingled, and fingers too?—or was he shaping
it?” (DG 141). The game Whitehead “won” from Mamoulian was the control of
chance. As Mamoulian once told Whitehead, “‘All life is chance…. The trick is
learning how to use it’” (DG 230).
But how did Mamoulian himself gain this quality? He is merely a human

being, albeit with superhuman powers. He scoffs at Whitehead’s query toward
the end as to whether he is the Devil: “‘You know I’m not…. Every man is his
own Mephistopheles’” (DG 348). We finally learn of Mamoulian’s past through
Whitehead’s daughter Carys, a “sensitive” who can probe people’s minds. She
ultimately summons up the courage to enter Mamoulian’s mind and finds that, as
a sergeant in the army, he was nearly executed before a firing squad when
“‘Chance stepped in on your behalf’” (DG 309), as a monk who rescues him
remarks. This monk teaches Mamoulian all he knows: how to resurrect the dead,
how to “‘take life from other people, and have it for yourself’” (DG 309), and
how to control chance. Mamoulian kills the monk, so that this knowledge is his
alone, but later he realizes that the monk really wanted to die once he had passed
on his information (the influence of Melmoth the Wanderer is very obvious
here). And what does Mamoulian himself want if not the same thing? “‘Don’t
you see how terrible it is to live when everything around you perishes? And the
more the years pass the more the thought of death freezes your bowels, because
the longer you avoid it the worse you imagine it must be? And you start to long
—oh, how you long—for someone to take pity on you, someone to embrace you
and share your terrors. And, at the end, someone to go into the dark with you’”
(DG 311). Whitehead is that person whom Mamoulian wants to accompany him
in death, but Whitehead has cheated him.
“He squandered all my teachings, all my knowledge, threw it away for
greed’s sake, for power’s sake, for the life of the body. Appetite! All gone
for appetite. All my precious love, wasted!” Marty could hear, in his litany,
the voice of the puritan—a monk’s voice, perhaps?—the rage of a creature
who wanted the world purer than it was and lived in torment because it saw
only filth and flesh sweating to make more flesh, more filth. What hope of
sanity in such a place? Except to find a soul to share the torment, a lover to
hate the world with. Whitehead had been such a partner. And now
Mamoulian was being true to his lover’s soul: wanting, at the end, to go
into death with the only other creature he had ever trusted. “We’ll go to
nothing…” he breathed, and the breath was a promise. “All of us, go to
nothing. Down! Down!” [DG 312].
The portrait of Mamoulian is extraordinarily complex, inspiring at once
horror, pathos, and awe. For the one and only time in his writing Barker has
abandoned his good versus evil dichotomy to present a rich and intricate conflict
of wills. There is no flaw in The Damnation Game: its structure is perfect, its
characters substantial and fully developed, its style pure and clean (he must have
had a good copy editor), and its denouement powerful and satisfying. Although
it is part horror story, part historical novel, part mainstream novel, and part

detective story, the supernatural premise structures the entire work.
With Weaveworld, The Great and Secret Show, and Imajica Barker is
attempting to do something very different. Perhaps irked by the charge that he
writes only about gruesome physical horror, Barker in these novels seeks a union
between imaginary-world fantasy and supernatural horror. The union is
reasonably successful in Weaveworld; much less so in The Great and Secret
Show and Imajica. What is still more curious is that the fundamental theme of
the first two works is really very much the same, and one wonders why Barker
needs two very hefty novels (and the prospect of at least three more sequels to
The Great and Secret Show) to expound a theme that is not intrinsically
interesting—or, at any rate, one that Barker does not treat in a very interesting
manner.
This theme is the power of art and the imagination: this is all that both these
novels are about. In Weaveworld we encounter an elaborately woven carpet
endowed with magical powers: it contains an entire realm of entity within its
substance. It quickly becomes clear that the Weaveworld is nothing but a symbol
for art. “Every inch of the carpet was worked with motifs. Even the border
brimmed with designs, each subtly different from its neighbor. The effect was
not overbusy; every detail was clear to Cal’s feasting eyes. In one place a dozen
motifs congregated as if banded together; in another, they stood apart like rival
siblings. Some kept their station along the border; others spilled into the main
field, as if eager to join the teeming throng there” (W 32). And the Weaveworld
itself, full of wondrous landscapes and bizarre but enchanting creatures, is also a
transparent symbol for the power of the imagination to transform the ordinary
into the magical. As is stated toward the end, “Magic might be bestowed upon
the physical, but it didn’t reside there. It resided in the word, which was the
mind spoken” (W 428).
Once this symbolism is established, however, nothing in particular is done
with it. Instead, we lapse again into a good versus evil paradigm where some
cardboard villains—the oily salesman Shadwell, the evil policeman Inspector
Hobart—attempt to gain control of the carpet either for personal gain or in order
to rule the Weaveworld. Two young people, Cal and Suzanna, with assistance
from various cute denizens of the Weaveworld, come to the carpet’s rescue and
save it from desecration. Indeed, the last two-thirds of the novel are nothing
more than an adventure story relating the battle for the possession of the carpet.
All symbolism pertaining to the Weaveworld and its appurtenances is ignored.
The remark in Weaveworld that the basic “story” of the weave is “‘about
being born, and being afraid of dying, and how love saves us’” (W 348),
however platitudinous it may be, seems to be the fundamental message of The

Great and Secret Show, subtitled “The First Book of The Art.” Here we are
involved with a mysterious “dream-sea” called Quiddity, which appears to us at
three critical junctures of our lives: “‘It’s a dream of what it means to be born,
and fall in love, and die. A dream that explains what being is for’” (GSS 211).
The whole of this interminable and tiresome novel involves the attempts by
various good or evil persons to gain control of Quiddity, which again is nothing
more than a symbol for our imaginations.
He no longer cared what words were most appropriate for this reality
[Quiddity]: whether it was another dimension or a state of mind was not
relevant. They were probably one and the same anyhow. What did matter
was the holiness of this place. He didn’t doubt for a moment that all that
he’d gleaned about Quiddity and the Ephemeris was true. This was the
place in which all his species knew of glory got their glimpses. A constant
place; a place of comfort, where the body was forgotten (except for
trespassers like himself) and the dreaming soul knew flight, and mystery
[GSS 566].
And when we put together statements like this with other remarks such as
“‘The real mystery—the only mystery—is inside our heads’” (GSS 211) and
with the assertion that one of the villains wants to “‘own the dreamlife of the
world’” (GSS 344), there is little doubt as to the nature of Quiddity. But the
brutal truth is that Barker has not made this conception interesting enough to
sustain a novel of such enormous length, much less the three or four projected
sequels he has in mind. If he really carries through his threat of writing four
books the size of this one on a theme he presents with such a poverty of interest
and complexity, then he may have made the greatest mistake of his career.
Perhaps affected by the poor response to The Great and Secret Show,
Barker has temporarily (and one hopes permanently) abandoned the continuation
of “The Art” and written another imaginary-world fantasy. Imajica, however, is
as beset with conceptual difficulties as its predecessor. And its gargantuan length
(it is by far the longest of his novels) painfully emphasizes its diffuseness and
lack of focus and makes one wonder whether, in discarding supernatural horror
for pure fantasy, he has not made a disastrous aesthetic decision.
It would be tedious and unprofitable to examine the plot of this shambling
behemoth of a novel. Suffice it to say that we are dealing with one John Furie
Zacharias, a womanizer and painter of forgeries who proves to be the hand-
picked “Reconciler” of the Five Dominions. The Fifth Dominion is the Earth,
and the other four exist in some wholly undefined relation to it. Opposing him is
an ancient society called the Tabula Rasa, which wishes to maintain the barriers
between this Dominion and the others, but is wiped out with surprising ease by

the Autarch Sartori, the ruler of the Second Dominion who comes to Earth to
establish his dictatorship here.
Barker’s supporters (like those of Stephen King) are fond of referring to the
“epic” imaginative sweep of this novel, as if mere bulk is sufficient to give a
work an “epic” quality. The fact is, Barker’s imagination (or sense of logic) fails
at key points: in defining the relationship between the Dominions; in
distinguishing one Dominion from another; in depicting a plausible means of
traveling between Dominions (one character, evidently speaking for Barker,
announces, “‘I don’t fully understand the mechanisms that carry us over…. I’m
not sure anybody does completely’” [I 333–34]); and, most significantly, in
specifying what a “Reconciliation” of the Dominions will actually mean. This
last failure is critical: with readers kept utterly in the dark about the nature,
purpose, and effect of Zacharias’s quest, the novel cannot even gain any sense of
dramatic tension as to whether the reconciliation will or should come about.
There is some suggestion of a conflict between reason (now preeminent in
the Fifth Dominion) and magic. In referring to the attempt by one minor
character, Chant, to cross Dominions, the narrator remarks, “…the power to do
so, which was usually—and contemptuously—referred to as magic, had been
waning in the Fifth since Chant had first arrived. He’d seen the walls of reason
built against it, brick by brick” (I 24). But beyond such fleeting mentions, very
little is made of this. One wonders, in any event, what purpose will be served by
the Reconciliation, since—aside from sundry odd-looking animals and quasi-
human beings—the other Dominions seem just as mundane as our own. “A
sizeable part of him wanted to exit this Dominion once and for all. Take himself
off to Yzordderex and set up business with Peccable; marry Hoi-Polloi despite
her crossed eyes; have a litter of kids and retire to the Hills of the Conscious
Cloud, in the Third, and raise parrots” (I 74). This passage also reveals Barker’s
uncanny knack of creating the most ungainly imaginary names I have lately run
across in fantasy fiction.
Along the way various other themes and motifs are thrown out, but in such
a haphazard and confused way that they fail (if I may say so) to be reconciled
into a unified whole. There are innumerable archly pretentious descriptions of
sex (between man and woman, man and man, woman and woman, and man and
some third gender from one of the Dominions) with the suggestion that sex has
some transcendent power or function associated with the Reconciliation, but one
never knows what it is. There is a half-baked parody of feminism in the notion
that the goddesses of the other Dominions are imprisoned or killed by the “God
of Gods” (I 294), Hapexamendios; there are suggestions that the spirits of all the
dead people in the world will somehow return once the Reconciliation takes

place. And on and on and on. Once again Barker has bitten off more than he can
chew: he does not have either the philosophic vision or the narrative skill to
unify these diverse threads, and the novel peters out ridiculously at the end. One
can only hope that he does not intend a sequel to this ambling leviathan.
A curious aspect of Barker’s supernatural work is that the horror revolves
wholly around the physical harm that may come to human beings. There is no
sign of Lovecraft’s “cosmic” vision, whereby human events are seen against the
vast backdrop of the uncaring universe, nor even much of an indication that
harm to the physical body may not be the apex of horror. No doubt Barker, by
consciously tailoring his work to “mainstream” criteria regarding the importance
of human relationships, imagines that this limiting of perspective might render
his work more acceptable to the general literary community, but the end result is
simply a narrowness of vision and conception. Even his most “cosmic” monster
—the huge entities in “In the Hills, the Cities”—is made up of human beings.
And even this impressive spectacle suffers from a bathetic anticlimax as Barker
remarks at a key point in the narrative, “Was there ever a sight in Europe the
equal of it?” (BB1, 207). “Rawhead Rex,” although not human, is simply a giant
somewhat larger and stronger than a human being; even in The Damnation
Game all the characters are simply human or (as with Anthony Breer, a
loathsome individual resurrected from the dead by Mamoulian) perversions of
the human. In Barker’s later work it is certainly suggested that the mind controls
the body and that therefore the horrors of the mind surpass those of the body.
But, firstly, we are still dealing with a human perspective and, secondly, there is
still vastly more harm done to the characters’ bodies than to their minds or spirits
or imaginations.
And yet, Barker reveals himself (in the many interviews he has given and in
the critical essays and introductions he has written) to be a surprisingly articulate
and stimulating spokesman for weird fiction in general and for his brand of
weird fiction (explicit, physically extreme horror) in particular. Even here,
however, I have some problems. He speaks repeatedly of the need for weird
fiction to be grounded in “metaphysics.” We live, Barker feels (surely correctly),
in a world where the “banal” reigns supreme—in television, in newspapers, in
most of our daily lives. Accordingly, weird fiction must be “confrontational” and
“subversive,” waking us up from our listlessness and lethargy (SE 202–3). I
believe he is on firm ground here, but I am not convinced that his own fiction
actually embodies these principles. (This is what used to be called the gap
between intention and achievement, before intention was banished from critical
theory.) Barker criticizes Stephen King for his all too frequent good-versus-evil
scenarios wherein the monster is portrayed as a “pure other” that must be

extirpated for the good of the world (SE 74–75), but we have already seen that
Barker has himself fallen into a very similar pattern in some of his own work,
notably Weaveworld and The Great and Secret Show. Perhaps Barker expressed
his views most clearly and succinctly in a 1988 interview:
I’m not just writing to horrify, I’m writing to disturb, excite and
subvert. Those functions are best served by the clearest possible views of
the imagined scenes. I never cut to shadows—never cut away the moment
of maximum revelation. What is revealed can be a moment of
transcendence or disgust or self-comprehension or all three. It can be erotic,
it can be funny, it can be foul. Those ambiguities and paradoxes are best
arrived at if you show all there is to see [SE 77].
This sounds good in theory, but in practice I fear that repeated doses of
mere physical horror do not excite terror or disgust as much as…boredom.
Barker says in a cocksure fashion that “What you can’t do to most of the images
in my books is ignore them” (SE 202). Well, yes you can, since after a while
they all start sounding the same. The only solution for someone in Barker’s
position is either to increase the dosage (as in The Damnation Game and his
films) or to opt for a different mode of writing altogether (as in Weaveworld and
its successors). In a sense I can understand and even sympathize with Barker’s
impatience with the subtlety, indirection, and suggestiveness of much traditional
weird fiction, which can on occasion lead to excessive obscurity (Robert
Aickman) or tameness (some of M. R. James and most of his disciples). But
Barker’s own frenetic pyrotechnics have drawbacks of their own. I defy anyone
to read his “The Midnight Meat Train” and then T. E. D. Klein’s “Children of
the Kingdom,” and not come away with a vastly greater impression of the
horrors that may dwell on the underside of New York City from Klein’s tale than
from Barker’s. Klein cannot possibly be accused of pulling any punches—his
denouement is as horrifying as anything I have read in modern literature. It is
simply that his tale is written with an elegance, meticulousness, and atmospheric
tensity that Barker can only dream of. Indeed, Barker at times disingenuously
makes a virtue of his carelessness in conception and style, as if such a thing is
somehow inextricable from in the message he is trying to convey:
I’m an inclusionist…. Whatever is going through my head at a given
time goes into the mix…. I don’t think of myself as a slick artist. I think I’m
kind of clunky in lots of ways. I don’t actually mind the clunkiness. It’s part
of what I am…. I think everything I’ve done is rough-hewn. If it were not
rough-hewn, I’d actually be simplifying it, I’d often be taking out
paradoxes, I’d often be taking out contradictions, I’d often be taking out a
kind of richness. Which would be highly regrettable.18

Barker may not be “slick,” but this is just about the slickest defense of
clumsy, ill-conceived writing I can think of.
What, in the end, is the verdict on Clive Barker? The honest truth is that,
with the sole exceptions of The Damnation Game and a handful of stories, the
entirety of his work is marred by poor conception and construction, slipshod
writing, excessive violence that serves no aesthetic purpose, and, in general,
simply a lack of depth and substance. His later novels make vast pretensions to
profundity but fail utterly to deliver on the promise. If Weaveworld effects a
fairly convincing union of horror and fantasy, then he has seriously erred in
embarking on what appears to be an interminable multinovel series with The
Great and Secret Show, which exhibits a complete lack of focus, direction, or
purpose. If Barker truly is, as Stephen King claimed, the “future” of horror, then
the field is in deep trouble.

 
III. RAMSEY CAMPBELL: THE FICTION OF PARANOIA
Although British writer Ramsey Campbell (b. 1946) does not have even a
fraction of the popular following of Stephen King, Clive Barker, Anne Rice, or
Peter Straub, there seems to be general agreement among critics in the field that
he is the leading weird fictionist of our time. But like Lord Dunsany and
Algernon Blackwood, Campbell has more often been praised than studied, and
little critical work of substance has been devoted to him. We are now, however,
at a stage where important study of him can begin. Not only does he now have
an impressive and voluminous body of writing, but he has recently made
available a bibliography of his own work, arranged chronologically by date of
writing, so that it is possible to trace his literary evolution with much precision.
(Throughout this essay, accordingly, all dates appearing in square brackets refer
to years of composition.) His bibliography shows that Campbell is not merely
one of the most prolific of modern weird writers, but perhaps the most
precocious. His first volume, the piquantly titled The Inhabitant of the Lake and
Less Welcome Tenants (1964), was issued by Arkham House when Campbell
was 18, but some of the stories in that collection actually date to as early as his
fourteenth year. (He has even been so generous as to make available a juvenile
volume, Ghostly Tales, that he wrote when he was about 11. In the introduction
to The Height of the Scream he reprinted a poem published when he was five
and a story written at the age of seven and a half [HS xiii–xx].) It is true that the
tales in his first published volume are, on the whole, rather lurid and bombastic
imitations of Lovecraft’s “Cthulhu Mythos,” but they are written with such
vitality and enthusiasm as to be on the whole superior to the mechanical
imitations of such purportedly mature authors as Brian Lumley and even August
Derleth. It was nine years before Campbell published his next volume, Demons
by Daylight (1973), a towering landmark in the history of weird fiction. What
has not been known until now is that some versions of those stories (leagues
beyond his early imitative work) date to his seventeenth year, and several final
drafts were completed by the time he was 21. His development from competent
apprentice to assured master was remarkably rapid.
If we date the commencement of Campbell’s mature writing to 1965, then it
would be a full decade before he would complete his first novel, The Doll Who
Ate His Mother [1975]. In the 1990 introduction to Demons by Daylight he
speaks of conceiving a science-fiction novel around 1973, although it was never
begun. In the introduction to The Height of the Scream he notes: “I never did

have the staying power to finish writing a novel. But that won’t be true of the
one I’m writing now, however” (HS xx). He had written nearly 150 short stories
before writing The Doll Who Ate His Mother; from 1976 to 1992, however, he
wrote 11 novels (excluding three novelizations of films written rapidly in 1976
and published under the house name “Carl Dreadstone”) but fewer than 100
short stories. This shift from short story writing to novel writing has been a
mixed benefit. To be sure, the novels have given Campbell greater visibility in
the literary arena, and several are notable successes (The Face That Must Die,
Incarnate, Midnight Sun), but one cannot help feeling that his distinctively
hallucinatory and elliptical style, like Robert Aickman’s and Thomas Ligotti’s
(the one a mentor of his, the other a disciple), is best suited to the short story.
Only two or three of Campbell’s novels rank with the absolute masterpieces of
the form, but easily a score of his short tales can take their place with the best
weird writing of all time, and several dozen others are tales we would be much
the poorer without.
Campbell has passed through several stages in his short story writing, and
these stages are exhibited with fair accuracy in his five principal short story
collections. The Inhabitant of the Lake (1964) gathers many of his stories written
between 1960 and 1963; Demons by Daylight (1973) prints stories written from
1966 to 1969 (although some were drafted as early as 1963); The Height of the
Scream (1976) collects stories written from 1967 to 1974 (with the exception of
“The Cellars” [1965]); Dark Companions (1982) contains one story (“Napier
Court”) written in 1967 but otherwise collects stories written between 1974 and
1978; and Waking Nightmares (1991) collects stories written from 1980 to 1988
(one was written in 1974 and another in 1976). Other of Campbell’s collections
—Cold Print (1985), Black Wine (1986), Night Visions 3 (1986), Scared Stiff
(1986)—contain stories written over a wide interval, while the chief virtue of the
recent Strange Things and Stranger Places (1993) is that it makes available to
American readers his scintillating novella Needing Ghosts. Dark Feasts (1987)
is a fine retrospective of some of his best work over the entirety of his career,
from 1960 to 1986, but is superseded by its revised edition, the magnificent
Alone with the Horrors (1991), an omnibus that may rank as the finest single
volume of weird fiction since Lovecraft’s The Outsider and Others (1939). Quite
a number of Campbell’s stories, however, remain uncollected.
Campbell’s progression as a short fictionist is suggestive. Leaving behind
the Lovecraftian imitations of The Inhabitant of the Lake, he adopted a
hallucinatory, dreamlike, and almost surrealist style (derived jointly from Robert
Aickman and Vladimir Nabokov) in Demons by Daylight. In his 1990
introduction to that collection he wryly notes Donald Wandrei’s belief that “one

underlying theme of the book was drug use.”1 By 1968 Campbell had already
mined this vein nearly to its limit, and he seemed for the next several years to be
searching for a new or different style to express his vision. The Height of the
Scream strikes me as in some ways more experimental than its predecessor, or at
any rate more tentative and heterogeneous. The very diversity of tone of the tales
in this collection makes it less unified than Demons by Daylight, and many of
the stories seem uninspired, overly obscure, and even a little self-indulgent.
Perhaps he was simply writing too much. He wrote 17 stories in 1973 and 27 in
1974: more than he has written in any other year.
But Dark Companions shows that he found a new voice as a short story
writer. The dream imagery of the Demons by Daylight period is not abandoned
but harnessed: the stories are now set more firmly in the mundane world, but
Campbell’s focus on individual psychology allows dreamlike effects to enter
precisely at the moment when the horror is beginning to manifest itself. His
fascination with the complexities of human relationships, typical of Demons by
Daylight, has given way to an intense concern with loneliness, both physical and
psychological. Recall that it was in this period that he wrote his masterwork of
solitary paranoia, The Face That Must Die.
With the stories of the Waking Nightmares period we see Campbell at the
very height of his short story technique. He is now no longer content to work in
a single style or mood, but varies them as the theme or subject warrants. Perhaps
this is a result of his relative sparseness of output in the short story: in the ten-
year period of 1981–90 he wrote only 28 short stories; in the years 1981, 1982,
and 1989 he wrote none at all.2 Accordingly, we have stories of all types here,
from dreamlike prose poems (“Just Waiting” [DF]) to an updating of the
conventional English ghost story (“Watch the Birdie” [WN]) to fiercely paranoid
first-person accounts (“Next Time You’ll Know Me” [WN]) to grimly realistic
tales of supernatural horror (“Old Clothes” [WN]). A curious development is a
very faint optimism in some of these tales (perhaps derived from his novels,
many of which have provisionally “happy” endings): whereas previous
Campbell protagonists meet their loathsome fates with dreary resignation, we
find that “In the Trees” (NV) the narrator escapes bodily harm, even though his
spirit is shattered; in “Old Clothes” the narrator manages to transfer the horror
(embodied in a raincoat) to someone else; and in “Apples” (DF) children
actually suppress a horror in the end. I do not know that much is to be made of
this: Campbell’s world remains, on the whole, as profoundly dispiriting as ever.
I am less certain of the overall course or development of Campbell’s
novels, as they do not appear to have very many thematic connections either

with his short work or with each other. There is, on the whole, a regrettable
tendency to describe at great length and detail the lives of commonplace middle-
class characters, with a special concentration on personal relationships and
family life. The weird scenarios frequently grow out of or are directed toward
these relationships. He seems to forgo the distinctively warped view of the world
he or his characters adopt in the short stories, replacing it instead with a
conventional outlook that suggests that these ordinary people and their concerns
are somehow significant in themselves. I myself find his novels compelling only
when they are told from some twisted perspective (The Face That Must Die, The
Count of Eleven) or when they suggest that human beings are symbols for vaster
phenomena (Incarnate, Midnight Sun). There are many writers who can write
about cheerful bourgeois characters and their wholesome, well-adjusted children,
but only Campbell can write the fiction of paranoia. This is why the novelette
Needing Ghosts may be his finest work.

BEFORE AND AFTER LOVECRAFT
Campbell’s Ghostly Tales [1957/58] is a delight. Consisting of 16 stories
(some very short, others quite long) the volume reveals a rather surprising
diversity of tone and style, and Campbell need feel no embarrassment at the
exhibition of his 11-year-old juvenilia: certainly Lovecraft’s story “The
Mysterious Ship” (1902), written at the age of 12, is far worse. Lovecraft, in
fact, is not the focus of this collection. It opens with a weird poem rather in the
manner of Thomas Lovell Beddoes, and at one point M. R. James is cited by
name (GT 37). The one explicitly Lovecraftian reference is amusing: coming
upon the term “shoggoth,” a character looks it up in the dictionary (!), where it is
defined: “evil spirit or demon in the shape of a tree with mouths scattered over
its trunk” (GT 9). Lovecraft would, no doubt, have been startled to read this
definition, since his shoggoth is a 15-foot protoplasmic amoeba. But Campbell
has mentioned to me that the definition is derived from Robert Bloch’s
“Notebook Found in a Deserted House.” Nevertheless, by 1960–61, when the
first of the tales to be included in The Inhabitant of the Lake were written,
Campbell had grasped, and even begun very tentatively to go beyond, the
Lovecraftian influence.
“The Tomb-Herd” and “The Tower from Yuggoth” [both 1960–61] testify
to Campbell’s desire, as he writes in the 1990 introduction to Demons by
Daylight, “to sound as much like H. P. Lovecraft as I could.” The former is set in
Lovecraft’s Kingsport; the latter in Arkham. Moreover, both seem to take place
in Lovecraft’s own era rather than in Campbell’s: although the date of “The
Tomb-Herd” is not specified, “The Tower from Yuggoth” is clearly set in 1929,
and its hero is given the transparently Lovecraftian name of Edward Wingate
Armitage. In terms of style, the opening of “The Tomb-Herd” says it all: “There
are myriad unspeakable terrors in the cosmos in which our universe is but an
atom; and the two gates of agony, life and death, gape to pour forth infinities of
abominations. And the other gates which spew forth their broods are, thank God,
little known to us” (TH 3). It is just as well that neither of these stories was
actually included in The Inhabitant of the Lake. The first of Campbell’s stories
that was included is “The Horror from the Bridge,” and it is in this story that
Campbell introduces his British analogue for Lovecraft’s mythical New England
topography. In the course of his early stories Campbell (at the suggestion of
August Derleth [CP 4]) invented such towns as Severnford, Temphill,
Brichester, Camside, Goatswood, and Clotton, all evidently set in the Severn

valley and all conforming approximately to Lovecraft’s Arkham, Dunwich,
Kingsport, and Innsmouth. But even “The Horror from the Bridge” is still set in
1931, as if he were satisfied in merely transplanting the Lovecraftian scenario to
another location.
Mechanically imitative as most of these early stories may be, some of them
already betray signs that Campbell was seeking to move beyond the
Lovecraftian influence. “The Church in High Street” [1960–61] and “The
Render of the Veils” [1962] contain considerably more dialogue than was
Lovecraft’s wont. The former tale, a revision of “The Tomb-Herd,” is now set in
Temphill. Other tales reveal a clever adaptation of Lovecraftian themes. “The
Insects from Shaggai” utilizes the notion of insects penetrating a man’s brain,
which, as Campbell admits (CP 5–6), was taken from a late entry in Lovecraft’s
commonplace book, as were the plots of a number of other early Campbell
stories. “The Inhabitant of the Lake” resembles Lovecraft’s “The Whisperer in
Darkness” in its use of the documentary style—in this instance, correspondence
between 
the 
two 
protagonists—to 
achieve 
narrative 
distancing 
and
verisimilitude. And, of course, Campbell cannot resist concocting his own
Lovecraftian god (Glaaki, first cited in “The Room in the Castle”) and mythical
book (The Revelations of Glaaki, first cited in “The Render of the Veils”). All
these devices would be used to much greater effect in some of the Demons by
Daylight stories.
Even before the publication of The Inhabitant of the Lake, however,
Campbell was seeking to shed the Lovecraftian cloak he had donned.
In 1963 he produced the first draft of “The Interloper,” one of the more
memorable tales in Demons by Daylight. “Before the Storm” [1965] is an
exceptionally bizarre dream-fantasy, although it is still rooted in Lovecraft’s
Mythos. But if we are to look for any single story of Campbell’s that marks his
declaration of independence from Lovecraft, it is “The Cellars” [1965]. Not only
is this Campbell’s first tale to be set in his native Liverpool, it is in other ways
typical of his later work—in its focus on human relationships, its evocation of
the squalor of urban decay, its oblique narration, and its nebulous, indirect, and
nearly incomprehensible horrific climax.
Campbell has spoken frequently of Lovecraft’s influence upon his work,
most extensively in the introduction to Cold Print (1985), a collection of his
Lovecraftian tales; but other remarks are also illuminating. In the 1990
introduction to Demons by Daylight he remarks that in that collection he was
striving to be as unlike Lovecraft as possible: “Having imitated Lovecraft, I
rejected him with all the obstreperousness of a fanzine contributor determined to
make a name for himself at the expense of his betters.” His most insightful

comment may be in the introduction to The Height of the Scream: “Lovecraft
had rooted his horrors in recognizable settings; I wanted to root mine in
recognizable human behavior, an altogether more universal thing” (HS xi). This
may not be entirely fair to Lovecraft; there is far more realism in Lovecraft than
mere settings, and the absence of vivid characters or relationships in his work is
a direct result of his portrayal of humanity’s inconsequence in an infinite and
uncaring cosmos. But it adequately conveys not merely Campbell’s own
difference from Lovecraft but the overall tendency of all post–Lovecraftian
weird fiction, a tendency that Campbell has exemplified more distinctively and
powerfully than any of his contemporaries. This tendency may be very crudely
defined as the shift from the cosmic to the human. When Campbell remarks that
Lovecraft’s “minimal characterization and plot work because they are right for
him” (HS x–xi), he is suggesting that it is not characters but phenomena that
form the true heart of Lovecraft’s fiction, whereas for Campbell (as for most
other modern weird writers) the human characters become not merely the object
of the reader’s sympathy but the sole or prime focus of the horrific scenario. At
its worst this tendency leads to Dziemianowicz’s “banalization” of horror: the
creation of an obvious and sentimental realism based upon the mundane
activities of ordinary middle-class people (Stephen King, Charles L. Grant), or
else an emphasis on crudely physical horror centering around the harm that can
be done to the human body (Clive Barker). In Campbell, however, the focus on
the human takes the form of an extremely intense concentration on individual
consciousness, to the degree that much of his work approaches stream of
consciousness while still retaining a sort of clinical detachment. As a result, his
vision is distinctly lacking in Lovecraftian cosmicism, and even later tales in
which he attempts to arouse a sense of cosmic fear (“The Tugging,” “The Voice
of the Beach”) seem half-hearted and unconvincing. Indeed, some of Campbell’s
most genuinely cosmic tales tend to be entirely un–Lovecraftian, such as the
nightmarish “Playing the Game” (WN).
Two magnificent tales in which Campbell reveals himself to have fully
assimilated the Lovecraftian influence while at the same time speaking in his
own voice are “Cold Print” [1966–67] and “The Franklyn Paragraphs” [1967].
The former vividly etches the milieu of Brichester, with its dismal slums and its
inhabitants stunted and imaginationless from poverty and urban decay.
Campbell’s later admission that Brichester had by now become merely a
metaphor for Liverpool (“My invented town of Brichester, originally intended as
the Severn Valley equivalent of Lovecraft’s Arkham, was Liverpool by now in
all but name” [FD xxi]) only confirms what we suspected all along. His great
innovation in this story was to revivify the stale concept of the mythical book of

occult lore (which, even toward the end of Lovecraft’s own career, had become
more and more of a game or in-joke) by linking it to the world of violent
pornography. His seedy narrator, entering a bookstore on the edge of town, is not
some scholarly antiquarian seeking forbidden knowledge: he has come to find
books analogous to those he has purchased elsewhere—Miss Whippe, Old-Style
Governess and Prefects and Fags (CP 199); but the Revelations prove more than
he bargained for. It is exactly in such a place that the horror originally inspired
by Lovecraft’s Necronomicon can be recreated in the present day.
“The Franklyn Paragraphs” is Campbell’s most audacious attempt to mimic
—and perhaps also to parody—Lovecraft’s documentary style. Campbell
himself appears as a character in the story, acting as narrator and engaging in a
correspondence with the eccentric writer Errol Undercliffe.3 At one point
Undercliffe criticizes one of Campbell’s own stories, “The Stocking” (elsewhere
in Demons by Daylight), dismissing it as “elaborately pointless” (DD 33): it is as
if Undercliffe is a sort of maturer version of Campbell himself, one who can
examine Campbell’s work with the objectivity that greater years and greater
experience as a writer bring. The story is written as if it were a critical article,
with Lovecraft’s own Mythos the subject of the commentary. Undercliffe
discovers a strange volume by one Roland Franklyn, We Pass from View;
Campbell (the narrator) claims that it “displays marked affinities with the
Cthulhu Mythos in certain passages, [but] such Lovecraft scholars as Derleth,
Lin Carter, Timothy d’Arch Smith and J. Vernon Shea can supply no
information on the book” (DD 31). Later Campbell reproduces the British
National Bibliography entry for the book (his years spent working in a library
were not spent in vain) and also the scornful Times Literary Supplement review
of it.
But “The Franklyn Paragraphs” is more than a succession of playful in-
jokes; it is one of the most insidiously horrific tales of Campbell’s early period.
Its power stems both from the subtlety and the indirection of its execution. As
frequently in Lovecraft, narrative distance is taken almost to an extreme: at one
point Campbell the narrator quotes a letter from Undercliffe who quotes a
passage of Franklyn’s book. In fact, there is an additional level of narrative
distance here, since Campbell the author must be separated from the persona he
has adopted as narrator of the story. Moreover, the story, as frequently in his
later work, probes the relationship between writing and reality. What happens if
an actual horror descends upon the writer of supernatural fiction? Should he not
be prepared for it, given his predisposition to the weird? Undercliffe concludes
that the opposite is the case: “Even the supernatural-story writer who believes
what he writes (and I’m not saying I don’t) isn’t prepared for an actual

confrontation. Quite the reverse, for every time he fabricates the supernatural in
a story (unless based on experience) he clinches his skepticism; he knows such
things can’t be, because he wrote them. Thus for him a confrontation would be
doubly upsetting” (DD 42). And when Franklyn’s widow tells Undercliffe what
would happen if he were to experience the supernatural (“‘God! You’d never
write about it, you’d never write about anything again’” [DD 42]), we see the
reason for the fragmentary and halting nature of Undercliffe’s last letter.
This richly textured story—with its complex network of narrative voices, its
attempt to maintain a harried sobriety in the face of unthinkable horror, and its
gradual build-up to a spectacularly powerful climax—is the summation of
Campbell’s Lovecraftian work. Undercliffe’s final message—“No longer could I
trust the surface of the world” (DD 44)—is exactly the burden of Lovecraft’s
work, but is here expressed with a vividness that is Campbell’s own. In the
contributors’ notes to his anthology New Tales of the Cthulhu Mythos (1980)
Campbell notes that “One of his ambitions is to write a single successful
Lovecraftian story” (NT 255). If this is so, then he can rest at ease, for in “Cold
Print” and “The Franklyn Paragraphs” he has twice accomplished the feat.
Although he has returned sporadically to the Lovecraftian mode in
subsequent stories, it is well that Campbell so quickly decided to speak in his
own voice, however adept and powerful some of his Lovecraftian imitations are.
His manifesto in this direction was Demons by Daylight. I am not alone in
remembering the shock I experienced when coming innocently upon that
volume, for who could have predicted that its 27-year-old author would develop
so quickly from the pastichist he had been?

DREAM AND REALITY
What makes many of the Demons by Daylight stories so successful is the
dreamlike—or nightmarish—atmosphere they evoke through an almost
Proustian focusing upon the shifting thoughts and emotions of the protagonists.
This quasi–stream of consciousness helps to blur the distinction between dream,
hallucination, memory, and reality in such a way that the supernatural
phenomena—which might otherwise appear highly implausible or ludicrous if
narrated with the objective realism of a Lovecraft—seem both strangely natural
and chillingly intense. “The End of a Summer’s Day” is prototypical. In this
story a couple, Maria and Tony, enter a cave as part of a tour group. Tony gets
lost in the cave, but no one believes Maria when she pleads that he is still inside
when all the others have emerged. This simple scenario raises a host of
unanswerable queries: is there a conspiracy against Maria to deprive her of her
lover; did Tony ever exist at all outside of her imagination; and who is the blind
man whom all the others in the tour group insist is her companion?
“Concussion” is, to my mind, the finest tale in Demons by Daylight, and it
again displays Campbell’s ability to mingle pathos and horror seamlessly. The
premise of the story seems grotesquely unlikely—an old man finds that a young
woman he meets on a bus is the same woman he once loved as a youth, as in
some strange fashion she has gone back in time to reenact the same scenario 50
years ago. But the heartrending poignancy of the tale rests not only in
Campbell’s insight into the emotions of young lovers but in the highly disturbing
way in which he flits back and forth between the present and the past, to the
point that we scarcely know which is which. (A much later story, “Just Waiting”
[1983; WN], employs this same device.) It would be futile to attempt to analyze
the other stories in Demons by Daylight: they are as elusive as a dream or a
memory, and yet they haunt us as only dreams or memories can. “The Guy,”
“Potential,” “The Sentinels”—all are masterpieces of atmosphere and
indirection. They still rank as some of Campbell’s finest tales. The greatness of
Demons by Daylight stems both from the intrinsic excellence of its contents—
there is not a single weak story here, and several are among the best in
Campbell’s work in particular and in modern weird fiction in general—and from
its historical importance. In this volume—with its uncompromising realism of
character and setting, its evocatively dreamlike prose style, its sexual frankness,
its extremely oblique narration—Campbell has almost single-handedly ushered
in the dominant mode of modern weird fiction. The influence of Robert

Aickman, whose own work embodies many of these same characteristics, is
evident in the volume, but Aickman’s work has not had nearly the impact of
Campbell’s. Although most of the tales in Demons by Daylight were completed
by 1968, only four years after the publication of The Inhabitant of the Lake, they
have completely abandoned the pulpish and derivative tone of that volume.
Campbell himself was aware of breaking new ground with these stories, as he
writes in the 1990 preface to the collection: “Accurately or otherwise, I tended to
feel that nobody else was writing horror fiction quite like this, and perhaps that
meant everyone else was right and I was wrong.” Fortunately for weird fiction,
Campbell received encouragement from colleagues and editors and persisted in
his revolutionary work. At times Demons by Daylight seems to have been
written by an entirely different author from that of The Inhabitant of the Lake; at
other times it seems to have been written in a different century.
Incarnate (1983), one of Campbell’s richest novels, might be worth
studying in this context. As with his later short stories, this work probes the
tenuous distinction between dream and reality but in an opposite fashion from
the tales in Demons by Daylight. Instead of blurring the real world by dream
imagery, Incarnate presents dreams that have all the clarity of waking life. As
with all Campbell’s work, this effect is created by an intense focus upon
individual consciousness; but here we are dealing not with one or two but five or
six highly distinct personalities. One of the many triumphs of the novel is the
skill with which their lives, thoughts, and experiences are skillfully integrated
into a complex fabric.
The novel opens with an experiment in which several very disparate
individuals are gathered together because they all appear to have had dreams of
the future: many have woken up to find their dreams embodied in the morning
paper. But in fact the scope of the work is larger, treating broadly of the
insidious incursion of dream phenomena into what we call the waking world.
The general focus of the novel is Molly Wolfe, an assistant producer for a
television station who has had disturbingly prescient dreams all her life. In a
penetrating essay on the novel, Michael A. Morrison has noted that one of the
most jarring moments in all Campbell’s fiction occurs when Molly discovers
that the humiliation she has suffered at the hands of the police, while
investigating the possible murder of a black man by some police officers, was all
a dream: Campbell never breaks the realistic narrative flow to signal where the
waking world has ended and the dream has begun. But is this experience “only”
a dream? When she sees a police officer whom she has never met before but
whom she saw in the dream, she reflects: “She’d dreamed of him before she’d
met him in what most people would call reality, and that proved the dream” (I

261). The suggestion is that dream is really another form of perception; or, as
one of Campbell’s characters says much later in a celebrated remark,
“‘Dreaming isn’t a state of mind … it’s a state of being’” (I 425).
Startling as the scene with Molly and the police is, an even more striking
tableau is a long episode in which another character, a gawky young man named
Danny Swain, encounters the leader of the original experiment, Dr. Guilda Kent,
years later. The reader, having read of Molly’s evident confusion of dream and
reality (or, rather, of their confusion between themselves), is prepared to accept
that this entire scenario—involving Danny’s frequent visits to Dr. Kent’s office
in a seedy area of Soho—is also a dream. And so, evidently, it turns out to be.
Danny appears to lure Dr. Kent into the movie theatre in which he works and
then sets it afire, apparently killing her. But is it then only his imagination that
causes Dr. Kent to come to his home later? How can this be only an apparition,
since Danny’s parents see the figure themselves? (I 404–5). And what of the fact
that the real Dr. Kent has all along been interred in a madhouse? With this entire
scenario Campbell has shown how utterly chimerical is the supposed distinction
not only between dream and reality but also between internal and external horror
—i.e., horror that is a product of a deluded mind and horror that is postulated to
exist in the external world.
It is at this point that some of the epigraphs with which Campbell prefaces
the novel come into play, in particular one from a letter by Lovecraft: “Surely
the strange excrescences of the human fancy are as real—in the sense of real
phenomena—as the commonplace passions, thoughts, and instincts of everyday
life.” Lovecraft, as a mechanistic materialist, was far from wishing to abolish the
distinction between dream and reality, as another letter testifies: “I confess to an
over-powering desire to know whether I am asleep or awake—whether the
environment and laws which affect me are external and permanent, or the
transitory products of my own brain.”4 What Campbell is doing in Incarnate is
interpreting Lovecraft’s phrase “real phenomena” in a very literal manner,
suggesting that dreams have some sort of ill-defined but “real” existence and that
they can somehow obtrude upon the “real” world in some hideous fashion.
Toward the end of the novel Campbell generalizes the notion, stating
through his characters that dreams have become stronger by being repressed.
The real Guilda Kent states bitterly:
“We’ve allowed them to grow stronger by trying to explain them
away, don’t you understand? Don’t you know yet what dreams are?”
…“Don’t answer that,” she said. “The trouble is, we thought we knew.
Science thinks it can distinguish between reality and dreaming. People who
can’t are locked up in places like this. You can’t lock dreams up. All that

does is make them stronger” [I 424].
Dream, in essence, “‘wants to feed on what we call reality … so it can take
its place’” (I 427). The conclusion of the novel tells the mesmerizing story of
characters drifting through a dream-world of their own invention in a desperate
effort to send dreams back to their own domain.
Incarnate remains Campbell’s most ambitious work of fiction, and by and
large he has succeeded in writing a compelling and vividly realized novel in
which the human characters are at once distinct individuals in their own right
and symbols for the broader thematic purpose he is seeking to achieve. If I still
hesitate to rank Incarnate among the very best works of its kind, it is because of
a certain slackness of style that affects all Campbell’s novels, as well as some
apparently unresolved issues. Most notable among these is Sage, a mysterious
figure who appears to be manipulating events so that the dreams can overrun the
waking world. Sage is one of Campbell’s most piquant villains, but it is never
clarified what his real purpose is in fostering the conquest of dream over reality:
what, exactly, will he gain by such a procedure? It is also not very clear to me
why some of the precognitive dreamers join Sage in his quest and others do not:
has he gained control of them somehow? Some other minor loose ends, perhaps
inevitable in a novel that places so many characters on the stage, could also be
enumerated. Nevertheless, Incarnate, in spite of its great length, is perhaps the
most readable and one of the most unified of Campbell’s novels, being guided
by a single theme—dream versus reality—that is on the surface extremely
simple but in actuality highly complex and baffling. Only The Face That Must
Die and some of his short stories can match the intensity of Incarnate’s
concluding portion.

ART AND REALITY
From the problematical relationship between dream and reality it is a short
step to the equally troubling relationship between art (usually writing) and the
real world. We have already seen this theme emerge in “The Franklyn
Paragraphs”: the genuinely supernatural obliterates writing, renders one
speechless (a theme to be found also in T. E. D. Klein’s “The Events at Poroth
Farm”). But the tale is still more complex than this, and one of its most potent
moments is when Errol Undercliffe, reading Franklyn’s We Pass from View, sees
words appearing of their own accord on the page: “FEEL THEM COMING
SLOWLY BURROWING WANT ME TO SUFFER CANT MOVE GET ME
OUT SAVE ME SOMEWHERE IN BRICHESTER HELP ME” (DD 37). We
can think of this as a vast refinement of the Lovecraftian narrator’s penchant for
scribbling until the bitter end, but in reality it symbolizes the writer’s heroic
effort to maintain his art in the face of the most overwhelming obstacles.
“Beyond Words” [1985; NV] presents a much more pessimistic account of
the artist’s plight in the modern world. A struggling but sincere writer of weird
tales develops a horrible ringing or tinnitus in his ears, which builds day by day
until he can no longer hear or write: what can this be but a symbol for the
impossibility of maintaining one’s aesthetic integrity in the face of rampant
commercialism (a publisher wishes him to write a fantasy trilogy and be the next
Tolkien) and the grinding realities of urban life? The story ends with the
monotonous repetition of “must go on, must go on” (NV 94)—but to what end
will the writer go on? He has already lost everything that means anything to him,
and he is nothing but an automaton whose life will be a mechanical series of
endlessly repeated gestures void of art or meaning.
It is possible that we should study here the several Campbell stories
involving films and their nebulous relationship to the real world. This is, indeed,
the subject of one of his earliest stories, “The Childish Fear” [1963], about the
horrors to be found in a movie theatre. Other tales continue to address this
theme, some to my mind very successfully—such as “After the Queen” [1969;
BW]—and others not so successfully—such as “Horror House of Blood” [1973;
HS]. But the tale that sums up this entire theme is “Boiled Alive” [1986], a
magnificently chilling and nightmarish story about the ubiquity of television,
films, and computers in our age, and of the degree to which they can simulate a
reality so unnervingly real and complete in itself that the actual world begins to
take on the aspect of a fiction.

The idea of living in a film wasn’t entirely unappealing. If it had been
a better film he might even have been flattered. Being able to repeat
favourite moments and speed up the boring parts was certainly tempting,
not to mention the ability to say of bad times “it’s only a film” or to have a
hidden voice explain things when he looked at them. But how much control
would he have? About as much as one generally has of one’s life, he
thought, then felt as if the voice that knew its lines could put him right if he
could just work out how to respond [DF 337].
Anyone who has remarked of some event in real life, “It’s just like a
movie,” or anyone who has been exposed to the “virtual reality” propagated by
certain computer programs, will find much in this story that is both harrowing
and prophetic.
Campbell’s most exhaustive—but not, perhaps, his most interesting or
satisfying—treatment of the relationship of film and reality occurs in his novel,
Ancient Images [1987–88]. This work purports to deal with a film made in
England in 1938 featuring Boris Karloff and Bela Lugosi, almost all copies of
which appear to have been lost or suppressed. It is suggested at the outset that
there is something supernatural about the film itself: many of those who worked
on it died or suffered strange accidents, and those few who have seen it found it
almost impossible to watch (this rather reminds one of Lovecraft’s commonplace
book entry about a “Book or MS. too horrible to read”5). But in fact the film
turns out not to be the focus of the supernatural element of the novel at all, even
though much of the story is spent in the protagonists’ desultory search for a print
of the movie by tracking down all those who were involved with it. It transpires
that the true reason for the tragedies surrounding the making of the film is an
obscure curse upon the region in which the film was made, a curse that requires
the sacrifice of human beings every 50 years lest nameless horrors emerge and
overrun the world. All this is rather hard to swallow, and as a result not much is
ever made of the connection between film and the real world. Ancient Images is,
in the end, only a moderately entertaining supernatural adventure story, with the
protagonists constantly sensing the presence of loathsome creatures all around
them: a doglike entity that is heard scratching behind doors; an incredibly thin
figure lurking just out of sight; hideous rotted scarecrows that come to life. As
with an earlier novel, The Nameless, the rich thematic and philosophical issues
raised by the scenario fail to be developed in depth or detail.
A curious theme can be found throughout the length and breadth of
Campbell’s work—what might be called the relationship between dolls and
human beings. This theme can be related to the art/reality trope because of the
suggestion of a possible connection between human beings and some

representation or duplicate of them. We find this motif appearing as early as the
strange tale “Cyril” [1968], in which an older woman seeks to seduce a shy
young man she has met. He has given her a doll, whom she names Cyril, but he
himself seems regrettably immune to her charms, even though she has convinced
him that it is too late for him to go home and that he will have to spend the night
with her. In her fury she tears the doll to bits. “But Flora only dragged her head
down and wished, cursed, prayed that the screams from the next room would
stop” (HS 153).
“Dolls” [1974; SS] is somewhat similarly conceived, although on the whole
it seems to be an oblique treatment of the voodoo legend. John Norton appears to
have the power to cause injury or death with the dolls that he creates, but then
suffers a similar fate from a lifesize doll he has fashioned to act as the “devil” for
his witch coven. A slightly different working out of the idea is found in “Playing
the Game,” which deals with an individual who manipulates a gameboard of
snakes and ladders that has a disturbing correlation with the real world. Perhaps,
Campbell is saying, we are all dolls or puppets made to dance along the course
of our lives by some unseen hand.
An ingenious variation of the doll/man theme occurs in “The Gap” [1977],
in which a writer, Lionel Tate, puts together a jigsaw puzzle that happens to have
himself in the picture. Why does the puzzle also have another figure (that of a
rival author, Don Skelton, whose book, The Black Road, Tate sees everywhere)
who appears to be stealthily creeping up on him? And why is the piece
containing Tate’s face apparently missing from the puzzle? With these typically
Campbellian elements a superbly atmospheric tale develops. At one point Tate,
seemingly pursued by some nameless figure, finally flings away the copy of The
Black Road that he has been idly carrying: “It caught at his feet in the dark until
he trampled on it; he heard its spine break. Good riddance.”6 It would be
comforting to think that his actual pursuer could be disposed of so easily.
It may be possible to extend this doll/man metaphor even further to cover
instances where any sort of reproduction of a person’s form or personality has
the power to overtake and destroy its original. Consider “Broadcast” [1969;
BW], wherein a man’s essence appears to be drained by a microphone, or “The
Next Sideshow” [1977], in which a mirror maze first presents distorted images
of a man who wanders casually within it, then physically distorts him. This latter
tale, however, appears to involve the notion of psychic or inner distortion under
the surface of outward normality.
I do not know if “In the Trees” [1983; NV, WN] fits exactly into this
paradigm, but it is such a magnificent story that I cannot forbear discussing it.
This is one of the few Campbell tales to be set in a rural milieu—specifically, a

forest into which a jaded bookdealer wanders, where he continually mistakes
various pieces of wood for telephones, human beings, and other objects. I am not
sure what symbolism is meant by this rather hideous omnipresence of wood, but
the cumulative atmosphere and suspense of the story is well-nigh unexcelled in
the whole of Campbell’s work.

HORRORS OF THE CITY
Campbell is the poet of urban squalor and decay. More so than T. E. D.
Klein’s New York or Clive Barker’s London, the Brichester or Liverpool of
Campbell’s mature stories evokes not merely the noise, grime, and dangers of
the city, but also the inhabitants—both lower-and middle-class—who find
themselves crushed within its omnipresent coils. Only Campbell could instill
horror in the commonest objects of our daily existence: plastic bags (“In the
Bag” [DC]), garbage (“Litter” [HS]), a raincoat (“Old Clothes” [WN]). “Lilith’s”
[1975] presents a prototypical account of Campbell’s world:
He rode home that way every weekday evening. The district depressed
him; its sameness did—the same colorless tower-blocks everywhere on the
slope above the river, the same slow procession of derelict terraces as the
bus ground uphill, the same hostilities scrawled on walls, attacking the
nearby travellers’ camp. The January rain on the glass of the bus made the
view worse, more the same: the houses were smudged brown blotches, the
boards in their windows were bedraggled slahes of dark crayon; huge pale
unsteady lumps of tower-blocks floated past. Palin sat swathed in layers of
tobacco-smoke, coughing; the driver had driven him upstairs when he’d
tried to stand, bloody little Hitler. The bus throbbed throatily to a stop [SS
49].
This single paragraph shows that his technique in depicting the urban
milieu is not realism at all but impressionism. The most telling evocations of the
city in his work occur not through simple description but through the metaphor-
laden visions of his jaundiced narrators.
In later work, such as “Beyond Words” [1985], Campbell finds that more
recent urban developments have not enhanced either the physical or
psychological environment of the city:
Liverpool’s dying of slogans, Ward thinks. Several thousand city
council workers are marching through the littered streets under placards and
banners and neon signs, Top Man, Burger King, Wimpy Hamburgers,
Cascade Amusements. Songs that sound like a primer of bad English blare
from shops under failing neon that turns words into gibberish. The chants of
the marchers and the chattering of signs lodge in Ward’s skull, crushing
fragments of the story he’s trying to complete. He dodges between stalls
that have sprung up in Church Street, hawking cheap clothes and toys and
towels imprinted like miraculous shrouds with a pop star’s face… [NV 81].

How different this is from Stephen King’s mechanical and uninspired
brand-name-dropping! It becomes evident from such passages that Campbell’s
eye for the urban landscape is as keen as his eye for the finest gradations of
human character. This is why some of his most powerful work depicts
individuals who are as tired and rundown as their cheerless environment. It is not
the urban landscape itself, but its effect upon those who dwell in it, that makes
Campbell’s work so dispiriting. It is scarcely to be wondered that his dominant
theme is paranoia, for what else could emerge from a realm that crushes people
and their dreams under the grind of metal and filth and crime?
“The Depths” [1978] provides the philosophical justification or rationale
for Campbell’s emphasis on the horrors of the city. It contains one of the most
ingenious premises in modern weird fiction: an author finds that if he does not
frantically write down his horrible nightmares of violence and sadistic crime,
they come true in actuality.
Before he’d begun to suffer from his writer’s block, there had been
occasions when a story had surged up from his unconscious and demanded
to be written. Those stories had been products of his own mind, yet he
couldn’t shake them off except by writing—but now he was suffering
nightmares on behalf of the world.
No wonder they were so terrible, nor that they were growing worse. If
material repressed into the unconscious was bound to erupt in some less
manageable form, how much more powerful that must be when the
unconscious was collective! Precisely because people were unable to come
to terms with the crimes, repudiated them as utterly inhuman or simply
unimaginable, the horrors would reappear in a worse form and possess
whoever they pleased [DC 79].
This is, of course, a scarcely veiled metaphor for the indifference to
society’s ills that typifies urban life, especially middle-class life. Just as the
repression of dreams causes them, in Incarnate, to emerge in a still more bizarre
and dangerous form, the repression of our sense of responsibility for urban
violence causes it to erupt in a still more explosive manner.
Many of Campbell’s stories seem to be what I would call
supernaturalizations of the horrors of the city; in other words, they are
metaphors for the very real and chilling dangers of urban life. “The Scar” tells of
what might happen in a dark alley in a bad part of town; “Down There” (DC)
hints of what might lurk in the basement of an office building; “After the Queen”
(BW) warns us not to linger in movie theatres too long; “The Man in the
Underpass” is a magnificent tale of the dangers of a pedestrian underpass, that
distinctively British topographical landmark which has exercised a great

fascination for Campbell; and perhaps the early “The Cellars” is an
exemplification of a mother’s warning to her daughter not to go to strange places
alone with a man. I wonder, however, whether some of Campbell’s less
successful stories are nothing but transmogrifications of urban paranoia: is, for
example, the predictable “Reply Guaranteed” [1967; HS] anything more than a
tale of women’s fear of rape? Analogously, “Smoke Kiss” [1973; HS] seems to
be little more than an allegory on the evils of cigarette smoking, and it draws
much of its imagery from the earlier “Ash” [1969; HS].
“Mackintosh Willy” [1977; DC] is perhaps Campbell’s masterpiece of this
type; it may well be the single most frightening story he has ever written. This
triumph of suggestiveness tells, through a boy’s eyes, the relatively simple story
of a derelict who dies, haunts the bicycle shelter he used to occupy in life, and
then pursues a boy who mutilated his corpse by putting bottle caps over his eyes.
No reason is given for the resurrection of the derelict’s body, but the subtlety of
the story’s prose and the richness of its atmosphere cause such an omission to
fall to the background, in contrast to such of Clive Barker’s failures as “Sex,
Death and Starshine” or Cabal, whose prosaic narration makes the lack of a
convincing explanation for the supernatural phenomena obtrusively evident.
Consider the hideous description of Mackintosh Willy drowning the boy in a
pond: “When I tried to raise him, I discovered that he was pinned down. I had to
grope blindly over him in the chill water, feeling how still he was. Something
like a swollen cloth bag, very large, lay over his face. I couldn’t bear to touch it
again, for its contents felt soft and fat” (DC 15). That “swollen cloth bag” is
reminiscent of a famous climax in one of M. R. James’s stories, in which a
supernatural entity is described as resembling “some rounded light-coloured
objects … which might be bags.”7 Indeed, the subtlety of the supernatural
manifestation in “Mackintosh Willy” is very Jamesian, but with a power and
poignancy drawn from a decaying urban milieu that James could not have
imagined.

PARANOIA
Paranoia is, for Campbell, the inevitable outcome of the ceaseless and
grinding squalor and decadence of the urban milieu. The palpably real horrors of
the inner city—crime, violence, poverty—compel its inhabitants to adopt an
eternal vigilance that can easily metamorphose into irrational suspicion and
vigilante justice. The emblematic work by Campbell in this mode is The Face
That Must Die [1976–77].
This novel (virtually the sole instance of purely nonsupernatural horror in
Campbell’s early work) may still rank as his finest for its compactness, intensity,
and relentless portrayal of a paranoid personality. I do not propose to study his
enlightening, and disturbing, introduction to the 1983 edition of the novel.
Suffice it to say that Campbell’s upbringing, which has some similarities to that
of Robert Aickman as recorded in The Attempted Rescue, gave him first-hand
experience of paranoia.
What allows The Face That Must Die to be a genuine work of horror fiction
—in contrast to the work, say, of Thomas Harris, which falls just outside the
realm of the weird—is the almost unbearably intense and unrelenting way in
which we are forced to inhabit the mind of a paranoid schizophrenic. We
participate in his actions, we see (and, after a fashion, understand) the twisted
logic of his reasoning, and we ultimately learn why he fears and suspects every
person and even every object he encounters.
Our initial meeting with the semi-invalid Horridge prepares us for his
gradual descent into mania. Entering a shop, he overhears a conversation by the
owners and immediately thinks to himself: “Was she referring to him?” (FD 10).
When he goes to a park and hears children shouting, he reflects: “People spoiled
his peace” (FD 12). At this point we might think him merely a somewhat
crotchety recluse, but more unpleasant traits emerge: a violent antipathy to
homosexuals, fear and hatred of women (“she wore trousers, which were
unnatural” [FD 13]), racism against blacks and foreigners. It is not long before
Horridge enunciates the archetypal paranoid complaint: “Was the whole world
mad?” (FD 45).
Gradually we learn the origins of Horridge’s state: as a boy he had been
accused by some girls of being gay; his father, also afflicted with severe
misogyny, warns him against masturbating and going out with girls; and his
father had himself caused the leg injury that forces him to walk with a
humiliating limp. Slowly a still more horrifying fact dawns upon us: but for

certain accidents of upbringing, Horridge could have been a relatively normal
person—or, conversely, but for those same accidents we ourselves could have
become a Horridge. The fact that many of his views are not entirely unusual
among certain classes and certain segments of British and American society
makes us wonder how many more Horridges are dwelling quietly in our midst,
ready to explode.
For it is not, of course, Horridge’s simple paranoia but the actions he takes
as a result of it that create the horror of this novel. Seeing a police sketch of a
murderer in the paper, he fancies that an individual (a gay man) living in a
nearby apartment is in fact the killer. He tries to notify the police, but they do not
appear to believe him. As a result, he feels he has no recourse but to kill the man
himself, and he does so.
Interweaved with Horridge’s hideous pursuit of an innocent man are the
lives of other occupants of the apartment building, in particular Peter and Cathy
Gardner, a young couple who seem destined to become Horridge’s next victims.
Cathy is (aside from Roy Craig, the gay man whom Horridge kills) the only
individual in the novel who is portrayed sympathetically. And yet, even she
experiences paranoia on occasion, first when meeting Peter’s mother (“Was it an
accident of words, or was she criticizing Cathy?” [FD 108]), then when Horridge
compels her to drive him to Wales (“Could he read her mind?” [FD 197]). It is
as if Horridge’s own paranoia were a sort of contagion that infects everyone
around him.
The gradual deterioration of Horridge is masterfully handled. Just prior to
killing Craig, he concludes, with shuddersomely unconscious irony, that he “had
to remind himself that he was dealing with a madman” (FD 92). After hearing
that someone else has confessed to the original murders, Horridge thinks his
radio is mocking him (FD 114); and again later: “He shut off the radio, which
was trying to distress him” (FD 159). The concluding twist of the novel is a
fittingly cheerless end to a work whose unremittingly bleak vision is singular
even amid Campbell’s own dark oeuvre.
The Count of Eleven (1991) will inevitably be compared to The Face That
Must Die, but this most unclassifiable of Campbell’s novels defies neat
categorization or comparison: who but Campbell could have written a comic
serial killer novel? It is this anomalous mixture of paranoia, gruesomeness, and
pure hilarity (and, perhaps, the fact that Campbell does not offer a facile moral
condemnation of a murderer) that caused the novel to receive very mixed
reviews upon its appearance. But it must be regarded as one of his great
triumphs if only for its scintillating wordplay, unexcelled in all his work.
In this novel we are presented with the bumbling but undeniably likeable

Jack Orchard, who becomes obsessed with numbers and begins killing people in
order to preserve the logic he fancies is inherent in his number mysticism. But it
would be erroneous to assume that Campbell fails to condemn Orchard for his
increasingly aberrant actions. Campbell’s purpose in displaying Orchard as an
“ordinary” man (husband, father, struggling shop owner) is not to point the tired
moral platitude that any of us could become murderers, but rather to depict the
insidious way in which “normality” slowly devolves into psychosis. The
characterization of Orchard is much more finely modulated than that of
Horridge. The latter, when we first see him, is already a psychotic; on the other
hand, Orchard immediately wins our sympathy for the sheer ill luck that seems
to dog his every attempt to provide for himself and his family, so that it becomes
impossible to determine at what precise point his increasingly harried but
seemingly well-intentioned actions cross the line successively from rationality to
eccentricity to dangerous insanity.
It is, however, the mingling of slapstick humor with hideous violence that
gives The Count of Eleven its utterly distinctive tone. A scene at the beginning,
in which an old man blunders about in Orchard’s video store and causes a fire
that burns the place down, could not have been surpassed by Wodehouse. A later
scene, where Orchard, now a murderer, kills a man by blasting him with a
blowtorch and hurling him into a river, presents the surface atmosphere of a
Three Stooges episode but gradually devolves into one of the most loathsome
murders in all weird or crime fiction:
[Jack] trained the jet of flames on the largest target within reach, the
top of Foster’s head. In a very few seconds the man’s hair hissed and
withered, and he was both bald and piebald. During these seconds he
emitted an almost inarticulate crescendo of sound—“Mmmur”—and Jack
had the dismaying impression that he was crying out for his mother. His
hands were convulsively slapping the water and keeping him afloat, so that
he was unable to move out of range of the flame. His scalp was peeling by
the time shock or helplessness or a yearning for the cool water caused him
to sink [CE 199].
And yet (as with Patricia Highsmith’s series of novels about the clumsy but
engaging murderer Tom Ripley) we cannot help liking Orchard even after he
commits the first several of his murders, especially as in some cases he resorts
not to murder but to mere arson, making sure that no “innocent” individuals are
killed or even injured. This sort of consideration could not have been imagined
by a Horridge. A recent commentator, Joel Lane, also sees an interesting
political dimension to the novel. “The problems faced by the Orchard family are
synonymous with Thatcherite economic culture: the slick, cold mechanisms of

banks, employers, insurance agents, estate agents. Life becomes a lottery, a
numbers game in which survival depends on ‘chancing.’ Jack Orchard takes this
value distortion literally, reducing people to numbers and placing absolute trust
in luck.”8 Truly, The Count of Eleven has turned the hackneyed serial killer
novel on its head: we may all be murderers, but we are also all victims, and it is
becoming increasingly difficult to tell the difference between the two.
Next to Horridge and Jack Orchard, Danny Swain, the pockmarked youth
who gradually becomes the focus of evil in Incarnate, is Campbell’s most
powerfully realized paranoid personality, especially as he is sketched in this
magnificent character portrait:
He couldn’t say he hated Mr. Pettigrew for treating him like a dog, not
when Mr. Pettigrew might be a friend of hers. He couldn’t say that he
wanted a job he had got for himself instead of the job Mr. Pettigrew had
given him as a favor to his father because it was clear nobody else would
employ him, just because he wasn’t very good at speaking. He wanted to be
somebody, that was all, somebody more than the schoolboy who had never
been able to speak up when the teacher had said, “Got a bone in your throat,
Danny?”; more than the teenager who’d locked himself in the toilet to hide
from the girls who said, “Got a bone in your trousers, Danny?”; the girls
kicking the toilet door and telling him what they were going to show him,
until he hadn’t dared go out when the afternoon bell rang because the girls
would be waiting for him in the classroom. He couldn’t say any of this, he
mustn’t get confused, mustn’t let his enemies confuse him. His trousers
were hurting his crotch, his stomach felt squeezed and he was afraid he was
going to fart … [I 87].
In this compact and bitter passage we can see Danny’s entire young life
encapsulated, as well as the origin of his hatred of women and of people in
authority. Once again Campbell has taken care to supply the psychological
background of his characters so that their paranoia seems an entirely natural
product of their stunted upbringing. And Danny, although ignorant, clumsy, and
full of repressed rage, earns our sympathy far more than Horridge does.
Campbell’s short stories feature some of his most notable paranoid
characters. In “The Little Voice” [1976; DC] horror is evoked by the simple
repetition of the meaningless syllables la, la, la. A schoolteacher, Edith
Locketty, hears the sounds repeatedly from the house next door, which appears
to have been inhabited only by an old blind man who has just died. But surely,
Edith thinks, the voice must be of some poor child who has been left alone in the
house. She herself is a prototypical paranoiac, close to the edge of insanity. “She
read her book to her class, and watched their faces dull. Ranks of uniformed

waxworks stared at her, drooping a little. Did they think they were too old for
the story, or that she was out of date? She saw the old man trembling. Noise
from next door floundered about her room, like a clumsy intruder. If she didn’t
act she would lose control of herself. ‘Talk quietly until I come back,’ she said”
(DC 107). But what of that la, la, la? Is it real or is it simply a product of Edith’s
imagination? Is it, indeed, the child that she aborted years before? This brooding
and atmospheric story ranks as one of Campbell’s finest in its careful etching of
a disturbed personality who at once repels us and in some strange fashion excites
our horrified pity.
The paranoid character stalks through the length and breadth of Campbell’s
work—from “Cold Print” [1966–67] to “A Street Was Chosen” [1990]—and
may well be, in addition to and working in conjunction with his portrayal of
decayed cityscapes, his most distinctive and easily recognizable contribution to
weird fiction. Hawthorne, Machen, and Lovecraft found the sinister in the
untenanted wilderness, but Campbell is the archetypal weird fictionist of the
metropolis. Jobs that lead nowhere and accomplish nothing; sex, drugs, and
crime as the only escapes from crushing poverty or aimless ignorance; caution
and vigilance devolving into irrational suspicion and freakish violence: this is
Campbell’s city, and it is something that those of the urban milieu can recognize
very plainly. And yet, Campbell’s erstwhile mentor H. P. Lovecraft prophesied
just such a development in his warning about the dangers of mechanization:
Granted that the machine-victim has leisure. What is he going to do
with it? What memories and experiences has he to form a background to
give significance to anything he can do? What can he see or do that will
mean anything to him? … We shall hear of all sorts of futile reforms and
reformers—standardised culture-outlines, synthetic sports and spectacles,
professional play-leaders and study-guides, and kindred examples of
machine-made uplift and brotherly spirit. And it will amount to just about
as much as most reforms do! Meanwhile the tension of boredom and
unsatisfied imagination will increase—breaking out with increasing
frequency in crimes of morbid perversity and explosive violence.9

SEX AND DEATH
Scared Stiff: Tales of Sex and Death (1986) is one of Campbell’s finest
collections. Most of its seven tales were originally written for anthologies
compiled by Michel Parry (including two anthologies of sex-horror stories edited
under the piquant pseudonym “Linda Lovecraft”), and they are among his most
affecting stories. But the mingling of sex and horror commences at a very early
stage in Campbell’s career. In the introduction to The Height of the Scream he
remarks wryly of the unconscious sexual symbolism to be found in “The
Inhabitant of the Lake” (HS x), while as early a tale as “The Moon-Lens” [1963]
already hints tentatively at a union of sex and the weird. Other early tales treat
intensely of human relationships at the same time that they treat of the
supernatural. “The Cellars” [1965] is once again a landmark in this regard, since
the premise of the story is the attempt of a dubious character named Vic to
seduce a coworker, Julie, by luring her into some deserted catacombs in
Liverpool.
An entire section in Demons by Daylight is titled “Relationships,” and we
find here some of Campbell’s earliest and best tales of love and death. We have
already made note of the exquisitely poignant “Concussion,” where the bizarre
decades-spanning love affair is the very core of the supernaturalism of the tale.
And we must make note of the elusive “The Second Staircase,” which initiates a
theme to which Campbell returns again and again. Let us consider the opening
paragraph. “DELTAFILMS INTERVIEW MEET EUSTON 9.00— But never
having met Mike Parry, Carol bobbed above the crowd and thrust through
trajectories as the clock edged on to 9.15, finding Mike finally beneath the clock,
hopefully holding aloft as identification a copy of Castle of Frankenstein. Mike
smiled recognition, then his mouth dropped as the minute hand turned
downward” (DD 96). What sounds like another of Campbell’s many tales of a
female protagonist turns out to be nothing of the sort, for Carol is actually a male
—but a male whose androgynous name symbolizes his doubt of his own virility.
As a result, he has become a misogynist (“Women—he hated them, their soft
helpless bodies, passively resisting, unattainable” [DD 104]); but, in some
dreamlike way that only Campbell could have devised, Carol finds himself
turned into a woman.
This fluidity between the male and female bodies is an idea that fascinates
Campbell, for it recurs in “The Seductress” [1975]: “When Betty lay trembling,
unable to look, the face stooped for her to see. It was Alastair’s mother, smiling

triumphantly. She passed a hand over her face. As though that reversed each
aspect of it she was James again; his long face replaced her square one, her small
plump nose was all at once slim and straight. She passed her hand upward and
was herself, as if she’d changed a mask. The mask smiled” (SS 92). It also
recurs, in a somewhat different way, in “Stages” (SS), where, perhaps as a result
of drug taking, a man’s personality and body merge insidiously with those of his
lover.
“Lilith’s” [1975] may perhaps be the best story in Scared Stiff, for a number
of reasons—its gritty evocation of Campbell’s derelict world of slums and
tenements, its utilization of the doll/man theme in a particularly vivid and
provocative way (here with the use of a sex doll, which has some nebulous
relation to the seductive owner of the store where a man bought it), and in its
portrayal of utterly cheerless passion, as the man dreams of making love to the
doll after having fished it out of the garbage:
He was making love to a girl. Her eyes sparkled; she panted, she
smiled widely, laughing—he made her feel alive as she never had before.
As soon as he was free he’d gone to her. He’d dressed and run to find her.
He was laughing too, as they worked together toward orgasm. He’d found
her and carried her easily to bed. Her left arm lay carelessly above her head,
carelessly twisted, impossibly twisted. He’d found her and dragged her out
the rest of the way, as cats struggled from between her limbs.
When he awoke screaming he was lying face down on the bed, in her
[SS 67].
Other tales are nearly as striking, although less explicitly sexual. “The
Previous Tenant” [1969; BW] treats poignantly of a painter who becomes
increasingly fascinated with the spirit of a young woman who committed suicide
in the flat he now occupies. But as the tale unfolds it develops into a story of
jealousy (the painter’s wife “accidentally” destroys the few remaining tokens of
the woman’s existence in the apartment) and of the irreconcilability of artistic
and domestic existence. “The Other Woman” [1974; SS] also involves a painter,
this one a commercial cover artist, who becomes fascinated with the picture of a
woman he himself has painted for some trashy bestseller, and whom he renders
with one blue eye and one brown eye. He imagines violently raping the woman,
and finds that he can no longer perform sexually with his wife unless he keeps
the image of the woman, and the violence he wishes to inflict upon her, in his
mind. This tale is conceivably nonsupernatural until the very last line, when we
read of the painter’s wife: “Then her legs closed over his, and he stared down to
see her eyes gazing at him: one blue eye, one brown” (SS 47). The subtlety and
rich texture of this story make this conclusion both startling and inevitable. The

overriding metaphor of the tale, of course, is the male instinct for rape, a desire
for sexual control that can cross over insidiously into ugly violence. “You would
throw her down on the floor. You’d lie on top of her so that she couldn’t kick,
you’d pin her flailing forearms down with your elbows. You’d lean your weight
on your thumbs at her throat. Her throat would struggle wildly as a trapped bird.
Her eyes would widen, trying to spring free of the vise: one blue eye, one
brown” (SS 26).
Aberrant sex is rarely presented in Campbell’s novels (here again his
concern for the sensibilities of his middle-class readers becomes evident), but it
cannot be said that the depiction of sex, love, and marriage in his longer work is
any more comforting than in his short stories. One of the principal goals or
functions of a supernatural manifestation in Campbell is to insinuate itself into
human relationships and corrupt them from within by bringing to the surface all
the dissatisfactions and resentments—between husband and wife, parent and
child, or entire generations of a family—that lurk beneath a superficially placid
and loving household. All this again points to the unusually noncosmic range of
Campbell’s supernatural phenomena, which almost always operate upon
individuals rather than upon the world or the universe at large.
The sexual frankness that Campbell introduced to weird fiction in Demons
by Daylight has had wide ramifications for the field, not all of them good: many
writers have neither the skill nor the restraint to produce anything but cheap
titillation out of the mingling of sex and horror. In many of Campbell’s own
tales, indeed, sex is nothing but tawdry and emotionless, a mating of animals in a
garbage-strewn alley. But such a depiction harmonizes drearily well with the
desolate urban panorama, where the sighs of love and passion devolve into the
grunts and grinding of meaningless sex.

CHILDHOOD
In the introduction to Waking Nightmares Campbell remarks that
“parenthood seems to keep sending me back to the theme of the vulnerability of
children” (WN 2), and children figure as protagonists—both as the victims and
as the perpetrators of evil—from the beginning to the end of his work. Perhaps
Campbell’s sensitivity to the world of childhood comes from the very early
initiation of his own writing career. In adhering faithfully to the old adage of
“write what you know,” he has drawn extensively in early and late writings upon
his own experiences as a youth.
Campbell can treat every aspect of the life of children with uncanny
psychological insight: games (“Little Man” [1978; ST], “Apples,” “The Old
School” [1988; WN]); the traumas of attending school (“The Interloper” [1968;
DD]); relationships with parents (“The Chimney” [1975; DF]); the slow
emergence from childhood into the adult world (“Being an Angel” [1988; WN]).
Of course, some of these themes are also treated from an adult perspective: recall
the sour schoolteachers in “The Little Voice” and “The Other Side” (WN), and
the game motif prevalent in “Playing the Game” and many other stories. But the
themes gain a particular poignancy when focusing upon children. And yet,
Campbell’s children are frequently not the beatific innocents of Victorian
wishful thinking but the tough, hard, street-wise youths of the inner city. It is no
wonder that, in “Apples,” they manage to gang together and overcome the
supernatural horror (in the form of an old man) that threatens them. Even these
children, however, have not yet been bludgeoned into the jaundiced cynicism
that affects so many of Campbell’s adults.
One of the first serious treatments of children in Campbell’s fiction occurs
in the chilling tale “The Man in the Underpass” [1973], among the earliest of his
tales to be narrated from the point of view of a child. As in Machen’s “The
White People,” the prototypical instance of this approach, the effectiveness of
this tale rests in the naiveté of the narrative voice: the children playing in a
pedestrian underpass fail to understand the hoary antiquity and menace of the
Aztec rites that animate the crudely drawn figure of a man in the underpass.
“Oh, it’s only that stupid thing on the wall,” June said. “No it isn’t,”
Tonia said. “There’s a real man down there if you look.” “Well, I don’t
want to see him,” June said. “What’s so special about him?” I said. “He’s a
god,” Tonia said. “He’s not. He’s just a man playing with his thing,” June
said. “He probably wouldn’t want you to see him anyway,” Tonia said.

“I’m going down. You go home.” “We’ll come with you to make sure
you’re all right,” I said, but really I was excited without knowing why [DF
93].
“Eye of Childhood” [1978; WN] presents a converse scenario, telling
moodily (and a little confusingly) of a seemingly normal child who practices
witchcraft.
Then there is the highly disturbing story “The Chimney,” a bizarre tale of a
lonely, frightened child and his parents. Campbell has referred to it as “disguised
autobiography—disguised from me at the time of writing, that is” (DF x). This
account of a boy terrified of seeing his father (or something else) come down the
chimney as Father Christmas can only make us think of some passages in the
introduction to The Face That Must Die, where Campbell tells of how his
estranged parents occupied separate floors of their house, so that he had almost
no contact with his father: “For most of my childhood … my father was heard
but not seen…. I used to hear his footsteps on the stairs as I lay in bed, terrified
that he would come into my room…. Worst of all was Christmas, when my
mother would send me to knock on his bedroom door and invite him down, as a
mark of seasonal goodwill, for Christmas dinner. I would go upstairs in a panic,
but there was never any response” (FD xvi–xvii).
And now “The Chimney”:
…I heard the slithering in the chimney.
Something large was coming down. A fall of soot: I could hear the
scattering pats of soot in the grate, thrown down by the harsh halting wind.
But the wind was emerging from the fireplace, into the room. It was above
me, panting through its obstructed throat.
I lay staring up at the mask of my sheets. I trembled from holding
myself immobile. My held breath filled me painfully as lumps of rock. I
had only to lie there until whatever was above me went away. It coudn’t
touch me [DF 148].
It should be remarked that the tale’s power in no way depends upon our
knowledge of Campbell’s biography: “The Chimney” is a masterwork of
brooding horror that requires no commentary, biographical or otherwise, to
elucidate it. But a knowledge of Campbell’s unusual upbringing lends a
poignancy to the tale that somehow augments its horrific effect.
Nearly all of Campbell’s novels feature children, mostly as innocent
victims meant to attract the reader’s sympathy, but occasionally as foci or
instigators of supernatural evil. Susan, the daughter of Helen Verney in
Incarnate, is perhaps Campbell’s most delicately etched child character, and her
apparent destruction, as the mysterious young girl Eve (a facet of Sage) usurps

her body, lends an aura of bitterness and tragedy to the novel. (I am, in fact, not
entirely clear what happens to Susan, as Campbell never mentions her once her
personality has apparently been ousted from her body by Eve.) Other child
characters—such as the stereotypical and excessively well-adjusted Francesca
and Russell in Obsession—are less well realized.
The Influence [1986–87] seems to reenact the Susan/Eve scenario of
Incarnate by featuring a battle between child-as-victim and child-as-villain. The
plot of this novel is not at all new. An elderly woman, Queenie, is so fiercely
determined to perpetuate her existence by sheer willpower that she usurps the
body of a little girl, Vicky, on the way to overtaking the personality of her
grandniece, Rowan. Nor is the execution very subtle (the moment the girl Vicky
mentions her name, we think of Queenie—i.e., Queen Victoria). And yet, the
confrontation of childlike naiveté and preternaturally aged sophistication is ably
handled. The novel contains one of the most spectacular dream sequences in all
Campbell’s work, a long, moody chapter in which Rowan, fleeing from the
home of her aunt (who has been violently murdered by Queenie/Vicky),
undertakes a laborious and seemingly endless trek back to her own home—first
by train, then, when she senses Vicky pursuing her, mile after mile on foot—
only to discover when she gets there, days or perhaps months later, that Queenie
has evicted her spirit from her body and occupied it instead. This novel too
suffers somewhat from sentimentality, and some of the quarrels between
Rowan’s parents are embarrassingly reminiscent of soap-opera bickering, but its
conclusion is poignant and satisfying.

RECENT WORK
Aside from The Count of Eleven, Campbell’s most recent major works
include two novels, Midnight Sun (1990) and The Long Lost (1993), and a
novelette, Needing Ghosts (1990). These three seem, in their very different
ways, to be grand summations of everything Campbell is and stands for. All the
themes that dominate his writing—dream and reality, art and reality, urban life,
paranoia, childhood—come to a head here and in many ways receive their most
potent and concentrated expression. What is more, they indicate that Campbell,
already a writer of 30 years’ standing, may perhaps not even now have reached
the pinnacle of his career. Brilliant and revolutionary as some of his work
already is, there may be even better yet to come.
Needing Ghosts [1989–90] is virtually the only one of Campbell’s works
(with the possible exception of a science fiction tale, Medusa) that can be
classified as a novelette—that unique form which seems especially suited for
weird writing, if the best of Lovecraft, Aickman, and Klein is any indication.
And it may well be his single greatest acheivement. Everything that defines
Campbell’s work is here, from the cheerless urban milieu and paranoia to the
spiritual loneliness of the modern city-dweller. And the whole tale (told in a
nightmarish, third person present tense that recalls the best of the Demons by
Daylight stories) is a long rumination on the interrelationship of words and life.
Steven J. Mariconda, in a sensitive review of the work, has identified the plot of
the story as involving “a horror writer who has gone mad, murdered his family,
and then turned the knife on himself. The events of the story, told from the
perspective of [the writer] after his death, are a surreal series of episodes that
lead to his realization of the murders. The entire narrative, Campbell hints at the
end, is—somehow—simply a dream of the dead author.”10 Persuasive as
Mariconda’s arguments are, I think a different interpretation of events could be
made.
The protagonist, Simon Mottershead, wakes up one day unaware of who he
is and what he is supposed to be doing. Gradually, as he ventures forth into an
utterly hallucinatory world, certain facts dawn upon him: he is an author, having
written at least one book, Cadenza; he is to deliver a lecture at a library; he has
(or had) a wife and children. At the outset it appears as if he is simply another in
Campbell’s long line of paranoiacs, perhaps similar to Horridge in The Face
That Must Die. But as events unfold, Mottershead desperately attempts to
maintain a hold on what he believes to be reality and sanity in a world that

appears to have gone completely mad. He stumbles into a bookstore and finds a
copy of his own book; its first line, “He knows this dark” (NG 27), is the first
line of Needing Ghosts itself. What does this mean? Already the problematical
distinction between art and reality is being broken down, as it does further when
Mottershead, blundering into the library (which is bizarrely juxtaposed to a
shopping mall) for his lecture, tells his audience how it feels to be a writer.
“Every day I’d be wakened by a story aching to be told. Writing’s a
compulsion. By the time you’re any good at it you no longer have the
choice of giving it up. It won’t leave you alone even when you’re with
people, even when you’re desperate to sleep…. When it comes to life …
it’s like seeing everything with new eyes. It’s like dreaming while you’re
awake. It’s as if your mind’s a spider which is trying to catch reality and
spin it into patterns” [NG 34].
“When it comes to life”—what can this refer to but Mottershead’s own
writing? Another fragment of the truth (if it is that) comes toward the end, as
Mottershead wends his way to what appears to be his own former home and
finds a videocassette containing an interview he evidently once gave. A
commentator remarks:
“In one of his stories a man who’s obsessed with the impossibility of
knowing if he has died in his sleep convinces himself that he has, and is
dreaming. Another concerns a man who believes he is being followed by a
schizophrenic whose hallucinations are affecting his own perceptions, but
the hallucinations prove to be the reality he has tried to avoid seeing. The
reader is left suspecting that the schizophrenic is really a projection of the
man himself” [NG 73].
This is a remarkably accurate description of what has transpired throughout
the story, as Mottershead harriedly attempts to escape pursuit from a bald-
headed man who dogs him for no apparent reason. When Mottershead finds his
family killed (a knife has impaled a book to their necks) he wonders: “Did he
once write about doing away with his family, or wasn’t he able to write it?” (NG
77). It is my belief that what has really happened to Mottershead is that, alive or
dead, he has fallen into his own fictional universe. The reality of his stories has
subsumed the reality of his life.
And yet, perhaps in the end it is not possible to decide what exactly has
happened in Needing Ghosts. Is Mottershead alive or dead? Is he caught in a
dream? Is the world around him a dream or a hallucination? I believe that a
number of entirely contradictory interpretations could be made of this tale, each
with just as much validity as the next. All we are left with in the end is pure
nightmare.

Midnight Sun is of an entirely different sort. It is the pinnacle of Campbell’s
realistic novels of character, written in a fluid, supple, richly textured prose
superior to that of any of his previous novel-length works, even Incarnate. It
tells the story of Ben Sterling, who as a boy was fascinated with a book written
by his great-grandfather, the explorer Edward Sterling, entitled Of the Midnight
Sun. This curious book of fairy tales haunts Sterling’s imagination even after his
aunt (who looks after him after his entire family has been killed in a car
accident) takes the book away from him in fear of its being a bad influence.
Growing into adulthood, Sterling marries and becomes a writer of children’s
books himself. At this point the novel suffers a perhaps inevitable letdown, as
Campbell, forsaking the intense psychological portrait of Ben as a boy, lapses
into conventionality by depicting his usual novelistic scenario of husband-wife-
and-happy-children, although in a somewhat less sentimental manner than in
other works. But this depiction is necessary to the thematic development of
Midnight Sun, whose focus is Ben’s search for what haunted him about Edward
Sterling’s book as a boy.
Throughout the novel Ben senses that he is on the brink of some stupendous
revelation, which is somehow connected with the dense forest behind his
ancestral home (“It seemed to him that the silent luminous dance was constantly
about to form a pattern in the air—that if he could only distinguish the pattern,
unimaginable revelations might follow” [MS 103]; “he felt as though an
inspiration or a vision larger than he could imagine was hovering just out of
reach” [MS 136]). Finally the revelation comes. Edward Sterling was found dead
of exposure in the icy forest, and Ben realizes that
Edward Sterling’s death had been only the beginning. The forest
concealed what his death had liberated—what had accompanied him
beyond the restraint of the midnight sun.
Perhaps it had been waiting for as long as there was ice there, waiting
for someone it could ride beyond the light. Perhaps that hadn’t been
Edward Sterling who had come back, but only a shell of him compelled to
walk and talk. It must have been the source of the strength which had
driven him north again in search of somewhere it could hide, but his body
had failed before it reached anywhere secret enough. The forest had hidden
it while its power grew during the long nights, and now it was awakening
[MS 210–11].
Now Ben feels as if he must take up the task of ushering in this ice-entity
back into the world. It is one of Campbell’s great triumphs that this nebulous
creature, as well as Ben’s apparent yielding to it, is never described as anything
but awesome and cosmic: fear has no place in this scenario. Campbell himself,

in the acknowledgments of the novel, places it in the category of “visionary
horror fiction,” and indeed much of the novel is reminiscent of Algernon
Blackwood’s portrayal of the throbbing vitality of nature, a portrayal as devoid
of horror (in the sense of fear for the harm that might be caused to human
beings) as Campbell’s. And yet, at the end Ben has a change of heart and seeks
to combat the entity and thrust it back into the dark again. Mariconda’s comment
that this reversal is “inadequately motivated” is itself charitably inadequate:
Ben’s actions seem to me entirely unmotivated. It is true that Ben’s self-
immolation in the depths of the forest bring to mind the impromptu fairy tale he
was told as a boy—of the people who live “at the edge of the coldest place in the
world” (MS 34) and whose responsibility it is to tend to the fires that will keep
the ice from overrunning the world—but the thrust of Campbell’s entire
narrative has been leading up to the conclusion that the release of the ice-entity
is in no way a horrific but simply an awesome event. “The world and the stars
had been less than a dream, nothing more than a momentary lapse in its
consciousness, and the metamorphosis which was reaching for the world was
infinitesimal by its standards, simply a stirring in its sleep, a transient dream of
the awful perfection which would overtake infinity when the presence beyond
the darkness was fully awake” (MS 323). And yet, Ben, by choosing his family
over the entity (“The only light he wanted to see now, too late, was the light in
Ellen’s and the children’s eyes” [MS 319]), is also choosing the safe and
bourgeois comforts of family life over the awesome and supremely impersonal
force of nature, even though Campbell has been suggesting all along that the
former is, in cosmic terms, utterly insignificant in relation to the latter. Despite
this severely flawed ending, Midnight Sun must still rank as one of Campbell’s
finest novels for its exquisitely modulated prose, its perfect unity of
construction, and the genuinely cosmic and visionary imagery evoked
throughout the entire work.
Overt supernaturalism is reduced almost to the vanishing point in The Long
Lost, which could easily pass for a poignant mainstream tale of domestic life.
This novel shows how keenly Campbell has learned to depict—again in prose of
exquisite fluidity that unites the subdued vitality of Midnight Sun with the
intermittent comedy of The Count of Eleven—the manifold ironies and
absurdities of everyday existence. He displays an uncanny knack for showing
how ordinary people can fall haplessly into the most grotesque situations, and
his deft strokes of character portrayal put to shame the plodding verbosity of
Stephen King and instead bring John Fowles or Evelyn Waugh to mind.
The Long Lost is based on the theme of the sin-eater—a stranger who,
according to ancient Celtic legend, must come to the home where a wake is

being held and eat the food (usually a small cake) symbolizing the sins of the
deceased. The stranger is then given money and hounded away lest he spread the
sins he has absorbed. In fact, the sin-eater motif is not immediately evident in
this tale of modern England, although anyone who has read Fiona Macleod’s
superb story, “The Sin-Eater” (1895)—or its skillful adaptation on Rod Serling’s
“Night Gallery”—will develop an awareness of it from the obscure hints
Campbell supplies. In this case, the sin-eater is an old woman, Gwendolen, who
is found lying in a catatonic state in a cottage on a small island off the coast of
Wales by David and Joelle Owain, who are vacationing there; Gwendolen claims
that her last name is Owain, so that David takes her for a long-lost relative.
Bringing her back to Chester, the Owains invite her to a barbecue with some of
their friends, at which time she distributes certain odd-tasting cakes she has
made.
While it is a shame to spoil the suspense of this novel by revealing its
denouement, one must do so in order to study it. Gwendolen is a sin-eater, and
has been for years, decades, and perhaps centuries: David only realizes toward
the end that the old photograph showing his grandfather as a small boy also
showed Gwendolen as an old woman. And yet, Gwendolen is far from being an
“evil” figure. Indeed, her portrayal as ineffably sad person who seems to bear
very heavily the ills of a long life (“‘I doubt you’ll meet anyone who believes in
sin more than I do’” [LL 71]) is a masterstroke of characterization. In effect,
Gwendolen distributes the cakes—the sins she has accumulated from her
anomalous occupation—lest she herself die with them. David asks her at the
end: “‘Did being frightened keep you alive somehow, Gwen? … What could
make you so scared?’” (LL 367–68).
The effect of the eating of the cakes by the guests at the barbecue is nothing
more than an emphasis of the “sins” or flaws of character each of them
possesses. David himself, although otherwise a loving husband, begins to
develop an unhealthy sexual attraction to Angela, the 14-year-old daughter of a
friend. Angela herself seems to be trying to seduce David with her young,
healthy body. Herb Crantry, whose wife has left him for another man, kills
himself and the man in a fit of jealousy. Doug Singleton, a lawyer, adopts a
coldly legalistic attitude toward even his friends. And so on. In one of the most
harrowing tableaux in all Campbell’s work, Richard Vale, owner of an
unsuccessful computer store, falls into despair over his economic troubles and
seeks to kill himself, his wife, and his two teenage children. The long chapter in
which this scene is narrated—beginning with the family’s wholesome day at the
seaside but with the reader’s slowly dawning realization that Richard both loves
his family and believes that killing them is the only solution to his problems—is

one long conte cruel unrivaled by anything even in The Face That Must Die.
Perhaps the only drawback to the novel is the lack of explanation as to why
the effects of the cakes abate toward the end. Somehow—and especially during
and after the funeral of Richard Vale’s family—the Owains and their friends
develop some sense of community that allows them to put aside their conflicts.
Whatever the case, the characters of all the protagonists in the novel are etched
with exquisite felicity, and although the novel almost entirely lacks the
“visionary” scope of Midnight Sun, the sin-eater theme causes The Long Lost to
achieve a cumulative sense of weirdness that is not compromised by the seeming
mundanity (and, toward the beginning, the occasional buffoonery) of the surface
events. Campbell’s growing interest in the complexities of language, exhibited in
The Count of Eleven, is also on display here, as we come to realize that every
single utterance by Gwendolen is a double entendre that refers covertly to her
baleful and perhaps unwillingly adopted mythic occupation.
Midnight Sun and The Long Lost may indicate that Campbell is finally
comfortable working in the novel form. He has conceived plots of sufficient
spaciousness that a novel is required for their exposition, and a novel that does
not involve the mere multiplication of human characters to carry the theme
forward, as was the case even with Incarnate. But if we have the right to expect
more novels of this sort from Campbell, how much more may we hope that he
will write a few more works like Needing Ghosts. A volume gathering three or
four tales of the calibre of Needing Ghosts would constitute the greatest weird
collection in the history of literature.

STYLE AND TECHNIQUE
It is singularly difficult to specify, in short compass and without extensive
quotation, the precise methods Campbell uses to create his horrific effects.
Certainly much of the power of his work derives purely from his prose style, one
of the most fluid, dense, and evocative in all modern literature. Campbell can
vivify anything. His eye for the details and resonances of even the most
mundane objects, and his ability to express them crisply and almost prose-
poetically, give to his work at once a clarity and a dreamlike nebulousness that is
difficult to describe but easy to sense. Consider his description of so prosaic a
thing as an airplane’s safety card: “Red arrows poked at cartoon passengers, who
leaned forward in attitudes of despair, clutching their heads. Passengers slid
down a yellow chute and hurried away; in their haste they’d left their mouths on
the plane. A woman helped a child don a life jacket. Panic had frozen the child’s
face into a bland mask, identical in three pictures. However the woman turned
her head, its outline remained exactly the shape of a strawberry” (P 100). And
such a description not merely enlivens what might otherwise be a tiresome
description of a routine flight, but also helps to create that air of brooding
ominousness that makes Campbell’s work so powerfully hypnotic.
It is largely as a result of his distinctive style and imagery that Campbell is
able to resurrect some of the hoariest and most hackneyed themes in weird
fiction and give them new life. An early story, “Napier Court” [1967], is one of
the finest haunted house stories in recent years, telling mesmerically of a house
whose previous inhabitant, a suicide, expressed the desire to “fade into the
house” (DC 21). In the end a young woman meets the same fate.
The house was empty. Alma was surrounded by a vacuum into which
something must rush. She stood up shaking and fell into the vacuum; her
sight was torn away. She tried to move; there was no longer any muscle to
respond. She felt nothing, but utter horror closed her in. Somewhere she
sensed her body, moving happily on her bedroom carpet, picking up her
ruined flute, breathing a hideous note into it. She tried to scream.
Impossible.
Only in dreams can houses scream for help [DC 32].
In other stories Campbell has given refreshing treatments to the themes of
the werewolf (“Night Beat”), the mummy (“Wrapped Up” [ST]), the zombie
(“Jack in the Box” [WN]) and the vampire (“Drawing In” [DC]). “The Proxy”
[1977; DC] ingeniously melds two old themes by presenting the ghost of a

house.
But it would be unjust to Campbell merely to suggest—as Gary William
Crawford has done in a mediocre booklet on Campbell—that he has only
revitalized standard weird scenarios. If the grim realism of his urban settings, his
hallucinatory style, his ability to mingle sex and horror, and the insidiously
subtle manner of his weird manifestations are not sufficient indications of his
fundamental originality, then several of his stories are founded upon strikingly
novel premises. Consider “The Pattern” [1975]. This story—dealing with a man
who comes to a seemingly placid rural town only to find increasingly disturbing
hints of strangeness all around him—gives the impression of being somewhat
longwinded, but its magnificent conclusion both redeems and justifies its length.
An inhabitant of the town tells the man and his wife what a spiritualist
conjectured when he investigated a loathsome murder that had occurred some
years before. “‘Oh, he had an explanation, he was full of them. He tried to tell
the police and me that the real tragedy hadn’t happened yet. He wanted us to
believe he could see it in the future. Of course he couldn’t say what or when. Do
you know what he tried to make out? That there was something so awful in the
future it was echoing back somehow, a sort of ghost in reverse’” (DC 148). Can
this somehow account for the screams the man keeps hearing around his house?
What else can he conclude when he finds his wife horribly butchered? “As all
the trees quivered like columns of water he heard movement behind him.
Though he had no will to live, it took him a long time to turn. He knew the
pattern had reached its completion, and he was afraid. He had to close his eyes
before he could turn, for he could still hear the scream he was about to utter”
(DC 150). I am inclined to connect this with such a story as “Playing the Game”:
perhaps Campbell senses that we are mere pawns in the control of a force or a
“pattern” vastly larger than us.
“Hearing Is Believing” (DF) is an interesting attempt to evoke horror purely
from sounds—in this instance a demonic stereo that continues to produce noises
even when it is not plugged in. This tale may have had a dim antecedent in the
early tale “The Plain of Sound” [1962; TH], in which the entities inhabiting a
desolate region are actually living sounds. Campbell is a great appreciator of
classical music and has written many record reviews for Liverpool newspapers;
it is, accordingly, not surprising that music plays a key role in many of his tales.
In “Cat and Mouse” music helps to sustain the atmosphere of weirdness: “I
thought Curlew River might help me define my thoughts. But I didn’t get as far
as the second side, with its angelic resolution. Peter Pears’ eerie vocal glissandi
in the part of the madwoman chilled me like the howls of a sad cat; the church
which the stereo recreated seemed longer and more hollow, like a tunnel gaping

invisibly before me in the air” (ST 26). In “Hearing Is Believing,” however,
sound itself becomes a source of horror. “Though the stereo wasn’t plugged in,
the sounds filled the speakers: a gust of wind splattered rain across sagging
wallpaper, waterlogged plaster collapsed, a prolonged juicy noise” (DF 282).
From a slightly different perspective, note should perhaps be made of the early
story, “Among the pictures are these:” [1973; CP], a sort of prose poem
describing some drawings Campbell had himself made in 1961.
If Campbell can vary the tone of his work at will, he can also utilize a
number of ingenious narrative devices when his themes call for them. One of the
most frequent of these is second-person singular narration in the present tense.
He is, of course, not the originator of this device—the pioneering, and perhaps
still the finest, example of it is Thomas Burke’s “Johnson Looked Back,” in
Night-Pieces (1935)—but it is, once again, a particularly vivid means for
Campbell to isolate an individual’s thought processes as they are occurring. A
number of tales in The Height of the Scream and Dark Companions employ it,
but none more effectively than “Heading Home.” This tale—in which the
severed head of a scientist manages to emerge from a basement where it has
been dumped and reunites with its body—falls just short of being a trick story
(as “Conversion” [DC] does not). The “you” of the tale seems to refer to the
entire person when in fact it refers only to the head, but this very fact
underscores the philosophical point that the head—or, rather, the brain within it
—is the person because that is where all thought and consciousness lie. The
metaphor by which this conception is expressed is the scientist’s discovery of a
formula that allows the brain to function independently of the body.
You recall the day you perfected the solution. As soon as you’d
quaffed it you felt your brain achieve a piercing alertness, become precisely
and continually aware of the messages of each nerve and preside over them,
making minute adjustments at the first hint of danger. You knew this was
what you’d worked for, but you couldn’t prove it to yourself until the day
you felt the stirrings of cancer. Then your brain seemed to condense into a
keen strand of energy that stretched down and seared the cancer out. That
was proof. You were immortal [DC 48].
Another device favored by Campbell is what I would call double narration.
This technique involves the successive narration of the same event through the
eyes of different characters. It is yet another testimonial to Campbell’s intense
interest in individual consciousness. Indeed, one might almost say that he is
curiously reluctant to abandon this perspective: it is strange how infrequently he
uses omniscient narration as opposed to narration centered upon a given
individual’s thought processes. Although double narration is employed in several

of his novels, its most striking usage occurs in The Face That Must Die. Its
power here stems from the juxtaposition of a “normal” and a “paranoid” view of
the same event. The murder of Roy Craig is dealt with in this manner: in Chapter
11 we follow Craig’s thoughts and actions up to the time of his sudden death on
his own doorstep; Chapter 12 then compels us to relive the event through the
eyes of Horridge. It is exactly because we know what is coming that the
technique gains its gruesome effectiveness. Chapters 22–24 of the novel form an
interlocking network of double narrations; they also present an anomalous
reversal of roles, as Cathy, spotting Horridge but thinking him a private
detective, wishes to speak to him, while Horridge, thinking that Cathy is helping
the police, flees her in the fog. Each chapter replays a certain portion of the
events of the previous chapter, then carries the narrative forward a little further
so that the next chapter can again replay these events and carry them on still
further.
Campbell’s general lack of humor in his tales has been noted (and,
evidently, rather foolishly regretted—as if his intense vision required a dollop of
comic relief now and again!), but one wonders whether some of his later stories
do not in fact parody his own manner. There was a period in the later 1970s
when his tales were becoming almost formulaic—one could predict that at the
end some hapless individual would finally come face to face with the
supernatural force that had been lurking just beyond his vision. Perhaps his
virtual surcease of short-story writing in the early 1980s gave him a fresh
perspective from which to regard his own work, for his later tales have, as I have
remarked, become more varied in style and tone. But parody is very evident in
such a tale as “Seeing the World” [1983; DF], in which a seemingly
conventional middle-class couple invite their neighbors to watch the slides of
their trip to Europe, during which they visited some catacombs and returned as
undead corpses. There may be parody even in Campbell’s early story “The
Whining” [1973], although here the joke is directed at the hackneyed
conventions of the moribund “ghost story” tradition. A man kills a pestiferous
dog but finds that it haunts him continually. How to get rid of the thing? He
remarks petulantly, “‘You realize it’s impossible to exorcise an animal? They
don’t understand English, never mind Latin’” (HS 30). Needing Ghosts is full of
twisted humor, although the laughter it provokes may be the hysterical laughter
of the insane at the sane.

PHILOSOPHY
Ramsey Campbell has discussed his own work on many occasions. He has,
indeed, rather a fondness for talking about himself, although—in contrast to a
number of other writers one can name—he always does so with a refreshing
candor and lack of self-congratulation. Almost every one of his short story
collections bears an introduction. A number of later editions of his novels
(several of which have been revised after first publication) contain introductions
or afterwords, the most riveting and disturbing being that for the 1983 edition of
The Face That Must Die. And he has given several illuminating interviews. He
makes no secret of the fact that much of his work is autobiographical. But why,
exactly, does he write horror fiction at all? He purports to discuss this issue in
two of his introductions, but to my mind neither of these provides a satisfactory
answer. In the introduction to The Height of the Scream he conducts a sort of
self-interview.
Why do I write horror fiction?
Because there’s nothing I enjoy more than writing.
But why horror fiction?
Because it’s what I do best. And it seems to me one ought to spend as
much time as possible doing what one does best [HS ix].
This is not very helpful, and he never returns to this particular issue. In the
introduction to Dark Companions he appears to take up the matter again, but his
answer there is no more conclusive. “My most vivid memories of my early
childhood are of being frightened …” (DC xi). What, in the end, does Campbell
hope to achieve by writing horror fiction? I am not sure that I know.
It is, accordingly, difficult to trace a coherent philosophy in Campbell’s
work: the supernatural phenomena in his stories are not—or are not consistently
—metaphors for his metaphysical or ethical concerns. The weird is most
frequently used by him as a vehicle for the examination of a wide array of
psychological states and the probing of an individual’s relationship either with
others or with his or her environment.
If Campbell is not seeking to convey a unified vision in his work, as
Lovecraft, Blackwood, and Machen did, he is also not concerned with using
fiction as a means of achieving easy moral solutions to difficult problems.
Indeed, it is exactly when Campbell is at his most didactic that he is least
successful. “The Words That Count,” for example, as he has himself admitted,11
is an attempt (rather ill-conceived, to my mind) to combat religious

fundamentalism. He seems to have a peculiar fondness for this tale, including it
not only in The Height of the Scream and Dark Feasts but submitting it as his
contribution to Dennis Etchison’s Masters of Darkness. Campbell returns again
and again to the theme of religious zealotry, sometimes quite effectively—as in
“Another World” [1987; WN], a nonsupernatural tale of paranoia bred by
religious fanaticism—and sometimes rather less so, as in the rather nasty and
predictable “It Helps If You Sing” [1987; WN]. Then there is the curious early
tale “Made in Goatswood” [1968]. Here some heathenish stone figures built by
Terry Aldrich, an unbeliever, for his lover Kim, a conventional Catholic, serve to
underscore their religious differences. But then Terry saves Kim when the
figures come to life and threaten her, and he appears to reconvert to Catholicism
in order to preserve their relationship: “Silently he made the sign of the cross.
Then he walked toward the house” (DD 153). It is disturbing how readily Terry
gives up his principles simply for an emotional attachment.
Religious fundamentalism is the focus of The Hungry Moon [1984–85].
Campbell evidently based the central character, Godwin Mann—an American
evangelist whose followers overrun a small English town which in ancient times
was a druid settlement—on Billy Graham. And certainly the portrayal of the
odiously hypocritical and self-important Mann, and his gradual infection of the
entire town with his dogmatic fundamentalism, is vivid and pungent, if in a sort
of irritating way. But Campbell suggests that Mann may have bitten off more
than he can chew when he causes the townsfolk to give up a nominally pagan
ceremony whereby a deep cave is decorated every year as a sort of peace
offering to the presiding deity or force residing within it. The townsfolk have all
imagined that this is merely a harmless tradition, with no more real significance
than the hanging of mistletoe at Christmas, but strange forces are released
thereby.
At this point the novel begins to gather steam and becomes quite
compelling; and one of the most cosmic tableaux in all Campbell’s work occurs
in a fascinating vision experienced by one of the characters, in which a
loathsome and titanic creature flees the dying moon at the dawn of history and
approaches the steaming earth. “Meteors still rained down, but caught fire in the
atmosphere. Huge continents were splitting, drifting apart as storms picked at the
world. Mountains reared up, seas flooded into gaps that were beginning to
outline continents she could almost recognize. There might soon be life as she
knew it—and then she realized what she had known instinctively. Life on earth
was what the watcher on the moon was waiting hungrily for” (HM 214). This
entity infects various characters so that they glow with a sickly white
phosphorescence (just as the moon does) and become loathsome spiderlike

creatures whose only goal is to destroy human beings as a prelude to the entity’s
regaining its sway over the earth.
The symbolism of the novel is very carefully worked out. In effect, The
Hungry Moon could (as with Dunsany’s The Blessing of Pan) be read as the
triumph of paganism over Christianity. Campbell slyly alludes to a number of
classical myths as the novel develops: the three dogs who tear apart the town’s
police chief can hardly fail to make us recall three-headed Cerberus; the feast of
human flesh that the moon-entity possessing Mann’s body serves up to the
townsfolk recalls the many such banquets in Graeco-Roman myth; and when an
already blind man gouges out his eyes as he feels himself near the horror, we
immediately think of the blinding of Oedipus when the truth of his actions
dawns upon him. In the central portion of the novel an eerie darkness,
reminiscent of Hodgson’s The Night Land, covers the town like a pall; but it may
well be a metaphor for the mental darkness of fundamentalism. The blinding of
several of the most fervently religious inhabitants, when the (secular) heroes of
the novel banish the darkness and restore the sun, can only suggest the blindness
to truth and enlightenment that affects so many religious extremists.
And yet, in the end I am not sure that the withering satire directed against
these fundamentalists does not obscure the general moral message of the novel.
The fanatics are portrayed as so loathsome that one almost wants them to be
possessed and destroyed by the moon-entity, even though that entity is also a
threat to the planet at large. And Campbell appears to take great relish in
disposing of his fundamentalists in some particularly grisly fashion, as with the
sanctimonious police chief:
They were dogs—mad dogs, to judge by the sounds of snarling and
cloth tearing. The flashlight beam swung toward them, and Nick saw them
bring the policeman down, one slavering red mouth burying its teeth in his
thigh, another ripping at his fist as he tried to defend himself. The man
screamed once, and then there was only an agonized gurgling. The next
swing of the flashlight showed the third dog on top of him, paws on his
chest, worrying his throat like a rat. He must have been as good as dead
when his free leg kicked out, his boot smashing the flashlight against the
wall. Then there was darkness in the main room, and the sounds of panting
and snarling and teeth ripping flesh [HM 196].
Aside from his novels, in which it might be said that he becomes overly
attached to his own sympathetic characters, Campbell rarely indulges in naive
struggles of good and evil or supernatural revenge in which a crime is fittingly
punished by a force from beyond the grave. This is taking the easy way out, and
Campbell realizes that much weird fiction that rests on such premises is now

hopelessly dated in an age that has seen injustice triumph with impunity on too
many occasions.
Accordingly, Campbell’s world is dark, brooding, and pessimistic, but not
cynical or misanthropic. Even his portrayals of paranoid personalities are free of
cheap scorn or contempt, and the care with which he probes the psychological
state of these psychotics bespeaks a consuming interest in it and a desire to
understand its sources and ramifications. But the bleakness of his vision has
frequently stirred comment. T. E. D. Klein—that pessimist who wants to be an
optimist—wrote in his landmark essay, “Ramsey Campbell: An Appreciation”
(1974): “Yet horror per se can be, in the end, somewhat limiting; and now that
he has mastered it, one might hope for an occasional ray of light to alleviate the
gloom…. An occasional vision of something behind a glass of stout and a
secretary’s knickers might add a needed dimension to the world Campbell has
created.”12 All this is a little silly, bringing to mind many myopic critics’
complaints of Bierce’s pessimism. Campbell is perfectly entitled to his
unmitigatedly glum outlook: this is clearly how he sees the world, and he is
under no obligation to present rosy pictures to satisfy Klein’s naive optimism. I
have already remarked that the half-hearted and unconvincing “happy endings”
to many of Campbell’s novels weaken them considerably. It is not merely that
these sudden reversals of fortune seem unmotivated and contrived, it is that they
appear to confound Campbell’s general vision of the world, in which we are
helpless pawns in the face of devastating horrors that can overwhelm us at any
moment and for any reason, or for no reason at all. If Campbell is doing more
than simply transmogrifying the dangers of urban life—and I believe he is—then
he must remain true to his world view, cheerless as it may be.
Ramsey Campbell is the only writer in the entire range of weird fiction,
with the exception of Lord Dunsany, to combine an almost prodigal
bountifulness of output with remarkably high and consistent level of quality.
Even if some of Campbell’s short tales do not entirely succeed, and even if some
of the novels tend to fall flat, every one of his works is written with meticulous
care: he is an author, like Machen, Dunsany, Lovecraft, Shirley Jackson, T. E. D.
Klein, Robert Aickman, and Thomas Ligotti, whose every work can be read
purely for the pleasure of reading it. And yet, as of this writing Campbell is only
in his mid-fifties—although he has been writing seriously for more than 35
years, it is possible that he is only at the midpoint of his literary career. The
prospect of hundreds more short stories and a dozen or so more novels from
Campbell’s pen in the next two or three decades—works that will continue to
probe new directions in the field as they continue to give further shape and
coherence to his own oeuvre—is one of the few reasons for maintaining an

interest in modern weird fiction.

 
IV. THE ALTERNATIVES TO SUPERNATURALISM
KILLING WOMEN WITH ROBERT BLOCH, THOMAS HARRIS, AND
BRET EASTON ELLIS
ROBERT BLOCH: HARD-BOILED HORROR
Robert Bloch (1917–1994) is a particularly apt writer illustrate both the
distinctions between and the uniting of the suspense story and the weird tale, for
it seems undeniable that he has written works of both types as well as works that
fuse the two. I have no intention of studying the whole of Bloch’s prodigally
vast output—which comprises some two dozen novels, hundreds of short stories
collected and uncollected, articles, introductions, screenplays, teleplays, and
miscellany,1 and which runs the gamut from pure mystery to supernatural horror
to science fiction—nor is such a thing necessary. To be honest, Bloch is by no
stretch of the imagination a great writer but merely a competent craftsman whose
most distinctive work combines mystery and horror in a seamless fashion. And
because his writing is on the whole transparently clear and generally void of
subtlety and complexity (I do not necessarily intend this as a criticism), it can be
studied for its purely formal qualities in ways that other, denser works cannot be.
Bloch’s entire writing career has been a dance on both sides of the
supernatural fence. In his teens he wrote entertainingly lurid supernatural tales
(many of them in the Lovecraftian vein2) for Weird Tales. But as early as the late
1930s he was approaching the realm of nonsupernatural horror. “The Cloak”
(1939; OW) concerns a cloak, once owned by a vampire, which appears to
endow the wearer with vampiric inclinations. This seems rather conventionally
supernatural, but Bloch handles it in such a fashion as to imply initially that the
vampiric tendencies are being brought on only through psychological
suggestion, and it requires the very last line of the story to push the tale into the
supernatural. Another, rather similar story is “The Man Who Collected Poe”
(1951), in which a man claims that he has rifled Poe’s grave, removed the
contents therefrom, and actually resurrected the body of Poe and compelled him
to write new tales. When a colleague is shown some clearly recent work that
appears to be in Poe’s handwriting, he feels that his friend has become so
obsessed with Poe that he has taken to writing like him. Only at the end do we
learn that Poe has in fact been resurrected.
In some of his tales Bloch suggests that certain natural events, usually

murder, are so horrible that they must be accounted for supernaturally. “Yours
Truly, Jack the Ripper” (1943) is of this sort. A fanatical Jack the Ripper scholar
maintains that a series of murders committed around the world over a period of
50 years proves that the Ripper must still be alive, even though he would now be
in his eighties or more. The idea is that the grisliness of these murders bears the
stamp of some especially deranged fiend, as the Ripper must have been. We
have seen that William Peter Blatty has presented this idea from a religious
perspective, suggesting that the heinousness of certain crimes necessitates belief
in Satan. Bloch broaches the idea in a secular fashion, but this celebrated tale
nonetheless suffers from implausibility and triteness. I am not giving away much
by revealing that the first-person narrator in the end turns out to be the
preternaturally aged Ripper. Still less successful is “‘Lizzie Borden Took an
Axe…’” (1946), in which a woman is possessed by the spirit of Lizzie Borden
and commits crimes very much like hers. A much better tale is the vastly clever
“I Like Blondes” (1956), in which we seem merely to be concerned with an old
rake who likes blondes either for sex or for murder, but who is actually an alien
from another planet who seizes blondes in order to eat them. The tale is told with
Bloch’s trademark humor, a mixture of the graveyard comedy of Bierce and a
stand-up comic’s one-liners. It was first published, interestingly, in Playboy.
The collection Such Stuff as Screams Are Made Of (1979) is devoted almost
wholly to what Bloch in an afterword terms “psychological suspense” (SS 284),
although a few purely supernatural tales (“The Weird Tailor,” “A Case of the
Stubborns”) and even some science fiction stories intrude anomalously. Many
are what Bloch (SS 285) frankly terms contes cruels, but there is one story that
presents one of the most original ideas in recent weird fiction. In “I Do Not Love
Thee, Dr. Fell” (1955) Clyde Bromely, feeling that his life is going nowhere and
having doubts as to his own identity, begins to see a psychiatrist. It transpires
that Clyde has actually invented his psychiatrist: he has in fact been going into
his own office and lying down on the couch, imagining that he is having a
session with a Dr. Fell. This tale seems authentically weird both because of the
extreme bizarrerie of Clyde’s psychological aberration and because Bloch relates
the entire idea to witchcraft and sorcery (“Three hundred years ago … a man
who couldn’t integrate his personality created a new one—he became a wizard”
[SS 103]). Less successful is the long story “The Screaming People” (1959), in
which a psychologist in an insane asylum manipulates his patients for his own
ends, even inducing them to commit murder. This foreshadows (again in a
secular manner) Blatty’s use of a similiar idea in Legion (1983) and, in its
treatment of the protagonist’s amnesia, may even foreshadow some of L. P.
Davies’s work. But the tale is rushed in its execution and fails to develop the

many interesting ramifications of the story line (a problem that dogs much of
Bloch’s fiction, early and late). It is obvious that Bloch has some kind of
hostility against psychiatrists, but at any rate stories like these plumb unknown
depths of human consciousness in ways that methodologically approach
Lovecraft’s and other cosmic horror writers’ probing of the depths of the
universe.
A number of Bloch’s novels center around very disturbed individuals, but
some seem clearly to be mystery-suspense works while others may well cross
over into the weird. A case, however, could be made for the weirdness of two of
his nonsupernatural novels, The Scarf (1947; revised 1966) and Psycho (1959). I
am almost inclined to rank the former above the latter as Bloch’s finest novel,
and perhaps only a highly contrived and implausible ending will force us to give
the palm to its more celebrated companion. The Scarf is the first-person account
of Dan Morley, who tells of a traumatic experience he had as a youth. A
handsome boy, he has attracted the attention of one of his teachers, a lonely
woman in her late thirties named Miss Frazer. One day she invites him to her
home and proceeds to tie him up with a maroon scarf, seal up the house, and turn
on the gas so that the two of them can die together as lovers. He manages to
escape, but Miss Frazer dies in the process. As a result, he confesses that “For
years I hated women, books, everything” (S 9).
It is at this point that the paradoxes begin. Although he hates women, he
attracts them and is attracted to them; although he hates books, he becomes a
writer of them. He undergoes a pattern of latching on to a woman, writing stories
about her, then killing her with the scarf. Words and reality have become
inextricably confused in his mind. It is as if he kills his women only so as to
provide a fitting climax to a story: “I killed Rena because she was just a story
character to me. She wasn’t real. She didn’t exist at all” (S 17). In a fascinating
and highly prophetic disquisition, Morley ponders on words and their ubiquity:
“A jumble of words on a slip and a mumble of words on a lip and you’re
married. Or divorced. Or buried, for that matter. You can’t buy, sell, or contract
without a magic formula. It’s all words now” (S 77). Is there a reality beyond the
facade of words? Yes, but only one: “Murder isn’t a word. Murder is a deed” (S
79). Morley kills not only to vent his hatred of women but, in a twisted way, to
affirm his own existence.
The quasi-weirdness of this novel comes from several directions. Morley
begins writing a “Black Notebook,” a notebook filled with his innermost
thoughts, in which he records not only his murders but the terrifying nightmares
he suffers; they are among the more effective dream-sequences in modern weird
literature. Moreover, it is precisely because there is no doubt of Morley’s guilt,

and accordingly no mystery or suspense element aside from the matter of
whether he will ever be caught, that we are not distracted from the perception of
his increasingly aberrant mental state. The latter part of the novel does indeed
take on a suspense element as certain characters finally begin to suspect Morley
of the murders and set about entrappping him; and the conclusion—rewritten in
the 1966 version3—is more than a little contrived. Here we find that Miss Frazer
did not in fact die, and she maintains that it was Morley who was in love with
her and sought to tie her up and commit joint suicide. I believe we are to
interpret this, however, as a lie fabricated by Miss Frazer in order finally to gain
Morley for herself—and Morley now seems resigned to such a fate (“Miss
Frazer and I are going to be married…” [S 160]). I am not especially happy with
this conclusion, but perhaps Bloch felt that this ending allowed him to give
Morley a more satisfactory comeuppance than merely death or incarceration.
Nevertheless, The Scarf is a powerful work of psychological horror; because of
its singleminded focus upon a disturbed mentality, it can take a place with the
best weird fiction of its kind.
It is difficult to treat of Psycho, just as it is now difficult to read it, without
reference to Alfred Hitchcock’s film, but we must try to do so, for the novel
reveals subtleties and moments of chilling terror that even the film has not
captured. As the story is so well known, I need not recapitulate it here. I wish,
however, to preface my discussion of it by examining a much earlier story,
“Enoch” (1946). This story bears striking thematic resemblances to Psycho but is
supernatural, and it perfectly exemplifies how a nonsupernatural work can be not
only more frightening than a supernatural one but more psychologically
compelling. “Enoch” is the tale of a man who is deemed insane for thinking that
some strange entity “that lives on the top of my head” (B 22) has ordered him to
commit repeated murder. At one point the man confesses that “Most people …
thought I was crazy—because of my mother” (B 26). This is not wholly
explained, but it appears that the man’s mother had the reputation of being a
witch. In any event, the man convinces the district attorney to take Enoch over
for a while; the latter, wanting to humor the man, agrees, and he inevitably finds
that Enoch is a real entity. “Enoch” is in fact (if I may be excused a Blochian
pun) rather innocuous: the supernaturalism of the tale undercuts any interesting
psychological analysis because the man’s murderous propensities are now
attributed to Enoch rather than to himself. It therefore scarcely matters what the
man’s relationship to his mother is, or why he commits the murders, since he is
not truly responsible for them. Bloch wisely did not make this mistake in
Psycho.
One of the many details the film version of Psycho fails to capture is the

degree to which, at the outset, Norman Bates’s symbiotic, love-hate relationship
with his (dead) mother is elaborated. By a transparent projection, Bates imagines
that it is his mother who is mentally ill and ought to be locked away in an
asylum. In a brilliant updating of the Jekyll and Hyde syndrome, Bates on
occasion wholly adopts the personality of his mother and then, regaining his own
personality, professes horror at what his “mother” has committed. But Bates is
by no means wholly unaware of his condition, and at one point comes
dangerously close to realizing it: “It was like being two people, really—the child
and the adult. Whenever he thought about Mother, he became a child again, with
a child’s vocabulary, frames of reference, and emotional reactions. But when he
was by himself—not actually by himself, but off in a book—he was a mature
individual. Mature enough to understand that he might even be the victim of a
mild form of schizophrenia, most likely some form of borderline neurosis” (P
83–84).
What makes Psycho a genuine weird tale is not primarily—or, rather, not
initially—our awareness of Bates’s profound mother fixation, which has led him
to deny the fact of his mother’s death, extract her body from her grave, place it
in his home, and imagine her alive once more. All this we learn only toward the
end of the novel, and we can now only imagine what an impact these revelations
would have had on the book’s first readers. What has laid the groundwork for
the weirdness of this conclusion is, firstly, the apparent lack of mystery as to the
deaths that occur at the Bates motel (they are, we believe, clearly the work of
Bates’s mother) and, secondly, some exceptionally fine touches of what I call the
pseudosupernatural–the suggestion of the supernatural in details of landscape,
atmosphere, or character description. The revelation that Bates’s mother is
actually dead comes about two-thirds through the novel. Shortly thereafter we
learn that the private detective Arbogast had told Lila Crane, sister of the
murdered Mary Crane, that he saw Bates’s mother (actually Bates dressed as his
mother) as he drove into the motel. At this point the sheriff, who knows Bates’s
mother is dead, remarks: “‘Maybe he saw her ghost sitting in the window’” (P
120). And indeed, it is momentarily conceivable to a reader that Bates’s mother
is in fact a ghost and has killed Mary and Arbogast, although most ghosts in
standard weird fiction do not wield knives. Another pseudosupernatural touch
occurs when Bates sees Lila come to the motel and thinks it is Mary who has
come out of the swamp where he dumped her (P 125).
The episode in which Lila boldly enters Bates’s home in order to find out
the truth of the matter is the most horrific scene in the novel. The
pseudosupernatural here functions on several levels. This entire episode is an
adaptation and subtilization of the conventional haunted-house story in which a

protagonist explores some centuried and cobwebbed dwelling where a sheeted
figure may emerge at any moment; and Bloch’s use of language simultaneously
enhances and subverts this convention. Lila, examining the musty and archaic
surroundings, uses such terms as “ghastly” and “horrors” to describe her
aesthetic response to the furnishings (“There was a bureau over in the corner …
one of those antique horrors” [P 142]), but we as readers are led to connote them
very differently. Lila then enters Bates’s mother’s room (Bates has taken his
mother’s corpse down to the fruit cellar), and although she notes that all the
items in it are some 50 years old, the room is “still alive” (P 144): again a double
meaning is intended here, suggesting both that the mother’s spirit lives because
of the meticulous way in which the room has been kept and that Bates is
attempting to keep his mother alive in a bodily manner. Finally, Lila, becoming
increasingly affected by the eerie atmosphere of the house, repeats to herself
harriedly, “There are no ghosts” (P 144, 145). Here again this brings to mind the
conventional haunted-house character’s attempts to reassure himself in the
presence of the supernatural, but in fact Lila is right—there are no ghosts here;
only Bates’s twisted mind. The enormous skill with which this chapter, and the
entire novel, is written must place it at the pinnacle of Bloch’s output.
Both The Scarf and Psycho suffer somewhat from a clumsy explanatory
ending that creates a sort of schoolroom atmosphere. But both are textbooks for
the depiction of crazed mentalities from within; it is remarkable that Psycho
allows for this sort of depiction in a third-person narrative. Bloch has regrettably
attempted to play upon the success of Psycho by writing two novel-length
sequels to it, both entirely unreadable. But they, along with much of the rest of
his uneven output, must be forgotten and forgiven. If the film has become an
imperishable cultural landmark, then the novel has itself spawned many
imitations and adaptations. It is to two of those that we now turn.
THOMAS HARRIS: THE MIND OF HORROR
Thomas Harris (b. ca. 1940) is not your usual bestselling author. In the first
place, in contrast to the mechanical regularity of Judith Krantz, Sidney Sheldon,
and especially Stephen King, Harris has written only three novels in about 15
years. In the second place, his spare, tight, but rather colorless style is leagues
away from the floridity, tawdriness, and plain bad writing of the Danielle Steels
of the world. In his two best and most representative novels, Harris straddles (or,
at least, is thought by some to straddle) the thin boundary between suspense and
horror, but to my mind he ultimately lands in the former domain.
Black Sunday (1975) is a mere potboiler, with a preposterous premise—

terrorists wish to blow up the Super Bowl from a blimp—and stereotypical
characters (Dahlia Iyad, the fanatical Palestinian terrorist; Michael Lander, the
embittered Vietnam War vet who seeks nothing but death and destruction; David
Kabakov, the ruthless Israeli secret service agent who foils the plot). It has only
one point of interest: early on a portion of a chapter is devoted to a psychological
history of Lander from infancy onward, supplying the inner motives for his
actions and desires. It is written in a clinical, almost emotionless manner, but it
nevertheless provides the necessary psychological motivation for the entire
novel.
Harris developed this idea in an ingenious way in Red Dragon (1981). The
premise of this novel is the attempt by Will Graham, a semiretired FBI agent, to
hunt down a serial killer by adopting the mindset of the criminal. Graham has an
unusual sensitivity to other people’s minds. (It must be emphasized that this idea
is not presented as in any way supernatural or occult, and Graham is far removed
from the “psychic detectives” who lumber implausibly through some of the work
of Algernon Blackwood, William Hope Hodgson, and others.) The FBI, stumped
in the matter, feel that this may be the only way to capture the killer.
This premise is, as I say, ingenious, but I wonder whether in fact it is
actually carried out. That is to say, does Graham really solve the case, or any
part of it, by entering the criminal’s mind? It seems that what he really does is
simply interpret the physical evidence more thoroughly, sensitively, and keenly
than others have. He states his purported principles to his wife.
“Molly, an intelligent psychopath—particularly a sadist—is hard to
catch for several reasons. First, there’s no traceable motive. So you can’t go
that way. And most of the time you won’t have any help from informants.
See, there’s a lot more stooling than sleuthing behind most arrests, but in a
case like this there won’t be any informants. He may not even know that
he’s doing it. So you have to take whatever evidence you have and
extrapolate. You try to reconstruct his thinking. You try to find patterns”
[RD 18].
This is all well and good, but let us now examine a particularly vivid
example of Graham’s psychological insight, as he examines a murder scene and
notes that the murdered children of a family have been brought down to the
bedroom where the parents have been killed.
Why did you move them again? Why didn’t you leave them that way?
Graham asked. There’s something you don’t want me to know about you.
Why, there’s something you’re ashamed of. Or is it something you can’t
afford for me to know?
Did you open their eyes?

Mrs. Leeds was lovely, wasn’t she? You turned on the light after you
cut his throat so Mrs. Leeds could watch him flop, didn’t you? It was
maddening to have to wear gloves when you touched her, wasn’t it?
There was talcum on her leg.
There was no talcum in the bathroom.
Someone else seemed to speak those two facts in a flat voice.
You took off your gloves, didn’t you? The powder came out of a rubber
glove as you pulled it off to touch her, DIDN’T IT, YOU SON OF A
BITCH? You touched her with your bare hands and then you put the gloves
back on and you wiped her down. But while the gloves were off, DID YOU
OPEN THEIR EYES? [RD 29–30].
The murderer perversely wanted the dead children to watch the killing of
the parents. All this is rather effective, but there does not seem to be any
conclusion here that has not been arrived at by anything other than very acute
deduction from the evidence. If Harris or his supporters think that he has
invented some “new” form of detection, then he and they had better think again.
But this is not what I wish to study here. What, if anything, makes this a
weird tale? Chet Williamson, both a sharp commentator and a gifted weird
fictionist, has written of this novel that it is “quite simply, the most frightening
book I have ever read.”4 I suppose I cannot quarrel with Williamson on what he
finds frightening, and it is, I trust, not because I am exceptionally hardened that I
did not find anything particularly frightening in this book.5 The work is highly
compelling, but it is a work of detection and suspense and not horror. Much of
the novel is given over to a very careful forensic analysis of evidence, until
finally sufficient clues are found to identify the murderer. Harris, with unusual
restraint for a popular writer, has not even peppered this novel with much overt
violence: the murders have already occurred at the start of the book, and we can
only infer their loathsomeness from the gradual accumulation of evidence.
It is, presumably, this whole notion of trying to enter the twisted mind of a
serial killer that is supposed to generate horror in the work, and there are
occasions when Harris attempts to invest this action with portentous shudders.
Graham’s great triumph is the capture of Dr. Hannibal Lecter, a highly learned
but fiercely cynical and misanthropic psychiatrist who sports the charming
soubriquet of “Hannibal the Cannibal.” Graham actually seeks Lecter’s advice
on the serial killings, and Lecter delivers a parting shot: “The reason you caught
me is that we’re just alike” (RD 73).
This sets the stage for a psychological history of the killer very much like
that in Black Sunday, and it is here that the parallels to Psycho become striking.

The killer, Francis Dolarhyde, was an orphan who was raised by a hideous and
tyrannical grandmother who made fun of his speech impediment and who once
threatened to cut off his penis with scissors when she found him as a young boy
exposing himself to a little girl. Although Dolarhyde certainly does not resurrect
his grandmother’s body like Norman Bates, he seems to have preserved her false
teeth (one suddenly thinks of Poe’s “Berenice”). And he pretends to have self-
tormenting conversations with his grandmother very similar to Bates’s; he
fancies that it is the grandmother who is urging him to kill a young blind woman,
Reba McClane, who has taken a romantic interest in him. “‘YOU MAY PUT
AWAY MY TEETH. YOU PITIFUL LITTLE HARELIP, YOU’D KEEP
YOUR LITTLE BUDDY FROM ME, WOULD YOU? I’LL TEAR HER
APART AND RUB THE PIECES IN YOUR UGLY FACE. I’LL HANG YOU
WITH HER LARGE INTESTINE IF YOU OPPOSE ME. YOU KNOW I CAN”
(RD 275). The parallels with Norman Bates’s unacknowledged attraction to
Mary Crane, and his “mother’s” murder of her in order that the bond between
him and his mother can be preserved, is striking. But Dolarhyde is tracked down,
Reba is saved, and Lecter’s plot to have Graham’s wife killed is foiled.
The Silence of the Lambs (1988) has now exceeded the acclaim of Red
Dragon, largely as a result of the success of the 1990 film version, one of the
most faithful adaptations of a literary work in years. If Silence lacks the gripping
and monomaniacal intensity of its predecessor, it is overall a finer work: in
fullness of characterization, in intricacy of plot, and in cumulative suspense. But
it, too, is not a weird tale. Once again much of the action revolves around the
mechanics of tracking down the serial killer, and here the evidence ranges from
death’s-head moths (found in the victims’ throats) to anomalous triangular
markings discovered on the back of one victim. As in Red Dragon, several of the
murders have already occurred, and much attention is given to rescuing the
killer’s latest victim, who has been abducted but is not murdered immediately.
Dr. Hannibal Lecter, who was merely a sort of sardonic commentator in
Red Dragon, plays a much larger role in The Silence of the Lambs, virtually
orchestrating the events even though he spends much of the novel behind bars.
(It is interesting that Harris has never given a full account of Will Graham’s
capture of Lecter, or even of Lecter’s own crimes. Perhaps a future novel will
deal with these rich issues.) Lecter really is one of the more delightfully evil
figures in recent literature, and his knowledge of psychiatry allows him to play
the most exquisite games of mental torture upon his various targets. While there
is something of the Gothic villain in Lecter, he could just as well be considered a
Moriarty figure. In this case, however, the Sherlock Holmes figure is not Will
Graham but Clarice M. Starling, a trainee in the FBI Academy. She has been

chosen to interrogate Lecter so as to produce a psychological profile of serial
killers But, because she finds that Lecter appears to know much about the serial
killer known as Buffalo Bill, she becomes enmeshed in that case and ultimately
helps to solve it. The sensitive portrayal of Starling is one of the quiet triumphs
of this novel.
The gripping mental battle between Lecter and Starling actually ends up
relegating the actual murderer to the background, and we learn relatively little
about the motivations of Buffalo Bill, who is ultimately identified as one Jame
Gumb. This is unfortunate, for had such a psychological history been supplied, a
much better case could have been made for the weirdness of The Silence of the
Lambs. It turns out that Gumb is profoundly confused sexually: he is not
homosexual, nor does he truly fit the psychological model of the transsexual; for
that reason he has been turned down for a sex change operation, and so he
resorts to killing women. Why? He wishes to make an entire suit out of women’s
skin, since this will be the closest he will ever come to being a woman. So he
takes various pieces of skin from each of his victims: the back from one, the
thighs from another, and so on. This, certainly, is exceptionally perverse, but
Harris’s presentation of it is so indirect (this, in fact, is the clue to the killings,
and so it cannot be fully revealed until the end) as to rob it of potential horror.
This is not a criticism: it only confirms that Harris’s prime goal in the novel is
detection, not horror.
What is interesting is that the film version of The Silence of the Lambs is
actually much more horrifying (and, accordingly, much less of a detective story)
than the novel. An early scene, in which Starling must confront Lecter in his
heavily guarded cell in a madhouse, is presented in the film as something out of
Melmoth the Wanderer: we seem suddenly transported out of the present and
into the horrors of the Inquisition. There is nothing like this in the novel. Jame
Gumb’s home in the film is a Gothic castle with a stone-encircled well in which
he keeps his hapless victim. One wonders whether the director of the film was
thinking of the climactic scene in Lovecraft’s The Case of Charles Dexter Ward
—Harris certainly wasn’t. I am not saying that the film is unfaithful to the novel
in these and other particulars; perhaps it is merely drawing out hints that were
only implicit in Harris’s work. Nevertheless, it is not paradoxical to say that the
film The Silence of the Lambs is weird whereas the novel is not.
Even if Red Dragon and The Silence of the Lambs cannot be considered
genuinely weird, they are certainly among the more successful works of popular
fiction in recent years. I am trying not to say this condescendingly, although it is
a fact that Harris tends to succumb to various conventions of popular fiction—
abundance of dialogue, stereotypical conflict of good and evil, occasionally

contrived plot twists, a plethora of technical knowledge of certain matters
(especially forensics) that is meant to impress the reader. On the other hand, he
at least avoids certain other conventions such as sentimentality, slipshod or
colloquial style, and a complete resolution of all plot threads at the end (Lecter
escaped toward the end of The Silence of the Lambs and is still on the loose). I
am not sure how aware of the weird tradition Harris is, but if he is working in the
field that Robert Bloch termed “psychological suspense,” then he gives equal
emphasis to both halves of that compound, and perhaps even a little more to the
latter.
BRET EASTON ELLIS: THE BANALITY OF HORROR
And now we come to American Psycho (1991). It is likely that the
controversy surrounding this book and its author will be forgotten in a very short
time, so it is worth outlining it here. Ellis had gained a certain amount of
celebrity as the author of two previous mainstream novels, Less Than Zero
(1985) and The Rules of Attraction (1987), which sought to lay bare the
emptiness of the twentysomething generation of the 1980s. American Psycho
was scheduled to be released by Simon & Schuster (the publisher of his two
previous books) in late 1990: it was accepted for publication, an advance was
offered to Ellis, and copies were actually printed. They were about to be
distributed when the head of Paramount Pictures, Simon & Schuster’s parent
company, saw some excerpts of the novel in a magazine and, apparently revolted
by the contents (or by the furor it was already causing), decided to withdraw the
book and destroy the printed copies. At this point a still greater furor arose. On
the one hand, charges of censorship were leveled. On the other hand, the book
was condemned—before it was released, and probably before it was even read—
by some conservative critics and some feminists as being misogynist,
gratuitously violent, and morally decadent. Finally the book was picked up by
Vintage and released in early 1991. Ellis, although somewhat disturbed at the
controversy,6 went laughing all the way to the bank: he was allowed to keep the
Simon & Schuster advance, and the novel remained on the paperback bestseller
list for several weeks.
Many individuals on both sides of the issue have seriously misunderstood
the work and its odd publishing history. The Author’s Guild rightly protested
Simon & Schuster’s actions not as censorship but as a breach of contract. And
hostile critics (like Roger Rosenblatt, who wrote a highly obnoxious and self-
righteous prepublication review7 that was clearly meant to prejudice readers
against the book before they had had a chance to read it for themselves) have by

some incredible means failed to grasp the obvious fact that this book is a satire—
a satire that continues to focus, like Ellis’s two previous books, on the
shallowness, rootlessness, and irresponsibility of the yuppie lifestyle of the
1980s. On this level the book is a brilliant work of fiction, if a little too long;
some passages toward the beginning contain some of the best social satire since
Evelyn Waugh.
It is, unfortunately, not my purpose to study this novel in any detail,
although it would be very rewarding to do so. I am solely concerned with
whether American Psycho is a weird tale in any sense. It emphatically is not,
despite one commentator’s highly uninformed linkage of it, as well as of the
work of Thomas Harris, to the splatterpunk movement.8 The very title of the
work, of course, suggests some sort of relationship to Psycho, whether it be the
novel or the film; there is in fact an allusion to the Hitchcock film at one point
(AP 108), as well as to the case of Ed Gein (AP 92), the Wisconsin murderer
upon whom Bloch’s Psycho was in part based. But beyond this there is little to
suggest any direct influence of Psycho or any other work of weird fiction upon
Ellis’s novel.
I want to approach both Psycho and American Psycho in a somewhat
roundabout way, and that is by briefly studying a celebrated predecessor to both
works, William Faulkner’s magnificent tale of necrophilia, “A Rose for Emily”
(1930). The story was included in Dashiell Hammett’s Creeps by Night (1931),
one of the most heterogeneous weird-suspense anthologies ever compiled,
containing everything from the cosmic horror of Donald Wandrei’s “The Red
Brain” to John Collier’s conte cruel, “Green Thoughts.” The volume’s
appearance led to an illuminating debate between August Derleth and H. P.
Lovecraft as to whether Faulkner’s tale was weird, Derleth apparently averring
that it was (we have lost his side of the correspondence), Lovecraft emphatically
affirming the contrary. One of Lovecraft’s comments is significant:
…I’m far from denying the Faulkner yarn a high place as a realistic
story. It is a fine piece of work—but is not weird. This sort of gruesomeness
does not suggest anything beyond ordinary physical life & commonplace
nature. Necrophily is horrible enough—but only physically so, like other
repellent abnormalities. It excites loathing—but does not call up anything
beyond Nature. We are horrified at Emily as at a cannibal—or as at some
practitioner of nameless Sabbat-rites—but we do not feel the stark glimpse
or monstrous doubt hinting at subversions of basic natural law.9
Lovecraft’s argument—fundamental to his view of weird fiction—is
persuasive, but I believe it contains a few fallacies that may at least force us to

qualify it. It is true enough that the horrible and the gruesome do not by
themselves constitute weirdness; it is also true that necrophilia is horrible, but it
is not merely “physically” so. The power of Faulkner’s tale rests on our
perception of the astonishing aberration of Emily’s psyche that led her to kill her
lover, keep the corpse in her bedroom, and lie next to it for decades, until her
own death. Lovecraft’s bias toward external, cosmic horror and his general lack
of interest in human beings appears to have caused him to underrate the degree
to which the mysteries of the mind could be nearly as powerful and bizarre as
the mysteries of the universe. I will grant that there is no actual “subversion of
basic natural laws” in Faulkner’s tale—to say that it somehow subverts our
norms of “human nature” is to say nothing in particular—and if in the end “A
Rose for Emily” remains on the borderland of the weird, then it is closer to that
realm than Lovecraft was willing to concede.
I am not certain of the influence of “A Rose for Emily” upon Bloch’s
Psycho, but the scenarios are in fact surprisingly close. The latter can almost be
seen as a mirror image of the former: the sexes are changed, but otherwise very
much the same things happen. Emily’s opportunities for associating with young
men were severely restricted by her father, just as Norman Bates’s were by his
mother; and Norman’s preservation of his mother’s corpse is a still more twisted
version of Emily’s preservation of her lover. But we have seen that what makes
Psycho authentically weird is its playing upon the conventions of the weird tale,
something generally absent in Faulkner’s story. For this reason “A Rose for
Emily” must remain outside—if only just outside—the domain of the weird.
And it is for this same reason that American Psycho must be banished from
the weird. This novel is the prototypical instance of the rule that a horror story is
not necessarily a story in which horrible things happen. American Psycho
certainly has enough of horror—vicious, mindless, cold-blooded murder, twisted
sex, cannibalism—but these acts are related in exactly the same tone and spirit as
the endless catalogues of high-fashion clothes and expensive furnishings, and the
boring, pointless dinners and parties that the narrator Patrick Bateman and his
yuppie friends attend night after night. In fact, I now believe that these latter
objects and events are meant to be just as horrifying as the loathsome murders
Bateman blandly commits. They horrify in exactly the same way as his murders:
by excess.
If there were some penetrating examination of Bateman’s psyche, then the
novel might more closely approach the weird, but it is precisely Ellis’s design
not to engage in such a thing. Bateman and all his cronies are psychologically
empty: there simply are no depths of character to fathom. He himself says at the
end, “Surface, surface, surface was all that anyone found meaning in” (AP 375).

A number of other factors contribute to this end: the narration of the entire novel
in the present tense (the present moment is all that matters to these people); the
fact that characters continually mistake one person for another (all these AmEx–
carrying, mousse-wearing Wall Streeters are alike and interchangeable, and it is
only an accident that Bateman commits murders and the others do not); and the
flat, toneless style that reflects the utter vapidity and banality of every single
character in the novel.
Toward the end American Psycho devolves into a sort of dream fantasy,
and one long stream-of-consciousness passage (AP 347–52) approaches the
weird as it records Bateman’s near-capture by the police after a chase scene in
which he murders victim after victim. The conclusion of the novel is as chilling
(and not in a physical sense) as anything that has happened before. Bateman,
who by now has killed dozens if not hundreds of people (it should be pointed out
that he kills not only women but men, children, and animals), finds himself in a
bar for one more round of meaningless drinking and socializing, and he reflects:
“Well, though I know I should have done that instead of not doing it,
I’m twenty-seven for Christ sakes and this is, uh, how life presents itself in
a bar or in a club in New York, maybe anywhere, at the end of the century
and how people, you know, me, behave, and this is what being Patrick
means to me, I guess, so, well, yup, uh…” and this is followed by a sigh,
then a slight shrug and another sigh, and above one of the doors covered by
red velvet drapes in Harry’s is a sign and on the sign in letters that match
the drapes’ color are the words THIS IS NOT AN EXIT [AP 399].
This is an obvious but still powerful metaphor. Bateman’s life has no exit:
he will keep on making $200,000 a year and go out drinking every night and
have meaningless affairs with women he doesn’t care for and who don’t really
care for him, and he will probably continue murdering, but it will all amount to
nothing. This is the true horror of the novel. I have remarked earlier that some
works of satire are written with such ferocity and misanthropy as to border upon
the weird, and it is in this sense—and this sense only—that American Psycho
might come close to horror. As for the bloodletting, it is all incidental; or, rather,
it is strictly subordinate to the satirical function. The novel is a cold, ugly work
—part 
social 
commentary, 
part 
farce, 
part 
suspense 
story, 
part
pseudopornography—but masterful in its cold, ugly way.
I am not certain that anyone aside from critics of the weird tale cares—or
should care—whether the works of Robert Bloch, Thomas Harris, and Bret
Easton Ellis, and others of their kind, are or are not weird. The distinctions, even
if valid, seem purely academic and do not affect the merit of the works in
question. Still, I think they are necessary in order that the weird tale, which has

already become so heterogeneous and so unlike the standard classics of the field,
not become so all-inclusive that anything a little out of the ordinary becomes
subsumed within it. An important recent trend in weird fiction is the mingling of
genres once thought distinct—mystery, suspense, science fiction, mainstream
fiction. And the future appears to promise further contortions on the part of
critics as we encounter new works that, consciously or not, continually pummel
the already weakened boundaries of genre. But if fine writing is the result of this
intermingling, then critics will be the only ones to complain.
THOMAS TRYON:

RURAL HORROR
In 1971 Thomas Tryon (1926–91), a minor Hollywood actor, published The
Other. To everyone’s surprise, it became a bestseller. Two years later he
published Harvest Home, followed by Lady (1974) and Crowned Heads (1976).
After a long hiatus he then issued All That Glitters (1986), The Night of the
Moonbow (1989), and The Wings of the Morning (1990), the last being the first
of a projected four-volume saga of a Connecticut family in the nineteenth
century on which Tryon was working prior to his death. The second novel in this
series, By the Waters of Babylon, as well as a children’s book, The Adventures of
Opal and Cupid, have been announced as forthcoming, but they have not as yet
appeared.
I have no idea whether Tryon chose to write horror novels because he
witnessed the success of Ira Levin’s Rosemary’s Baby (1967). I tend to doubt it,
for his novels have nothing of Levin’s tediously conventional supernaturalism.
Certainly he could not have been directly inspired by the example of William
Peter Blatty’s The Exorcist (1971), which emerged simultaneously with The
Other. While it could be said that the fortuitous appearance of The Exorcist and
The Other initiated the literary “boom” in weird fiction whose decline we are at
the moment witnessing, Tryon’s works are worth considering for more than
sociological reasons: they are, in fact, rather good.
What The Exorcist did for the tale of supernatural horror, The Other and
Harvest Home did for the nonsupernatural tale of psychological horror: they
legitimized it and showed that in the hands of a master it formed a genuine
subclass of the weird tale. We have already seen that some previous works of
this type—notably the novels of Robert Bloch—so closely tread the nebulous
boundary between horror and suspense that classification becomes difficult.
Tryon changed all that. The Other and Harvest Home are emphatically
nonsupernatural and psychological—the horror is largely or wholly internal, a
product of a disturbed mind, and not external—but they are also emphatically
horrific. Indeed, I know of few authors who have simulated what I call
ontological horror (horror at the perception of some violation of natural law in
the external world) better than Thomas Tryon. It is unfortunate that his purely
horrific novels are limited to The Other and Harvest Home. Lady and The Night
of the Moonbow are so tangentially horrific that they can hardly be classed in the
field at all (although they are fine novels for all that), while Crowned Heads and
All That Glitters, being purely novels of Hollywood life, will not be considered

here at all.
The Other is based on a trick. To say this is not at all to say that it is
somehow meretricious, for the “trick” is the whole focus of the novel and the
source of Tryon’s investigation of the psychology of his protagonist. In this tale
of Niles and Holland Perry, twin boys growing up in rural Connecticut in the
1930s, we do not learn until about two-thirds through the novel that Holland is
actually dead and that Niles, shattered by the loss of his twin brother, is
desperately pretending that Holland is still alive. Neither the third-person
narrator of the novel proper, nor the first-person narrator who introduces each of
the three segments of the book (and who turns out to be Niles, speaking from a
lunatic asylum), reveals the truth until Niles’s grandmother Ada, who initially
allowed him to continue pretending that Holland was alive but finally tires of it
because of the tragedy it has caused, forces Niles to confront the spectacle of
Holland’s grave. This is one of the most powerful and shocking moments in all
modern weird literature. The first-person narrator (the grown-up Niles) seems
finally to concede the matter of Holland’s being dead:
Witness this astonishing reverence, this passion for a corpse; the boy is
in thrall to a cadaver, obsessed by a ghoulish inamorato; not a ghost, not a
vision, but a living breathing thing of flesh and blood; Holland, he himself.
Such are the properties of the game. Be a tree, be a flower, be a bird—be
Holland. With this—creature—he acts out his little pageants of blissful
agony, the happy, subtle tyrannies, loving his twin, yet supplanting him,
idolizing him, yet tearing him from his place; it is not enough to be
Holland’s twin, he must become Holland himself
[O 209].
But the boy Niles cannot accept it, and he continues the pathetic charade
that leads to still more horror and death, until he is finally put away.
The degree to which Niles rejects the truth of his brother’s death is exactly
reflected in the degree to which both the third-person and the first-person
narrators conceal this fact from us. And the degree to which Holland seems to
Niles a living being, even though he is dead, is reflected in the degree to which
we unsuspectingly assume Holland’s existence until little cracks in the narrative
cause us to doubt it, making the shattering revelation simultaneously shocking
and inevitable.
The Other is, in effect, really a detective story, but it remains a work of
horror because it pretends not to be a detective story. We have no reason to
doubt Holland’s guilt in the various gruesome crimes that are committed until it
is revealed that Holland is dead. At this point, our increasingly horrified
awareness 
of 
Holland’s 
psychological 
aberrations 
is 
suddenly 
and

cataclysmically transferred to Niles. Throughout the novel, random utterances
that seem to have the most innocent implications—or, indeed, to have no
implications at all—become, once the secret is known, full of loathsome
suggestion.
It is vital to Tryon’s purpose to establish the psychological similarity—
indeed, near-unity—of Holland and Niles. The closeness of the brothers is
emphasized at every turn: “As twins should, they had been inseparable to begin
with. Why, they had shared the same cradle, head to foot—that old wicker
cradle, still in the storeroom—until they outgrew it, and then they slept in the
same crib. You would have thought they were Siamese twins, so close they
were; one being housed in two forms. What had happened? Whose fault? She
could not tell. Always the same question, over and over…” (O 66). The
ominousness of those last few sentences, coming well before the revelation,
escapes us here: we do not know what “happened” or whose “fault” it was. But
this closeness of the twins leads to the notion that “Holland could more often
than not tell what he [Niles] was thinking, and vice versa” (O 34). This, along
with the already quoted passage stating that Niles could mentally be Holland at
times (the “game” referred to in that passage is a process taught to Niles and
Holland by Ada whereby their minds become psychologically united with some
other being or object), is important in clarifying some ambiguous matters later
on. And note this remark: “Niles considered his profile against the dark sky:
Holland, he thought; Holland. He needed him—they needed each other. That
was the thing. He was—what?—dependent upon him. Without Holland, he felt
some unidentifiable part of him had been lost” (O 103). Consider the enormous
subtlety of this statement (something we again fail to realize at this point): the
final sentence is in the pluperfect tense. If Holland were alive, surely the
sentence would have been in the imperfect or subjunctive.
It is not merely that Niles, heartbroken at the loss of his twin, seeks to keep
him alive in his mind; there is the suggestion that psychologically Niles is
transferring his “evil” side to Holland. Niles cannot admit to himself that he, not
Holland, has committed all the atrocities in the tale (and there are many of
them). After “Holland” has killed his cousin Russell’s pet rat, Niles even chides
him in his mind: “Oh Holland, you bastard. What a heartless thing to do” (O
39). This sort of scenario is repeated over and over again. Even Ada states,
“Niles, don’t you think sometimes you blame Holland for things that perhaps are
not his fault?” (O 86). Fascinatingly, at one point the first-person narrator (who
of course is Niles) actually remarks: “Believe me, Niles is not entirely the
paragon he appears, nor Holland quite the knave” (O 98). Of course, Holland
when alive really was the “bad boy” of the two, and he ultimately caused his

own death when he tried to hang Ada’s cat in the well but fell down it himself.
This incident itself—the most deeply repressed event in Niles’s psyche—is
fragmentarily related several times throughout the novel until all the details
finally come out. Holland was playing with the cat on his thirteenth birthday in
March. Initially the first-person narrator reports the incident in a highly oblique
manner.
A frightful scene, as you can imagine, the cat clawing, spitting,
Holland chuckling–fiendishly, as it were, and now, amidst the horrible
caterwauling, crying out as his body tumbled over the brink of the well, the
animal with him—miaow! miao-o-ow—and there was one who thought, for
a quick moment, that Holland was—but no, he told himself, he’s only hurt.
“Help! Somebody help! He’s hurt! Holland is hurt! Help!” And surely there
was time yet; the well was dry; the cat, poor creature, was dead as a
doornail, and there was the end of that. But Holland—a patch here and
there and he’d be fine, though sore for a week, which is what comes of
hanging cats in wells. (“Are you sore, Holland? Does it hurt?” “Sure it
hurts, what didja think?”) [O 15].
There are a number of interesting things here. Even now Niles cannot admit
the true state of affairs to himself (recall that he is the grown-up narrator telling
the tale at this point). “Holland was—but no, he told himself, he’s only hurt.”
But Holland is dead. The tone of mild recrimination—Holland, you really
oughtn’t to have hung that cat, such a mean thing to do—belies the fact that
Holland brought about his own destruction. And that parenthetical remark is
critical, for it is the focus of the deception here; but again, as elsewhere, it is also
the point at which Niles refuses to acknowledge reality: Niles is (as we learn
much later) pretending to have this conversation with Holland as he looks at him
in his coffin. A little later Ada reflects on the incident:
Ada shook her head again, thinking about her own cat—Pilakea.
Pilakea was a word Holland had collected from somewhere; “trouble,” it
meant, in Hawaiian. Trouble indeed. But of course there wasn’t any more
Pilakea; that one had come to a bad end, back in March, right after St.
Patrick’s Day. On Holland’s birthday. Died horribly, poor koshecka;
Holland had hanged it in the well. Holland … what senseless, what tragic
destruction [O 65].
Again Tryon’s subtlety of diction must be marveled at here: the “tragedy”
of course is not merely the death of the cat but the death of Holland.
Ada is, of course, a critical figure in this whole chain of events. She has
both, in psychological terms, encouraged Niles in his fantasy (hence the double
meaning behind the seemingly innocuous phrase that she “indulg[ed] his whim”

[O 50]) and, in narrative terms, assisted in the deception of the reader by
pretending to acknowledge Holland’s existence. One supposes that at least one
such figure is necessary to this sort of narrative, since otherwise it would be
nearly impossible to pull off the deception for any length of time.
Once we know the true state of affairs, all sorts of remarks and incidents,
either passed over without question or else the source of undefined puzzlement,
become starkly clear. Why is Niles afraid to go to the cemetery ? (O 57). What
trauma did Niles’s mother suffer in March? (O 142–43). Why is Aunt Fanny
anomalously horrified at the sight of what appears to be Holland in a costume,
when in fact it is Niles? (O 144). And when Ada, seemingly talking of Niles’s
mother, says to him, “And sometimes it takes longer for some people to get over
things than others, do you see” (O 90), is she really thinking only of Niles’s
mother or also of Niles himself?
There are only three points in the novel that become difficult to explain on
purely naturalistic grounds. First, an elderly neighbor, Mrs. Rowe, appears to
entertain Holland (actually Niles dressed up in a costume Holland was known to
wear) for tea. But it was stated earlier that “her mind was sometimes cloudy” (O
155), so perhaps we are to assume that she is senile, or else that she is humoring
Niles. Niles’s elder sister Torrie, lying in bed with her husband Rider, refers to
Niles and Holland in the present tense (“I swear they’re gypsies” [O 134]). But
perhaps this remark is meant as a sort of generic description, or, because she
knows that Niles is overhearing them, as a way of humoring Niles in his
obsession. The most troubling detail is when the imaginary Holland reveals to
Niles that he saw Torrie and Rider in bed the previous Thanksgiving, at a time
when they must have conceived the child that Torrie is about to deliver. The real
Holland was still living then, but how is he able now to pass on this information,
which comes as a shock to Niles (“‘Saw them?’ Niles was thunderstruck. ‘You
watched?’” [O 136])? Here I think we must have recourse to the anomalous, and
nearly supernatural, mental synchronicity of the twins, or rather to Niles’s power
to be Holland on occasion. This particular incident is the only one that is not
ultimately elucidated naturalistically, and it is perhaps Tryon’s way of leaving
the matter fractionally open to doubt, as he does later when Ada thinks to
herself: “It was no good, she could tell. He would never give it up, this
incredible, this monstrous delusion, these remains he was obsessed with. It
would be with him for as long as he lived. She could see that now. And this
outburst she had just witnessed, so unlike him, but so like … the Other … it was
almost as though…” (O 270). Almost as though, we are to understand, Niles is
actually possessed by Holland.
The Other is a masterwork in every sense: in a tightness of writing that does

not preclude passages of poignant lyricism as well as clutching horror; in a
succession of ghastly incidents—the death of Russell as he leaps from a hayloft
onto a pitchfork; Niles (as Holland) pushing his mother down the stairs and
crippling her; Niles abducting his sister’s baby and killing it in a particularly
loathsome manner; the suspicion that the real Holland killed his father months
before his own death that almost numbs us; in an atmosphere of rural placidity
that is subtly disturbed by an ever-growing undercurrent of terror and punctuated
by startling incidents of sudden death. But Tryon saves the greatest horror for
last, introducing it so quietly that it perhaps escapes many readers. We register
the fact that the first-and third-person narrators of the novel are very different:
the latter, usually seeing things through Niles’s eyes, presents the world as a 13-
year-old boy would perceive it; but the former, right from the beginning, makes
clear his adult sophistication. The surprise, therefore, is not merely that this is
Niles, and not merely that he is in an asylum for the criminally insane; it is the
clear suggestion that he has been there for a long time (“But Miss DeGroot says
I’m ‘family,’ meaning, I suppose, that I have been here that long” [O 288]) and
will surely be there for a very long time to come. It is this that helps to raise this
novel far above that of a mere display of sordid crime, and even above that of a
penetrating study of a diseased mind, though it is that. The novel, ending with
Niles finally identifying himself completely with his dead brother (“Call me his
name—Niles; Niles, for God’s sake, isn’t that crazy? When I have told them, for
years have told them, my name is Holland” [O 288]), becomes authentic tragedy.
Harvest Home is in some ways a still greater work, presenting a many-
stranded tapestry of horror in which the diverse elements are all miraculously
united in one of the most shuddersome denouements in the history of weird
fiction. Like The Other, it is set in rural Connecticut, but in the present day; and
yet, as we are introduced to the small, tightly knit village of Cornwall Coombe,
we can imagine that we have entered some ageless agricultural community
where the continual cycle of the planting, nurturing, and harvesting of the corn is
the eternal and perhaps the only reality. It is something one of the villagers tells
Ned and Beth Constantine just as they are moving into the town from New York:
Tradition, he continued, was the important thing here; tradition and
custom, customs that had been preserved through the villagers’ lineage
since olden times. They were a tightly knit, insular group, these corn
farmers, apparently determined to cut themselves off from the rest of
society in an effort to preserve their own folkways, much as had the Amish
in Pennsylvania, the Mennonites in Ohio. What had been good for a man’s
father and grandfather was good enough for him; what they had worn, he
wore; the tools they used, he used—a scythe to mow the hay, a sickle to cut

the corn [HH 32–33].
The parallel with the Amish and the Mennonites seems suggestive, for the
people of Cornwall Coombe appear as archaically devout as those other isolated
folk: “did people still observe Whitsunday?” (HH 26), Ned wonders as he first
enters the town. But what is the true religion of Cornwall Coombe? The Widow
Fortune, who is the matron of the entire town, clarifies the matter. “She pointed
upward. ‘See that blue sky now, that’s God’s sky. And up there in that vasty blue
is God. But see how far away He is. See how far the sky. And look here, at the
earth, see how close, how abiding and faithful it is. See this little valley of ours,
see the bountiful harvest we’re to have. God’s fine, but it’s old Mother Earth
that’s the friend to man’” (HH 60). The god they worship seems older than the
Christian god. Another resident, Mrs. Buxley, almost gives the show away at one
point when she remarks: “You’re bound to think us positively heathenish
hereabouts” (HH 86).
It is important for Tryon at the outset to establish the apparent serenity and
placidity of this forgotten and undisturbed corner of the world. Cornwall
Coombe is only a short drive from New York, and yet it is “hardly on the map at
all” (HH 18): the simultaneous isolation and reality of the village is critical. Will
Ned and Beth fit into the community and its somewhat peculiar ways? They
certainly mean to try: Ned remarks, after some months, “I felt I was becoming a
fixture in the village” (HH 104). It is a fond wish. What he does not realize is
that, as one villager says to his wife, “The social unit here is not the family, it’s
the community. And the community is founded on corn” (HH 125). This simple
statement will take on ominous overtones much later.
And yet, things seem tranquil enough as Ned, an artist, wins favor by
drawing portraits of the villagers and Beth participates in a sewing circle and
other village activities. Although unbelievers, they gradually realize that church
attendance is expected of them as a matter of social etiquette. Indeed, it becomes
increasingly clear that a number of activities are either prescribed or proscribed,
and that the tolerance for any deviations from the unwritten social laws of the
community is very small.
Harvest Home, even more decidedly than The Other, proclaims the
nonsupernatural basis of the horrors that come to dominate its latter segments.
There are frequent mentions of a ghost that is said to haunt the nearby woods,
and some villagers seem to regard the phenomenon quite seriously. One tells
Ned that it is the ghost of a revenuer who met a bad end (HH 123); another can
still hear his bansheelike howls. Ned scoffs at this, as do some of the other, more
enlightened townspeople. But then he has this experience:
As I kicked the branch into the gully, lightning flashed again, a sharp

electric current of blue that turned the sky a sickly green color. Then
suddenly, above me, at the top of the embankment, materializing out of the
darkness, there appeared what I immediately thought must be the Ghost of
Soakes’s Lonesome. Ghastly, eerie, the figure was a gray ashen hue, the
white garments flapping like cerements, a specter returned from the grave. I
have never seen a ghost, nor do I believe that ghosts exist, but at that
moment I was absolutely certain I was looking at one. It seemed to glow
against the lurid sky, hovering some twelve feet above me, the body cut off
by the edge of the embankment, head upraised, arms outstretched. I tried to
tell myself I was imagining all this, but there it stood, a haggard, silvery
shape, like some ghoul risen from the dead.
It turned on me the most terrible countenance I had ever seen. An
appalling face, the flesh was as white as the clothes, except for the dark
recesses of the eyes and the red, grinning mouth. It was this grin that made
it seem more horrible, scarcely a smile at all, but the parody of one. A poor,
painted smile, witless, demented, grim, the inane smile of a rag doll. Dark
gouts of liquid erupted from the corners of the mouth while one hand—
feeble, supplicating—lifted in a pitiful gesture and tore at the grin, as
though to strip it away [HH 148–49].
But almost immediately Ned doubts the supernatural cause of the
apparition: “I felt sure this was no ghost, no supernatural creature, but something
as real as the moon itself, real enough to have been human and alive” (HH 149).
In the daytime Ned explores the woods and finds a rotting skeleton
embedded in a tree root; the wind whistling through the skeleton’s skull is the
cause of the bansheelike sounds (HH 157). This may be a sufficient explanation
for the old tradition of the ghost—perhaps it is in fact the revenuer who was
killed many years ago—but it does nothing to explain Ned’s recent experience
with an evidently living creature. The (natural) explanation for that comes only
later, when Ned stumbles into the shack of Jack Stump, formerly a genial
general handyman of the village. He has been horribly mutilated: his tongue has
been cut out and his mouth crudely sewn up. As Ned ponders the spectacle, he
begins to connect this event with his ghastly encounter. “Then it dawned on me.
The phantom in the windstorm. Not the Ghost of Soakes’s Lonsome, but the
mutilated Jack Stump, his mouth stitched up into the grim red smile, the face
ash-smeared” (HH 248–49). A more emphatic repudiation of the supernatural
could hardly be asked for.
Ned’s fortunes take a critical turn when he befriends a young man, Worthy
Pettinger. Worthy has been selected as the next Harvest Lord, a high honor in the
eyes of the villagers; but he spurns the office and attempts to flee the

community. The Widow Fortune warns him: “‘Worthy, don’t shirk your duty to
your Lord’” (HH 236). This seemingly clumsy expression, with the pointed
repetition of “your,” is another of Tryon’s masterstrokes of subtlety: perhaps
Worthy’s (and the community’s) “Lord” is not everyone else’s. But Worthy pays
no heed. Not only that, he makes a dramatic gesture by bursting into a church
meeting.
Worthy lifted his right hand from the door panel and made a fist of it,
and the fist trembled as he raised it and spoke in a loud, angry voice: “May
God damn the corn!”
Immediately a babble of sounds arose, women covering their faces
with their hands, some of the men turning to one another with angry
mutters.
“May God damn the corn!”
He remained frozen in the open doorway, his clenched fist held aloft.
“And may God damn the Mother!” [HH 256].
That Mother, of course, is Mother Earth (cf. HH 309), and the cursing of
her is the most heinous blasphemy the villagers can imagine. But Ned abets
Worthy’s attempts to escape and is ultimately detected. Worse, Worthy is
dragged back as a virtual prisoner of the town.
Ned, increasingly disturbed by a series of odd occurrences, is already
reflecting on his false sense of belonging to the community. Matters become
worse when his wife Beth, who is already alienated from him because of his
suspected dallying with Tamar Penrose, now reproves Ned for helping Worthy.
It becomes clear that Beth has chosen the social unit of the community, not the
family. This evolution is inevitable, for Beth, like all women, has a deep
connection with Mother Earth, as the Widow Fortune tells Ned: “‘She [earth] is
all of woman, and more. She bears as a woman bears. She gives and sustains as a
woman does, but a woman dies, being mortal. But she is not. She is ever fruitful.
She is the Mother’” (HH 323).
Interweaved in this complicated network of strange events is the old
mystery of Grace Everdeen, a young girl who was chosen as the Corn Maiden 14
years ago but who died under cloudy circumstances. Ned becomes increasingly
obsessed with this mystery, questioning anyone who might have had anything to
do with the matter. He has come to feel that it has a central bearing on recent
events. And so it does. Ned finally discovers that Grace had contracted a rare
disease, acromegaly, that made her physically grotesque. The townspeople
refused to let such a disfigured person play the role of the Corn Maiden, and they
killed her. It was her body, not that of a revenuer, in the woods. It was Jack
Stump’s discovery of the body that led to his own mutilation. And now Ned

faces the prospect of being killed or harmed himself.
The climax of the novel has almost unbearable potency. It is here that
Tryon simulates supernatural horror through skillful manipulation of atmosphere
and diction. The secret ceremony of Harvest Home, in which only the women of
the village, along with the Harvest Lord, participate, is explicitly compared to
the Eleusinian Mysteries (HH 392); Ned recklessly bursts in on the ceremony,
horror-struck that his own wife is participating. That ceremony, involving
ritualistic language that becomes increasingly archaic (very reminiscent of the
conclusion of Lovecraft’s “The Rats in the Walls,” whence Tryon probably
derived the technique), involves nothing less than the death of the Harvest Lord
after he has impregnated the Corn Maiden. It is this suggestion of the hoary
antiquity of the ceremony, in addition to its barbaric violence, that lends a quasi-
supernatural aura to the event. There are few scenes in all weird literature more
powerful than the spectacle of Beth and the Harvest Lord coupling.
She was not his lover, nor he hers, but both were instruments of the
women, his arms bound, hers held outstretched on the earth as he probed
her, and my cries broke from my lips again, mingling with the ecstatic
chant that moment by moment mounted in tempo and pitch, “Ldhu, ldhu,”
thrusting their shoulders as he thrust, grunting as he grunted, “Ldhu,” and
“Ldhu,” some moving behind him, their fingers tracing the curve of his
back as it arched and bent again, rose and sank, their passion spurring his
passion, she beneath him crying out in lust and pain. In the madness and the
moonlight, his face contorted in spasm as he pushed his way farther. And
then, in the moment of complete knowledge, they worked each other, met
shudderingly, and capitulated. The corn was made [HH 407].
But again, as with The Other, a quieter but even more loathsome horror
concludes the novel. A villager who early befriended Ned and Beth, Robert
Dodd, is blind. He seems harmless enough, listening to recorded novels
throughout the story. But Ned then discovers that he not merely is blind but
actually has no eyes. What is the significance of the Widow Fortune’s remark:
“‘Take Robert, for instance; he had trouble many years ago; he learned’” (HH
322)? What was that trouble? What has he learned? Could he himself have
violated the Harvest Home ceremony as Ned did? It certainly seems so, for Ned
suffers a like fate: he is blinded and his tongue is cut out. Only then do we
realize that the entire novel has been a monumental flashback; only then do we
perceive the ominousness of the opening paragraph:
I awakened that morning to birdsong. It was only the little yellow bird
who lives in the locust tree outside our bedroom window, but I could have
wrung his neck, for it was not yet six and I had a hangover. That was in late

summer, before Harvest Home, before the bird left its nest for the winter.
Now it is spring again, alas, and as predicted the yellow bird has returned.
The Eternal Return, as they call it here. Thinking back from this day to that
one nine months ago, I now imagine the bird to have been sounding a
warning. But that is nonsense, of course, for who could have thought it was
a bird of ill omen, that little creature? [HH 13].
Harvest Home, with its rich characterization, deft construction, fluid prose,
and cumulative force, is one of the great weird novels of our time, and a virtual
textbook on how to update the form while simultaneously drawing upon history
to lend texture and substance. Both The Other and Harvest Home are horror
novels in the strictest sense: though nonsupernatural, they powerfully delineate
horrific scenarios, and their themes are such as to require the novel form for their
execution. Richness of character portrayal, rather than being an awkward
encumbrance, is a necessary component of both works; but whereas The Other is
essentially concerned with the abnormality of a single individual, Harvest Home
shows the increasingly aberrant nature of an entire community. It is accordingly
a longer and richer work, and each character is painted with slow and careful
strokes that gradually uncover the twisted mentalities lying beneath outward
normality. In this regard Harvest Home, although seemingly padded with
dialogue and descriptive passages that bear no strict relationship to the central
plot, is as carefully and tightly written as The Other. In both novels Thomas
Tryon has triumphantly demonstrated that the novel and the horror tale can be
fused so that their best features work smoothly together to produce an amalgam
that is greater than both. It is unfortunate that so few others have learned by his
example.
Tryon may not have a well-rounded world view (it does not, at any rate,
fully emerge in his novels) but he wields a narrative device that approaches a
world view and links all his novels, whether weird or not. This device might be
referred to as the successive peeling off of layers, whether of characters or of
events. To understand how this device functions in Tryon, let us briefly consider
two of his other novels.
Lady is a winsome and delightful story of a charming but enigmatic and
melancholy woman, Adelaide Harleigh, who fascinates the young boy who
narrates the novel. There is nothing at all weird about this work; if anything, it
may approach the detective story in that there appears to be some nameless
secret in Adelaide’s past, and it is something we do not learn until almost the
final page: she killed her husband many years ago because she had fallen in love
with her black servant. All this is presented with the utmost delicacy and
sympathy, and we leave the novel realizing that Adelaide could have done

nothing else in order to preserve her happiness.
The worst thing about The Night of the Moonbow is how Tryon’s publisher
shamelessly attempted to capitalize upon the fame of The Other and Harvest
Home by presenting this novel as weird, when it is nothing of the sort. Instead, it
is the sensitively written story of a strange boy, Leo Joaquim—who, like Lady,
has a mysterious past—at a summer camp. A poignant and evocative work, it
has no legitimate weird elements save a “haunted house” (which, of course, is
not actually haunted) at the edge of the camp, and which does not even figure
centrally in the novel in any event.
What unites all four of these novels is the careful etching of character that
gradually reveals more and more about the protagonists, until finally the surface
layers are peeled off to display the core of their personalities: the psychotic
horror of Niles Perry, the loathsome primitivism of the inhabitants of Cornwall
Coombe, the crime of passion that has cast a shadow over Adelaide Harleigh, or
the human tragedy that disfigures the youth of Leo Joaquim. This device
functions in regard to events as well: the constant reiteration of the tale of
Holland Perry and the cat, or of the murder of Grace Everdeen, each time lends
more and more detail to the account until finally the truth is known. Is Tryon
saying that each of us, if the external layers of our character were peeled away,
would find something nameless in the depths of our past or the depths of our
psyche? Although he never explicitly articulates this philosophy of human life, it
structures all his work, weird and nonweird alike.
I am unsure of Tryon’s actual influence upon subsequent weird fiction,
specifically upon nonsupernatural horror. His work continues to be read and
admired by the weird community, but the recent trend toward psychological
suspense does not seem to owe a great deal, in any specific sense, to Tryon’s
brand of pseudosupernaturalism. Nevertheless, I believe that such works as
Bloch’s Psycho and Tryon’s The Other provided models for the intense
exploration of aberrant psychological states that one finds in Campbell’s The
Face That Must Die and other works of this kind, even if there is no effort at
simulating the supernatural. As for Harvest Home, it seems—like Klein’s The
Ceremonies—a strange and wonderful throwback to the heyday of Machen and
Lovecraft in its densely textured prose and evocation of the awe and mystery of
nature.
If Thomas Tryon had continued in the vein of The Other and Harvest
Home, he might well have rivaled Shirley Jackson and Ramsey Campbell for
preeminence in modern weird fiction. But he chose a different path, and that was
his prerogative: perhaps he did not wish to be pigeonholed as a “horror writer”;
perhaps, in his first two novels, he had said all he had to say in the horrific mode.

Whatever the case, the whole of Tryon’s work (save perhaps his Hollywood
novels, which seem to have a very restricted appeal) is worth reading, if for no
other reason than for his exquisite prose, skillful character drawing, flawless plot
construction, and a richly evocative atmosphere that remains long after the work
is finished. There are few more accomplished works in weird fiction than The
Other and Harvest Home: they will survive long after their noisier successors
have been forgotten.
PETER STRAUB: FROM GHOST STORY TO THRILLER
The career of Peter Straub (b. 1943) may be very instructive. After writing
a horrendous mainstream novel, Marriages (1973), which shamelessly aped two
of his idols, D. H. Lawrence and Henry James, and after being unable to sell his
second novel, Under Venus, an equally dreary and meandering mainstream love
story, Straub was encouraged by his agent to write something more marketable
—a “gothic.”10 Although he had read some horror and science fiction as a youth,
he did not really know what a “gothic” was, but he managed to produce a
competent supernatural tale, Julia (1975), even though it too labors somewhat
under a heavy Henry James influence. Finding the weird tale to his liking, he
wrote what may in fact be his best supernatural tale, If You Could See Me Now
(1977). Ghost Story (1979) lifted Straub to bestsellerdom, but this turn of events,
although good for his pocketbook, was not entirely beneficial to his literary
career. Over the next decade and a half he produced the odd fantasy,
Shadowland (1981); the confused and verbose Floating Dragon (1983), half
supernatural and half science fiction; a disastrous collaboration with Stephen
King, The Talisman (1984); and, after a several-year hiatus, three entirely
nonsupernatural novels, Koko (1988), a mind-numbingly windy novel about
Vietnam and its aftermath, Mystery (1990), which is a detective story and
nothing more, and The Throat (1993), far and away his best book but also a
murder mystery.
As early as 1984, Straub asked himself whether he would keep on writing
horror novels. He responded: “No, I say, only until I think I’ve done everything I
can do with that kind of book” (WA 9). It may be that he has done all he can do
in the weird tale, although his recent collection of shorter tales, Houses Without
Doors (1990), makes a partial and very adept return to supernaturalism. And his
abandonment of the weird tale for the “psychological thriller” (as Koko was
billed) may or may not be representative of the flight from supernatural horror
that has characterized so much writing in this field over the last two decades.
It is, however, unwise to think of Straub as in any way a generic horror

writer: he has, with a certain arch arrogance, always considered himself a
mainstream writer. Much of his work is rather tiresomely and self-consciously
literary, and many of his pronouncements on his own work are irksomely smug
and self-congratulatory. The introduction to Wild Animals (1984) trumpets the
influence of Saul Bellow, John Updike, John O’Hara, Alison Lurie, and Iris
Murdoch upon Under Venus, and refers to Julia as “a dark book, driven and
gloomy and cynical in the raw, startled manner of adolescence” (WA 8–10). And
elsewhere: “Shadowland is close to horror, but it’s really a territory I created.”11
Straub may be happy to act as his own critic and back-patter, but a more
balanced view might reveal that his earlier novels are reasonably skillful, his
later ones wordy and rambling beyond belief and tolerance, and his work as a
whole pretty generally void of any broad philosophical meaning or resonance.
Certain themes—in particular, a fascination with the mysterious power of
women—crop up repeatedly in his work, but with a sameness that robs them of
interest or insight. As can be said for a number of authors in this volume, Straub
is not as good a writer as he thinks he is.
The bulk of Straub’s weird work (I do not consider Koko, Mystery, or The
Throat to be weird, and Marriages and Under Venus certainly are not) is
structured around a single concept: the notion that a force or personality
occupies the bodies of various human beings (usually women) over successive
generations, sometimes over the course of centuries. This premise is utilized in
Julia, Ghost Story, and Floating Dragon, while a slight variant is used in If You
Could See Me Now; only Shadowland, in many ways an anomaly in Straub’s
work, does not conform to this pattern. It is not clear to me that Straub has varied
this single theme such that it is worth using in four different novels, two of them
very long.
Julia concerns a weak-willed and somewhat neurotic woman, Julia Lofting,
whose daughter Kate died at the age of nine. Julia is shattered by the loss and
eventually leaves her domineering husband Magnus. She in fact believes that
Magnus killed Kate by attempting to perform an emergency tracheotomy on her
when she was choking on a piece of meat; she bled to death. Strange things
begin to happen in the house Julia has moved into: is Kate haunting her?
Gradually this notion gives way to another and more disturbing one. Julia
stumbles upon a book that tells the story of Heather Rudge, a society queen who
murdered her young daughter Olivia 25 years ago. Heather, still alive and in an
asylum, bluntly tells Julia: “‘Olivia was evil. She was an evil person. Evil isn’t
like ordinary people. It can’t be got rid of. It gets revenge’” (J 131). It must be
Olivia who is haunting the house Julia occupies—the very house she died in—
and it may well be Olivia’s spirit that is occupying the body of a wicked little

girl Julia sees occasionally in the park. But why is Julia the one being haunted?
What has she done to deserve the haunting? Living in the same house does not
seem to be a sufficient motive. Why is the word “MURDERESS” scribbled on
her bathroom mirror? Finally the truth comes out: Magnus was actually Olivia’s
father. And Julia, not Magnus, was the one who killed her daughter, Kate—she
had been repressing the incident all along.
Julia is a compact and effective work, skillful in its execution and subtle in
its portrayal of a neurotic personality. I am, however, troubled by the failure to
account adequately for the origin of the supernatural element in the tale. Why is
Olivia “evil”? How did she get that way? The mere remark that “murder is … an
eternal crime” (J 145) merely confuses the issue: did the murder of Olivia
somehow compel her spirit to persist over the years (if so, why don’t all murder
victims react that way?), or was Olivia evil before she was murdered? The latter
seems to be the only plausible alternative, but no account is made of the prior
existence of the spirit that possesses Olivia.
Nevertheless, there are some fine touches in the novel. Straub, like his
mentor Henry James, who hangs oppressively over this novel, is determined to
suspend the question of the actual supernaturalism of the various weird
manifestations as long as he can. We are offered three possible explanations for
the weird events: they are a product of Julia’s disturbed mind; they are the result
of (natural) actions by various characters (Magnus, desperately seeking to win
Julia back, breaks into her home at one point, which Julia interprets as the
actions of Olivia or a poltergeist); and they are the result of supernaturalism. The
third hypothesis finally prevails. Julia, looking up old friends of Olivia’s, learns
that they are being systematically killed. This clinches the matter in her mind,
and we are left with the same conclusion in the novel’s disturbing ending.
The premise of If You Could See Me Now is not new. Alison Greening, a
fetching young girl who entrances the young Miles Teagarden, tells him just
prior to her death at the age of 14 that they should make a vow to meet in their
hometown in Wisconsin in 20 years. “‘And if you forget, I’ll come after you. If
you forget, God help you’” (I 9). By golly, she does just that. Nearly 60 years
prior to Straub’s writing, Lovecraft jotted down the core idea in his
commonplace book (and it was not new to him): “Man makes appt. with old
enemy. Dies—body keeps appt.”12 This is not exactly a case of a spirit
possessing successive bodies, but a spirit returning after the body is dead.
Despite the hoariness of the theme, the treatment is deft. Miles was himself
blamed for the death of Alison as they were swimming in a quarry, and when he
returns to the town 20 years later (ostensibly to write his Ph.D. dissertation, but
in reality because he feels a strange need to adhere to Alison’s portentous

adjuration), he is not slow to feel the town’s lingering resentment. This whole
aspect is handled quite crudely. Miles, an academic from the sophisticated East,
is clearly Straub’s object of sympathy against the spiteful small-town hostility of
the uncouth and ignorant villagers. A further awkwardness is added by frequent
interjections of “statements” by the various townsfolk (taken down by the police
after the events) as they reflect upon the events in hindsight. The intent is clearly
to create suspense, as we are given dim foreshadowings of what is to come, but
the treatment is too clumsy and obvious to be effective. And yet, as a conte cruel
in which Miles suffers repeated humiliation by the townspeople, the novel
attains cumulative power and an atmosphere of ineluctable doom. The bulk of
the narrative, told from Miles’s point of view, does not fail to suggest that Miles
brought down much of this abuse upon himself by his own bizarre and self-
centered actions, but we are clearly meant to side with him against the
hypocritical minister, the small-minded and oily sheriff, his misogynist cousin,
and other unsavory characters.
Like Julia, If You Could See Me Now plays upon the question of whether
the supernatural is actually involved. As Miles enters the town, a horrible murder
has just been committed, and more murders—all of teenage girls—occur during
his stay. Miles quickly becomes the object of suspicion, but he himself comes to
believe that the spirit of Alison has returned: “I had awakened Alison’s spirit,
that terrible force I had felt in the woods, and I knew now that spirit was rancid
with jealousy of life. On the twenty-first she would appear … but as the date
drew nearer, she was growing in strength. She could take life. That, she had been
able to do from the day I had begun to draw near the valley” (I 269).
It is at this point that Straub commits what I believe is an error of judgment.
As the story is building up powerfully to the return of Alison, perhaps in the
flesh, Straub stages a deliberate anticlimax. “It was two minutes past twelve. She
had not come. The twenty-first of July had slipped into the past and she was not
coming. She would never come. She was dead. I was stranded alone in only the
human world. My guilt, moving under some impetus of its own, shifted hugely
within me and came to a new relationship with my body” (I 308). But shortly
thereafter the matter is reversed, as Alison’s actual murderers—the sheriff and
Miles’s cousin—are found killed in a particularly revolting manner: only Alison
could be the cause. The idea, no doubt, is that readers will have let down their
defenses so that this supernatural revelation can have that much greater an
impact; but to me the sensation is one of deceit and trickery—a rabbit pulled out
of a hat. Straub has deliberately destroyed the atmosphere he has been building
up throughout the entire novel, and he cannot resurrect it in a few pages. This is
also the first of several novels in which Straub is faced with a certain

awkwardness in writing a plausible conclusion. Once the spirit of Alison is
raised, how is it to be quelled? It seems to have more than human strength, and
yet Miles and his cousin’s daughter manage somehow to destroy it by fire,
allowing them to drive off happily ever after. If I say, therefore, that If You
Could See Me Now is probably Straub’s best and most satisfying weird novel, it
is only because his other novels are burdened with still greater problems of
conception and execution.
The core of Ghost Story is already evident in If You Could See Me Now. In
the latter, the sheriff, “Polar Bears” Hovre, tells Miles: “‘…we’re all men alone
—single men. The four of us that used to know each other. Duane, Paul Kant,
you and me’” (I 182). Three of these four at least (all save Paul Kant, a loner
suspected of being gay) were fascinated with Alison Greening as boys. The four
old men of Ghost Story—Ricky Hawthorne, Sears James, John Jaffrey, and
Lewis Benedikt—were similarly fascinated as youths with the actress Eva Galli,
whom another member of their circle, Edward Wanderley, brought into their
small New York town. By now it becomes clear that this fascination with
mysterious and alluring women rests with Straub himself; and yet, I cannot help
suspecting a hint of misogyny behind it. We eventually learn that these five men
actually killed the actress and then concealed her body so as not to endanger
their careers and reputations. Incredibly, Straub seems to lay the blame on the
actress herself: she was behaving wildly, taking her clothes off and mocking the
others; one of the men lashed out at her in fear, and she struck her head on the
mantel and died.
The last third or so of the novel is merely an adventure story in which the
men, who are being systematically killed off by the spirit of the actress, pursue
and attempt to kill her. All the sympathy is on their side, and Straub manages to
justify both the earlier killing and the present one by casually referring to the
woman’s “false humanity” (GS 540): she wasn’t human anyway, so it’s all right
to kill her. The spirit of this creature, which has inhabited various bodies over
the course of decades and has entered the lives of each of the male protagonists
in various disastrous ways, is finally referred to as follows:
…what you saw when you looked at Eva Galli on screen was a young
woman who was not likable. Even Alma had not been likable; even Anna
Mostyn, when truly seen—as at the Barnes’s party—seemed coldly
perverse, driven by willpower. They could for a time evoke human love,
but nothing in them could return it. What you finally saw was their
hollowness. They could disguise it for a time, but never finally, and that
was their greatest mistake; a mistake in being [GS 547].
I pity the lot of women if they can be killed with insouciance merely for

being unlikable and hollow.
But I am not concerned about the misogyny underlying the entire
conception of this novel: it suffers from greater problems than this. It is obvious
that Ghost Story is not merely a sort of combination of Julia and If You Could
See Me Now (the idea of a spirit inhabiting various bodies over generations,
taken from the former; the idea of a group of men all fascinated with the same
woman, taken from the latter), but is transparently derived from Machen’s “The
Great God Pan,” in which several individuals compare notes and find that the
strange woman who, under different guises, haunted their lives is the same
person. This connection would be clear even if Straub had not confessed to it in
an interview.13 He has not done anything in particular with the root conception
save to elaborate it with a mass of background detail and character description.
Much of this is admittedly adept, but once the secret is out, the novel devolves
into a very extended chase sequence, as each of the principals strives to kill off
the evil spirit before it kills him.
Straub’s penchant for happy endings (every one of his novels except Julia
and perhaps Koko ends with the complete elimination of the horror, whether it be
natural or supernatural) betrays him more painfully in Ghost Story than in any of
his other works. We are to understand that the spirit animating Eva Galli and all
her other incarnations is a manitou. The problem is that according to legend a
manitou is immortal or nearly immortal; how, then, does one dispose of such a
wearily persistent entity? The present incarnation of the manitou remarks that “‘I
have lived since the times when your continent was lighted only by small fires in
the forest, since Americans dressed in hides and feathers’” (GS 469). Straub
attempts to set the stage by noting that, since the young men who ganged up on
Eva Galli managed to kill her (although at the last moment the spirit escaped the
body and entered that of a lynx, thereby continuing its existence), it is in some
way vulnerable. The men manage first to kill off two repulsive sidekicks she has
brought along for the ride, then finally her current incarnation. But of course this
would be too easy, and so we are treated to the ludicrous spectacle of one of the
men pursuing the spirit as it changes forms over and over again, until finally it
enters the body of a wasp. The man captures the wasp and chops it up with a
knife, causing a certain amount of unfortunate injury to his hand in the process.
But the thing is evidently gone for good, and we humans can all breathe easier
for it. Straub sums things up by remarking: “Creatures like Anna Mostyn or Eva
Galli are behind every ghost story and supernatural tale ever written” (GS 422)
—every tale, that is, written by those who like Straub seem to find the focus of
horror and fascination in females. It would be interesting to see how Straub
would incorporate the entities in Lovecraft’s “The Colour out of Space” or At the

Mountains of Madness into his scheme.
I do not wish to be unduly harsh on Ghost Story. The landscape of Milburn,
an idyllic suburban town in New York state, is depicted with admirable affection
and lyricism; the male characters are all rendered distinctly and lovingly. The
structure of the novel is highly complex and could be described as a sort of
spiral: we are first led down from the recent past (the death of Edward
Wanderley a year before the novel opens, the first victim of the manitou’s
revenge) to the story of Don Wanderley and his brother David, who years before
both fell in love with the same woman (another incarnation of the manitou), to
the fateful death of Eva Galli 50 years in the past, then back to the present and
the quest to eliminate the manitou. Some of the most powerful scenes in the
novel are those in which the manitou induces hallucinations in its enemies.
These hallucinations, heartrending or horrific in turn, touch upon exactly those
sources of love and fear that make the human characters human, and the
lightning quickness with which Straub introduces these sequences seriously
disrupts our own hold on truth and reality.
The first appearance of the manitou’s sidekicks—the evil Gregory Bate and
his brother Fenny, who live in appalling ignorance and squalor in rural New
York—is one of the most arresting tableaux in the entire novel. It is tiresome,
however, to read the stereotypical moral condemnation of the villains of the
piece: “…the man … was not merely a wolf, but a supernatural being in wolf
form whose only purpose was to kill, to create terror and chaos and to take life
as savagely as possible … pain and death were the only poles of its being” (GS
378). Well, we certainly can’t sympathize with such a creature, can we?
Lovecraft amusingly speculates on according sympathy to a protagonist whose
sole desire is the extirpation of the human race,14 but Straub will have none of
this: his villains are bad, and all you can do is kill ’em. And for a near-immortal
entity, our manitou seems to have curiously limited horizons: “‘I am going to
shatter Milburn, Donald. My friends and I will tear the soul from this pathetic
town and crush its bare bones between our teeth’” (GS 469). Surely this creature
has bigger fish to fry.
I want to bypass Shadowland temporarily and turn to Floating Dragon,
since it continues the theme of an evil spirit possessing a succession of bodies.
The entity in question occupies male bodies this time; but otherwise the novel is
startlingly, almost embarrassingly, similar in conception to Ghost Story. As in
that novel, we are treated to a complex interweaving of different narrative
voices, as the various protagonists gradually come together in the small and
wealthy suburban town of Hampstead, Connecticut, to confront the horror. This
horror is not mobile, as was the manitou in Ghost Story, but generally keeps

pretty close to home. It has been causing periodic disasters in the town since
colonial times, and for some entirely unaccountable reason it seems stronger
once every hundred years (FD 430). Alas, we are in one of those periods now,
and people die like flies before our stalwart heroes unite to dispel the creature—
apparently by singing happy songs.
The biggest problem with Floating Dragon is that it goes on too long.
Straub has fallen in love with his own narrative voice and cannot prevent himself
from elaborating every incident in entirely needless detail—even such an utterly
inconsequential thing as the weird suicide of a dog, which throws itself under the
wheels of a car. (Even here is emphasis is not on the dog—the true focus of the
scene—but on two unimportant human characters who argue over who is
responsible for the animal’s death.) We are not meant to forget that Straub is a
novelist, and novelists (all the writing manuals say so) have to have plenty of
character description, realistic dialogue (even if the dialogue serves no purpose),
and background description. There is, as a result, a grotesque lack of proportion
in this novel: Straub does not know what incidents to elaborate and what
incidents to compress.
Another serious, indeed crippling, flaw is a fundamental confusion in the
very premise of the work. The novel opens with the release of a poison gas from
a chemical plant secretly operated by the government. This chemical, DRG-16,
has miraculous properties: “‘Skin lesions, hallucinations, outright madness, flu,
changes in pigmentation, even narcotization—some percentage of a treated
population will simply be mildly tranquilized. There may even have been
evidence of fugue state and telepathic ability…’” (FD 42). That’s quite a lot to
ask of a drug, even one produced by the Defense Department, but let it pass.
What nearly disfigures this novel is Straub’s apparent confusion over how this
quasi-science-fiction premise and the supernatural premise of the body-and
century-hopping spirit are supposed to interact. Through large parts of the novel
the chemical issue is not even addressed, and the spirit is the focus of all the
attention; finally, toward the end, Straub makes some half-hearted attempts at
integration, and his final statement on the matter is as follows:
“Graham,” Richard said, “I still don’t know what really happened.”
“No,” the old man said.
“I thought I would somehow understand it better as time went on. I
thought I’d come around to thinking that the Telpro business was more
important than we thought at the time.”
“That Telpro installation was just out there in the world,” Graham
said. “I think Gideon Winter could grab it and use it because of the name—
DRG. Or the other position is that the name was a coincidence, and the

accident was a real accident, and Winter simply capitalized on it” [FD 511].
It can hardly be clearer from this that Straub has not thought out the matter
in his own mind. It was an enormous mistake to mingle a quasi-science-fiction
and a supernatural conception in this novel; one or the other would have
sufficed. It is also irresponsible of him to have undertaken a sizeable novel of
this sort without having worked out the issue in advance. As it is, the two
disparate elements continually jostle each other awkwardly, and he does not
have the ability to harmonize them.
And then there is Shadowland.15 It is clear that Straub is trying to do
something very different from his other works here. It is as if the very success of
Ghost Story impelled him to write a novel as unlike it as possible. In a way this
is admirable—we have grown all too tired of writers who adhere mechanically to
a once-successful formula—but I am not sure what we are to make of the result
here. At about the time he was writing Shadowland, I heard Straub speak at a
convention16 about his desire to inject more of a “fantasy” element into his
work. Puzzled by the multifarious use of this term, I asked him what,
specifically, he meant by it. He replied (I quote from memory): “You know—
gnomes, elves, that sort of thing.” I confess that I quailed at the prospect of a
very promising proponent of supernatural horror writing about gnomes and
elves, but I assume that Straub was referring more generally to the creation of an
alternate reality or realm of magic and wonder. This is in fact what he has done
both in Shadowland and in his collaboration with Stephen King, The Talisman.
The result in each case is not, to my mind, successful. Shadowland has its
supporters, but I find the novel simply fatiguing. The mechanism or metaphor by
which the bounds of reality are broken or expanded is sleight of hand—
progressing from card tricks to more and more elaborate feats of prestidigitation
until finally we are evidently to perceive the utter instability and superficiality of
a world that purports to be governed by science and rationality. At the outset it is
made clear what a magician’s function is:
“A magician uses all of himself. Uncle Cole says a magician is in
synthesis. Synthesis. He says you’re part music and part blood, part thinker
and part killer. And if you can find all that in you and control it, then you
deserve to be set apart.”
“So it’s about control. About power.”
“Sure it is. It’s about being God” [S 54–55].
Later, as more and more inexplicable things occur, one character ponders
earnestly: “magic existed in the teeth of all the hypocrites and bores, in the teeth
of all the proprieties too” (S 190).

But the novel ends up numbing and stupefying the reader with its plethora
of bizarre events; toward the end they simply lose force through sheer surfeit.
Add to this a highly pretentious writing style and highly unpleasant and
unsympathetic characters, and the result is a noble failure.
The critical juncture in Straub’s career to date is The Talisman, his
heroically awful collaboration with Stephen King. At the time it seemed a good
gimmick to have the two leading horror writers of the day team up on a novel,
but the result is such utter confusion that one is better off forgetting that this
work ever existed. Straub, however, seemed in a quandary what to do next.
While King continued to grind out bestseller after bestseller every year, or
sometimes twice a year, four years passed before another book bearing Peter
Straub’s name appeared. It seemed as if he had tried everything the field had to
offer: the ambiguous horror tale (Julia, If You Could See Me Now), pure
supernatural horror (Ghost Story), an awkward combination of supernatural
horror and quasi-science fiction (Floating Dragon), and two forays into
imaginary-world fantasy (Shadowland, The Talisman). What was there left to
do? In an interview conducted shortly after the publication of The Talisman,
Straub confessed: “I’m tired of using the typical materials of the genre. I don’t
want to write anymore about animated corpses, about devils, about inexplicable
fires, about loathsome diseases. I want to work with material closer to the human
vein” (FF 232). It is interesting that in this same interview Straub already
announced that he was working on Koko, and that he stated bluntly: “Koko won’t
be a horror novel.”
Koko is the ploddingly tedious and longwinded story of some Vietnam
veterans who seek to find a fellow soldier, Tim Underhill, whom they suspect of
committing some particularly grisly murders in Singapore and Bangkok. Straub
owlishly attempts to inject the novel with sociological significance: the vets have
bad dreams about being back in Nam; one character opines: “‘The goddamned
war still isn’t over, I guess’” (K 40); and so on and so forth. This may all be
closer to the human vein, but Straub just doesn’t have the talent to enliven this
realistic material beyond the level of superficiality and unintended caricature. He
has chosen a subject he does not have the capability of handling. All the
characters are flat and boring—and there is not a little misogyny in the vicious
portrayal of Michael Poole’s estranged wife Judy, who comes off (and is meant
to come off) as a small-minded and conventional bitch who doesn’t understand
her husband’s need to come to terms with what happened in Vietnam. As in
Floating Dragon, every incident is elaborated in endless detail, as Straub
evidently believes that mere bulk may create the illusion of weight and
significance.

If Koko is nothing more than an extremely drawn-out detective story, in
which the identity of the killer is ultimately revealed to be not Underhill but
another soldier in the company, then the very title of Mystery proclaims that it
too is a detective story. Although scarcely shorter than Koko, it is rather more
effective because the core of the mystery is more intrinsically complex. And, for
once, Straub has shed his literary pretensions to write a fairly straightforward
work that does not make windy claims to be anything other than the entertaining
narrative it is. Let us ignore the fact that we are initially introduced to a very
hackneyed know-it-all detective, Lamont von Heilitz (“‘I am an amateur of
crime’” [M 81]): most of the novel—and the mystery—is focused on young Tom
Pasmore, who acts as von Heilitz’s eyes, ears, and legs as he explores a decades-
old murder in a Wisconsin resort. Mystery is, to be sure, longer than the average
detective story. Only two writers have managed to write mysteries of such length
with any real success: Dorothy L. Sayers (I think not so much of Gaudy Night as
of Have His Carcase and Busman’s Honeymoon) and P. D. James (A Taste for
Death, Devices and Desires). Mystery is, of course, entirely devoid of
philosophical significance, but it is a good story.
The Throat seeks to unite both the themes and the characters of its two
predecessors; indeed, Koko, Mystery, and The Throat comprise a sort of trilogy
concerning the Blue Rose murders that occurred in the mythical Illinois town of
Millhaven. At the outset one becomes a little concerned that Straub has become
excessively fond of his own characters and as a result has made his work too
coyly self-referential. The novel is narrated in the first person by the now
middle-aged Tim Underhill, who turns out to be a friend of Tom Pasmore, now
an older man living in Millhaven. More curiously, the strange out-of-body
experience related at the outset of Mystery as occurring to Pasmore actually
happened to Underhill as a boy when he saw his sister murdered. I am not sure
what purpose is served by Straub’s revision of his own work; but I am heartened
to announce that once The Throat gets underway, it proves to be a thoroughly
satisfying sequel to Koko and Mystery, and somehow manages to lend them a
substance and richness that they did not possess on their own.
The Throat, at 700 pages, is Straub’s longest book, and yet it is his most
compellingly readable: all the arch pretentiousness that marred his earlier work
has fallen away, and he tells his detective story with verve, vigor, and panache. I
wish I could study this novel in detail, with its extraordinarily complex and very
skillfully told plot, its vivid and crisply realized characters, and its sheer
narrative drive. But since it is nothing more than a murder mystery I cannot
justify any lengthy discussion of it here. Suffice it to say that Straub has
successfully and seamlessly united the Vietnam theme of Koko and the murder

mystery 
theme 
of 
Mystery 
(“Millhaven 
and 
Vietnam 
were 
oddly
interchangeable, fragments of some greater whole, some larger story” [T 79]).
The opening scenes in Vietnam are told with a compactness and bland irony that
puts the verbosity of Koko to shame, while the elucidation and resolution of both
the original Blue Rose murders of the 1950s and the apparent recrudescence of
them in the present surpass Mystery in deftness of execution. I am not wholly
convinced of one critic’s assessment that these three Blue Rose books “confront
many of the same themes and problems as Straub’s supernatural books”;17
indeed, the only “message” I can derive from these novels is the platitude that
child abuse and war trauma can lead to hideous violence. This message is
elaborated in a windy and superficial way in Koko, but is not even given much
attention in The Throat: if it had been, then a case might have been made that
these works are of the “psychological horror” type. But, like Harris’s Silence of
the Lambs, the overwhelming bulk of The Throat is simply given over (quite
enthrallingly) to Underhill’s and Pasmore’s discovery and analysis of critical
evidence in the case, so that in the end we get very little in the way of a
psychological portrait of the killer. The attempt to trace deep themes in The
Throat may not even be worth making, for there do not seem to be any; the
novel is simply a thoroughly entertaining read. I trust I may be permitted some
hyperbole in saying that The Throat is not merely Straub’s best book but perhaps
the best single detective story ever written, surpassing anything by Agatha
Christie, John Dickson Carr, Dorothy L. Sayers, Margery Allingham, Margaret
Millar, Ruth Rendell, P. D. James, or anyone else. But it is not a weird tale.
Houses Without Doors has both its reassuring and its disturbing sides: it is
reassuring that Straub has not entirely abandoned the domain of the supernatural,
but it is troubling to see him returning to a pompous, pretentious, and self-
consciously literary approach that he seemed on the brink of shedding with
Mystery. In the first place, this collection of stories of widely varying length
(from five pages to 125) were clearly written at different times, and yet Straub
attempts to link them by adding meaningless “interludes” that reveal little save
his own literary posturing. Moreover, two stories explicitly derive from (or, as
Straub self-importantly announces in an author’s note, have “deep connections
to” [HD 357]) Koko. “Blue Rose” and “The Juniper Tree” are both mentioned in
Koko as stories written by Tim Underhill, but does Straub really expect us to
care what “deep connections” exist between these stories and his tiresome
novel? Both tales are quite effective, but they are not weird. “Blue Rose” may be
marginally so, as it involves a young boy who hypnotizes his little brother and
does all sorts of nasty things to him while he is under hypnosis; but I believe that
the phenomena related here are too clearly associated with what is actually

known of the powers of hypnosis to be classified as weird. If Lovecraft is correct
in saying that the weird tale describes events “which could not possibly
happen”18 (i.e., those not encompassed by science as presently known), then
“Blue Rose” is not weird because hypnosis of the sort described in the story
“could possibly happen.” As for “The Juniper Tree,” it is certainly a moving tale
about a boy who is sexually abused in a movie theatre, but there is nothing at all
weird about it.
The real drawing cards in Houses Without Doors are two long stories, “The
Buffalo Hunter” and “Mrs. God.” Both are powerfully atmospheric and lyrical
tales and show that Straub has finally mastered the art of characterization and the
ability to introduce the weird in the most subtle and insidious manner.
The disturbed protagonist of “The Buffalo Hunter” could rival any of
Ramsey Campbell’s psychotics in his gradual deterioration from seeming
normalcy to lunacy and death. Bob Bunting, lonely, inhibited, and working at a
dead-end job as an accountant for a pornographer, invents a fantasy life as a
ladies’ man so that his parents will think him a normal guy with a healthy
interest in women. In fact, he is terrified of women, has an unhealthy
relationship with his father, and clearly yearns for the closeness to his mother
that he had as an infant. A blind date tells Bunting the brutal truth: “‘I know
guys like you,’ she said, her eyes blazing at him…. ‘I know a few inadequate
children who can’t handle relationships, one in particular, but I thought I was all
done hanging around a guy who spent half the night making phone calls and the
other half in the bathroom…’” (HD 181). She doesn’t know the worst of it:
Bunting becomes fascinated with baby bottles and begins to affix them to the
walls of his room. This is an obvious symbol for Bunting’s longing for the
responsibility-free life of infancy, but Straub handles it well.
The weird element in the story is introduced with great deftness. Bunting,
reading a western by Luke Short called The Buffalo Hunter, seems actually to
enter the world of the book, spending time riding a horse on the prairie. The
same thing happens with a Raymond Chandler novel. We are clearly intended at
the outset to interpret this phenomenon psychologically, as merely another
aspect of Bunting’s yearning to escape from life. But then he picks up Anna
Karenina and reads the line: “And all at once she thought of the man crushed by
the train the day she had met Vronsky…” (HD 199). Later the superintendent of
his building finds him dead in his room: “‘It looked like he got hit by a train. It’s
crazy, but that’s what I thought when I saw him. He was smashed up against the
wall, and the bed was all smashed…’” (HD 206). This idea, to be sure, is not
new, but sufficient praise cannot be extended to the subtlety and elegance of
Straub’s handling of it. “The Buffalo Hunter” comes close to redeeming all

Straub’s missteps of the previous decade.
“Mrs. God” is ultimately rather less successful, although it has a pervasive
atmosphere of weirdness found nowhere else in his work. Straub states in his
author’s note that the story is a pastiche of Robert Aickman, but he need not
have made such a declaration: the setting in an English country house, the
inexplicable events, and the polished, erudite atmosphere all proclaim allegiance
to the elusive and occasionally confusing Aickman. As with Aickman’s work,
we are not entirely sure what exactly has transpired here, and it would be futile
to trace the plot of this long and somewhat rambling story: everything is
subordinate to mood. Although Straub stated that one of the things he “learned”
from Stephen King was that a weird tale could be “bad-mannered, noisy, and
operatic,”19 “Mrs. God” indicates that Straub has wisely abandoned an approach
that does not suit him at all and returned to well-mannered weird writing.
I do not, in the end, know what significance Straub’s possibly temporary
abandonment of the supernatural in Koko, Mystery, and The Throat really has. It
is true that Stephen King himself has made a few excursions into
nonsupernaturalism (disastrously in Cujo, more successfully in Different
Seasons, Misery, and others), and many other writers have recently written very
powerful tales that involve nothing supernatural; but the course of Straub’s
career displays an exhaustion of conventional supernatural elements, often with
a single work, so that there was no alternative but to enter the adjacent but
fundamentally different mode of the detective story. But this may have more to
do with Straub’s unoriginality than with any supposed lack of intrinsic variety in
supernatural themes. He has, after all, essentially written one work four times:
Julia, If You Could See Me Now, Ghost Story, and Floating Dragon all concern
the endurance of a human or quasi-human spirit over the course of years. Even
his detective trilogy, excellent as its final two components are, furrows the same
ground over and over again.
It is also true that Straub’s work savors rather too much of the study and the
library. Peter Penzoldt’s remark about Lovecraft—“He was too well read”20—is
far more applicable to Straub. The influence of Henry James, Arthur Machen,
Stephen King, and Robert Aickman hangs heavily over Straub’s work, to such a
degree that there is a real question over what is genuinely Straub and what is
some conscious or unconscious recollection of a prior literary text. If he is to
continue in the weird vein (and there is no guarantee that he will do so), then he
will have to find some ideas that are actually his, learn a little more concision,
and harness a prose style that at its best is one of the most precise, well-
modulated, and evocative in the entire realm of modern literature. If he can do

this, he may one day accomplish what he has yet to accomplish in nearly 30
years of writing: produce a wholly satisfying and significant work of
supernatural horror.

 
V. PSEUDO-, QUASI-, AND ANTI-WEIRD FICTION
ROBERT AICKMAN: “SO LITTLE IS DEFINITE”
Robert Aickman (1914–81) is an exceptionally odd writer. He earned his
living as founder and chairman of the Inland Waterways Association, an early
environmentalist concern devoted to preserving England’s inland rivers from
destruction and pollution. He seems to have taken to writing weird fiction
relatively late in life, publishing his first collection—We Are for the Dark
(1951), containing three stories by him and three by Elizabeth Jane Howard—
when he was well into his thirties. More than ten years would pass before the
issuance of Aickman’s next collection, Dark Entries (1964). In all, eleven
collections of Aickman’s tales have been published (three are posthumous), a
seemingly significant sum for a life’s work, but the figure is deceptive. There
are, in fact, only a total of 48 short stories by Robert Aickman, and these are
distributed in such a peculiar fashion in his various collections that a given story
may appear in two or even three different volumes. Aickman also wrote two
novels—The Late Breakfasters (1964), which, aside from a few ghostly effects,
turns out rather surprisingly to be a sensitive and poignant story of lesbianism,
and The Model (posthumously published in 1987), a charming but ultimately
insubstantial quasi-fairy tale set in Tsarist Russia. One of his most delightful
works is his autobiography, The Attempted Rescue (1966), as Aickman follows
the curious tradition of piquant autobiographies by weird writers established by
Arthur Machen (Far Off Things, 1922), Algernon Blackwood (Episodes Before
Thirty, 1923), Lord Dunsany (Patches of Sunlight, 1938), and a number of
others.
I certainly mean no criticism of Aickman’s relatively modest literary
output, for his literary gifts were of an extremely high order. His prose style—
supple, urbane, sophisticated, restrained, yet capable of surprisingly powerful
emotive effects—never falters from the beginning to the end of his work. There
are few writers who are as purely pleasurable to read, regardless of their subject
matter or the success or failure of their actual work, as Robert Aickman. His
major literary influences (it might be better to say analogues) appear to be M. R.
James and Walter de la Mare, yet he excels the former in richness and variety of
texture and the latter in the sustained intensity of all his literary work.
But Aickman based his work upon a very odd theory of weird fiction, a
theory he evolved seemingly early in life and maintained to the end. His most

succinct enunciation of it appears in The Second Fontana Book of Great Ghost
Stories (1965), which he edited:
In my Introduction to the first Fontana Book of Great Ghost Stories, I
tried to define what seem to me the basic facts about the genre. I pointed
out that the ghost story must be distinguished both from the mere horror
story and from the scientific extravaganza. I suggested that the ghost story
draws upon the unconscious mind, in the manner of poetry; that it need
offer neither logic nor moral; that it is an art form of altogether exceptional
delicacy and subtlety; and that, not surprisingly, there are only about thirty
or forty first-class specimens in the whole of western literature [F2, 7].
The supposed support for these claims is to be found in Aickman’s
introduction to The Fontana Book of Great Ghost Stories (1964), but in many
ways his reasoning seems either flawed or insufficient. I do not wish to concern
myself overmuch with his apparent denigration of either science fiction or what
he calls the “horror story”: he refers to the latter as “purely sadistic; it depends
entirely upon power to shock” (F1, 7). But since he never tells us what specific
tales he considers horror stories as opposed to ghost stories, this is not of much
help. His remark would be very apt if applied to the recent splatterpunk
movement, but I suspect his condemnation extends much more widely than this.
In any event, the crux of the matter, as regards Aickman’s own work, is the
assertion that the ghost story appeals to the unconscious mind and that it “need
offer neither logic nor moral.” These are, it is no surprise, the distinguishing
features of his tales.
The curious thing about Aickman’s notion of the unconscious is that he
assumes as self-evidently true Freud’s assertion that “only a small part, perhaps
one-tenth, of the human mental and emotional organisation is conscious” (F1, 7).
When faced with manifest evidence that Freud is no longer uniformly accepted
on this point, Aickman merely launches into one of his frequent denunciations of
the excessive rationalism of the modern world: “Our main response to this
discovery has been to reject the nine-tenths unconscious more completely and
more systematically than ever before…. The most advanced psychologists have
begun even to claim that the unconscious mind has no existence, and that
unhappiness can be cured physically, like, say, cancer” (F1, 7). Aickman will not
win a place among leading philosophers or psychologists with things like this.
Still more curious is the idea of the ghost story requiring neither moral nor
logic. The first part of this assertion is not especially problematical, and
Aickman’s targets are such obviously didactic weird tales as Dr. Jekyll and Mr.
Hyde. But in the same breath he speaks of the ultimate message of weird fiction:
“…what the ghost story hints to us is that there is a world elsewhere, as

Coriolanus put it (meaning something rather different, but that is just like a
ghost); that as flies to wanton boys are we to the gods; that luck’s a chance, but
trouble’s sure; that achievement and comfort are (like the poor ghosts
themselves) immaterial” (F1, 8). But, mind you, the ghost story does not teach or
preach. Perhaps there is no direct contradiction in all this, and what Aickman is
saying here may be what I have maintained all along: that the weird tale offers a
unique opportunity for a writer to express his world view because it allows for a
reordering of the universe in accordance with the author’s vision. Aickman
implies here that that world view is likely to be either avowedly cosmic
(although I find his own work not at all cosmic, certainly not in the manner of
Lovecraft or Blackwood) or generally pessimistic, as his own view of life
certainly was.
But what of the claim that the weird tale need offer no “logic”? What does
this exactly mean, and how does Aickman justify it? Well, to my mind he
doesn’t. I can find no passage in that first introduction to the Fontana series in
which he presents his case for the alogicality of weird fiction; in fact, the closest
he comes is in the introduction to The Third Fontana Book of Great Ghost
Stories: “The successful ghost story does not close a door and leave inside it still
another definition, a still further solution. On the contrary, it must open a door,
preferably where no one had previously noticed a door to exist; and, at the end,
leave it open, or, possibly, ajar” (F3, 7). This is unexceptionable: a tale in which
every feature is explained would be science fiction or, at any rate, not a weird
tale. But this is in no sense a justification for the weird tale’s lack of logic even
on the level of plot. I think Aickman’s position on this matter has to be inferred
from his notion of the unconscious: if a weird tale can reach those depths of the
unconscious toward which it ought to be striving, then the surface plot need not
“make sense” because that is an appeal to that conscious one-tenth in which
Aickman has no interest. It is a widespread complaint against Aickman that his
stories are oftentimes highly confusing, ambiguous, and obscure, hence the
subtitle to this article, “so little is definite” (AR 11), which I have quoted
somewhat out of context from The Attempted Rescue. It is, indeed, a tribute to
the consistency of his philosophy of the weird tale (and to his lack of interest in
commercial success) that, even to the end of his life, he disdained the mere
dovetailing of a plot. He never made it easy for his readers.
The problem with the scorn of “logic” on this level is that it can lead to
great abuses, especially in writers far less gifted and far more intellectually lazy
than Aickman. There is a real danger that the events in a tale will seem random
and unmotivated if they are not somehow brought together into a coherent
scenario. If nothing else, there seems to be a violation—or, at the very least, a

stretching to the uttermost limits—of Poe’s notion of the unity of effect. The
symbolism in Aickman’s stories is at times so obscure and, I believe, so related
to personal symbols that conveyed meaning for him but which he was perhaps
not entirely successful in conveying to others, that the reader cannot help feeling
dissatisfied and, accordingly, failing to absorb those “hints” (“that there is a
world elsewhere … that as flies to wanton boys are we to the gods”) that
Aickman saw as the function of the weird tale. He seems to have felt that the
mere creation of a sense of the inexplicable was a sufficient purpose for weird
writing. He would certainly not have agreed with L. P. Hartley, a master of
weird fiction in his own right who presented an argument exactly contrary to
Aickman’s: “The ghost-story writer’s task is the more difficult [i.e., than the
detective story writer’s], for not only must he create a world in which reason
doesn’t hold sway, but he must invent laws for it. Chaos is not enough. Even
ghosts must have rules and obey them.”1 What is more, those tales that Aickman
himself singles out for praise—Blackwood’s “The Wendigo,” Hichens’ “How
Love Came to Professor Guildea,” Onions’ “The Beckoning Fair One”—all
“make sense” on the level of surface plot as well as on the level of philosophical
import. The only philosophy I can detect in the mass of Aickman’s fiction is the
idea that the world is a little odder than it seems to be.
I wonder whether Aickman’s belief in the occult has anything to do with all
this. His tales themselves are singularly, and thankfully, devoid of occultist
trappings, but in one of the Fontana introductions he finally makes this
confession:
While it is true that serious psychic research (as distinct from
psychological) and the ghost stories of fiction are far apart, yet the latter
would lose much, and become mere playthings, if the former had nothing to
investigate. It is my belief and my experience that “paranormal
phenomena” do occur; and my opinion that the future well-being of man
might be forwarded by more attention being paid to them. There is evidence
that a mystical, clairvoyant faculty of a most practical kind is commonly
taken for granted in many “primitive” societies, from pre-communist Tibet
to the Hebrides; and is merely bred out and killed off by industrialism,
compulsory education, and the belief that every question has an answer [F5,
8].
I hardly know how to respond to this farrago of nonsense. Weird tales were
hardly “mere playthings” to Lovecraft, Dunsany, and other unbelievers, but
rather their means for conveying their deepest and sincerest visions of the
universe. Indeed, Lovecraft frequently states that it is exactly because he could
not believe in conventional religion or in spiritualism that he required the

imaginative outlet of weird fiction. And it never seems to occur to Aickman, foe
to all modernism that he is, that clairvoyance has been beaten out of modern man
because it is very likely to be false. In any event, it is conceivable that Aickman,
like Machen and Blackwood, is so intent on shaking us from our ingrained
rationalism that he wishes to present the inexplicable simply as such. In this
sense he may be doing exactly the sort of preaching that he chides others for.
It may be of some interest to note that, whether in spite or because of his
interest in the paranormal, Aickman appears to disavow conventional religious
belief. In The Attempted Rescue he speaks of the influence of Norman Douglas,
whose “combination of anti–Christianity with political and social traditionalism”
(AR 119) greatly affected him. He also notes the influence of two other great
foes of religion, H. L. Mencken and Bernard Shaw (AR 119). Later, when
speaking of his fondness for the music of Delius, he notes: “Delius offers deep,
mystical feeling without implications of conventional religion” (AR 168). There
is, however, little explicit anticlericalism in Aickman’s stories: “Larger Than
Oneself” appears to open with considerable cynicism directed toward
spiritualism and perhaps toward religion in general, but the story nevertheless
seems an instantiation of the rather curious idea, stated by one of the characters,
that “Sin is a sense of something larger than oneself” (PD 189). Similarly, the
quasi-spiritualist ceremony in “A Roman Question” is initially treated as
something of a joke, but it does in fact appear to cause the ghostly manifestation
in the tale.
The curious thing is that Aickman could write stories that “make sense” in
terms of plot when he chose, and I cannot help but feel that they are among the
strongest of his tales. As for the stories that don’t “make sense,” it seems that
their effectiveness will depend, firstly, upon a given reader’s tolerance for the
lack of explanation and, secondly, a sensitivity to the particular images and
symbols utilized by Aickman in the story in question. I myself find such tales as
“Meeting Mr Millar” and “Letters to the Postman” extremely unnerving, but can
imagine that they may not so affect other readers or that other tales will. Since
Aickman placed so much importance on the unconscious as a motivating force
for the composition of weird fiction, it seems evident that he attempted, insofar
as is possible, to tap his own unconscious for some of the more disturbing
particulars in his tales or, at the very least, that he depicted or transmogrified
phenomena that were personally disturbing to himself. Hence the importance or
validity of an autobiographical interpretation of his work.
There is no question that Aickman belongs somewhere within the realm of
weird fiction; but where exactly his place is in that realm is a singularly vexing
question. His general similarity in tone to writers like M. R. James, Walter de la

Mare, Oliver Onions, and L. P. Hartley does not to my mind make him in any
sense a “traditional” writer of ghost stories. Aickman used the term “ghost story”
only because “no other suggested name … has come my way”; and he realizes
that “often there is no actual ghost” (F2, 9). There are, in fact, very few ghosts in
Aickman, and in many cases perhaps not even anything supernatural—certainly
not conventionally so. In many tales the weird is engendered by the increasingly
odd behavior of various characters; but for all that he cannot be called a writer of
psychological horror, for he is not interested in the psychology of his
protagonists except insofar as he wishes to delineate (and does delineate with
exquisite delicacy and sensitivity) their psychological reactions to the weird
phenomena. Aickman himself subtitled nearly all his collections “Strange
Stories” or “Strange Tales”; and in the end perhaps no more precise a
designation is possible.
Aickman did not write short stories so much as novelettes—they tend rather
uniformly to be about 10,000 words in length. He requires this length to create
and sustain the mood of strangeness that makes his work so uniquely
compelling; indeed, it is exactly on those few occasions when he tries to
compress that he lapses into triteness and conventionality. “The Waiting Room”
is an undistinguished story about ghosts appearing in the waiting room of a
remote train station; they are the former inmates of a prison previously existing
on the site. Even an additional twist at the very end cannot make this tale
anything but routine. On the other hand, some stories drag on interminably, not
because Aickman’s writing is anything less than polished and elegant, but
because of a curious lack of focus on the central weird phenomenon. “Residents
Only” has some magnificent descriptions of a decrepit cemetery, but Aickman
seems to feel that the weird component of this story requires so much “subtlety”
and indirection that he devotes the majority of the tale to a tiresome account of
the inconclusive actions of a governmental committee overseeing the cemetery.
For long periods the true heart of the story—the fate of Rogerson, the cemetery’s
caretaker—is virtually forgotten.
“My Poor Friend” is another example of how Aickman’s excessive
reticence in regard to the actual supernatural manifestation and its origin mars an
otherwise potent tale. The narrator becomes associated with a peculiar and rather
harried M.P., Walter Enright, who makes the startling admission that his wife
has left him, taking their two children, who are “not human at all. They ought
not to live” (PD 221). This certainly sounds promising. Is the wife some sort of
alien entity? It is difficult to tell, since the narrator only gets fleeting glimpses of
a “woman in the black dress” (PD 236) whom he thinks is the woman in
question. As for the children, their harrowing appearance in a very gripping

conclusion is introduced by the simple words: “It seemed as if a bird had got in”
(PD 237). Evocative as this is, it really causes the tale to break down logically: if
the children are birdlike creatures, how can they be the offspring of a woman
who appears to be more or less human? Aickman has simply failed to provide a
sufficient rationale for the birth of these anomalous creatures. Contrast
Lovecraft’s “The Shadow over Innsmouth”: the idea of fish creatures mating
with humans to produce loathsome hybrids is probably equally ridiculous
scientifically, but it contains that aesthetic logic which the supernatural tale
requires if it is not to lapse into absurdity and unbelievability. Because Aickman
has not laid the foundations properly, the result seems arbitrary: why bird
creatures as opposed to anything else?
But it would be unfair to Aickman to keep harping upon his possible
failures when he has so many undoubted successes to his credit. I believe that
the most efficient way to examine these successes is to start with his stimulating
autobiography.
The Attempted Rescue (1966) is one of the most poignant books I have ever
read. Without the least inelegance of diction, Aickman manages to be startlingly
revelatory about his profoundest sentiments (e.g., “For years I suffered
unspeakable agonies from sex frustration” [AR 156]). It is unfortunate that the
autobiography proceeds only up to the outbreak of World War II; Aickman’s
continuation of it, The River Runs Uphill, has recently been published, but I have
not had access to it. And yet, it becomes rapidly clear that Aickman’s early years
were so central to the development of his entire world view that perhaps much or
all that we need to know about him can be found in The Attempted Rescue, even
though he says virtually nothing about his writing there. To be sure, his
upbringing was extremely odd. He lived in terror of his demonic father, had a
love-hate relationship with his mother, was appalled by the constant wrangling
of his parents, and, as an only child, led a generally solitary and inward-looking
existence. The degree to which he bravely articulates his conflicting and clearly
painful early memories makes his autobiography an act of great courage.
I do not believe that an autobiographical approach is necessarily the ideal or
even a universally useful method of exegesis; but it is very clear that Aickman’s
fiction has pronounced autobiographical overtones, although they are never
presented bluntly and are always skillfully and seamlessly enmeshed in the
narrative. Some of the autobiographical touches may be either obvious or
thematically insignificant—the meticulous chronicling of parliamentary activity
in “My Poor Friend” is surely a product of Aickman’s own experience with his
Inland Waterways Association, as is the endless sequence of inconclusive
meetings of an Open Spaces and Cemeteries Committee in “Residents Only.”

Elsewhere, however, autobiography so infuses a tale that it becomes extremely
tempting to examine it with care, especially when some central tenet of
Aickman’s general philosophy is involved.
There are, I think, four autobiographical points that may be worth studying
in detail: Aickman’s nostalgia for the past; his relations with women; his sense
of class; and his fondness for travel.
I actually wish to study the last point first, even though it may appear to be
the least significant. Travel was, certainly, important to Aickman, as he makes
clear: “Travel, the art of travel, is the great impersonal passion of my life,
though personal also, because I need a perfect companion, and cannot make art
without” (AR 89). But what becomes quickly obvious when reading his weird
fiction is that in virtually every story the intrusion of the weird depends upon the
protagonist’s traveling to some unfamiliar locale—not necessarily remote or
intrinsically anomalous, but simply some realm other than his or her own. “No
Stronger Than a Flower” appears to be one of the few stories set in a locale
familiar to the protagonists (the apartment of a married couple), and yet it too
involves a journey to the unknown, and it is exactly such a journey that triggers
the strange. A wife, tired of her husband’s complaints that she takes no particular
interest or care in her appearance, decides to go to a peculiar beauty shop
advertised in a magazine, and finds that “the address was in a street, and indeed
a part of the town, which were outside her restricted topography” (UD 98). Her
slow degeneration begins at this point.
One of Aickman’s earliest stories, “The Trains,” establishes a pattern that
would hold true for most of his career. Here two young women are hiking on
foot in the north of England. The region they have entered is already sufficiently
remote and forbidding, but Aickman casts further doubt on rationality when one
of the women finds that the map she is consulting does not appear to be correct
in certain very small particulars. By a fairly obvious but still effective sequence
of symbols, it later turns out that the map, which “hasn’t proved too accurate”
(WDS 56), is destroyed in the rain. With the shackles of known reality sloughed
off, the weird adventure can begin.
This notion of entering an unfamiliar realm is the key to one of the most
distinctive features of Aickman’s horrific technique. Although he appears on the
surface to be a “supernatural realist,” describing the real world meticulously and
slyly inserting the weird through the accumulation of background details, the
true secret of his weird artistry is his ability to portray seemingly normal regions
that are somehow wrong. A statement by a character in “Hand in Glove” gets to
the heart of the matter: “There’s something very wrong with almost everything”
(I 17). The realms he describes do not, in the end, correspond to anything we

know, even though the characters attempt to move within them as if there were
nothing intrinsically odd about them; they are, in the end, as fantastic as
Dunsany’s Pegana or any of Thomas Ligotti’s dream-worlds. This notion of
wrongness could, indeed, be extended to virtually everything that happens in
Aickman’s fiction—landscape, psychological reactions of characters, and even
the smallest details of what appear to be mundane transactions.
One of Aickman’s favorite devices is simply imprecision in topographical
detail. At least three of his stories take place on islands. This would in itself be a
sufficiently isolating technique, but he compounds it by failing to specify the
name of the island or where exactly it is located. In “The View” we appear to be
on an island just off the coast of England; in “The Wine-Dark Sea” it is off the
coast of Greece; in “The Houses of the Russians” it is evidently off the coast of
Finland. But no more precise delineation is to be found, and once we are there
we are in a sort of hazy topography where anything can happen. Every one of
Aickman’s stories, whether set in an intrinsically remote area or not, is of this
type.
“The Hospice” is an enormously powerful story with an extremely simple
premise. A man named Maybury is traveling on business and finds that he is
short of gas late one evening, and he is compelled to stop at a roadside inn
simply called “The Hospice.” At first, everything seems normal as he sits down
to dinner in the inn’s dining room; but, with the most exquisite pacing and
subtlety, weird details begin to accumulate. Maybury is first given an enormous
bowl of soup, followed by an equally enormous serving of a main course. Then
he notices that the other diners, all but one of whom are seated at a long central
table, are elderly people eating “as if their lives depended on it” (CHM 132).
Later he “had the horrid idea about them that eating was all they did do” (CHM
134). Finally he notices that one of the old men has his leg attached to a rail
beneath the table (CHM 136)—what can this possibly mean? There follows what
seems to be a hackneyed scenario whereby Maybury is pressured to stay the
night, with all sorts of obstacles being put up against his leaving. But he finally
does leave, albeit by an unusual avenue: one of the inn’s guests has evidently
died, and Maybury is allowed to ride away in the hearse. Throughout the tale
there has been the most delicate balance between farce and horror, and this
conclusion—in which Maybury eventually alights from the hearse at a bus stop
—should not be seen as an anticlimax: firstly, the inn’s proprietor has already
had his sadistic pleasure by witnessing Maybury’s discomfiture throughout his
stay and by compelling him to depart in this ignominious and hideous manner;
secondly, it is the simple realization that such a place can exist just off the beaten
track that is the true source of horror.

There is something very strange about Aickman’s nostalgia for the past. It
is not his loathing of the machine (AR 7), which he thinks will overtake human
beings and become our master (Lovecraft and Dunsany said as much); it is rather
his nostalgia for a past that he never experienced, namely the period prior to
1914, the very year of his birth. Aickman certainly perceives this difficulty.
When he remarks that “It may be doubted whether there has ever been so much
happiness in England at any other time as there was between 1880 and 1914”
(AR 26), he is quick to add: “I discovered long ago that it and not this was my
world too, though I never knew it” (AR 26). Aickman evidently believes that he
gained so thorough a knowledge of this vanished world from his father and other
older relatives that he inevitably felt a part of it. It is peculiar how tenaciously he
clings to this view of a pre–1914 Eden; even when discoursing upon restaurants,
he veers off into an aside: “The great age of restaurants, as indeed of all civilized
pleasures, ended in 1914, and I saw only the epilogue, but even the epilogue was
incomparably brighter, more varied, and, not least, cheaper than now seems
imaginable” (AR 87).
This belief that he is living in a time in which he manifestly has no
business, and which is trampling so many of the beliefs he cherishes, very
largely accounts for Aickman’s profound pessimism. The Attempted Rescue
leaves no doubt of the fact of his pessimism, although there is no real account of
its origin: at the very outset he remarks that we live in “a world where happiness
is impossible” (AR 8); later, when recounting one of his few successful
relationships with women, he remarks: “…when, at last, you are really happy,
die at once” (AR 58). Perhaps it is incorrect to attribute Aickman’s pessimism
wholly or even largely to his nostalgia. No doubt that was an important
contributory factor, but his relations with women, as well as his class
consciousness, were also of significance.
Given this tendency to look backward, it is a little odd that only a few of
Aickman’s stories are actually set in the past. Those that are—for example,
“Pages from a Young Girl’s Journal,” set in the time of Byron—do not strike me
as among his most successful. But perhaps it is not odd at all; for it is by locating
his work either in the contemporary world or in the interwar years, as the bulk of
his tales tend to be located, that Aickman can allow himself his lugubrious
references to the lost world of the Edwardians and the barren hopelessness of the
present. He is not at all to be condemned for his nostalgia (surely no thinking
person can be content with the current state of civilization) and in fact this
longing for a vanished era lends a distinctively somber or melancholy cast to his
work and actually facilitates the subtle incursion of the weird.
“Growing Boys” is an ingenious story that can be studied in this context.

Initially it seems to be the comic tale of a mother’s difficulty in controlling her
two large, rowdy, voracious 15-year-old sons, who storm into the house only for
meals and then storm out again. But this is only the beginning. The boys have
been expelled from their school, either for poor work or perhaps for more serious
derelictions. Then a policemen comes to the house and reports that the boys have
gone on some sort of rampage. The charges “‘include a long list of assaults,
fifteen at least so far, and we are expecting more…. There are a couple of
attempted rapes expected to be reported soon’” (TLD 28). When we read the
policeman’s remark that “‘violence … [is] growing fast pretty well everywhere
in the world’” (TLD 28)—a remark that echoes the boys’ father’s comment that
“‘some boys grow faster than some other boys’” (TLD 28)—we begin to
perceive the drift of the tale: the boys are symbols for the increasing violence in
modern society. It is even said at a later point that “‘Those two are like children
of the future’” (TLD 37–38); and still later: “they were passing unnoticed amidst
the freaks and zanies that people urban and suburban areas in the later part of the
twentieth century” (TLD 45). The symbolism is completed by the boys’ Uncle
Stephen, a relic of the past, who says, “‘I know all about times changing, none
better… The fact remains that I have not changed. I am older, unfortunately, but
otherwise exactly the same’” (TLD 37). He becomes the boys’ opponent and in
the end destroys them—no doubt to Aickman’s great relish.
Just as nearly all of Aickman’s stories involve a journey into the unfamiliar,
so do they almost all involve a sexual tension between the protagonist (usually
male, but on a surprising number of occasions female) and an alluring figure of
the opposite sex. The title of a later Aickman collection, Tales of Love and
Death (1977), could serve for almost any of his volumes, as could the epigraph
from Yeats cited in Powers of Darkness (1966): “I am still of the opinion that
only two topics can be of the least interest to a serious and studious mind—sex
and the dead.”
All this, understandably, has its origins in Aickman’s own life, as narrated
in The Attempted Rescue. It is remarkable how forthright he is about his relations
with women: if it was courageous of him to admit to a “sex frustration” for much
of his early life, then it was equally courageous of him to have stated: “Possibly
the most formative thing of all about my childhood was that love was never
mentioned about the house, or seldom at all and never seriously; let alone
sensuality, which was taken hardly to exist, and where it did exist, to be
criminal” (AR 97). In this aspect Aickman’s household did not differ greatly
from that of his post–Edwardian peers, and it would be a very facile and inexpert
psychoanalysis that lays all the peculiarities of his relations with women at the
door of his repressed upbringing. Aickman did marry briefly (although it must

have occurred subsequent to World War II, as it is not recounted in The
Attempted Rescue) and had a number of affairs with women, but in the end he
confesses that in his youth “there were only the infrequent, fleeting girls and
women I have mentioned, all untouchable; supplemented by an occasional
distant actress, totally inaccessible. I have been pursuing them ever since” (AR
98). That penultimate phrase, of course, makes us immediately think of “The
Visiting Star,” about the arrival of a world-famous actress to participate in a
local theatre production.
Aickman confesses that “Always (or, rather, when I have had anyone at all)
there has been one woman for whom I have felt affection, and occasionally
passion, but mainly dependence, often almost total; and sometimes another
woman who has been a beauty, an inspiration, and in dream, an unreality far
more powerful in the directing of my life than any person or things of substance”
(AR 44). I cannot actually find any clear parallel to this scenario in his fiction;
perhaps the closest we get is the very delicate story, “Marriage.”
Here a man, Laming Gatestead, meets and feels attracted to a woman,
Helen Black, but later finds himself still more attracted to her roommate, Ellen
Brown. The coincidence of their names does not pass unnoticed, and Helen
remarks that Ellen “‘happens to be the exact opposite to me in almost every
way’” (TLD 72). This is so not only physically—one has fair hair, the other
dark; one’s hand, when Laming shakes it, is dry, the other’s is moist—but
temperamentally: Helen proves to be quite unanimated, whereas Ellen, although
seemingly reticent, turns out to be a seductress who engages in sex with Laming
at every opportunity after their first meeting, once lying with him in a park.
Autobiographically, Helen seems to be the woman for whom Aickman feels
mere “affection,” whereas Ellen is the “unreality” who directs his life. The
critical remark in this context is made by Helen: “‘I sometimes feel quite a
shadow when I’m with her’” (TLD 72). The word “shadow” was used frequently
by Aickman in The Attempted Rescue (generally of his father) to refer to a sort
of imp of the perverse that led a person to do things detrimental to his or her own
best interest. If this meaning is applied to the story, then Ellen is in fact Helen’s
shadow, and is nothing more than another side of her personality. And yet,
Aickman refrains from stating definitively which one of the women is the real
one and which the shadow. Laming’s mother concludes with the remark:
“‘There’s always the one you take, and the one you might have taken’” (TLD
84).
“Letters to the Postman” is one of the oddest stories I have ever read. A
young man, Robin Breeze, takes over the postal route in a remote region of
England. He hears strange things about a woman, Rosetta Fearon, living

apparently alone in a house along his route: she never gets any mail, and indeed
is hardly seen by any of the villagers. Then one day he finds a note in her
mailbox addressed to him: “Something strange has happened to me. I find that I
am married to someone I do not know. A man, I mean. His name is Paul. He is
kind to me, and in a way I am happy, but I feel I should keep in touch. Just
occasional little messages. Do you mind? Nothing more, for God’s sake. That
you must promise me. Write to me that you promise” (I 188–89). Only Aickman
could have come up with such a scenario. This brings up, however, an
interesting point that applies nearly uniformly to his entire work: we are
evidently to accept this statement at face value. Unlike Shirley Jackson,
Aickman does not appear interested in the psychological issues raised by the
possibility that characters may be deliberately lying, possibly for sadistic or
cynical reasons; and as this tale progresses it seems that Rosetta is indeed telling
the truth. Robin and Rosetta continue exchanging anomalous little notes, and
Robin finds that he has fallen in love with her, even though he has seen her—or,
rather, even though he thinks he has seen heronly at random moments in the
village. “The woman wore long gloves, stretching up casually over her wrists, or
over the sleeves of her slim dress, different every day. Always she seemed about
to smile” (I 193).
Rosetta’s relations with her husband appear to deteriorate over time, and
gradually she comes to feel that she must escape. Naturally, she calls upon
Robin to aid her. He now becomes convinced that she is as much in love with
him as he is with her: he rents a small apartment for her to use when she leaves
her husband, and he imagines the bliss of living with her or even marrying her at
some point. Rosetta does indeed flee her house and husband, coming to stay in
Robin’s apartment; but she has very different ideas about their relationship. She
is grateful for his help, of course, but that was all she asked of him, and she
lectures him sternly before departing out of his life. I have no idea whether this
story is some twisted version of an episode in Aickman’s own life; but it shows
once again the difficulty of categorizing Aickman within the realm of weird
fiction. There is nothing supernatural in this tale, but for all that one can hardly
call it a mainstream story—it is simply “strange.”
A little more conventionally supernatural, but only a little, is “The Swords.”
This is one of the few stories in which Aickman adopts a slightly more
colloquial style than is his custom, as he narrates the tale of a boy attracted by a
curious exhibit at a fair. A woman lies on a chair while the master of ceremonies
invites members of the audience—only eight of them, and all male—to take one
of a pile of evidently sharp swords next to her and plunge it into her body. They
do so, first with reluctance, then more eagerly, as they see that the swords have

no appreciable effect aside from making a loathsome hiss when they enter her
flesh. Afterwards they are allowed to kiss her. The symbolism of this action does
not, I imagine, need to be belabored. And yet, the tale effects as harrowing a
union of sex and weirdness as anything in Ramsey Campbell. The master of
ceremonies lets the woman come to the boy’s apartment for a “private show”
(CHM 20). He attempts to have sex with her, but is dissatisfied with her lack of
enthusiasm. He pulls her arm and finds that it has come off in his hand. The
woman hastily arises, dresses, and leaves, snatching the body part away from
him at the last minute. Comical as this may sound when baldly told, Aickman’s
narration of the entire episode—a boy’s worst nightmare of his “first
experience” (CHM 1)—is chilling.
“I believe that magnificence, elegance, and charm are the things that matter
most in daily life” (AR 15). With this pronouncement, and many others,
Aickman unhesitatingly claims allegiance to the idea of life as a fine art, and it is
inevitable that this notion melds into his sense of aristocracy. His family was
only on the fringe of the British aristocracy, but he sampled enough of it in youth
—particularly through visits to relations who were actual aristocrats—that he
came to find comfort in “a patrician household, such as I was determined to soar
to later” (AR 70). Aristocracy mingles with nostalgia for the past when Aickman
speaks of the pre–1914 world: “Of course it was a world for the few, but almost
all good things are for the few, and almost everything is depreciated when too
many people have it” (AR 26). Such an opinion would scarcely win favor in the
democratic tyranny of today; but I have no inclination to pass judgment upon
Aickman for beliefs such as this: not only did he defend them ably and live by
them throughout his life, but they can be found just as commonly in the thought
of Lovecraft, Machen, and Dunsany, and can even be said to strengthen their
work by lending it an austerity and dignity lacking in the work of their more
egalitarian contemporaries. And perhaps we ought all to consider whether the
following does not have more than a modicum of truth: “Not to be able to phrase
things finely, is, in general, not to be able to feel them finely” (AR 133). On this
criterion Aickman could feel things very finely.
What is interesting about Aickman’s attitude toward class is that some of
the weird events in his stories are triggered by, or perhaps simply are, violations
of social etiquette. “Ravissante” is a prototypical example. This tale is nothing
more than the encounter between a man and the eccentric widow of a painter
whom he admires. The widow commands the man more and more imperiously
to examine, feel, and even fondle the clothes of her adopted daughter. That is, in
effect, the entire story. I am not convinced, however, that the conclusions the
narrator draws from this encounter are entirely sound or plausibly derived:

“Human relationships can be so fantastically oblique that one can never be sure”
(PD 3) and “The sheer oddity of life seems to me of more and more importance”
(PD 7). Here again the symbolism of the tale is either too obscure or too
obvious: fondling a woman’s clothes is a clear metaphor for the man’s desire to
fondle the woman herself—but what of it?
“The Unsettled Dust” is a little more interesting along the same lines, but it
too is ultimately unsatisfying. Here a member of the Psychic and Occult
Research Committee of the Historic Structures Fund comes to visit a manor
house, inhabited by two sisters, which is reputed to be haunted. Aickman’s
attacks on modern life (which “seems every day to grow more uniform,
regulated, and unambitious” [UD 9]) and democracy (“…as patrician standards
merge with plebeian ones, and there is less opportunity for the graces of
entertainment as distinct from the utilities” [UD 24]) are blunter than usual; but
the atmosphere of weirdness is in large part created by the man’s uneasiness in
trying to deal amicably with the two sisters, who obviously don’t like each other
or at the very least are “utterly bored with one another” (UD 23). This social
tension gradually metamorphoses into a quasi-supernatural one: the dust that the
narrator notes with embarrassment all around the house (doesn’t the maid clean
properly?) finally becomes a huge cloud rolling along the back lawn like the
exhaust from some enormous automobile. But again the symbolism of the dust
eludes me: are we to understand it as suggesting the decrepitude of the
“patrician” way of life?
Other of Aickman’s stories suggest that he shares the class consciousness
attributed to his characters. In “No Stronger Than a Flower” the husband of the
woman who has sought the beauty treatment is “sincerely shocked” (UD 103)
when his wife refuses to change into proper attire to receive their friends.
Indeed, the entire story urges us to find actual horror in the wife’s increasing
disregard for social convention.
Two of Aickman’s stories, “Ringing the Changes” and “Meeting Mr
Millar,” unite many or all of his important themes in an exceptionally powerful
way. In “Ringing the Changes” we have the idea of travel (a pair of newlyweds,
Gerald and Phrynne Pascoe, visit an obscure coastal town in England for their
honeymoon), frustrated sex (Gerald feels increasingly disturbed at the odd
milieu into which he has fallen), and nostalgia (the town seems untouched by
modernity). The place has a reputation for its church bells, but the volume of the
bells on this particular night seems highly anomalous. How can all the churches
be practicing their bell ringing at the same time? The sound continues without
cessation, growing louder and louder. The hotel’s proprietors are getting drunker
and drunker, as if seeking oblivion for the night. Why? What is the meaning of

the bells? An old commander who lives in the hotel finally tells the couple:
“‘They’re ringing to wake the dead’” (PD 102). Blunt as this sounds, it carries
great potency after the enormously subtle and gradual build-up. Gerald and the
commander discuss this outrageous proposition:
“I don’t believe in the resurrection of the body,” said Gerald. As the
hour grew later, the bells grew louder. “Not of the body.”
“What other kind of resurrection is possible? Everything else is only
theory. You can’t even imagine it. No one can” [PD 102].
The idea of ringing all the bells in a town on a special night in order to raise
the dead is no doubt illogical, but it has that aesthetic logic I mentioned earlier—
it taps our unconscious in the sense that it is a very short step from ringing bells
to commemorate the dead to ringing them to raise the dead. Accordingly, this
tale satisfies where others of Aickman’s do not. It would require a long
commentary to trace the seamless way in which Aickman builds up the
cumulative suspense in this story, and the spectacular climax—where the dead
(if that is who they are) are only heard, never seen—is a masterstroke of
suggestiveness.
“Meeting Mr Millar” also plays upon many of Aickman’s central themes. A
starving writer moves into a cheap flat, and is forced to take a job as editor for a
pornography publisher. The large apartment below him seems occupied by a
company (“Stallabrass, Hoskins and Cramp. Chartered Accountants”), but it
does not seem to engage in much actual business. The writer hears “endless
giggling, shouting, and banging of doors” (CHM 196); the employees’
conversation, which he occasionally overhears, “was always of unbelievable
commonplaceness or banality” (CHM 198). Peculiar details accumulate,
including a strange encounter with Mr. Millar, evidently the head of the
company: rarely has such an entirely colorless individual inspired so much
vague terror. Finally, after a series of strangely disturbing but curiously
inconclusive incidents, another tenant makes an odd suggestion: “‘It just struck
me for one moment that you might have seen into the future. All these people
slavishly doing nothing. It’ll be exactly like that one day, you know, if we go on
as we are. For a moment it all sounded to me like a vision of 40 years on—if as
much’” (CHM 225). It is not clear how seriously we are to take this explanation;
I do not imagine that Aickman simply wishes to reduce his story to a
sociological dystopia. Nevertheless, the tale’s odd twists and turns all seem to
work, achieving a cumulative power in no way marred by the lack of an
explanation. “Meeting Mr Millar” is also one of Aickman’s most
autobiographical stories, and much could be written on its connections with
passages and sentiments in The Attempted Rescue. It may well be his greatest

success.
I feel almost impertinent criticizing Robert Aickman, for his purely literary
gifts—a prose style of impeccable fluidity, urbanity, and elegance; a high
sensitivity to those nuances and details productive of a weird scenario; a keen
insight into all aspects of human psychology, not merely those touching upon the
strange; and some very powerful weird conceptions that do not require copious,
or any, bloodletting for their effectiveness—make his work a triumph, even if
one violently disagrees withhis theory of weird fiction, as I do. That theory of
weird fiction—especially in its absence of “logic”—results not so much in
stories as in vignettes or impressions, which we are evidently to value regardless
of their coherence or ultimate significance. But Aickman is certainly an assured
master of the type of weird fiction he chose to write, and his work is a
wondrously refreshing contrast to the slovenliness, crudity, and gratuitous
violence that increasingly passes for weird fiction nowadays. His younger
contemporaries could learn much from him about the philosophy and
methodology of the weird tale; but I do not think many of them are listening.
ANNE RICE: THE PHILOSOPHY OF VAMPIRISM
In 1976, Anne Rice (b. 1941) published Interview with the Vampire.
Surprisingly, it became a bestseller. After writing two mainstream novels, The
Feast of All Saints (1980) and Cry to Heaven (1982), she wrote three sequels to
her first novel, The Vampire Lestat (1985), The Queen of the Damned (1988),
and The Tale of the Body Thief (1992). She also published three other horror
novels, The Mummy; or, Ramses the Damned (1989), The Witching Hour (1990),
and Lasher (1993), two other mainstream novels under the pseudonym Anne
Rampling, and three volumes of soft-core pornography (tactfully labeled
“erotica”) under the name A. N. Roquelaure.
Rice is worth considering in the context of modern weird fiction if for no
other reason than that her first novel is strikingly original and evocative. She
resembles Shirley Jackson in the sense (and only in the sense) that she is
approaching the field from the realm of mainstream literature and does not
appear to be especially familiar with the long history of weird fiction, even
specifically of the fiction of vampirism which she has explored so voluminously
in her own work. As a result, her writing exhibits a number of traits
characteristic of the mainstream experimenter in the weird: a concern not so
much with the weird phenomenon itself as with its function and ramifications in
a network of human relationships; an originality of conception and treatment
born, curiously, of a lack of awareness of the many similar works in the field;

and a lush, richly textured, almost florid style, but a style in no way derived from
Lovecraft, Machen, Dunsany, Shiel, or other masters of weird prose.
Interview with the Vampire is a remarkable piece of writing. The premise—
a vampire in modern-day San Francisco agrees to be interviewed on tape and
tells the story of his two centuries of existence does not sound especially
prepossessing, and indeed the novel is not so much a narrative as a series of
often striking set pieces and tableaux. Louis (we are never told his last name
here), a Frenchman, became a vampire at the age of 25 in 1791 (I 4) after he had
moved to Louisiana. The process by which he becomes a vampire, at the hands
of the vampire Lestat, is arresting: he is nearly drained of blood, then is forced to
drink Lestat’s blood, now mixed with his own, from the vampire’s wrist. This
entire process seems to be a transparent metaphor for homosexual love, and in
some senses it is exactly that: “‘Never had I felt this, never had I experienced it,
this yielding of a conscious mortal…. He was pressing the length of his body
against me now, and I felt the hard strength of his sex beneath his clothes
pressing against my leg’” (I 231). But there is always more to the procedure than
mere sex, as Louis learns in the end: “‘For vampires, physical love culminates
and is satisfied in one thing, the kill’” (I 256).
What Rice must first establish is the nature and functions of her vampires.
Perhaps because she is not thoroughly versed in the literature of vampirism, she
dispenses with some of the standard vampiric traits with insouciance. It is true
that her vampires must go about only at night, but it is symptomatic of her
writing that Louis responds to this not with horror but with pathos when he sees
the sun rise for the last time: “‘I said good-bye to the sunrise and went out to
become a vampire’” (I 14). Analogously, Lestat informs him scornfully that
other traditions of the vampire—fear of the cross, ability to turn to smoke, death
by the driving of a stake through the heart—are all “‘bull-shit’” (I 23). What is
more, vampires need not sustain themselves merely on human beings: animals
can serve the purpose just as well. In The Vampire Lestat several other
conventional traits of the vampire are done away with: vampires can now see
themselves in mirrors (V 104); they need not spend the days in coffins filled
with the earth of their native land—any resting place will suffice, even the
ground (V 336).
But what makes Interview with the Vampire so unclassifiable—what makes
it fit very uneasily into either the realm of weird fiction or that of mainstream
fiction—is, firstly, its emphasis on the vibrant and sensual physical sensations of
being a vampire (sensations that cannot be seen as mere metaphors for normal
human states) and, secondly, its moral disquisitions on the nature of vampirism
and the inevitable bloodletting caused by such a state. I am not sure that any

portion of the novel is horrifying or frightening in any real sense, even though
we read nearly the whole of it with a certain awed fascination.
Consider Louis’s first sight of the vampire: “‘…the moment I saw him, saw
his extraordinary aura and knew him to be no creature I’d ever known, I was
reduced to nothing. That ego which could not accept the presence of an
extraordinary human being in its midst was crushed. All my conceptions, even
my guilt and wish to die, seemed utterly unimportant. I completely forgot
myself!’” (I 13). This is rather uncannily similar to that perception of the
supernatural which shatters the psyches of so many of Lovecraft’s characters,
but it is here bereft of any sensation of fear. Similarly, a later scene, in which a
little girl, Claudia, is turned into a vampire, must rank as one of the most
stunning tableaux in modern weird fiction, and yet it too contains more of pathos
and eroticism than of horror:
“‘Where is Mamma?’ asked the child softly. She had a voice equal to
her physical beauty, clear like a little silver bell. It was sensual. She was
sensual…. I found her on my lap, my arms around her, feeling again how
soft she was, how plump her skin was, like the skin ofwarm fruit, plums
warmed by sunlight; her huge luminescent eyeswere fixed on me with
trusting curiosity. ‘This is Louis, and I am Lestat,’ he said to her, dropping
down beside her. She looked about and said that it was a pretty room, very
pretty, but she wanted her mamma” [I 93–94].
Being a vampire is an anomalous condition: one was once human but is no
longer so; one must subsist by killing. Louis, who can never forget his former
humanness, reflects plangently on his condition: “‘… I … had presided over the
death of my own body, seeing all I called human wither and die only to form an
unbreakable chain which held me fast to this world yet made me forever its
exile, a specter with a beating heart’” (I 168). Louis had earlier maintained that
he had experienced a “‘divorce from human emotions’” (I 24), but it is obvious
that this is more a wish than a reality. It is Lestat, perhaps because of his longer
tenure in the vampiric state, who asserts the amorality of vampirism: “‘We are
immortal. And what we have before us are the rich feasts that conscience cannot
appreciate and mortal men cannot know without regret. God kills, and so shall
we; indiscriminately He takes the richest and the poorest, and so shall we; for no
creatures under God are as we are, none so like Him as ourselves, dark angels
not confined to the stinking limits of hell but wandering His earth and all its
kingdoms’” (I 89).
But let us not be deceived at the transparently religious symbolism in this
speech of Lestat’s: not only is he doubtful of God’s existence (hence Satan’s), he
is openly atheistic. Louis claims to be so (“‘God did not live in this church; these

statues gave an image to nothingness. I was the supernatural in this cathedral. I
was the only supernatural thing that stood conscious under this roof!’” [I 145]),
but he cannot bring himself to accept this belief wholeheartedly. He is shattered
by a later conversation with an old vampire in Europe:
“‘Then God does not exist … you have no knowledge of His
existence?’
“‘None,’ he said.
“‘No knowledge!’ I said it again, unafraid of my simplicity, my
miserable human pain.
“‘None.’
“‘And no vampire here has discourse with God or with the devil!’
“‘No vampire that I’ve ever known,’ he said, musing, the fire dancing
in his eyes. ‘And as far as I know today, after four hundred years, I am the
oldest living vampire in the world’” [I 239–40].
An amusing passage in The Vampire Lestat seems to clinch the matter:
“‘What if they’re right,’ she said. ‘And we don’t belong in the House of God.’
‘Gibberish and nonsense. God isn’t in the House of God’” (V 190). This leads
Louis to a quasi-humanist position: “‘Because if God doesn’t exist we are the
creatures of highest consciousness in the universe. We alone understand the
passage of time and the value of every minute of human life. And what
constitutes evil, real evil, is the taking of a single human life. Whether a man
would have died tomorrow or the day after or eventually … it doesn’t matter.
Because if God does not exist, this life … every second of it … is all we have’”
(I 238). I shall refrain from harping upon the obvious fallacy of that first
sentence.
The substance of Interview with the Vampire derives from its richly sensual
and evocative prose and its probing of complex metaphysical and emotional
issues dealing with the vampiric state. The tortured Louis, by turns coldly
cynical and pitiably human, is a fine creation, although the child vampire
Claudia, who as she continues her unnatural existence maintains the pristine
innocence of her little girl’s body but becomes morally more ruthless and savage
than either Louis or even Lestat, is perhaps a still greater triumph of conception
and characterization. The sheer vitality of this novel ought to make it survive in
spite of its somewhat rambling structure and slight repetitiveness.
Where Interview with the Vampire fails is in its portrayal of the historic
backdrop against which the action is presumably set. Louis has been on the earth
for more than 200 years—and 200 of the most eventful years of human history—
but he seems to have gained remarkably little insight from his long existence on
two continents. After spending the first 70 or so years of his vampiric life in

Louisiana, he and Claudia make their way to the France of Napoleon III (I 205):
it appears that the American Civil War came and went without his noticing it.
Louis remarks at one point that “‘I had now lived in two centuries, seen the
illusions of the one utterly shattered by the other, been eternally young and
eternally ancient, possessing no illusions’” (I 142), but nothing in his account
justifies such a cocksure opinion. It is in this absence of historical perspective
that Rice’s novels in general suffer by comparison with those of Les Daniels. It
would be facile to say that this somehow points to a difference between the male
perspective, focusing upon the realities of political and social history, and the
female perspective, emphasizing emotional values; it is more likely that Rice
simply doesn’t know as much about history as Daniels, who always researches
the historical settings of his novels with scrupulous care. Kathy Mackay, in an
interview with Rice, notes in reference to The Feast of All Saints (a novel begun
prior to Interview but completed and published later), “She found that as soon as
she tried to write about these people [the Creoles of New Orleans], she didn’t
know enough about the 19th Century and her writing didn’t work.”2 It does not
appear as if she had remedied the fault with Interview.
And yet, as if conscious of this failing, Rice makes The Vampire Lestat
more explicitly embedded in the very wide-ranging historical epochs in which it
is set. Some rank this novel still higher than Interview, but I am not one of them.
It is true that it not so much follows up on as subsumes and envelops its
predecessor, but to my mind it already reveals that longwindedness and
excessive fondness for her own voice and her own creations which mar most of
Rice’s later works. This novel is narrated entirely by Lestat, whom we find in
San Francisco in 1984 in the rather charming role of a rock star. Right from the
beginning he reflects at great length upon the differences between the eighteenth
and the twentieth centuries, in the course of which he makes a number of
statements (e.g.,“In fact the poverty and filth that had been common in the big
cities of the earth since time immemorial were almost completely washed away”
[V 8]) that make us highly skeptical of his, and Rice’s, grasp of historical reality.
(And what are we to make of the fact that a review of a play in the time of
Mozart is cited from the Spectator [V 69], a paper that came and went half a
century earlier?) Unfortunately, Rice does not allow Lestat to elaborate upon his
rock stardom, a potentially interesting subject,3 but instead compels him to tell at
appalling length the not very compelling story of his life from childhood to
vampiredom. I fail to understand the significance or value of much of this
narrative, especially as there seem to be no new conceptions developed here.
There is some interest provided when Lestat transforms his own mother,

Gabrielle, into a vampire, after which time they become pseudolovers, but
otherwise we have heard it all before in Interview. Indeed, the portrayal of Lestat
here is not even consistent with that in Interview, as he gains the same tormented
moralism that typified Louis in Interview but which Lestat entirely repudiated:
“‘I can live without God. I can even come to live with the idea there is no life
after. But I do not think I could go on if I did not believe in the possibility of
goodness’” (V 72). Perhaps we are to understand that all vampires, in the
infancy of their vampiredom, are afflicted with human morality until the decades
and centuries finally bludgeon it out of them.
Interest in the novel finally appears toward the conclusion, in which Rice
attempts something no less grandiose than a sort of origin of species for
vampires. Marius, a Roman vampire who has lived for nearly two millennia,
stumbles upon the mother and father of all vampires in Egypt, Akasha and Enkil,
who are the real figures behind the myth of Isis and Osiris. It transpires that the
lives of all the vampires in the world depend upon the continued existence of this
pair—or, more specifically, of Akasha, who seems to have vastly greater power
than her consort. The convoluted but riveting tale Rice spins here, after 400
pages, is indeed worth the wait and comes close to redeeming this otherwise
bloated novel. Her writing finally attains the vibrancy and dynamism we found
in Interview, and even Lestat—who through worldweariness buries himself in
the ground for much of the nineteenth century—finds himself at last capable of
an interesting historical reflection when he awakens early in the twentieth: “I do
not remember when it became the twentieth century, only that everything was
uglier and darker, and the beauty I’d known in the old eighteenth-century days
seemed more than ever some kind of fanciful idea. The bourgeois ran the world
now upon dreary principles and with a distrust of the sensuality and the excess
that the ancient regime had so loved” (V 509). And the final scene, in which
Akasha awakens and apocalyptically disrupts Lestat’s rock concert, brings the
novel to a fittingly cataclysmic conclusion.
Unfortunately, Rice found herself so enraptured by the figure of Akasha
that she brought her back for the interminable Queen of the Damned, a nearly
unreadable novel full of angst-ridden maunderings by various vampires,
ponderously prophetic dreams, and an extraordinarily clumsy structure of
shifting narrative voices. Rice’s writing has now become flabby, verbose, and
self-indulgent, and this book’s lack of focus, pacing, and ultimate purpose make
us blanch when we finally reach the end and see the ominous words on the last
page: “The Vampire Chronicles Will Continue.”
That continuation took another four years to materialize, and one would be
justified, after reading Rice’s next two published novels—The Mummy (1989), a

silly but entertaining potboiler, and The Witching Hour (1990), a staggeringly
prolix and pointless nonvampiric novel—to be wary of The Tale of the Body
Thief (1992). Had Rice completely lost the art of telling a good story? Had
bestsellerism laid its heavy hand on her as it has on so many others? It is with
some relief that one can announce that The Tale of the Body Thief, while by no
means the best of Rice’s novels, ably picks up the thread of Interview with the
Vampire and The Vampire Lestat and, remarkably enough, actually introduces a
new idea in the Vampire Chronicles.
That new idea is personality exchange. It is, of course, not in fact new in the
history of weird fiction, and Rice herself is aware of it. In the early parts of the
novel her human protagonist Raglan James slyly presents Lestat, who narrates
the entire novel in the first person, with various horror tales (Lovecraft’s “The
Thing on the Doorstep,” Robert Bloch’s “Eyes of the Mummy”) and films (Vice
Versa, All of Me) dealing—as Lestat finally deduces—with the swapping of
personalities. James, it appears, has the ability to effect this exchange if he has a
willing partner, and much of the early part of the novel is spent in his attempts to
seduce (the word is not too strong) Lestat into agreeing to this exchange.
Lestat, now a vampire for several centuries, yearns for the human form and
the human condition. Would it not be a delight to see the sun again, to eat fine
food and drink the best wines, to have sex with men or women—to be, in other
words, once again a part of the human race instead of a loathed outsider? Lestat
agrees to switch bodies with James for a mere two days, with the possibility of a
longer exchange if he likes the human state; and, in spite of vehement objections
from his human friend David Talbot, he effects the exchange. And the inevitable
happens: James “steals” his body, vanishing and leaving Lestat in a strong,
handsome, but unfamiliar and uncomfortable human form.
If being a vampire is anomalous, Lestat has forgotten how many
inconveniences the human condition has: the finest food tastes like sand or dirt,
wine is a poor substitute for blood, and the tedious human necessities of eating,
sleeping, and defecating prove unutterably wearying. Meanwhile Raglan James,
in his vampiric state, goes on a murderous rampage while Lestat and Talbot
spend the bulk of the novel tracking him down. Ultimately, they corner him on
the Queen Elizabeth 2 and force him to switch back to his own form. Some
further twists occur hereafter, but they do not add appreciably to the novel’s
significance.
The Tale of the Body Thief is in part an adventure story, in part a rumination
on God, and in part a sort of modern Gulliver’s Travels. If Gulliver, after
becoming accustomed to the high civilization of the Houyhnhnms, finds the
human form repellent and disgusting, Lestat can see only the brutish side of

being mortal. Even sex proves unsatisfying, since he ends up clumsily raping a
waitress and failing to persuade his dear friend Talbot to have a homosexual
encounter, although Talbot has leanings in that direction. As with Louis in
Interview with the Vampire, it is only the awesome sight of the sun that
reconciles him, momentarily, to being human. But in the end he learns his true
nature: “I was Lestat, drifting between hell and heaven, and content to be so—
perhaps for the first time” (T 343).
One would think that such a novel would allow Rice to make interesting
reflections on the nature of identity, but in fact the philosophical substance of the
novel lies in the various discussions of God conducted by Lestat, Talbot, and
Gretchen, a nun whom Lestat encounters in his human state. Talbot is convinced
he has seen God and the Devil talking in a cafe; Gretchen presents a vigorous
defense of altruism: “‘God may or may not exist. But misery is real. It is
absolutely real, and utterly undeniable. And in that reality lies my commitment
—the core of my faith. I have to do something about it!’” (T 246). Lestat
provisionally accepts Talbot’s vision, and is also momentarily shaken out of his
cynicism by Gretchen’s devotion; but in the end he reverts to his old atheistic
self, discounting Talbot’s account and even making Gretchen confess that there
is no God (T 253). It is not clear what relevance these theological discussions
have to the core of the novel, but they are admirably presented.
As with all her novels, The Tale of the Body Thief works best as a
succession of striking images: the exchange of personalities between James and
Lestat, involving their respective souls floating up out of their own bodies and
plunging like divers into each other’s torpid form; the spectacular dreams or
hallucinations Lestat experiences when he falls ill in his human state, as he
conducts bizarre dialogues with the spirit of Claudia; the account of Talbot’s
experiences among primitive magicians in Brazil; and, toward the last, Lestat’s
search (in his own body) for Gretchen in the jungles of South America, and her
rejection of him as a monster and abomination. This novel has a somewhat better
sense of narrative pacing than some of Rice’s previous works, but it too goes on
a little too long.
In The Vampire Lestat there is a mention of the “vampire Ramses” (V 302),
but much later Marius corrects this impression, declaring that Ramses is not a
vampire at all because he has “‘never drunk blood’” and “‘can walk in the
daylight as well as in the dark’” (V 474). In fact, Ramses is a mummy. I do not
know what led Rice to write The Mummy, nor do I know whether it is some
early, much-rejected novel or one that was written hastily to capitalize upon the
success of the Vampire Chronicles. The fact that it was published only in a trade
paperback suggests that even her publisher did not feel it worth the dignity of

hard covers. And yet, I find it more enjoyable than such overblown and
pretentious things as The Queen of the Damned or The Witching Hour. It is
nothing more than a cheap pulp thriller, but an entertaining one for all that. All
the characters are stereotypes—Lawrence Stratford, an explorer singlemindedly
devoted to the cause of science; Henry Stratford, his wastrel nephew; Julie
Stratford, his feminist daughter determined to carry on her father’s mission;
Samir Ibrahaim, the wise native assistant. Ramses himself is, as it were, the only
character who comes alive as a vibrant and complex personality, as perhaps does
Elliot, Lord Rutherford, Stratford’s friend (and one-time lover) who finds the
figure of Ramses powerfully fascinating and plunges himself into the mystery of
his existence as one final intellectual thrill at the end of a long and hard life.
Ramses is no dusty and bandage-wrapped relic stalking about blindly and
mindlessly. After being revived by the sun, he becomes a compellingly suave
and enigmatic figure who easily wins the doting love of Julie. But Ramses’ own
love for his long-lost Queen Cleopatra is the driving force of his resurrected life.
Conveniently enough, he discovers the body of Cleopatra in an Egyptian
museum, where it is ignorantly labeled as an anonymous woman of the Graeco-
Roman period, and he revives her after a fashion with the elixir by which he
himself gained immortality. Unfortunately, Cleopatra’s body is not wholly
intact, and the resurrected queen, although physically alluring, proves to be a
lustful and murderous maniac who goes on a rampage until finally perishing in a
railway accident (although in Rice’s works one never quite seems to perish). All
this is great fun, even though much of the novel makes us wince at Rice’s
ponderous attempts to inspire fear (“What if there were an immortal being under
those wrappings?” [M 22]) or romance (Julie on yielding her virginity to
Ramses: “‘Batter down the door… The virgin door. Open it, I am yours
forever’” [M 230]). And Ramses’ pontifications on the contrast between ancient
and modern times are no more interesting than Louis’s or Lestat’s. I cannot
decide whether this novel is meant seriously or as a parody. If it is meant
seriously, then it is simply bad; if it is a parody, then Rice has concealed her
intentions rather too well. I am half inclined to think that she began the work as
a parody (the writing is much poorer, by ordinary standards, at the beginning
than at the end), but, as she warmed to the task and got into the flow of the
narrative, changed her mind and tried to write a serious pulp romantic adventure.
But there is no such thing as a serious pulp romantic adventure. The Mummy
also concludes with the note that the adventures of Ramses the Damned will
continue, but to date no sequel has emerged.
And now we come—reluctantly—to The Witching Hour. It is the nadir of
Rice’s works. By now a bestselling author with the assurance that any new work

will sell many copies and bring her lots of money, she has spawned a 965-page
novel that goes nowhere and should have been cut by a full two-thirds. By no
means should an author so utterly lacking in narrative drive be allowed to write a
novel of this length. One might imagine that Rice thinks of herself as an oldtime
pulpster, getting paid by the word.
The plot of this novel is deceptively simple. A mysterious force or entity
named Lasher seems to hang around all the members of the Mayfair family. This
is Rice’s excuse for undertaking the stupefyingly tedious account of the lives of
the “Mayfair witches” from the late seventeenth century to the present—an
account whose utter lack of vital connection with the main narrative, set in the
present, is rendered painfully obtrusive by the use of a different typeface. That
main narrative is the sentimentalized story of Rowan Mayfair, the latest of the
Mayfair clan, and Michael Curry, a young man whom Rowan saved from
drowning. At long last, after 850 pages, one finally gets some vague idea of who
or what Lasher is: he is a force from some other plane of existence who
desperately wishes to become human. He infuses himself into the body of the
baby being carried by Rowan, and when he is born—a man of full stature but
with the delicate physique of a baby—he and Rowan dash off to Europe, leaving
Michael disconsolate, full of flatulent philosophical maunderings (“‘I believe in
Free Will, the Force Almighty by which we conduct ourselves as if we were the
sons and daughters of a just and wise God, even if there is no such Supreme
Being’” [W 963]) and waiting for Rowan to return. Although there is no note
that the Witching Hour chronicles will continue, Rice has now produced a windy
and pointless sequel in Lasher. One can only hope that she does not follow
through on her threat to alternate the Vampire and Witching Hour cycles.
When The Witching Hour was published, coming hard on the heels of The
Mummy, there began to develop the ominous idea that Anne Rice was already
finished as a writer; that the curse of bestsellerdom, and the arrogant self-
indulgence it very often brings, had descended upon her as it has descended
upon Stephen King, Peter Straub, and Clive Barker, and would prevent her from
ever producing a work as vital and powerful as Interview with the Vampire. But
The Tale of the Body Thief should have restored at least some of our faith that
Rice still has the power, skill, and self-restraint to write vibrantly in the weird
mode. She is not, and probably never will be, one of the great masters of weird
fiction—she will never deserve to be ranked with Poe, Machen, Blackwood,
Lovecraft, Shirley Jackson, and Ramsey Campbell—but she has contributed
some highly creditable novels to a field whose masterworks are still very few in
number.

THOMAS LIGOTTI: THE ESCAPE FROM LIFE
“There is no field other than the weird in which I have any aptitude or
inclination for fictional composition. Life has never interested me so much as the
escape from life.”4 Ironically, this utterance by H. P. Lovecraft was made when
he was well into what he himself called his “quasi-realistic”5 phase, in which the
weird is introduced subtly and gradually through the painstaking accumulation
of realistic details in every aspect of the tale except that pertaining to the weird
manifestation. And that Lovecraft was far from truly wishing for an “escape
from life” is evident in his earnest concern for economic justice and political
reform as the depression of the 1930s grinded on. At the Mountains of Madness
could only have been written by one for whom the real world manifestly existed.
The whole notion of escaping from life—escaping, that is, from the
mundane, the actual, the real—can apply much more pertinently to a recent
writer, Thomas Ligotti (b. 1953). Ligotti’s interest is focused more intensely and
exclusively on the weird, than any author’s in the history of weird fiction. I do
not think it would be possible to study, for example, the sociopolitical aspects of
Ligotti’s fiction—there do not seem to be any. His portrayal of human
relationships, when it occurs at all, is either perfunctory or sardonic. Human
characters, indeed, are virtually insignificant in themselves in his work, serving
only as embodiments of or conduits to the unreal.
Ligotti is himself one of the strangest phenomena in weird fiction, not only
for the utter bizarrerie of his own work but for the curious way in which he has
emerged as a leading writer in the field. Having published a certain number of
stories in fan magazines (Nyctalops) or what might at best be called “semi-pro”
magazines (Fantasy Tales, Eldritch Tales) in the early 1980s, he issued a
collection of short stories, Songs of a Dead Dreamer, through the specialty firm
of Silver Scarab Press, operated by Harry O. Morris, Jr. When this volume
emerged in 1986, Ligotti was still almost entirely unknown: I myself received a
review copy of it and rather hastily and ignorantly dismissed it as mere “fan
fiction.” But Morris had, as it were, backed the right horse, for very shortly
thereafter Ligotti was embraced by many of the leading writers and critics of the
field (Ramsey Campbell had written an introduction to Songs of a Dead
Dreamer) and his reputation began to grow, although still in a sort of
subterranean fashion. A British trade paperback of his collection, augmented
with new stories (and, it must be admitted, with some of the more
embarrassingly poor ones removed), emerged in 1989. This was reprinted in
hardcover in this country in 1990 and in paperback the next year. A second and
still more substantial collection, Grimscribe, appeared in late 1991, and a third

collection, Noctuary, was published in 1994. Liggoti is, however, still content to
publish the majority of his work in the small press, although he has made
occasional forays into full-fledged professional journals (Magazine of Fantasy
and Science Fiction) and anthologies (Douglas E. Winter’s Prime Evil, 1988).
Perhaps this is just as well, for his work is certainly not bestseller material in the
manner of Stephen King’s or Clive Barker’s.
If Ligotti’s refreshing lack of self-promotion is virtually unique in what has
become the big-business world of weird fiction, then his actual work is also
entirely original and unclassifiable. His is the most distinctive voice in the field.
This is not to say that he is necessarily the best weird fictionist now writing—
Ramsey Campbell and T. E. D. Klein, at least, are still his superiors—but his
work is perhaps the most easily recognizable of any current writer’s because of
its sheer difference from that of his contemporaries. Ligotti is one of the few
modern weird writers to draw extensively from the older masters of the weird
tale—Poe, Lovecraft, Blackwood, Machen—but his work is so far from being
pastiche that it is difficult in all but a few cases to pinpoint actual literary
influences.
The focus of all Ligotti’s work is a systematic assault on the real world and
the replacement of it with the unreal, the dreamlike, and the hallucinatory.
Reality is, for him, a “grossly overrated affair” (“Alice’s Last Adventure” [SDD
38–39]). It is simply too prosy and dull, lacking in intrinsic value or dramatic
interest: “It would be difficult to conceive of a creature for whom this world—its
bare form seen with open eyes—represented a coveted paradise” (“Vastarien”
[SDD 263]). Accordingly, Ligotti’s literary goal is to suggest that other realm
which we glimpse either through dreams or, worse, stumble upon by accident in
obscure corners of this world. Ligotti has neatly summed up his aesthetic of the
weird in “The Consolations of Horror,” a magnificent essay that ranks among his
finest works:
The horror story does the work of a certain kind of dream we all know.
Sometimes it does this so well that even the most irrational and unlikely
subject matter can infect the reader with a sense of realism beyond the
realistic, a trick usually not seen outside the vaudeville of sleep. When is
the last time you failed to be fooled by a nightmare, didn’t suspend disbelief
because its incidents weren’t sufficiently true-to-life? The horror story is
only true to dreams, especially those which involve us in mysterious
ordeals, the passing of secrets, the passages of forbidden knowledge, and, in
more ways than one, the spilling of guts.6
This tells us many things: the importance and prevalence of dream imagery
in Ligotti’s work; the scorn of the “true-to-life”; and the notion of the quest—the

quest for “secrets” and “knowledge” of the realm of the unreal. I shall examine
all these points more detailedly later, but what I wish to consider now is the
difficulty of classifying Ligotti’s work within the standard distinctions existing
within the weird tale. Many of his tales do not conform to the conventions of
supernatural horror, which Maurice Lévy has compactly defined as work in
which “the irrational makes an irruption into the real world”:7 the “real world”
exists so fragmentarily for Ligotti that the contrast between the “natural” and the
“supernatural” is never sufficiently established. This is not (or not yet) meant as
a criticism, but simply as a defining characteristic of Ligotti’s writing. Nor can
his tales be classified as “fantasy” (by which I mean the otherworldly fantasy of
a Dunsany or Tolkien) because they are set in what is more or less recognizable
as the “real world,” but a real world depicted so sketchily—and, perhaps, with
such a lack of enthusiasm—that its sole function seems to be as a springboard
for the beyond. “Victor Keirion belonged to that wretched sect of souls who
believe that the only value of this world lies in its power—at certain times—to
suggest another world” (“Vastarien” [SDD 263]). Ligotti in fact rejects such
divisions in weird fiction as ontological or psychological horror:
What seems important to me is not whether the spectre is within or
outside of a character … but the power of the language and images of a
story and the ultimate vision that they help to convey. For all that,
everything that happens in every story ever written is merely an event in
someone’s imagination—exactly as are dreams, which take place on their
own little plane of unreality, a realm of nowhere in which outside and
inside are of equivalent ontological status, where within is without and both
are phantasmal in essence [F 33].
And yet, does Ligotti flee from the real world simply because it is boring or
“overrated”? In “Professor Nobody’s Little Lectures on Supernatural Horror” he
speaks of the “logic of supernatural horror” as “a logic that is founded on fear; it
is a logic whose sole principle states: ‘Existence equals Nightmare.’ Unless life
is a dream, nothing makes sense. For as a reality, it is a rank failure” (SDD 206).
Compare this with the character in “The Mystics of Muelenberg” who has found
“a greater truth: that all is unreal” (G 112–13), or the statement of the narrator of
“Allan and Adelaide: An Arabesque”: “I have seen the soul of the universe …
and it is insane,”8 or that of the narrator of “The Sect of the Idiot”: “Life is the
nightmare that leaves its mark upon you in order to prove that it is, in fact, real”
(SDD 234), or a random remark in “In the Shadow of Another World” that
speaks of the “marriage of insanity and metaphysics” (G 130). What statements
like these suggest is that what we all take to be the real world is actually unreal

and also mad. Consider “The Journal of J. P. Drapeau”:
From the earliest days of man there has endured the conviction that
there is an order of existence which is entirely strange to him. It does
indeed seem that the strict order of the visible world is only a semblance,
one providing certain gross materials which become the basis for subtle
improvisations of invisible powers. Hence, it may appear to some that a
leafless tree is not a tree but a signpost to another realm; that an old house is
not a house but a thing possessing a will of its own; that the dead may
throw off that heavy blanket of earth to walk in their sleep, and in ours. And
these are merely a few of the infinite variations on the themes of the natural
order as it is usually conceived.
But is there really a strange world? Of course. Are there, then, two
worlds? Not at all. There is only our own world and it alone is alien to us,
intrinsically so by virtue of its lack of mysteries [SDD 257].
This utterance conveys, perhaps as succinctly as any, Ligotti’s own quest: it
is not, in the end, a replacement of the real world by the unreal, but a sort of
turning the real world inside out to show that it has been unreal all along.
The vehicle for this transformation is language. Ligotti has evolved a highly
distinctive and idiosyncratic style that, with seeming effortlessness,
metamorphoses existence into nightmare. Its closest analogue, on purely stylistic
grounds, is the eccentric idiom of M. P. Shiel, although he is not a writer whom
Ligotti acknowledges as an influence or model. And yet, the analogy is apt in
more than one way. Lovecraft referred to Shiel’s “Xélucha” as a “noxiously
hideous fragment,”9 and much of Ligotti’s work could be so labeled: it
stylistically echoes Shiel’s tortuous, metaphor-laden prose poetry while at the
same time seeking to capture that atmosphere of nightmarish or hallucinatory
strangeness that typifies Shiel’s best short work. Plot is almost everywhere
negligible, and everything is subordinate to mood. There is also in Ligotti a
considerable dose of Blackwood’s searching exploration of the precise
psychological effect of the weird upon human consciousness.
Ligotti, indeed, in essays, interviews, and stories, talks much of style and
language, and every one of his stories, successful or otherwise, is written with
impeccable meticulousness. In speaking of the need for subtlety in relating a
weird tale, he has remarked that “extraordinary subjects require a certain
deviousness in the telling, that a twisted or obscure technique is needed to realize
the maximum power of the strange” (R 21). This is reminiscent of T. S. Eliot’s
celebrated justification for the obscurity of Modernist poetry: “We can only say
that it appears likely that poets in our civilization, as it exists at present, must be
difficult. Our civilization comprehends great variety and complexity, and this

variety and complexity, playing upon a refined sensibility, must produce various
and complex results. The poet must become more and more comprehensive,
more allusive, more indirect, in order to force, to dislocate if necessary, language
into his meaning.”10 The resemblance may in fact not be entirely adventitious:
the absence of any vivid or realistic description of the contemporary world gives
Ligotti’s tales a curiously archaic cast, but in their allusiveness and disregard for
the mechanics of plot they are strikingly modern. However much Ligotti draws
upon the weird masters of the early part of the century, his work could only have
been written by one sensitive to the ambiguities of his fin de siècle. If he errs
rather more frequently than I would like on the side of excessive obscurity and
excessive plotlessness, and if his style remains just on this side (and sometimes
on the other side) of bombast and fustian, then it is perhaps an occupational
hazard in the sort of highly intellectualized and self-conscious weird fiction
Ligotti has chosen to write.
One of Ligotti’s many distinctive attributes is the frequency with which he
can metafictionally enunciate his own literary agenda in his tales. Many of his
stories are just as much about the writing of horror tales as they are horror tales.
In “The Frolic,” a psychiatrist’s report of a madman’s visions are uncannily like
Ligotti’s own aesthetic quest for the unreal: “‘There’s actually quite a poetic
geography to his interior dreamland as he describes it. He talked about a place
that sounded like the back alleys of some cosmic slum, an inner-dimensional
dead end…. Less fathomable are his memories of a moonlit corridor where
mirrors scream and laugh, dark peaks of some kind that won’t remain still, a
stairway that’s “broken” in a very strange way…’” (SDD 13). The book Victor
Keirion finds in “Vastarien” is similar:
It seemed to be a chronicle of strange dreams. Yet somehow the
passages he examined were less a recollection of unruled visions than a
tangible incarnation of them, not mere rhetoric but the thing itself. The use
of language in the book was arrantly unnatural and the book’s author
unknown. Indeed, the text conveyed the impression of speaking for itself
and speaking only to itself, the words flowing together like shadows that
were cast by no forms outside the book. But although this volume appeared
to be composed in a vernacular of mysteries, its words did inspire a sure
understanding and created in their reader a visceral apprehension of the
world they described, existing inseparable from it [SDD 269].
It is not surprising, therefore, that Ligotti has written, in addition to the
actual essay “The Consolations of Horror,” several pseudoessays on the writing
of weird fiction. The most interesting of these is “Notes on the Writing of
Horror: A Story.” This work proposes to narrate a tale in three distinct styles—

the realistic, the traditional Gothic, and the experimental. In the course of this
disquisition it becomes clear where Ligotti’s own sympathies lie. He dispenses
with the realistic technique, viciously parodying the Stephen King style of
mundane realism: “Nathan is a normal and real character, sure…. And to make
him a bit more real, one could supply his coat, his car, and grandfather’s
wristwatch with specific brand names, perhaps autobiographically borrowed
from one’s own closet, garage, and wrist” (SDD 105). The traditional Gothic
style is a little more to Ligotti’s liking, but only because “isolated supernatural
incidents don’t look as silly in a Gothic tale as they do in a realistic one” (SDD
108). One would imagine that the experimental technique is in fact Ligotti’s
own, but his lukewarm account of it makes this doubtful. Then we find a fourth
technique, and it gains Ligotti’s resounding vote of approval: “…the proper style
of horror is really that of the personal confession” (SDD 113). This connects
with a sentiment in “The Consolations of Horror”: “Nothing is worse than that
which happens personally to a person.”11 This may be nothing more than the old
adage that you can’t frighten anyone else unless you yourself are frightened, but
in some fashion or other it leads to the curious notion that “the tale teller, ideally,
should himself be a writer of horror fiction by trade” (SDD 114). The number of
writers in Ligotti’s fiction is unusually high.
There are, of course, certain drawbacks to this extreme self-consciousness
and awareness of the heritage of horror on Ligotti’s part. I have already cited, in
connection with Peter Straub, Peter Penzoldt’s comment that Lovecraft “was too
well read,”12 and I fear that criticism may apply even more aptly to Ligotti. The
original edition of Songs of a Dead Dreamer contained some disastrous attempts
at comic rewritings of classic horror tales—The Island of Dr. Moreau, Dr. Jekyll
and Mr. Hyde, Frankenstein—which Ligotti wisely removed in the later edition.
Elsewhere he has perpetrated still more arid and jejune rewritings of Poe
(“Selections of Poe”) and Lovecraft (“Selections of Lovecraft”). I am utterly at a
loss to understand the purpose of these writings. Even a work such as “Studies in
Horror”—a series of prose poems or vignettes each narrated in a different style
(“Transcendent Horror,” “Gothic Horror,” “Spectral Horror,” so on)—is
certainly a tour de force of sorts and reveals Ligotti’s mastery of these varied
idioms, but the whole seems dry and academic. And a story like “The Mystics of
Muelenberg” suffers from an attention to the niceties of language so excessive as
to rob the words of their imagistic power. They don’t add up to anything beyond
themselves.
At this point I wish to make a brief digression to consider Ligotti’s attitude
to Lovecraft, since I believe it will enlighten us on his precise place in weird

fiction. Ligotti has remarked: “I hope my stories are in the Lovecraftian tradition
in that they may evoke a sense of terror whose source is something
nightmarishly unreal, the implications of which are disturbingly weird and, in
the magical sense, charming” (R 21). But in explaining why he does not use the
framework and nomenclature of Lovecraft’s myth cycle, Ligotti adds that
“Lovecraft’s universe … is a very specific model of reality, one whose portrayal
demands a more realistic approach to fiction writing than mine is” (R 21). The
relatively tactful reference to realism is to be noted, since it contrasts violently
with the snide attack on supernatural realism in “Notes on the Writing of
Horror.” And yet, Lovecraft was a supernatural realist, and the difference
between him and the brand-name realism of Stephen King is a difference of
methodology and not, fundamentally, one of approach. Ligotti has flatly
declared that he is most attracted to Lovecraft’s early tales (F 34; DM 117), in
which the dream element is more prevalent and the supernatural elements not
always satisfactorily accounted for; he has remarked of the later work that “I
find Lovecraft’s fastidious attempts at creating a documentary style ‘reality’ an
obstacle to appreciating his work” (F 33). Two stories by Ligotti are markedly
Lovecraftian. “The Sect of the Idiot” appears to be influenced most by “The
Music of Erich Zann” and “The Festival.” “The Last Feast of Harlequin,”
dedicated “To the memory of H. P. Lovecraft” (G 45), does indeed draw upon
Lovecraft’s late tale “The Shadow over Innsmouth” (although more perhaps
upon “The Festival,” his earlier working out of the same idea), but shall see that
this story is an extreme anomaly in Ligotti’s fiction. In any event, a very crude
distinction between Lovecraft and Ligotti might be enunciated as follows:
whereas Lovecraft tries to make the unreal (i.e., the supernatural) real, Ligotti
tries to make the real unreal (i.e., everything is “supernatural,” or at any rate
unnatural and monstrous).
Ligotti’s emphasis on language has led him, like Lovecraft, to be very
prodigal in the inventing of mythical books. Vastarien, Cynothoglys, The
Noctuary of Tine—these are only a few of the cryptic volumes in the Ligottian
library. The author has remarked: “I have some notes about the ‘forbidden
book,’ in the Lovecraftian sense, that is, a kind of metaphysical obscenity, an
offense against all conception of order. I think my conclusion was that the
forbidden book would require the forbidden author to write it, though it might be
a work of imagination and not, like the Necronomicon, a book of genuine
revelation” (DM 116). Imagination as opposed to revelation: here again is a
critical distinction between the Ligottian and the Lovecraftian universe.
Lovecraft’s tomes reveal loathsome truths about the real world; Ligotti’s
transport one to the unreal.

“Vastarien” is Ligotti’s most searching exploration of the forbidden book
theme. The plot of this richly atmospheric tale—which stands with “The Last
Feast of Harlequin” at the pinnacle of his achievement—is deceptively simple: a
man finds a book and it drives him mad. But what a wealth of dense imagery is
created by means of this seemingly hackneyed device! Victor Keirion searches
for a book to transport him out of this world, but most of the “forbidden” books
he finds are insufficient for the task: they are all “sodden with an obscene reality,
falsely hermetic ventures which consisted of circling the same absurd landscape.
The other worlds portrayed in these books inevitably served as annexes of this
one; they were impostors of the authentic unreality which was the only realm of
redemption, however gruesome it might appear” (SDD 264–65). But Vastarien
is different: it is “‘not about something, but actually is that something’” (SDD
267). This is a piquant conception, and a very neat resolution of the inveterate
problem of the relation between the signifier and the signified—here they are
one! But what sort of book is Vastarien? “To all appearances it seemed he had
discovered the summit or abyss of the unreal, that paradise of exhaustion,
confusion, and debris where reality ends and where one may dwell among its
ruins” (SDD 271). I shall return to this conception later.
Another extraordinarily powerful tale, “Nethescurial,” strikes me as a very
subtle—and perhaps unconscious—adaptation of Lovecraft’s seminal story “The
Call of Cthulhu.” This is not to deny the essential originality of Ligotti’s work,
or to suggest that the tale in any way incorporates the now hackneyed “Cthulhu
Mythos” in the manner of an August Derleth or a Brian Lumley, but I believe
that the basic framework of the two tales is strikingly similar. Lovecraft’s tale is
divided into three sections. In the first, a man discovers papers left by his grand
uncle attesting to the existence of a cult worshipping a hideous god, Cthulhu,
and the possible existence of that entity itself; the second section narrates a
policeman’s discovery of this cult and its beliefs; the third finally reveals—
although again through a document—the actual existence of Cthulhu as he
attacks the hapless crew of a derelict ship.
It can be seen that the basic pattern in Lovecraft’s story is the gradual
transformation of words into reality: whereas at the outset we only read of
Cthulhu from the narrator’s paraphrase of documents, at the end we vicariously
experience the proximity of the nameless creature. Ligotti adapts this pattern and
in a sense even surpasses it. “Nethescurial” is presented as a letter written by one
friend to another; it begins: “I have uncovered a rather wonderful manuscript”
(G 69). This manuscript tells of a man who comes to a mysterious island named
Nethescurial and, in the course of discussions with a Dr. N——, learns of an
“omnipresent evil in the living world” (G 71), “an absolute evil whose reality is

mitigated only by our blindness to it” (G 75). Suggestive as this is, the horrors
remain curiously abstract. The letter writer even remarks that the “words of this
peculiar manuscript seem rather weak in this regard”—i.e., in the matter of
actually conveying the bizarrerie of the situation. Thus ends the first section of
the tale.
In the second section the letter writer has experienced a disturbing dream in
which he is in a room poring over maps, all of which feature some island named
Nethescurial. In the room is an altar with an idol on it. When a weird band of
worshipers comes to pray before it, one of the worshipers loathsomely melds
with the idol.
The third section of the tale opens with the remark: “Well, it seems this
letter has mutated into a chronicle of my adventures Nethescurialian” (G 81).
The writer speaks more truly than he knows, for as this section proceeds we
learn that the writer’s own words are insidiously being mutated by Nethescurial
(whatever it may be), as he unwittingly begins to duplicate the expressions of the
manuscript he had so desultorily examined at the outset. The relations to
Lovecraft’s story are obscure but significant—Nethescurial as a parallel for the
sunken island of R’lyeh; worshipers praying before an entity whose true nature
they themselves may not understand; Cthulhu’s influence of dreams mirrored by
the narrator’s loss of control over his own language. And Ligotti brings home the
reality of the weird phenomenon in a way that perhaps even exceeds Lovecraft:
the letter writer can only conclude with a pitiable denial of the true state of
affairs—“I am not dying in a nightmare” (G 84).
It is already evident that one vehicle by which the unreal is reached is
dream. I have no doubt that many of Ligotti’s tales incorporate fragments of his
own dreams, but there is certainly more to it than that. Consider another
comment on Lovecraft: “Lovecraft dreamed the great dream of supernatural
literature—to convey with the greatest possible intensity a vision of the universe
as a kind of enchanting nightmare” (F 32). This, too, is clearly Ligotti’s dream. It
is suggestive that, in answering a query as to why he took to writing horror
fiction, he noted: “I’ve never been tempted to write anything that was not
essentially nightmarish” (F 30)—as if horror and nightmare are fundamentally
synonymous.
Ligotti’s treatment of the dream theme is complex and multifarious. On
occasion it can be very simple, as in “Oneiric Horror,” an exquisite prose poem
that does nothing but paint a dream. I wonder whether Ligotti wrote this vignette
as a sort of elaboration or commentary on the illustration by Harry O. Morris, Jr.,
that accompanies it, as Dunsany did in his Book of Wonder. In any event, the
details and objects of this dream are described with all the meticulous realism

that other writers would bestow upon the real world. A very suggestive phrase in
“The Dream of a Mannikin”—“the divinity of the dream” (SDD 56)—is capable
of two meanings: in the surface plot of the story it refers to the sense of
irrefutable reality a dream conveys to its dreamer for the duration of its
existence; but it also suggests—again metafictionally—the dominance of dream
over reality.
This dream world or other realm (although recall that it is not an “other”
realm but merely an aspect—perhaps the “true” aspect—of this realm) takes a
peculiar form in Ligotti. We have already cited some characteristics of it: the
“back alleys of some cosmic slum” in “The Frolic,” the “paradise of exhaustion,
confusion, and debris” in “Vastarien.” Or consider the sinister movie theatre in
“The Glamour”: “…the round-backed seats were at the same time rows of
headstones in a graveyard; the aisles were endless filthy alleys, long desolate
corridors in an old asylum, or the dripping passages of a sewer narrowing into
the distance; the pale movie screen was a dust-blinded window in a dark
unvisited cellar, a mirror gone rheumy with age in an abandoned house; the
chandelier and smaller fixtures were the facets of murky crystals embedded in
the sticky walls of an unknown cavern” (G 166). This notion of the world-as-
junkheap is obsessively pervasive in Ligotti, and, although he himself merely
states that this sort of imagery has “haunted me since childhood” (DM 117), I
wonder whether it has to do with his general world view. “Being something of a
pessimist, I tend to think, in those rare moments when I really think, that
existence is by nature evil. And nothing is good” (DM 116).
“Mad Night of Atonement,” a rather tiresome and longwinded story,
enunciates this idea. Dr. Francis Haxhausen, a sort of itinerant showman very
much like Lovecraft’s Nyarlathotep, has discovered the “law and the truth of the
Creator”: “what delight His heart” are “ruins and the ghosts of puppets.” “‘All
the lonesome pathetic things, all the desolate dusty things, all the misbegotten
things, ruined things, failed things, all the imperfect semblances and
deteriorating remnants of what we arrogantly deign to call the Real, to call …
Life. In brief, the entire realm of the unreal—wherein He abides—is what He
loves like nothing in this world’” (N 113). This is, I take it, what Robert M. Price
has termed Ligotti’s Gnostic vision–the notion of the “imbecilic demiurge, a
distant relation of the true divinity and the ill-advised creator of the dreadful
material world.”13 Ligotti himself confirms this conception in “Nethescurial”:
“Imagine the universe as the dream, the feverish nightmare of a demonic
demiurge” (G 76). I wonder, too, whether the mannikin or puppet theme, which
also recurs with great frequency in Ligotti’s work, can be related to this idea. On
the most elementary level the mannikin theme simply suggests a mockery of the

human: Dr. Haxhausen can momentarily turn human beings into puppets, and
perhaps vice versa, and at the end of the tale it appears that his audience—and
perhaps the entire world—has been so transformed (or perhaps was so all along).
On another level the notion relates to Ligotti’s conception of characterization in
weird fiction, as enunciated in “The Consolations of Horror.” In discussing “The
Fall of the House of Usher” Ligotti notes that we do not genuinely care about the
fates of the human characters in the tale—our perspective as readers is more
godlike: “This is a world created with built-in obsolescence, and to appreciate
fully this downrunning cosmos one must take the perspective of its creator,
which is all perspectives without getting sidetracked into a single one…. And the
consolation in this is that we are supremely removed from the maddeningly
tragic viewpoint of the human.”14
I cannot help feeling that there is a strain of misanthropy running through
Ligotti’s work (I hardly need add that this is not meant pejoratively): the
protagonist of “Alice’s Last Adventure” remarks acidly, “Thank goodness
there’s only one of everybody” (SDD 40). The clinical detachment of Ligotti’s
narrative voice, the sardonic (or, in his poorer work, cheaply sarcastic) tone he
adopts in reference to his human puppets, and the number of characters who
reveal themselves by their own words to be grotesque buffoons certainly
underscore a refreshing scorn for human life.
Some of Ligotti’s tales allow a little more of the observably real world than
others, and a few of these are among his great successes. “The Frolic,” an early
and relatively conventional story, is still powerful for the visions of a lunatic that
so hideously defy the inept rationalizations of a psychiatrist to account for them
naturalistically. “Alice’s Last Adventure” recounts a rather old idea—fictional
characters coming to life—but does so with great adeptness and cumulative
power. I could have done without the trite ending—the author, overtaken by her
creations, scribbles away to the bitter end—and I also think that this tale is
remarkably similar in conception to Jonathan Carroll’s The Land of Laughs
(1980), although perhaps the idea was probably not derived directly from that
work.
“Les Fleurs” is emblematic of the “twisted or obscure technique” that
Ligotti employs in his work. Here again the plot seems simple—a man evidently
lures and kills a series of women—but a profound unease is engendered in the
reader because of the many features of the story that are left tantalizingly
unexplained. The protagonist has apparently already killed one woman, Clare (it
is never revealed how), and is now pursuing another one, Daisy. At his
apartment he shows her an odd object that looks something like a cactus or
perhaps a furry animal (the function of this object is never clarified). He attends

meetings of some sort (their nature and purpose are never elucidated). Finally he
shows her a painting, but her reaction is not what he was expecting: she is
nonplussed and perhaps a little disturbed. And when we read that Daisy now
“truly possesse[s] a sure knowledge of my secrets” (SDD 26) and that her fate is
accordingly sealed, we realize the truth (or, at least, a fragment of the truth): the
man is not a mere homicidal maniac but one who wishes to indoctrinate a
woman of the proper sensitivity into his mysterious sect, but who must kill any
who are not suitable.
Incredibly, “The Last Feast of Harlequin” is a relatively early tale of
Ligotti’s (F 34), and yet it is leagues away from the nightmarish unreality of the
rest of his work. I trust it is not simply my bias toward supernatural realism that
makes me rank this tale as his best. If nothing else, it may perhaps be the very
best homage to Lovecraft ever written. To call it a mere pastiche would be to do
it an injustice.
The story follows traditional Lovecraftian lines: an anthropologist
interested in exploring the “significance of the clown figure in diverse cultural
contexts” (G 3) reads an article by a former professor of his, Dr. Raymond Thoss
(who, I take it, is not the same as the Dr. Thoss of “The Troubles of Dr. Thoss”
[SDD 155–67]), about a festival that takes place every year in December in the
Midwestern town of Mirocaw. He visits the town in the summer and thinks he
sees Dr. Thoss there, although he appears transformed into an inarticulate
derelict. This compels him actually to go to the town during the festival. He
insinuates himself into the goings-on, dresses up as one of the many derelicts
who seem to serve some cryptic ritual function, and is led by them into an
underground chamber where horrors of various sorts transpire. This superficial
and incomplete synopsis cannot even begin to suggest the tale’s richness of
texture, density of atmosphere, psychological and topographical realism, and—
the most Lovecraftian feature of all—the notion of ancient and loathsome rituals
surviving into the present day, related to and perhaps the origin of the most
ancient human myth cycles. If there is any complaint to be made of this story, it
is that it appears to lack the cosmicism of Lovecraft’s most representative work.
The bulk of the story is very likely derived from Lovecraft’s “The Festival”
(1923), with a brief nod to “The Shadow over Innsmouth” at the end. The horror
of the story seems to affect only random individuals rather than, as in the later
Lovecraft, the entire race or the entire cosmos. Nevertheless, “The Last Feast of
Harlequin” clearly demonstrates that Ligotti can write the sort of documentary
realism he appears to scorn without losing the individuality of his own voice.
Ligotti’s third collection, Noctuary (1994), reveals some disturbing
features. In the first place, most of the stories are reprints, and Ligotti has

seriously erred both in opening the volume with “The Medusa,” which displays
him at his worst in a longwinded tale full of self-indulgent, smart-alecky, high-
sounding sentences that in the end mean nothing, and in closing it with an
augmented version of the “Studies in Horror” (now collectively titled “Notebook
of the Night”). It might be thought, given Ligotti’s general scorn for the
mechanics of plot and his emphasis on mood, that the prose poem would be an
ideal form for him, but it is exactly here that his singleminded emphasis on pure
verbal witchery presents its greatest drawbacks. He has failed to note that even
the most delicate prose poems—whether by Baudelaire or Clark Ashton Smith
or Dunsany (Fifty-one Tales)—must present some unified or coherent narrative
if they are to have any effect. Most of the items in Noctuary are simply too
insubstantial, fragmentary, and directionless to amount to much. A passage from
“The Spectral Estate” typifies their essence. “Long exasperated by questions
without answers, by answers without consequences, by truths which change
nothing, we learn to become intoxicated by the mood of mystery itself, by the
odor of the unknown. We are entranced by the subtle scents and wavering
reflections of the unimaginable” (N 175–76). This is an ideal that Ligotti does
not always fulfill, and most of these items, written with undeniable panache as
they are, simply leave no impression upon the reader and are forgotten the
moment they are finished.
The other disturbing thing about Noctuary is that there is only one original
work in the volume. And yet, this tale, “The Tsalal,” is almost worth all the other
stories combined. It concerns an individual, Andrew Maness, who is the
incarnation of the Tsalal (a term taken consciously from Poe’s Narrative of
Arthur Gordon Pym), or “a perfect blackness” (N 86). Maness’s father, a
reverend, has written a book called Tsalal, and Andrew ponders its significance.
“‘There is no nature to things,’ you wrote in the book. ‘There are no
faces except masks held tight against the pitching chaos behind them.’ You
wrote that there is not true growth or evolution in the life of this world but
only transformations of appearance, an incessant melting and molding of
surfaces without underlying essence. Above all you pronounced that there
is no salvation of any being because no beings exist as such, nothing exists
to be saved—everything, everyone exists only to be drawn into the slow
and endless swirling of mutations that we may see every second of our lives
if we simply gaze through the eyes of the Tsalal” [N 80].
I do not know if this accurately represents Ligotti’s philosophy, but it is an
ideal instance of that intellectualized horror of which he is such a master.
Somehow Andrew Maness is the embodiment of this nihilistic existentialism,
and only Ligotti could have written so compellingly hypnotic a tale around such

a dryly philosophical conception.
The fact that Ligotti has written (or published) so few new tales in the last
few years is indeed a cause for worry, and one hopes that he is not prematurely
“written out.” My feeling (perhaps it is only a hope) is that he is undergoing a
fallow period while searching for something new to say, or a new way to say it.
He has surely done all that one can possibly do in his current idiom. My respect
for Ligotti is considerable: he has literary gifts beyond what most other writers
in this field could even dream of; he has a uniqueness of vision that sets his work
radically apart from all others; he is a highly articulate spokesman for his brand
of weird fiction; and he has read exhaustively in the best work in the field and
has profited enormously thereby. But I am troubled by a number of things: his
writing is so self-conscious and self-referential that it utterly lacks spontaneity
and emotional vigor; its appeal seems directed almost wholly to the intellect; he
seems, apparently by design, not to care about the complete reconciliation of the
various supernatural features in a given tale; and a number of his stories—like
“The Shadow at the Bottom of the World” (G 203–14), one of the most
exquisitely modulated pieces of prose I have ever read—are flawlessly written
by the sentence but do not in the end convey a very powerful impression. I
fervently hope (especially in light of the recent championing of his work by
leading critics in the field) that Ligotti is not in danger of becoming self-
indulgent, overly obscure, and, worst of all, content to remain at the level he has
attained. He will, I believe, have to start writing more stories—as opposed to the
vignettes, prose poems, sketches, and fragments that so far constitute the bulk of
his output—if he is to gain preeminence in the field. Ligotti’s own tastes
notwithstanding, few will doubt that Lovecraft initiated the most representative
phase of his career when he adopted the documentary realism of “The Call of
Cthulhu” in 1926; if he had stopped writing before that point, we would have
little reason to remember him. This is not to say that Ligotti’s current work is
somehow qualitatively equal to Lovecraft’s pre–1926 work (it is, in some ways,
rather better). Nor, of course, is it possible to say that “The Last Feast of
Harlequin” is a harbinger of a realistic phase on Ligotti’s part, since it is an early
work. But I think that Ligotti will have to write more tales like “The Last Feast
of Harlequin,” “Vastarien,” or “Nethescurial” if he is to join the ranks of
Lovecraft, Blackwood, Dunsany, Jackson, Campbell, and Klein, as he is on the
verge of doing.

Epilogue
It should be obvious to any reader that one of my objectives in this book is
to lay down a canon of modern weird writing. No one need be reminded of the
problematical nature of such an enterprise, although one hopes there may be less
scepticism of it in light of Harold Bloom’s The Western Canon (1994), which
argues more cogently for the necessity of canon formation than I can do. In
essence, Bloom’s argument is as follows: There must be canons (and, indeed,
there will always be canons whether anyone wants them or not) because there is
only a limited time for reading amidst the myriad other activities of life. Such
canons need not be exclusive, although by their very nature canons establish
certain criteria that some works will meet and others will not; and any single
critic’s or reader’s canon need be nothing more than suggestive, not prescriptive.
What is criticism, after all, but an individual’s exercise of critical judgment? The
degree to which that judgment is coherent, informed, and sensitive will
determine its validity.
Turning to our humble field of weird fiction, it should be clear that no one
has sufficient leisure to read all the works in this realm that have been written in
the past 200 years, even if anyone were so foolish as to undertake such a task.
Some principle of selectivity must be had, and I can state unequivocally that my
principle—hence my canon—is based upon the actual literary merits, as best I
can assess them, of the works and authors I have read. I am aware that utilizing
something so elitist and antidemocratic as literary quality as a yardstick must
seem very anomalous, but my whole training as a critic leads me to it. There
might conceivably be other criteria by which a canon is formed, but I am not
interested in them. I am not, for example, interested in what weird fiction can tell
us about our society because I am not interested in society. This may or may not
be a deficiency on my part.
The overriding question, addressed sporadically in this book, is whether
literary merit coincides with popular appeal. The question is relevant to the
weird tale because of the widespread conception that weird fiction is, pure and
simple, a “popular” literary mode and that there are no other criteria of value in
this realm other than popularity. I do not know how such a conception could
have gained currency except through a very myopic view of the history of the
field. Certainly, after the initial popularity of the Gothic novels of the late
eighteenth century, it could never be said that serious weird fiction—including

the work of Poe, LeFanu, Machen, Dunsany, Blackwood, Lovecraft, Aickman,
and so many others—was “popular” in any meaningful sense. I have attempted
to address the disjunction of popularity and literary merit throughout this book,
but the matter really boils down to certain basic if uncomfortable truths about
society: in particular, the truth that, for a variety of complex reasons, the “mass
reading public” is incapable of assessing a literary work on its purely literary
merits.
The brute fact of the matter is that public education in the English–speaking
world—especially in America—does not inculcate literary values into its
charges or permit them to distinguish literature from hackwork. Many untutored
readers cannot make a distinction between what happens to tickle their fancy and
what actually makes for a substantial work of literature. Since such readers are
by far in the majority, and since democratic capitalism has given them
purchasing power undreamed of in prior ages, it is natural that many writers
would seek to cater to their tastes in order to make a living. This tendency
became evident as early as the advent of the dime novels at the turn of the
century—whose readership was almost exclusively among the ill-educated—and
advanced through the pulp magazines to the paperbacks of today. Lovecraft was
keenly aware of the situation and of its sociological causes.
Bourgeois capitalism gave artistic excellence and sincerity a death-blow by
enthroning cheap amusement-value at the expense of that intrinsic excellence
which only cultivated, non-acquisitive persons of assumed position can enjoy.
The determinant market for written … and other heretofore aesthetic material
ceased to be a small circle of truly educated persons, but became a substantially
larger … circle of mixed origin numerically dominated by crude, half-educated
clods whose systematically perverted ideals … prevented them from ever
achieving the tastes and perspectives of the gentlefolk whose dress and speech
and external manners they so assiduously mimicked. This herd of acquisitive
boors brought up from the shop and the counting-house a complete set of
artificial attitudes, oversimplifications, and mawkish sentimentalities which no
sincere art or literature could gratify—and they so outnumbered the remaining
educated gentlefolk that most of the purveying agencies became at once
reoriented to them. Literature and art lost most of their market; and writing,
painting, drama, etc. became engulfed more and more in the domain of
amusement enterprises.1
If anyone has doubts about Lovecraft’s assessment, one glance at any
week’s bestseller lists should relieve them. Critics who equate popular appeal
with literary merit had best occupy their time writing studies of Danielle Steel
and Sidney Sheldon.

Turning to realities, my vaunting of Shirley Jackson, Ramsey Campbell, T.
E. D. Klein, and Thomas Ligotti—and my devaluation of Stephen King, Clive
Barker, Peter Straub, and Anne Rice—should come as no surprise. I repeat that
there are ways in which the writers I have demoted could be raised in one’s
estimation, but I do not think it could be done on the basis of pure literary merit.
And I repeat that that is the only basis which interests me.

 
Notes

Introduction
1. Winfield Townley Scott, “A Parenthesis on Lovecraft as Poet” (1945), in
S. T. Joshi, ed., H. P. Lovecraft: Four Decades of Criticism (Athens: Ohio
University Press, 1980), p. 215.
2. See Harlan Ellison, “Harlan Ellison’s Watching,” Magazine of Fantasy
and Science Fiction 80, No. 1 (January 1991): 104–10.
3. On this point see Douglas E. Winter’s introduction to Prime Evil (New
York: New American Library, 1988), p. 2. See also, more generally, Ramsey
Campbell in Necrofile No. 2 (Fall 1991): 12–13, and Steve Rasnic Tem, “The
Subject Matter of Horror,” Necrofile No. 3 (Winter 1991): 18–19.
4. Lovecraft to Jonquil Leiber (20 December 1936), Selected Letters 1934–
1937, ed. August Derleth and James Turner (Sauk City, WI: Arkham, 1976), p.
380.
5. See Lovecraft to August Derleth (23 May 1931), ms., August Derleth
Papers, State Historical Society of Wisconsin: “The Simon & Schuster request I
spoke of was made first a year ago, when their book editor Clifton P. Fadiman
wrote me … to ask if I had any book MSS. to submit—& saying he would give
careful attention to anything I did submit. I replied that I had nothing of novel
length, but would like very much to get a short story collection published—to
which, however, he responded that they do not consider short story collections.”
6. Both volumes appeared on the New York Times bestseller list for June 20,
1971. By July 25 The Exorcist had risen to No. 1, remaining there for 11 weeks,
until October 10. It was on the bestseller list for a total of 55 weeks, until July 9,
1972. The Other ranked No. 2 on the bestseller list on August 15, 1971,
remaining in that position off and on for the next several weeks. It was on the
bestseller list for a total of 24 weeks, until November 28, 1971.
7. See Stefan Dziemianowicz, “Lovecraft and the Modern Horror Writer,”
in The H. P. Lovecraft Centennial Conference: Proceedings, ed. S. T. Joshi
(West Warwick, RI: Necronomicon Press, 1991), p. 45, where the term
“familiarization of horror” is used. In private discussions Dziemianowicz has
used the term “banalization” to refer to a particularly flat or superficial use of
familiar elements of ordinary life.
8. “The Defence Remains Open!” (1921), Miscellaneous Writings, ed. S. T.
Joshi (Sauk City, WI: Arkham House, 1995), p. 155.
9. Thomas Ligotti, “Notes on the Writing of Horror: An Interview with
Thomas Ligotti [by Carl Ford],” Dagon Nos. 22/23 (September–December

1988): 5.

Chapter 1
I. Shirley Jackson: Domestic Horror 1. Jackson’s year of birth is usually
given as 1919, a date she herself gave in later years. But her biographer, Judy
Oppenheimer, has determined that Jackson was actually born on December 14,
1916, and that 1919 was given as the year of her birth so that she could seem to
be younger than her husband, Stanley Edgar Hyman. (See O 11, 88.) 2. Some of
these stories have now been gathered in Just an Ordinary Day, ed. Laurence
Jackson Hyman and Sarah Hyman Stewart (New York: Bantam, 1997).
3. “Sanctuary: Shirley Jackson’s Domestic and Fantastic Parables,” Studies
in Weird Fiction No. 6 (Fall 1989): 15.
4. “One Last Chance,” McCall’s 83, No. 7 (April 1956): 112. The reprint in
RD is considerably more elaborated.
5. “On Being a Faculty Wife,” Mademoiselle 44, No. 2 (December 1956):
136.
6. Plautus, Amphitryo, in The Rope and Other Plays, tr. E. F. Watling
(Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1964), p. 230.
7. “The House,” Woman’s Day 15, No. 8 (May 1952): 116.
8. Ibid., p. 118.
9. “Bulletin” (1954), rpt. in The Best from Fantasy and Science Fiction:
Fourth Series, ed. Anthony Boucher (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1955), pp.
182–85.
10. H. P. Lovecraft, “The Outsider” (1921), in The Dunwich Horror and
Others, ed. S. T. Joshi (Sauk City, WI: Arkham House, 1984), p. 52.
11. “The Possibility of Evil,” Saturday Evening Post 238, No. 25
(December 18, 1965): 68–69.
12. The number of paired women in Jackson’s fiction is certainly large.
Jackson claimed to be horrified at one reviewer’s suspicion of a lesbian
undercurrent to Hangsaman (O 232–33), but this novel, as well as The Haunting
of Hill House and We Have Always Lived in the Castle, certainly dwells at great
length on a potentially intimate relationship between two women. Perhaps not
much is to be made of this: recall the frequency of paired male characters in
Lovecraft.
13. “Strangers in Town,” Saturday Evening Post 231, No. 48 (May 30,
1959): 77, 79.
14. Lovecraft: A Study in the Fantastic, tr. S. T. Joshi (Detroit: Wayne State
University Press, 1988), p. 14.

15. See Dale J. Nelson, “Arthur Jermyn Was a Yahoo: Swift and Modern
Horror Fiction,” Studies in Weird Fiction No. 7 (Spring 1990): 3–7.
16. A chapter from this novel, “Du côté de chez Todd,” has frequently been
included in horror anthologies under the title “The Man Who Liked Dickens.” It
is one of the nastiest contes cruels ever written.
17. “One Ordinary Day, with Peanuts” (1955), in Best American Short
Stories 1956, ed. Martha Foley (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1956), p. 204.

Chapter 2
II. The Persistence of Supernaturalism 1. “‘So Much Mystery…’: The
Work of William Peter Blatty,” Studies in Weird Fiction No. 9 (Spring 1991):
13–17.
2. This same problem haunts the windy novelette “The Sun Dog” (FPM),
about a supernatural camera.
3. If King wished a word for this phenomenon based upon the analogy with
“telekinesis” (movement from a distance), the term would not be “pyrokinesis”
but “telepyrosis” (fire from a distance).
4. Rage may have had its origin in a very early short story, “Cain Rose Up”
(1968; SC), involving a college student who suddenly begins shooting people
with a rifle. Here, however, there is insufficient psychological analysis of the
murderer to produce a compelling scenario.
5. One detail will suffice. At one point King writes a dramatic one-sentence
segment—“Nothing much happened for the next two weeks” (I 878)—which no
informed reader can fail to recognize as a plagiarism of a one-sentence chapter
in Bradbury’s Something Wicked This Way Comes (1962; rpt. New York:
Bantam, 1963, p. 112): “Nothing much else happened, all the rest of that night.”
Many other similarities could be pointed out.
6. Mary Pharr, “Of Women and Wolves,” Necrofile No. 8 (Spring 1993): 2.
7. See Magistrale’s Landscape of Fear: Stephen King’s American Gothic
(1988).
8. “T. E. D. Klein: Master of Ceremonies” (interview by Carl T. Ford),
Dagon Nos. 18/19 (July–October 1987): 46.
9. This is exactly what Les Daniels has condemned as “melodrama”; see
“Lovecraft and Modern Horror,” The H. P. Lovecraft Centennial Conference:
Proceedings, p. 43.
10. “T. E. D. Klein: Master of Ceremonies,” pp. 47–48.
11. It may be well to note here that Klein’s second novel, Nighttown, is to
be, in his words, a “paranoid horror novel set entirely in New York City” (FF
135). This may suggest that the novel will be nonsupernatural, but Klein has told
me that it will in fact be supernatural.
12. See Steven J. Mariconda, “The Hints and Portents of T. E. D. Klein,”
Studies in Weird Fiction No. 1 (Summer 1986): 19–28.
13. The influence of Lovecraft’s “The Dunwich Horror” becomes evident at
this point.

14. Arthur Machen, The House of Souls (New York: Knopf, 1922), p. 149.
Hereafter abbreviated as M in the text.
15. S. T. Joshi, “‘The Events at Poroth Farm’ and the Literature of Horror,”
Dagon Nos. 18/19 (July–October 1987): 10–12.
16. Collected Ghost Stories of M. R. James (London: Edward Arnold,
1931), p. 148.
17. See note 9.
18. Stephen Haff, “Clive Barker: Spokesman for the Strange,” Other
Dimensions No. 1 (Summer 1993): 3.

Chapter 3
III. Ramsey Campbell: The Fiction of Paranoia 1. “Introduction” to
Demons by Daylight (New York: Tor, 1990), n.p. Further citations will not be
specifically footnoted.
2. A numerical breakdown of his short-story writing by year from 1962
onward is as follows: 1962 (5); 1963 (8); 1964 (3); 1965 (7); 1966 (2); 1966–67
(1); 1967 (6); 1968 (13); 1969 (12); 1970 (4); 1971 (5); 1972 (2); 1973 (17);
1974 (27); 1975 (10); 1976 (11); 1977 (10); 1978 (11); 1979 (5); 1980 (4); 1981
(0); 1982 (0); 1983 (6); 1984 (1); 1985 (3); 1986 (3); 1987 (3); 1988 (4); 1989
(0); 1990 (8).
3. In Demons by Daylight “The Franklyn Paragraphs” and “The Interloper”
appear in a section entitled “Errol Undercliffe: A Tribute,” the latter story
bearing Undercliffe’s byline as author. Campbell seems to have been successful
in passing off Undercliffe as a real author: I have noted cross-references to
Undercliffe in the catalogues of several libraries I have visited.
4. H. P. Lovecraft to Maurice W. Moe (15 May 1918), Selected Letters
1911–1925, ed. August Derleth and Donald Wandrei (Sauk City, WI: Arkham
House, 1965), p. 63.
5. H. P. Lovecraft, Commonplace Book, ed. David E. Schultz (West
Warwick, RI: Necronomicon Press, 1987), Vol. 1, p. 4 (entry 56).
6. “The Gap,” in The Year’s Best Horror Stories X, ed. Karl Edward
Wagner (New York: DAW, 1981), p. 65.
7. M. R. James, “The Treasure of Abbot Thomas,” in Collected Ghost
Stories, p. 175.
8. Joel Lane, Review of Waking Nightmares and The Count of Eleven,
Studies in Weird Fiction No. 11 (Spring 1992): 33.
9. H. P. Lovecraft to Woodburn Harris (25 February–1 March 1929),
Selected Letters 1925–1929, ed. August Derleth and Donald Wandrei (Sauk
City, WI: Arkham House, 1968), pp. 308–9.
10. Steven J. Mariconda, Review of Needing Ghosts and Midnight Sun,
Studies in Weird Fiction No. 9 (Spring 1991): 33.
11. In his author’s note to the story in Masters of Darkness, ed. Dennis
Etchison (New York: Tor, 1986), pp. 128–29.
12. T. E. D. Klein, “Ramsey Campbell: An Appreciation,” in Discovering
Modern Horror Fiction II, ed. Darrell Schweitzer (Mercer Island, WA: Starmont
House, 1988), p. 99.

Chapter 4
IV. The Alternatives to Supernaturalism
1. A serviceable bibliography can be found in Randall D. Larson’s Robert
Bloch (Mercer Island, WA: Starmont House, 1986).
2. Bloch’s Lovecraftian stories have now been collected in Mysteries of the
Worm (1981).
3. See Larson, pp. 63–64.
4. Horror: 100 Best Books, ed. Stephen Jones and Kim Newman (New
York: Carroll & Graf, 1988), p. 184.
5. I am not being entirely flippant in saying that the most horrifying
moment in Red Dragon for me was not the murders or the psychological probing
of the murderer, but the scene in which Dolarhyde goes to the Brooklyn Museum
and eats the original Blake watercolor of the “Great Red Dragon,” a picture that
has haunted him since youth. People come and go, but one cannot destroy great
art like that!
6. See the enlightening interview of him by Roger Cohen, “Bret Easton
Ellis Answers Critics of ‘American Psycho,’” New York Times, March 6, 1991,
pp. C13, 18.
7. New York Times Book Review, December 16, 1990, pp. 3, 16.
8. Ken Tucker, “The Splatterpunk Trend, and Welcome to It,” New York
Times Book Review, March 24, 1991, pp. 13–14.
9. Lovecraft to August Derleth (6 November 1931), ms., August Derleth
Papers, State Historical Society of Wisconsin.
10. Jay Gregory, “Peter Straub” [interview], Twilight Zone 1, No. 2 (May
1981): 14.
11. Jack Sullivan, “Breaking In,” Twilight Zone 6, No. 1 (April 1986): 27.
12. Lovecraft, Commonplace Book, 1:1 (entry 8).
13. Gregory, p. 13.
14. “Take a werewolf story, for instance—who ever wrote a story from the
point of view of the wolf, and sympathising strongly with the devil to whom he
has sold himself? Who ever wrote a story from the point of view that man is a
blemish on the cosmos, who ought to be eradicated?” Lovecraft to Edwin Baird
(c. August 1923), Weird Tales, March 1924; rpt. in Miscellaneous Writings, p.
509.
15. I confess to be somewhat uncertain as to the correct title for this work.
The title page and spine of the book clearly read Shadow Land, but the running

heads and the text itself read Shadowland. I assume that the latter is correct, and
that the variant is the product of incompetence by copy editors or designers at
Coward, McCann & Geogheghan.
16. The Northeastern Regional Fantasy Convention (NECON) at Bristol,
RI. I cannot recall the year, but it was 1981 or 1982.
17. Bernadette Lynn Bosky, Review of The Throat, Necrofile No. 9
(Summer 1993): 4.
18. Lovecraft to August Derleth (20 November 1931), Selected Letters
1929–1931, ed. Augut Derleth and Donald Wandrei (Sauk City, WI: Arkham
House, 1971), p. 434.
19. Gregory, p. 15.
20. Penzoldt, The Supernatural in Fiction (1952); portions rpt. in S. T.
Joshi, ed., H. P. Lovecraft: Four Decades of Criticism, p. 64.

Chapter 5
V. Pseudo-, Quasi-, and Anti-Weird Fiction 1. L. P. Hartley, “Introduction”
to The Third Ghost Book, ed. Cynthia Asquith (1955; rpt. New York: Beagle
Books, 1970), p. viii.
2. Kathy Mackay, “Anne Rice: Risks Fuel Success in Her World of
Imagination,” Los Angeles Times Book Review, February 3, 1980, p. 3.
3. This is also the subject of S. P. Somtow’s novel Vampire Junction
(1984), but this obscure if brilliant work is not likely to have been read by Rice.
4. H. P. Lovecraft, Letter to J. Vernon Shea (7 August 1931), Selected
Letters 1929–1931, p. 395.
5. H. P. Lovecraft, Letter to Robert E. Howard (25–29 March 1933),
Selected Letters 1932–1934, ed. August Derleth and James Turner (Sauk City,
WI; Arkham House, 1976), p. 170. Lovecraft dates this phase to “The Colour out
of Space” (1927).
6. “The Consolations of Horror,” Crypt of Cthulhu No. 68 (Hallowmass
1989): 48.
7. Maurice Lévy, Lovecraft: A Study in the Fantastic, p. 107.
8. “Allan and Adelaide: An Arabesque,” Crypt of Cthulhu No. 68
(Hallowmass 1989): 13.
9. “Supernatural Horror in Literature,” in Dagon and Other Macabre Tales,
ed. S. T. Joshi (Sauk City, WI: Arkham House, 1986), p. 413.
10. “The Metaphysical Poets” (1921), in Selected Essays (New York:
Harcourt, Brace, 1950), p. 248.
11. “The Consolations of Horror,” p. 43.
12. See Section IV, note 20.
13. Robert M. Price, “Thomas Ligotti’s Gnostic Quest,” Studies in Weird
Fiction No. 9 (Spring 1991): 29.
14. “The Consolations of Horror,” p. 47.

Epilogue
1. H. P. Lovecraft, Letter to C. L. Moore [7 February 1937], Selected
Letters 1934–1937, pp. 397–98.

 
Bibliography
General
Barron, Neil, ed. Horror Literature: A Reader’s Guide. New York:
Garland, 1990. Rev. as Fantasy and Horror. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press,
1999.
Bleiler, E. F., ed. Supernatural Fiction Writers. New York: Scribner’s,
1985. 2 vols.
Carroll, Noël. The Philosophy of Horror; or, Paradoxes of the Heart. New
York: Routledge, 1990.
Daniels, Les. Living in Fear: A History of Horror in the Mass Media. New
York: Scribner’s, 1975.
Joshi, S. T. The Weird Tale. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1990.
Reginald, Robert, ed. Science Fiction and Fantasy Literature: A Checklist
1975–1991. Detroit: Gale Research Co., 1992.
Schweitzer, Darrell, ed. Discovering Modern Horror Fiction I. Mercer
Island, WA: Starmont House, 1985.
_____, ed. Discovering Modern Horror Fiction II. Mercer Island, WA:
Starmont House, 1988.
Sullivan, Jack, ed. The Penguin Encyclopedia of Horror and the
Supernatural. New York: Viking Penguin, 1986.
Tymn, Marshall, ed. Horror Literature: A Core Collection and Reference
Guide. New York: Bowker, 1981.
Wiater, Stanley. Dark Dreamers: Conversations with the Masters of
Horror. New York: Avon, 1990.
Winter, Douglas E. Faces of Fear: Encounters with the Creators of Modern
Horror. New York: Berkley, 1985.
Robert Aickman
A. Primary
The Attempted Rescue. London: Gollancz, 1966. [AR]
Cold Hand in Mind. London: Gollancz, 1975. New York: Scribner’s, 1977.
*New York: Berkley, 1979. [CHM]
Dark Entries. London: Collins, 1964. [DE]

The Fontana Book of Great Ghost Stories (editor). London: Fontana, 1966–
72. 8 vols. [F1, F2, etc.]
Intrusions. London: Gollancz, 1980. [I]
The Late Breakfasters. London: Gollancz, 1964.
The Model. New York: Arbor House (William Morrow), 1987.
Night Voices. London: Gollancz, 1985. [NV]
Painted Devils. New York: Scribner’s, 1979. [PD]
Powers of Darkness. London: Collins, 1966. [PoD]
The River Runs Uphill: A Story of Success and Failure. Burton-on-Trent:
Pearson, 1986.
Sub Rosa. London: Gollancz, 1968. [SR]
Tales of Love and Death. London: Gollancz, 1977. [TLD]
The Unsettled Dust. London: Mandarin, 1990. [UD]
We Are for the Dark (with Elizabeth Jane Howard). London: Jonathan
Cape, 1951. [WFD]
The Wine-Dark Sea. *New York: Arbor House (William Morrow), 1988.
London: Mandarin, 1990 (abridged). [WDS]
B. Secondary
Briggs, Scott D. “Robert Aickman: Sojourns into the Unknown.” Studies in
Weird Fiction No. 12 (Spring 1993): 7–12.
Crawford, Gary William. “The Poetics of the Unconscious: The ‘Strange
Stories’ of Robert Aickman.” In Discovering Modern Horror Fiction II, ed.
Darrell Schweitzer. Mercer Island, WA: Starmont House, 1988, pp. 43–50.
Morris, Christine Pasanen. “The Female ‘Outsider’ in the Short Fiction of
Robert Aickman.” Nyctalops No. 18 (April 1983): 55–58.
Clive Barker
A. Primary
Books of Blood, Volume 1. London: Sphere, 1984. *New York: Berkley,
1986. [BB1]
Books of Blood, Volume 2. London: Sphere, 1984. *New York: Berkley,
1986. [BB2]
Books of Blood, Volume 3. London: Sphere, 1984. *New York: Berkley,
1986. [BB3]
Books of Blood, Volume 4. *London: Sphere, 1985. New York: Poseidon
Press, 1986 (as The Inhuman Condition). [BB4]

Books of Blood, Volume 5. *London: Sphere, 1985. New York: Poseidon
Press, 1987 (as In the Flesh). [BB5]
Books of Blood, Volume 6. *London: Sphere, 1985. [BB6]
Cabal. London: Collins, 1988. *New York: Poseidon Press, 1988 (with
Books of Blood, Volume 6). [C]
The Damnation Game. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1985. *New
York: Ace/Putnam, 1987. [DG]
The Great and Secret Show. *London: Collins, 1989. New York: Harper &
Row, 1990. [GS]
“The Hellbound Heart.” In Night Visions 3 (with Lisa Tuttle and Ramsey
Campbell). Arlington Heights, IL: Dark Harvest, 1986. *New York: Berkley,
1988 (as Night Visions: The Hellbound Heart). [NV] Separate publication New
York: HarperPaperbacks, 1991.
Imajica. New York: HarperCollins, 1991. [I]
The Thief of Always. New York: HarperCollins, 1992.
Weaveworld. London: Collins, 1987. *New York: Poseidon Press, 1987.
[W]
B. Secondary
Brown, Michael, ed. Pandemonium: Further Explorations into the Worlds
of Clive Barker. Forestville, CA: Eclipse, 1991.
Haff, Stephen. “Clive Barker: Spokesman for the Strange” [interview].
Other Dimensions No. 1 (Summer 1993): 2–8.
Jones, Stephen, ed. Clive Barker’s Shadows in Eden. Lancaster, PA:
Underwood-Miller, 1991. [SE]
Winter, Douglas E. “Clive Barker.” In Faces of Fear. New York: Berkley,
1985, pp. 207–20.
William Peter Blatty
A. Primary
The Exorcist. New York: Harper & Row, 1971. [E]
I, Billy Shakespeare! Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1966.
I’ll Tell Them I Remember You. New York: Norton, 1973.
John Goldfarb, Please Come Home! Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1963.
Legion. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1983. [L]
The Ninth Configuration. New York: Harper & Row, 1978. [N]
Twinkle, Twinkle, “Killer” Kane! Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1966. [T]
Which Way to Mecca, Jack? New York: Bernard Geis Associates, 1960.

B. Secondary
Briggs, Scott D. “‘So Much Mystery …’: The Fiction of William Peter
Blatty.” Studies in Weird Fiction No. 9 (Spring 1991): 13–17.
Winter, Douglas E. “William Peter Blatty.” In Faces of Fear. New York:
Berkley, 1985, pp. 36–49. [FF]
Robert Bloch
A. Primary (not complete)
The Best of Robert Bloch. Edited by Lester Del Rey. New York: Ballantine,
1977. [B]
Firebug. New York: Regency, 1961. New York: Tor, 1988.
The Kidnaper. New York: Lion Pocketbooks, 1954. New York: Tor, 1988
(as The Kidnapper).
The Opener of the Way. Sauk City, WI: Arkham House, 1945. *St Albans:
Panther, 1976 (abridged). [OW]
Psycho. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1959. *Greenwich, CT: Fawcett
Crest, 1960. [P]
The Scarf. New York: Dial, 1947. Rev. ed. *Greenwich, CT: Fawcett Gold
Medal, 1966. [S]
Screams [includes The Will to Kill, Firebug, and The Star Stalker]. San
Rafael, CA: Underwood-Miller, 1989.
The Skull of the Marquis de Sade and Other Stories. London: Robert Hale,
1975. *London: Corgi, 1976.
Such Stuff as Screams Are Made Of. New York: Ballantine, 1979. [SS]
B. Secondary
Larson, Randall. Robert Bloch. Mercer Island, WA: Starmont House, 1986.
Ramsey Campbell
A. Primary
Alone with the Horrors: The Great Short Fiction of Ramsey Campbell
1961–1991. Sauk City, WI: Arkham House, 1993.
Ancient Images. London: Legend/Century, 1989. *New York: Scribner’s,
1989. [AI]
Black Wine (with Charles L. Grant). Niles, IL: Dark Harvest, 1986. [BW]

The Claw. *London: Futura, 1983 (as Claw; as by Jay Ramsey). New York:
St Martin’s Press, 1983 (as Night of the Claw; as by Jay Ramsey). [C]
Cold Print. Santa Cruz, CA: Scream/Press, 1985. *New York: Tor, 1987.
[CP]
The Count of Eleven. London: Macdonald, 1991. *New York: Tor, 1992.
[CE]
Dark Companions. New York: Macmillan, 1982. [DC]
Dark Feasts: The World of Ramsey Campbell. London: Robinson, 1987.
[DF]
Demons by Daylight. *Sauk City, WI: Arkham House, 1973. New York:
Carroll & Graf, 1990. [DD]
The Doll Who Ate His Mother. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1976. *New
York: Jove/HBJ, 1978. Rev. ed. New York: Tor, 1985. [DM]
The Face That Must Die. London: Star, 1979. Rev. ed. *Santa Cruz, CA:
Scream/ Press, 1983. [FD]
“The Gap.” In The Year’s Best Horror Stories X, ed. Karl Edward Wagner.
New York: DAW, 1981, pp. 55–66.
Ghostly Tales. Special issue of Crypt of Cthulhu No. 50 (Michaelmas
1987). [GT]
The Height of the Scream. Sauk City, WI: Arkham House, 1976. [HS]
The Hungry Moon. New York: Macmillan, 1986. [HM]
Incarnate. New York: Macmillan, 1983. *New York: Tor, 1984. [I]
The Influence. New York: Macmillan, 1988. [In]
The Inhabitant of the Lake and Less Welcome Tenants. Sauk City, WI:
Arkham House, 1964.
The Long Lost. London: Headline, 1993. [LL]
Medusa. Round Top, NY: Footsteps Press, 1987.
Midnight Sun. London: Macdonald, 1990. *New York: Tor, 1991. [MS]
The Nameless. Glasgow: Fontana, 1981. New York: Macmillan, 1981. Rev.
ed. *New York: Tor, 1985.
Needing Ghosts. London: Legend/Century, 1990. [NG]
New Tales of the Cthulhu Mythos (editor). Sauk City, WI: Arkham House,
1980. [NT]
Night Visions 3 (with Lisa Tuttle and Clive Barker). Niles, IL: Dark
Harvest, 1986. *New York: Berkley, 1988 (as Night Visions: The Hellbound
Heart). [NV]
Obsession. New York: Macmillan, 1985. [O]
The Parasite. London: Millington, 1980 (as To Wake the Dead). Rev. ed.
*New York: Macmillan, 1980. [P]

Scared Stiff: Tales of Sex and Death. Los Angeles: Scream/Press, 1986;
*rev. ed. 1987. [SS]
Slow. Round Top, NY: Footsteps Press, 1986.
Strange Things and Stranger Places. New York: Tor, 1993. [ST]
The Tomb-Herd and Others. Special issue of Crypt of Cthulhu No. 43
(Hallowmass 1986). [TH]
Two Obscure Tales. West Warwick, RI: Necronomicon Press, 1993.
Waking Nightmares. New York: Tor, 1991. [WN]
B. Secondary
Campbell, Ramsey. The Core of Ramsey Campbell: A Bibliography and
Reader’s Guide. Edited by S. T. Joshi and Stefan Dziemianowicz. West
Warwick, RI: Necronomicon Press, 1995.
Crawford, Gary William. Ramsey Campbell. Mercer Island, WA: Starmont
House, 1988.
Joshi, S. T., ed. The Count of Thirty: A Tribute to Ramsey Campbell. West
Warwick, RI: Necronomicon Press, 1993.
Klein, T. E. D. “Ramsey Campbell: An Appreciation.” Nyctalops No. 13
(May 1977). Rpt. in Discovering Modern Horror Fiction II, ed. Darrell
Schweitzer. Mercer Island, WA: Starmont House, 1988, pp. 88–102.
Lane, Joel. “Negatives in Print: The Novels of Ramsey Campbell.”
Foundation No. 36 (Summer 1986): 35–45.
Morrison, Michael A. “The Forms of Things Unknown: Metaphysical and
Domestic Horror in Ramsey Campbell’s Incarnate and Night of the Claw.”
Studies in Weird Fiction No. 6 (Fall 1989): 3–9.
Vine, Phillip. “Ramsey Campbell” [interview]. Interzone, March–April
1989, pp. 11–16.
Winter, Douglas E. “Ramsey Campbell.” In Faces of Fear. New York:
Berkley, 1985, pp. 65–78. [FF]
Bret Easton Ellis
American Psycho. New York: Vintage, 1991. [AP]
Less Than Zero. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1985.
The Rules of Attraction. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1987.
Thomas Harris
Black Sunday. New York: Putnam’s, 1975.

Red Dragon. New York: Putnam’s, 1981. [RD]
The Silence of the Lambs. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1988. *New York:
St. Martin’s Press, 1989. [SL]
Shirley Jackson
A. Primary
 i. Books
The Bird’s Nest. New York: Farrar, Straus, 1954. Rpt. in *The Magic of
Shirley Jackson. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1966, pp. 147–380. [B]
Come Along with Me. Ed. Stanley Edgar Hyman. New York: Viking, 1968.
Rpt. *New York: Popular Library, n.d. [C]
Hangsaman. New York: Farrar, Straus, 1951. Rpt. *New York: Popular
Library, 1976. [H]
The Haunting of Hill House. New York: Viking, 1959. Rpt. *New York:
Popular Library, 1977. [HH]
Life among the Savages. New York: Farrar, Straus, 1953. Rpt. in *The
Magic of Shirley Jackson. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1966, pp. 383–
530. [LS]
The Lottery. New York: Farrar, Straus, 1949. Rpt. *New York: Popular
Library, n.d. [L]
Raising Demons. New York: Farrar, Straus, 1957. Rpt. in *The Magic of
Shirley Jackson. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1966, pp. 531–753. [RD]
The Road through the Wall. New York: Farrar, Straus, 1948.
The Sundial. New York: Farrar, Straus, 1958. Rpt. *New York: Ace, n.d.
[S]
We Have Always Lived in the Castle. New York: Viking, 1962. Rpt. *New
York: Popular Library, n.d. [W]
 ii. Short Stories
“‘All She Said Was “Yes.”’” Vogue 140, No. 8 (November 1, 1962): 142–
43, 169, 171, 174–75.
“The Box.” Woman’s Home Companion, November 1952, pp. 25, 82–83. In
LS.

“Bulletin.” Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction 6, No. 3 (March
1954): 46–48. Rpt. The Best from Fantasy and Science Fiction: Fourth Series,
ed. Anthony Boucher. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1955, pp. 182–85.
“Family Magician.” Woman’s Home Companion, September 1949, pp. 23,
92–93, 98, 100.
“The House.” Woman’s Day 15, No. 8 (May 1952): 62–63, 115–16, 118–
19. In LS (in part).
“Karen’s Complaint.” Good Housekeeping 149, No. 5 (November 1959):
38, 40, 42, 46.
“The Life Romantic.” Good Housekeeping 129, No. 6 (December 1949):
165–67. In LS.
“Look, Ma, We’re Moving.” Good Housekeeping 134, No. 2 (February
1952): 49, 173–75.
“Lucky to Get Away.” Woman’s Day 16, No. 11 (August 1953): 26, 117–
19. In RD.
“Monday Morning.” Woman’s Home Companion, November 1951, pp. 21,
57, 60. In LS.
“On Being a Faculty Wife.” Mademoiselle 44, No. 2 (December 1956):
116–17, 135–36. In RD (in part).
“One Last Chance.” McCall’s 83, No. 7 (April 1956): 52, 112, 114, 116. In
RD.
“One Ordinary Day, with Peanuts.” Magazine of Fantasy and Science
Fiction 8, No. 1 (January 1955): 53–61. Rpt. The Best American Short Stories
1956, ed. Martha Foley. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1956, pp. 195–204.
“The Possibility of Evil.” Saturday Evening Post 238, No. 25 (December
18, 1965): 61–64, 68–69.
“Queen of the May.” McCall’s 82, No. 7 (April 1955): 47, 73, 75, 78. In
RD.
“Shopping Trip.” Woman’s Home Companion, June 1953, pp. 40, 85–87. In
LS.
“Strangers in Town.” Saturday Evening Post 231, No. 48 (May 30, 1959):
18, 76–77, 79.
“Worldly Goods.” Woman’s Day 16, No. 8 (May 1953): 10–11, 178–79. In
RD.
B. Secondary
Egan, James. “Sanctuary: Shirley Jackson’s Domestic and Fantastic
Parables.” Studies in Weird Fiction No. 6 (Fall 1989): 15–24.

Friedman, Lenemaja. Shirley Jackson. Boston: Twayne, 1980.
Hall, Joan Wylie. Shirley Jackson: A Study of the Short Fiction. New York:
Twayne, 1993.
Oppenheimer, Judy. Private Demons: The Life of Shirley Jackson. New
York: Putnam’s, 1988. [O]
Parks, John G. “Chambers of Yearning: Shirley Jackson’s Use of the
Gothic.” Twentieth Century Literature 30 (1984): 15–29.
Stephen King
A. Primary
The Bachman Books. New York: New American Library, 1985. [BB]
Carrie. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1974. *New York: Signet, 1975. [C]
Christine. New York: Viking, 1983. *New York: Signet, 1983. [Ch]
Cujo. New York: Viking, 1981. *New York: Signet, 1982. [Cu]
Danse Macabre. New York: Everest House, 1979. *New York: Berkley,
1982. [DM]
The Dark Half. New York: Viking, 1989. [DH]
The Dark Tower I: The Gunslinger. West Kingston, RI: Donald M. Grant,
1982. [G]
The Dark Tower II: The Drawing of the Three. West Kingston, RI: Donald
M. Grant, 1987.
The Dark Tower III: The Waste Lands. West Kingston, RI: Donald M.
Grant, 1991.
The Dead Zone. New York: Viking, 1979. [DZ]
Different Seasons. New York: Viking, 1982. [DS]
Dolores Claiborne. New York: Viking, 1993. [DC]
The Eyes of the Dragon. New York: Viking Penguin, 1987. *New York:
Signet, 1988. [ED]
Firestarter. New York: Viking, 1980. *New York: Signet, 1981. [F]
Four Past Midnight. New York: Viking, 1990. [FPM]
Gerald’s Game. New York: Viking, 1992. [GG]
It. New York: Viking, 1986. [I]
The Long Walk (as by Richard Bachman). New York: New American
Library, 1979. *New York: New American Library, 1985 (in The Bachman
Books). [BB]
Misery. New York: Viking, 1987. [M]
Needful Things. New York: Viking, 1991. [NT]

Night Shift. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1978. [NS]
Nightmares & Dreamscapes. New York: Viking, 1993.
Pet Sematary. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1983. [PS]
Rage (as by Richard Bachman). New York: New American Library, 1977.
*New York: New American Library, 1985 (in The Bachman Books). [BB]
Roadwork (as by Richard Bachman). New York: New American Library,
1981. *New York: New American Library, 1985 (in The Bachman Books). [BB]
The Running Man (as by Richard Bachman). New York: New American
Library, 1982. *New York: New American Library, 1985 (in The Bachman
Books). [BB]
’Salem’s Lot. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1975. *New York: Signet,
1976. [SL]
The Shining. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1977. *New York: Signet,
1978. [S]
Skeleton Crew. New York: Putnam’s, 1985. [SC]
The Stand. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1978. Complete ed. *New York:
Doubleday, 1990. [St]
The Talisman (with Peter Straub). New York: Viking/Putnam’s, 1984. [T]
Thinner (as by Richard Bachman). New York: New American Library,
1984. *New York: Signet, 1985. [Th]
The Tommyknockers. New York: Putnam’s, 1987. [To]
B. Secondary
Magistrale, Tony. Landscape of Fear: Stephen King’s American Gothic.
Bowling Green, OH: Bowling Green State University Popular Press, 1988.
_____. Stephen King: The Second Decade. New York: Twayne, 1992.
_____, ed. The Dark Descent: Essays Defining Stephen King’s
Horrorscape. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1992.
Reino, Joseph. Stephen King: The First Decade. Boston: Twayne, 1988.
Underwood, Tim, and Chuck Miller, ed. Bare Bones: Conversations on
Terror with Stephen King. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1988. New York: Warner,
1989. [UM]
_____, ed. Fear Itself: The Horror Fiction of Stephen King. Lancaster, PA:
Underwood-Miller, 1982.
_____, ed. Kingdom of Fear: The World of Stephen King. Lancaster, PA:
Underwood-Miller, 1986.
Winter, Douglas. Stephen King: The Art of Darkness. New York: New
American Library, 1984 (rev. ed. 1986).

T. E. D. Klein
A. Primary
“Camera Shy.” Crypt of Cthulhu No. 56 (Roodmas 1988): 21–27.
The Ceremonies. New York: Viking, 1984. [C]
Dark Gods. New York: Viking, 1985. [DG]
“Dr. Van Helsing’s Handy Guide to Ghost Stories.” Twilight Zone 1, No. 5
(August 1981): 69–75; 1, No. 6 (September 1981): 74–77; 1, No. 7 (October
1981): 56–60; 1, No. 8 (November 1981): 62–66 (as by “Kurt Van Helsing”).
“The Events at Poroth Farm.” From Beyond the Dark Gateway 1, No. 2
(December 1972). Rev. ed. *West Warwick, RI: Necronomicon Press, 1990
(with introduction by the author). [EP]
“Hagendorn’s House.” Country Inns, Spring 1987, pp. 82–88. Dagon Nos.
18/19 (July–September 1987): 52–61 (as “Well-Connected”).
“Ladder.” In Borderlands, ed. Thomas F. Monteleone. New York: Avon,
1990, pp. 188–200. [L]
“Magic Carpet.” Myrddin No. 3 (1976): 18–22.
Raising Goosebumps for Fun and Profit. Round Top, NY: Footsteps Press,
1988. [RG]
“Renaissance Man.” Space 2 (1974). Rpt. in Microcosmic Tales, ed. Isaac
Asimov, Martin Harry Greenberg, and Joseph D. Olander. New York: Taplinger,
1980, pp. 59–64.
“S.F.” In The Year’s Best Horror Stories: Series III, ed. Richard Davis.
New York: DAW, 1975, pp. 39–55.
B. Secondary
Dagon Nos. 18/19 (July–October 1987). Special T. E. D. Klein issue.
Articles by S. T. Joshi, Robert M. Price, Steven J. Mariconda, Mark Valentine,
Mark Morrison, Carl T. Ford (interview), Peter F. Jeffery, and Peter Cannon.
Mariconda, Steven J. “The Hints and Portents of T. E. D. Klein.” Studies in
Weird Fiction No. 1 (Summer 1986): 19–28.
Price, Robert M. “T. E. D. Klein.” In Discovering Modern Horror Fiction I,
ed. Darrell Schweitzer. Mercer Island, WA: Starmont House, 1985, pp. 68–85.
Winter, Douglas E. “T. E. D. Klein.” In Faces of Fear. New York: Berkley,
1985, pp. 122–35. [FF]
Thomas Ligotti

A. Primary
“Allan and Adelaide: An Arabesque.” Crypt of Cthulhu No. 68
(Hallowmass 1989): 10–16.
“Charnelhouse of the Moon.” Crypt of Cthulhu No. 68 (Hallowmass 1989):
35–36.
“The Consolations of Horror.” Crypt of Cthulhu No. 68 (Hallowmass
1989): 42–48.
“Ghost Stories for the Dead.” Crypt of Cthulhu No. 68 (Hallowmass 1989):
18–20.
Grimscribe: His Lives and Works. London: Robinson, 1991. *New York:
Carroll & Graf, 1991. [G]
Noctuary. London: Robinson, 1994. *New York: Carroll & Graf, 1994. [N]
“Oneiric Horror.” Dagon Nos. 22/23 (September–December 1988): 55–56.
“The Real Wolf.” Nocturne No. 1 (1988): 6–9.
“A Selection of Poe.” Fantasy and Terror No. 6 (1985): 20–24.
“Selections of Lovecraft.” Crypt of Cthulhu No. 68 (Hallowmass 1989):
38–41.
Songs of a Dead Dreamer. Albuquerque, NM: Silver Scarab Press, 1986.
Rev. ed. *London: Robinson, 1989. [SDD]
“Ten Steps to Thin Mountain.” Crypt of Cthulhu No. 68 (Hallowmass
1989): 37, 36.
B. Secondary
Dagon Nos. 22/23 (September–December 1988). Special Thomas Ligotti
issue. Articles by Mike Ashley, Christine Morris, Robert M. Price, Stefan R.
Dziemianowicz, and Simon MacCulloch.
Dziemianowicz, Stefan, and Michael A. Morrison. “The Language of
Dread: An Interview with Thomas Ligotti.” In Science Fiction & Fantasy Book
Review Annual 1990, ed. Robert A. Collins and Robert Latham. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press, 1991, pp. 109–18. [DM]
Ford, Carl T. “Notes on the Writing of Horror: An Interview with Thomas
Ligotti.” Dagon Nos. 22/23 (September–December 1988): 30–35. [F]
Price, Robert M. “Thomas Ligotti’s Gnostic Quest.” Studies in Weird
Fiction No. 9 (Spring 1991): 27–31.
Ramsey, Shawn. “A Graveside Chat: Interview with Thomas Ligotti.”
Deathrealm No. 8 (Spring 1989): 21–23. [R]
Schweitzer, Darrell. “Weird Tales Talks with Thomas Ligotti.” Weird Tales

No. 302 (Winter 1991–92): 51–55.
Anne Rice
A. Primary
Interview with the Vampire. New York: Knopf, 1976. *New York:
Ballantine, 1977. [I]
Lasher. New York: Knopf, 1993.
“The Master of Rampling Gate.” Redbook, February 1984. Rpt. in The
Ultimate Dracula, ed. Byron Preiss. New York: Dell, 1991, pp. 11–33.
The Mummy; or, Ramses the Damned. New York: Ballantine, 1989. [M]
The Queen of the Damned. New York: Knopf, 1988. [Q]
The Tale of the Body Thief. New York: Knopf, 1992. [TBT]
The Vampire Lestat. New York: Knopf, 1985. *New York: Ballantine,
1986. [V]
The Witching Hour. New York: Knopf, 1990. [W]
B. Secondary
Mackay, Kathy. “Anne Rice: Risks Fuel Success in Her World of
Imagination.” Los Angeles Times Book Review, February 3, 1980, p. 3.
Ramsland, Katherine. Prism of the Night: A Biography of Anne Rice. New
York: Dutton, 1991.
Wiater, Stanley. “Anne Rice.” In Dark Dreamers. New York: Avon, 1990,
pp. 163–71.
Peter Straub
A. Primary
Floating Dragon. New York: Putnam’s, 1983. [FD]
“The General’s Wife.” Twilight Zone 2, No. 2 (May 1982): 25–38. West
Kingston, RI: Donald M. Grant, 1982.
Ghost Story. New York: Coward, McCann & Geogheghan, 1979. *New
York: Pocket, 1980. [GS]
Houses without Doors. New York: Dutton, 1990. [HD]
If You Could See Me Now. New York: Coward, McCann & Geogheghan,
1977. *New York: Pocket, 1979. [I]
Julia. New York: Coward, McCann & Geogheghan, 1975. *New York:

Pocket, 1976. [J]
Koko. New York: Dutton, 1988. [K]
Marriages. New York: Coward, McCann, 1973. New York: Pocket, 1977.
Mrs. God. West Kingston, RI: Donald M. Grant, 1991.
Mystery. New York: Dutton, 1990. [M]
The Talisman (with Stephen King). New York: Viking/Putnam’s, 1984.
The Throat. New York: Dutton, 1993. [T]
Wild Animals: Julia, If You Could See Me Now, Under Venus. New York:
Putnam’s, 1984. [WA]
B. Secondary
Gregory, Jay. “Peter Straub” [interview]. Twilight Zone 1, No. 2 (May
1981): 13–16.
Winter, Douglas E. “Peter Straub.” In Faces of Fear. New York: Berkley,
1985, pp. 221–34. [FF]
Thomas Tryon
All That Glitters. New York: Knopf, 1986.
By the Rivers of Babylon. New York: Knopf, 1992.
Crowned Heads. New York: Knopf, 1976.
Harvest Home. New York: Knopf, 1973. *Greenwich, CT: Fawcett Crest,
1974. [H]
Lady. New York: Knopf, 1974. [L]
The Night of the Moonbow. New York: Knopf, 1989.
The Other. New York: Knopf, 1971. *Greenwich, CT: Fawcett Crest, 1972.
[O]
The Wings of the Morning. New York: Knopf, 1990.

Table of Contents
Preface
Introduction
I. SHIRLEY JACKSON:DOMESTIC HORROR
DOMESTIC FICTION
DOMESTIC INTO WEIRD
LANGUAGE, TRUTH, AND HORROR
LONELINESS
MISANTHROPY
HOUSES
CONCLUSION
II. THE PERSISTENCE OF SUPERNATURALISM
WILLIAM PETER BLATTY: THE CATHOLIC WEIRD TALE
STEPHEN KING: THE KING’S NEW CLOTHES
BUNGLED SUPERNATURALISM
THE POWERS OF THE MIND
ADOLESCENCE
APOCALYPSE
KING AS MAINSTREAM WRITER
AUTHORSHIP
NONSUPERNATURALISM
CONCLUSION
T. E. D. KLEIN: URBAN HORROR
THEORY AND PRACTICE
NEW YORK AND ENVIRONS
WORDS AND THINGS
CLIVE BARKER: SEX, DEATH, AND FANTASY
III. RAMSEY CAMPBELL: THE FICTION OF PARANOIA
BEFORE AND AFTER LOVECRAFT
DREAM AND REALITY
ART AND REALITY
HORRORS OF THE CITY
PARANOIA
SEX AND DEATH
CHILDHOOD
RECENT WORK

STYLE AND TECHNIQUE
PHILOSOPHY
IV. THE ALTERNATIVES TO SUPERNATURALISM
KILLING WOMEN WITH ROBERT BLOCH, THOMAS HARRIS,
AND BRET EASTON ELLIS
ROBERT BLOCH: HARD-BOILED HORROR
THOMAS HARRIS: THE MIND OF HORROR
BRET EASTON ELLIS: THE BANALITY OF
HORROR
THOMAS TRYON:
RURAL HORROR
PETER STRAUB: FROM GHOST STORY TO THRILLER
V. PSEUDO-, QUASI-, AND ANTI-WEIRD FICTION
ROBERT AICKMAN:“SO LITTLE IS DEFINITE”
ANNE RICE:THE PHILOSOPHY OF VAMPIRISM
THOMAS LIGOTTI:THE ESCAPE FROM LIFE
Epilogue
Notes
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Bibliography
General
Robert Aickman
A. Primary
B. Secondary
Clive Barker
A. Primary
William Peter Blatty
A. Primary
B. Secondary
Robert Bloch
A. Primary (not complete)
B. Secondary
Ramsey Campbell
A. Primary
B. Secondary

Bret Easton Ellis
Thomas Harris
Shirley Jackson
A. Primary
i. Books
ii. Short Stories
B. Secondary
Stephen King
A. Primary
B. Secondary
T. E. D. Klein
A. Primary
B. Secondary
Thomas Ligotti
A. Primary
B. Secondary
Anne Rice
A. Primary
B. Secondary
Peter Straub
A. Primary
B. Secondary
Thomas Tryon

