

Praise for Richard Smoley’s The Dice Game of Shiva
“The Dice Game of Shiva carries the reader insightfully through metaphor, a breadth
of references, and insight into the diaphanous realms of consciousness. Richard
Smoley’s fascinating examples and challenging thinking invite readers to explore
meaning and applicability to their own spiritual journeys. Exploration of the
relationship between consciousness and its experience plays throughout the text and
draws the reader to a deeper experience of self. I recommend this text for any student
of mind and purpose.”
— Betty Bland, president of the Theosophical Society in America
“This is an exciting, powerful book on the nature of mind and its relation to the
universe. It is hard to put down. It is written largely from an Eastern viewpoint by a
man who has, here and elsewhere, demonstrated his comprehensive knowledge of the
Western searchings. (See, for example, his book Hidden Wisdom.) The depth and
extent of Hindu psychology and philosophy of mind is little known in the West. This
book has been long needed. One cannot read it without emerging feeling somehow
‘more,’ an inner stirring and movement in new directions, the same sort of feeling you
have when you see Guernica for the first time or really hear the Appassionata. Do not
pick it up unless you are prepared for this.”
— Lawrence LeShan, PhD, author of
A New Science of the Paranormal and How to Meditate
“I have a standing rule: I read anything Richard Smoley writes — and The Dice Game
of Shiva proves once again that I’m correct to do so. This book is a profoundly wise
examination of the nature of consciousness and its place — our place — in the
universe. Smoley’s writing is engaging, personal, and elegant. Anyone interested in
the origin, nature, and destiny of consciousness should read this important book.”
— Larry Dossey, MD, author of
The Power of Premonitions and Healing Words
“I loved Richard Smoley’s The Dice Game of Shiva, which thoughtfully deals with
conundrums from consciousness to causality. He quotes the Indian dharma master
Ramana Maharshi, who teaches the nondual view that it is impossible to be separate

from an infinite God, or infinite consciousness. He similarly describes the
inseparability of consciousness from the contents of consciousness — thereby
dismantling the so-called mind-body problem. And he convincingly attacks the
illusion of causality with which we try to order our lives, quoting Bertrand Russell,
who wrote that causality ‘is a relic of a bygone age … like the monarchy.’”
— Russell Targ, physicist and author of Limitless Mind

THE
DICE GAME OF
SHIVA

Also by Richard Smoley
Conscious Love: Insights from Mystical Christianity
Forbidden Faith: The Secret History of Gnosticism
The Essential Nostradamus
Inner Christianity: A Guide to the Esoteric Tradition
Hidden Wisdom: A Guide to the Western Inner Traditions
(with Jay Kinney)
First Flowering: The Best of the Harvard Advocate, 1866–1976
(editor)

THE
DICE GAME OF
SHIVA
HOW CONSCIOUSNESS
CREATES THE UNIVERSE
RICHARD SMOLEY
New World Library
Novato, California

Copyright © 2009 by Richard Smoley
All rights reserved. This book may not be reproduced in whole or in part, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means — electronic,
mechanical, or other — without written permission from the publisher, except by a
reviewer, who may quote brief passages in a review.
The permissions acknowledgments on page 201 are an extension of the copyright
page.
Text design by Tona Pearce Myers
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Smoley, Richard.
 The dice game of Shiva : how consciousness creates the universe / Richard
Smoley.
     p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-57731-644-2 (pbk.: alk. paper)
1. Religion—Philosophy. 2. Consciousness. 3. Experience. I. Title.
BL51.S5885 2009
210—dc22
2009033391
First printing, November 2009
ISBN 978-1-57731-644-2
Printed in the United States on 30% postconsumer-waste recycled paper
 New World Library is a proud member of the Green Press Initiative.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

For Robert Krier Smoley

CONTENTS
Acknowledgments
Prologue: A Kabbalist at Oxford
1. The Light That Governs the Universe
2. The Game of Consciousness
3. Two against One: The Persistence of Dualism
4. Constant Conjunction: The Problem of Causation
5. Patterns in Her Garment: The Chain of Associations
6. A Just Universe?
7. Beyond the Copper Mountain: The Dimensions of Faith
8. The Conscious Civilization
Notes
Bibliography
Permissions Acknowledgments
Index
About the Author

F
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
irst I would like to thank my dear wife, Nicole, and my little son, Robert (to whom
this book is dedicated), for providing me with a loving home in which this book
could be created.
In addition, I appreciate the help and support of my agent, Giles Anderson, and
my editor, Jason Gardner, for enabling me to shape my ideas into a finished book.
Thanks are also due to Kristen Cashman and Bonita Hurd for their careful attention to
the manuscript in the editing process.
Finally, I am grateful to Joy Mills and Gerald J. Larson for their thoughtful
reading of the manuscript and for helping me to sharpen my insights. Of course any
errors and omissions in this book remain my responsibility and not theirs.
Richard Smoley
Winfield, Illinois
March 2009

T
PROLOGUE
A KABBALIST AT OXFORD
he threads of most books can be traced to any number of points in their authors’
lives. If I were to place the genesis of this book somewhere in particular, I would
choose the late 1970s, when for two years I was a student at the University of
Oxford.
I admit that I had no well-defined reason for going there. I had received a
bachelor’s degree in classics from Harvard, and, having my mind set on a literary
career, I vaguely thought it would be useful to polish off my Greek and Latin studies
with a degree from Oxford in Literae Humaniores (“more humane letters”), also
known as Greats, a celebrated course in which one studied ancient history, classical
literature, and/or philosophy. Each student had to choose two of the three; I chose the
latter two.
The picture of Oxford that many Americans have is an idyllic one, and the school
is usually imagined as it might have been around 1910, with the men in straw boaters
and the women in Edwardian gowns. In this world, viewed through a soft focus, the
principal occupations are tea parties, cricket, flirtations, aristocratic whimsies, and
adolescent despair. There one occasionally drops in on one of the dons and engages in
witty repartee over glasses of brown sherry, or falls in love with the daughter of an
earl, only to be spurned because of one’s social inferiority.
All this had little to do with the actualities of 1978. While there were glimpses of
this past (to the extent that it was ever real), the dominant mood was much less
frivolous. At least it was so in my college, Corpus Christi — Oxford is divided into
colleges, each with its own history, atmosphere, and traditions. Corpus was tiny, with
some two hundred undergraduates, but it had an august scholarly reputation,
particularly in the classics. Over time I would learn that this reputation rested not so
much on genius as on an extraordinarily well-honed pedantry. In one of Robertson

Davies’s novels (I don’t remember which), one of the characters has his genealogy
traced by an owlish and desiccated Corpus man. This was the spirit of the place, and
while many students did not fit the mold — the graduate students, with whom I
tended to socialize, were, fortunately, a more diverse and worldly lot — there were
many who did.
I was not among them. I was a restless and dissatisfied student, constantly
grumbling and frequently depressed. Although I’d enjoyed the Greek and Latin
classics as presented in the more relaxed world of Harvard, I found the prescribed
course in Greats curiously dull. The menu in literature, for example, included the
Thesmophoriazusai, one of Aristophanes’ less funny comedies, in which the tragedian
Euripides sneaks into the women’s rites for Demeter; the later elegies of Sextus
Propertius, written when this intense and refined poet had carved himself into a
literary monument; and the second half of The Aeneid, a section so tiresome that it
may explain why Vergil wanted to have the poem burned after his death.
But it was philosophy that truly baffled me. I do remember moments of triumph
— a funereal December afternoon when I rose from a battered oak table in the reading
room of the Bodleian Library and congratulated myself on finally having read the
entirety of Plato’s Republic in Greek, and the following spring, when I set myself to
read Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics, again in the original, over the course of a single
week, largely because I wanted to take the spring holiday off for a trip to Egypt. It
was good that I did, because in Egypt I fell ill with a form of dysentery that somehow
transformed itself into a severe shoulder infection, forcing me to miss most of the next
term.
The masterpieces of Plato and Aristotle, though not always compelling reading,
are deservedly renowned, and as texts they formed a superb introduction to
philosophy. The method of instruction at Oxford was, however, somewhat peculiar, at
least to someone used to American education. There were no courses in the sense
familiar to us. Your entire degree depended on ten or eleven essay-style examinations,
which you took at the end of your time there. The dons did not grade you in the
meantime, although you were called before a panel at the end of every term and told
how well or poorly they expected you to do. There were any number of lectures, but
these were not required and were generally underattended. The heart of the program
was a weekly meeting with a tutor, who supplied you with a reading list that you were
to use as the basis of an essay. You read the essay aloud the next week, and then the
tutor made his or her comments.
At its best this type of instruction no doubt promotes a sharp and subtle interaction
that hones the minds of both pupil and teacher. I did not encounter it at its best. My
chief tutor in philosophy was a balding, bespectacled man with strange mannerisms

that included hunching over his armchair and scratching the carpet with his fingers in
a manner that seemed oddly simian. His taste in attire (say, a wide-lapelled jacket of
some unrecognizable material, matched with a pale purple shirt and an interestingly
striped tie) led one of my friends to remark, “He dresses like his wife buys his
clothes.” I will never forget the time when, while reading an essay aloud, I mentioned
as an example of an incorrect belief the idea that World War II began in 1941. He
must have been only half-listening, because he looked up sharply and said, “For some
of us it began a bit before that!” “I said it was an incorrect belief,” I replied. “Oh,” he
grunted and went back to scratching the carpet.
I studied with him for a year and a half, and never for a single second did I have
the impression he was anything but utterly bored with me and my intellectual
productions. How could it have been otherwise? He had heard the same essays on
Plato’s cave and Aristotle’s concept of virtue over and over again, for years upon
years; it was extremely unlikely that I — or anyone else who was neither
transcendentally brilliant nor frankly insane — could have come up with something
he had not heard before.
The rest of the philosophy curriculum was equally peculiar. If you had not known
otherwise, you could have easily concluded that, with the exception of a few stray
insights from Descartes and Hume and Kant, nothing of the slightest interest had
occurred in the field between the death of Aristotle in 322 BC and the rise of logical
positivism in the 1930s. It was only midway through my time there that I realized
what was really going on. I was not surveying the discipline of philosophy in any
broad sense; I was attending a particular school of philosophy. It was Oxford
philosophy, with its own heritage and trends and dogmas, and one could no more
expect complete impartiality there than one could have expected it at the school of
Pythagoras or the Academy of Plato.
Thinking for oneself was ostensibly encouraged, but the correct line was clear.
Religion was generally regarded with a tolerant, though occasionally irate,
bemusement. Certainly there were religious believers at Oxford, as well as a chapel in
every college; there were even “permanent private halls” with names like Blackfriars
and Greyfriars that were intended for training clergy, but these seemed remote and
obscure. (An issue of Oxford Today magazine informs me that Greyfriars, founded by
the Franciscan order, closed its doors in June 2008.) Among philosophers, it was
tacitly acknowledged that one would be an atheist or agnostic. In moral philosophy,
utilitarianism was the right view, and some even took it to the point of embracing the
then-novel cause of animal rights. Metaphysics was avoided: examining such issues
as being and existence was the sort of thing they did on the Continent, along with
eating snails and driving on the wrong side of the road. Philosophy of mind was a

trickier matter. The simplistic equation of the mind with the brain — a view known as
materialism — presented too many philosophical problems to be entirely accepted,
but nothing more plausible had taken its place. The prevailing view was a vague
functionalism holding that the mind arises out of the functioning of the brain,
although how this happened was never entirely explained or understood (as it still
isn’t).
All in all, it was a philosophy of “nothing but.” God is nothing but a crutch for the
weak; the mind is nothing but the brain or the operations of the brain; morality is
nothing but the maximization of pleasure and the minimization of pain for the greatest
number (possibly including beasts). Indeed “nothing but” ranks, along with the
common law, industrial manufacture, the men’s suit, and Stilton cheese, as one of the
major contributions of the British people to world civilization. Although it was
transmitted to the United States along with a language and a tradition of hopeless
ineptitude at cooking, Americans, with their bizarre and incoherent longings for
transcendence, have never been quite successful at replicating the smug assurance
with which the British can pull off this attitude of “nothing but.”
I did not take well to it. My own more mystical nature rebelled, and in any case I
could see the enormous number of holes in the accepted views. Animal rightists could
(and sometimes did) argue that a full-grown cow has more of a right to life than a
newborn human baby. The philosophy of mind was a blank space to be filled in:
philosophers seemed to be waiting like Vladimir and Estragon for a scientific
vindication of materialism that they were sure would come any day now. What was
most bewildering, however, was that every now and then one would see a particular
conclusion dismissed as “counterintuitive.” I could not help asking what exactly this
intuition was that served as a touchstone for the most intricately reasoned arguments,
and, if it was so reliable, why we did not drop the arguments and trust our intuitions to
begin with.
It did not take me long to grow demoralized by this course of study. My last
trimester there, the spring — or as it is called, Trinity — term of 1980, was taken up
with review for the final exams that I would sit for in June. I found the philosophy
review classes so worthless that soon I simply stopped attending, and I decided that I
was going to have to figure it all out on my own. My strategy worked successfully
enough; at any rate my tutors were surprised at how well I did.
And yet to paint my two years at Oxford as uniformly dark would be an
exaggeration. The social life, which for me was centered on the Middle Common
Room — the college’s watering hole for graduate students — was far more agreeable:
talking till two or three in the morning with whoever happened to turn up, fueling the
discussion with bottle after bottle of Jubilee, a superb brown ale created by an

Oxfordshire brewery to commemorate Elizabeth II’s twenty-fifth year on the throne;
instruction in the game of go by Billy Swan, an affable and soft-spoken Scotsman
with a doctorate in philosophy; a surprise birthday party thrown for me by my
girlfriend, Antoinette, at which for the first and only time in my life I chain-smoked a
pack of Dunhills; and the special dinners, held on Wednesdays every month or so, for
which the college kitchen would cook a more elaborate meal than usual, and which
partakers would accompany with wine bought from the buttery.
Despite these fond memories, and despite a certain intellectual rigor that the
course of study imparted to me through all my resistance, my two years at Oxford
would have seemed a total waste of time to me had it not been for an unforeseen
circumstance that befell me soon after I arrived.
Thinking it would be fun to take part in some extracurricular activities, in my first
week I went to the Freshers’ Fair, a showcase for the various clubs and societies that
flourished at the university. There were groups that put out publications with names
like Isis and Tributary and Vague; there was the Lucky Jim Society, dedicated to
“cycling aimlessly around the countryside”; there were the people who rode to
hounds; and there were the people who harassed the people who rode to hounds. As I
meandered among the representatives of these organizations, I came across a man
with long hair, a scraggly beard, and a pair of very thick eyeglasses. He was, I would
later learn, not a student but an employee at the Inland Revenue, Britain’s equivalent
of the IRS. He thrust a leaflet into my hand and said (anomalously, since it was
October), “There you are, and a happy Christmas to you.”
The flyer was for something called the Oxford Kabbalah Group. I knew what the
Kabbalah was — in my last year at Harvard, I had begun to frequent the Mystic Eye,
an occult bookshop (now long vanished) that was nestled in a basement on the edge of
Harvard Square — but I had never met anyone who knew anything about this
tradition. In 1978, it had not yet attracted the attention of power-crazed urbanites or
scholars desperate for untapped fields of research. So I began going to the group’s
meetings, which were held in the garret office of a junior fellow at Magdalen College.
You walked up to the top floor of one of the college’s venerable buildings, empty
and half-lit in the evening, and went to a medium-sized room under the eaves. There,
on a mantel over a fireplace containing one of those British electric fires that never
produce heat that can be felt more than three feet away, was a slab of white Formica
about the size of a small tabletop, onto which the Kabbalistic Tree of Life was incised.
A pair of candles stood on either side of it, and a bottle of red wine warmed near the
electric fire, to be consumed with bread and cheese when the meeting was done.
There were never more than seven to ten participants, usually fewer, and the majority
were not students at all but local people: Dave, the Inland Revenue employee; Ally, a

member of the grounds crew at Trinity College; a psychiatrist whose name I’ve
forgotten; Christine, a flirtatious thirtyish divorcée; Peter, our host, a research fellow
at Magdalen who was also the leader of the group; and assorted others who came and
went. None of us, or practically none, were Jewish.
I continued to go faithfully for the whole two years I was there. The week I came
down with my shoulder infection was unfortunately the one in which I had taken the
kitty (a small cloth purse that held the group’s financial resources, usually amounting
to seven or eight pounds) in order to buy bread and cheese and wine for the meeting. I
was far too sick to sit through it, but somehow I managed to drag myself to Oxford
Covered Market to pick up what was needed. Weak with fever, I showed up at the
group, dropped off the food, and staggered back to my room.
I could never quite tell what my friends at Corpus made of it all. The group met on
Wednesday evenings, so on weeks when there was a special dinner they were always
puzzled to see me rush off afterward to this odd society that I belonged to. They
seemed to consider it an amusing eccentricity of mine — not a bad thing in a place
that is, after all, the world capital of amusing eccentricities. But to tell the truth, I was
somewhat ashamed of my interest, knowing how far it was from the dominant
intellectual climate. When people asked me about it, I usually put them off.
No one in the group knew a great deal about the subject, really. We had read a few
books, and every term, Warren, one of the Kab-balists who had started the group,
would come up from London and give us an informal lecture. One time we piled into
Dave’s car — a three-wheeled motorcycle painted the color the French call caca d’oie
— and went to London to visit Glyn, the other founder of the group, who could
always be found in the kitchen at the end of his long, narrow flat in Maida Vale,
drinking endless cups of coffee or tea and smoking cigarettes that he rolled himself. I
visited Glyn many times after that, up to the time of his death in early 2007; I found it
unthinkable to go to the United Kingdom without seeing him and went more than
once for that purpose alone.
None of this added up to the England I expected from reading the plays of Shaw
or the novels of Evelyn Waugh, and every time I think about a part of the world I’ve
never visited, I have to imagine that, like England, it bears only the most tenuous
resemblance to the clichés about it. In retrospect I can see the unlikely circumstances
of my spiritual initiation as a test of my ability to see past appearances. When the
spiritual teacher G.I. Gurdjieff first met the aristocratic composer Thomas de
Hartmann in 1915, he arranged a rendezvous at a seedy café in Petrograd populated
with whores. De Hartmann was even more taken aback by the dirty cuffs on
Gurdjieff’s shirt. And yet there was something in de Hartmann that enabled him to
look past the facade; eventually he became one of Gurdjieff’s most dedicated and

important pupils. My own test was, unlike de Hartmann’s, not deliberately contrived,
but it made its own share of demands on me.
In the end, what led me to pursue Kabbalah and esotericism instead of hewing to
the rigidities of Oxford philosophy was (apart from a deep-seated rebelliousness in
my character) a sense of the dimensions of each. When we met in the Kabbalah
group, our discussions were not always profound, and in fact were seasoned with a
large dose of the silliness that could only be expected of beginners, but I had the sense
of being surrounded by something greater — an unseen cosmos that was as infinite
and mysterious as the night sky. When I turned to the ideas propounded in the dark-
blue volumes published by Oxford University Press or in scholarly journals such as
Mind and the Philosophical Review, I felt like a child who has been locked indoors on
a summer day.
The skeptic — and today there is always a skeptic, inside us as well as outside us,
one who haunts us as the devil haunted medieval monks — would say that this was a
decision based on emotion rather than on reason. No doubt; but does that invalidate
it? In recent years we have been introduced to the concept of emotional intelligence
— an awareness and sensitivity to the felt nature of reality that is different from, and
complementary to, intellectual intelligence. Why should our philosophy lack
emotional intelligence, as it so often seems to do?
So it went. The Kabbalah group was shifting and mutable. People came and left,
including Peter, whose office we had been using, so at the end of my second year we
began meeting in the hopelessly shabby flat Antoinette and I shared on Walton Street
in Jericho — a working-class district of Oxford that, disguised under the name
“Beersheba,” appears as the neighborhood of Jude the Obscure in Hardy’s novel.
Antoinette, whose father was an agnostic and whose mother was a diehard atheist, did
not entirely approve of the group. She would usually arrange to be out on the evenings
the meetings were held, and if she arrived home before everyone had left she would
go upstairs to the bedroom and read.
A year or so after I came back to the United States, the group fell apart for reasons
that were never explained, except by someone who obscurely remarked that
“Christine turned it into a sex party.” In a way I regret missing out on all the fun.
The story does not end there, of course. Over the years I kept in sporadic contact
with people I had met through the group (there were similar ones meeting in London,
Manchester, and Cambridge in those years), and today I’m still in touch with them
through email and my regrettably infrequent trips to England. Warren Ken-ton, one of
the group’s founders, now lectures on the Kabbalah worldwide; his many books,
published under his Hebrew name, Z’ev ben Shimon Halevi, are among the best and
most authoritative treatments of the subject. As for me, I moved to San Francisco with

Antoinette after we returned to the United States (we split up, amicably, a couple of
years later), and for many years I struggled to reconcile what I had learned in England
with what I experienced in the waves of New Age spirituality cresting in California in
the 1980s.
To tell any more of my story would be to stray farther into the realm of memoir
than I intend. I talk about it at such length because I can’t help feeling that our
civilization faces what I faced at Oxford: a choice between an arid materialistic
philosophy that nonetheless remains academically prestigious and esoteric teachings
that are profound and inspiring but often despised or ignored by the academic
mainstream. At the time I did not have the intellectual apparatus to reconcile the two.
Had I known more, I could have seen echoes of Plato’s teaching in the Kabbalah.
(Some in antiquity went so far as to claim that Plato learned everything he knew from
Moses, although it’s more likely that much of late Platonism eventually found its way
into Kabbalistic thought.) What Plato called doxa, for example — usually translated
as “belief” — corresponds almost exactly to the Kabbalistic Hod, often, though
somewhat misleadingly, translated as “glory.” (Significantly, doxa also sometimes
means “glory,” as in the last line of the Lord’s Prayer.) The concepts of doxa and Hod
both point to the level of consciousness that judges by appearances and externalities.
What Plato called noesis — the perception of true reality in the eternal and
unchanging Forms — the Kabbalah knows as Binah, or Understanding. I did not
realize these things until much later, and it’s just as well I didn’t: discoursing on the
Kabbalistic Tree of Life would not have sat well with the Oxford examiners.
This narrative may make it seem as if I’m about to proffer the Kabbalah as an
instant solution to the intellectual and spiritual conundrums of our age. I am not.
Although the Kabbalah remains the center point of my own spiritual path, and
although many of the ideas I discuss in this book have Kabbalistic correlates, it so
happens that the language of the Kabbalah doesn’t always offer the most meaningful
or accurate way of expressing them, and I’ve had to look farther afield. Moreover, the
years between my time at Oxford and the present led me to explore many different
paths: A Course in Miracles, Tibetan Buddhism, and Gurdjieff’s teachings, among
others, not to mention my eight years spent as editor of Gnosis, a now-defunct journal
of the Western esoteric traditions. Each tradition has its own profound lessons to
impart, and each casts a unique light on a transcendent reality that is ultimately
beyond expression.
In recent years, it’s seemed useful to formulate some of my ideas in the language
of esoteric Christianity, if only because Christianity remains the religious core of our
civilization. My books Inner Christianity and Conscious Love in particular are the
results of this effort. Still more recently, I’ve found that certain Hindu schools of

philosophy — particularly the one known as the Samkhya, which happens to be the
oldest — speak in terms that correspond to my own train of thought. They address in
a peculiarly powerful way the central issue not only of human life but also, perhaps,
of all existence: the relationship between consciousness and the contents of its own
experience — between purusha and prakriti, to use the language of the Samkhya, or
between “I” and the world, to use the language of inner Christianity. I believe that this
perspective presents some strong and possibly conclusive answers to questions that
have vexed Western philosophy and religion since their origins.

L
CHAPTER ONE
THE LIGHT THAT GOVERNS
THE UNIVERSE
anguishing in a Nazi jail in June 1944, the theologian Dietrich Bonhoeffer wrote a
remarkable letter to his friend Eberhard Bethge.1 It is a haunting document, not
only because Bonhoeffer would never live to flesh out his ideas (he would be
hanged by his captors in April 1945), but also because, more than sixty years later,
religion has not managed to solve — or frequently even face — the problem he
sketched out. He writes, “Man has learnt to deal with himself in all questions of
importance without recourse to the ‘working hypothesis’ called ‘God.’ In questions of
science, art, and ethics this has become an understood thing at which one now hardly
dares tilt. But for the last hundred years or so it has also become increasingly true of
religious questions; it is becoming evident that everything gets along without ‘God.’”
Humanity, Bonhoeffer goes on to say, has come of age. We don’t need the idea of
God to explain the workings of the universe; we are increasingly able to understand
these things without it. Bonhoeffer’s remarks echo the famous anecdote about the
scientist Pierre-Simon Laplace, who, at the turn of the nineteenth century, published a
work containing calculations of planetary motions. Napoléon called him in for an
interview. The emperor, who was fond of asking embarrassing questions, said,
“Monsieur Laplace, they tell me you have written this large book on the system of the
universe, and have never even mentioned its Creator.” Laplace replied, “I had no need
of that hypothesis.” Napoléon, greatly amused, told the story to the mathematician
Joseph-Louis Lagrange, who commented, “Ah! It is a beautiful hypothesis; it explains
many things.”2
Two hundred years later, we have, it would seem, still less need of “that
hypothesis” than did Laplace. Science has closed up more and more of the causal gaps

that divinities once had to fill. Unlike the ancients, we do not have to posit a hand of
God that keeps the planets in their courses. Nor do we need a God to explain the
origins of the cosmos or, very likely, of life. If there is an intelligence responsible for
the universe, it is not the craftsman offered by conventional religion. Can we, then,
jettison the idea of God, or, with Lagrange, shall we keep it not for its explanatory
force but for its beauty?
Merely posing such a question will look like arrogance to the believer. Who are
we to say we can take or leave the supreme ruler of the universe? It is not for us to
decide such things; it is blasphemous to contemplate them. In any event, we have
other needs for the idea of God. In 1788 Immanuel Kant wrote, “Two things fill the
mind with ever new and increasing admiration and awe, the more often and steadily
we reflect upon them: the starry heavens above me and the moral law within me.”3
Even if we have no more need of God to account for the starry heavens, don’t we still
require his services as the guarantor of the moral law within?
Not necessarily. An article in the British newsmagazine The Economist discusses
how human beings differ from chimpanzees in their approach to fairness.4 Scientists
tested this by means of the ultimatum game, in which there are two players, a
proposer and a responder. They have to divide a quantity of some good (which could
be anything from cash to chocolates). The proposer chooses how much will go to him
and how much to the responder. The responder has no choice but to take or leave the
offer (hence the name of the game).
One might expect that the responder would accept any offer, no matter how small;
after all, even a tiny portion of the good is better than nothing. And in fact that’s what
chimps do. But humans don’t. Human responders have been repeatedly shown to
reject any offer smaller than 20 percent — even though it’s to their disadvantage to do
so. The refusal is presumably intended to punish the proposer for his greed.
In this way chimpanzees turn out to be more rational economic agents than
humans, who will walk away from an offer they deem unfair. And yet, The Economist
points out, “a number of researchers in the field of human evolution think that a sense
of fairness — and a willingness to punish the unfair even at some cost to oneself — is
humanity’s ‘killer app.’ It is what allows large social groups to form.” Chimps are
willing to punish actual thieves, but not perpetrators of unfairness. It seems that “the
more sophisticated idea of fair shares, which underpins collaborative behaviour,
appeared in the hominid line only after the ancestors of the two species split from one
another.”5
An impressive finding, but also a dismaying one. The moral order within is
considerably less magisterial when viewed as a genetic glitch that happens to foster

large-scale collective efforts. It’s somewhat deflating to see our higher moral impulses
as the operation of selfish genes rather than as the law of God imprinted on our hearts.
Of course, as the more exuberant defenders of scientistic humanism emphasize,
we don’t have to find these discoveries deflating. They are triumphs of the human
mind; they mean that we understand the world (at least the visible world) in new and
astonishing ways. And in fact we would probably be far more inclined to exult in our
advances if they did not point to a grim conclusion: that the universe is blind and
mechanical, we are infinitely small and alone in it, and our existence has no meaning.
Most theologians balk and wince when confronted with this possibility.
Bonhoeffer does not. He is not afraid to ask the final, most dreadful question: “Even
though there has been surrender on all secular problems, there still remain the so-
called ‘ultimate questions’ — death, guilt, to which only ‘God’ can give an answer,
and because of which we need God and the church and the pastor. So we live, in some
degree, on these ultimate questions of humanity. But what if one day they no longer
exist as such, if they too can be answered ‘without God’?” Bonhoeffer showed no
more courage, I believe, in resisting the Third Reich (for which he had been
imprisoned) than he did in facing this issue.
Of course, it’s one thing to pose such questions and quite another thing to answer
them, and this Bonhoeffer fails to do. The letter trails off into theological niceties,
which were no doubt interesting to his correspondent but seem irrelevant to the
subject he has just raised. Another letter, written a month later, takes up the theme
again:
We cannot be honest unless we recognize that we have to live in the world etsi
deus non daretur [even if God were not given to us]. And this is just what we
do recognize — before God! … The God who lets us live in the world without
the working hypothesis of God is the God before whom we stand continually.
Before God and with God we live without God. God lets himself be pushed
out of the world on to the cross. He is weak and powerless in the world, and
that is precisely the way, the only way, in which he is with us and helps us.6
This passage combines two of the most distinctive aspects of Christianity through
the centuries. On the one hand, for all its sins and enormities, Christianity has on
countless occasions shown a relentless moral courage in embracing the suffering of
the world: in feeding the poor, caring for the sick, and, like Bonhoeffer himself,
opposing injustice. In this way, as Bonhoeffer might say, Christianity “is with us and
helps us.”
Alongside this formidable moral courage, on the other hand, we find a tremendous

intellectual timidity and recalcitrance. It is simply unconvincing to say, “The God who
lets us live in the world without the working hypothesis of God is the God before
whom we stand continually.” What does this mean? That we are supposed to believe
in God because, in some mysterious and paradoxical way, we do not believe in him?
This is a common tactic in Christianity, which has often taken refuge in paradox when
it has found itself trapped in logical impossibilities. The most famous example is a
remark by the church father Tertullian about the crucifixion of the Son of God:
“Prorsus credibile est, quia ineptum est”: “It is by all means to be believed because it
is absurd.”7 For many centuries this approach worked — largely thanks to the
emotional appeal (and political might) of Christianity rather than because of its innate
plausibility — but as an answer to today’s questions, it is not very helpful.
Bonhoeffer, facing the Nazi hangmen, may have found solace in reflecting that God is
asking us to live in a world in which we cannot believe in God. This is an impressive
feat, but it does not necessarily enable us to take the same comfort.
Someone might object that this attitude is too rationalistic, that it doesn’t do
adequate justice to the mystery of the universe. Certainly there are genuine mysteries
and paradoxes, and ignoring or denying them in some rationalistic fashion is
mistaken. But this does not mean that one can evade every dilemma simply by calling
it a paradox. Even Zen monks don’t attempt to apply their koans outside the
monastery.
Christianity consequently has made a habit of evading its own contradictions.
Ironically, its great enemy, scientism, has done the same thing. Scientism, as I am
using the term, is not science as such — which is a methodology rather than an
ideology — but rather a pseudoreligion that has set up science as its god. Like
conventional Christianity, scientism has its own baggage to hide and its own screen
behind which it tries to stash this baggage. In the case of scientism, the baggage has to
do with purpose, intent, and design in the universe. The screen it uses is blind chance
and randomness.
Let’s look at one of the more recent statements of this perspective, by the
philosopher Daniel Dennett. Summarizing his refutation of the argument from design
— the idea, first formulated by William Paley in his 1802 book Natural Theology,
that the universe is so complex and intricate that it must have had a supremely
intelligent designer — Dennett contends:
When we looked through Darwin’s eyes at the actual processes of design of
which we and all the wonder of nature are the products to date, we found that
Paley was right to see these effects as the result of a lot of design work, but we
found a non-miraculous account of it: a massively parallel, and prodigiously

wasteful, process of mindless, algorithmic design-trying, in which, however,
the minimal increments of design have been thriftily husbanded, copied, and
re-used over billions of years.…
What is left behind is what the process, shuffling through eternity,
mindlessly finds (when it finds anything): a timeless The Light That Governs
the Universe Platonic possibility of order. That is, indeed, a thing of beauty, as
mathematicians are forever exclaiming, but it is not itself something intelligent
but, wonder of wonders, something intelligible.8
This is a fascinating passage. To say that the universe is not intelligent but
intelligible has a certain rhetorical charm but glosses over one rather crucial question:
where did the intelligence come from that is able to perceive the universe at all? If it
developed out of mindless matter (as materialists argue), we are not told why or how.
This was the conundrum I encountered while studying philosophy of mind at Oxford.
Things have not changed much in the past thirty years. Even cognitive scientists still
confess themselves to be at a loss about this question. In an October 2007 issue of
Scientific American, neuroscientists Christof Koch and Susan Greenfield write,
“Neuroscientists do not yet understand enough about the brain’s inner workings to
spell out exactly how consciousness arises from the chemical and electrical activity of
neurons.”9
What consciousness might be is one of the chief themes of this book, and I treat it
in some detail. For now let’s turn back to the first paragraph of Dennett’s quotation, in
which he says both that the process of evolution is mindless and that it involves
design.
Let’s grant Dennett’s basic point: the old argument from design, the concept of a
clockmaker God who fashioned the universe, is obsolete and unconvincing. This
leaves us with an extremely strange dilemma: the concept of a design without a
designer, or, if you prefer, an intent without anyone to intend it. And it is true that the
idea of design hangs around scientism like a stray mongrel. Here is another passage
from Dennett, in which he explains why we find sugar sweet: “Our sweet tooth is not
just an accident or a pointless bug in an otherwise excellent system: it was designed to
do the work it does, and if we underestimate its resourcefulness, its resistance to
perturbation and suppression, our efforts to cope with it are apt to be
counterproductive.”10
Materialist philosophers insist that, when they mention design, it’s simply a
manner of speaking — a metaphor and nothing else. Another evangelist of scientism,
Richard Dawkins, takes this tack in his 1976 book The Selfish Gene:
We must not think of genes as conscious, purposeful agents. Blind natural

selection, however, makes them behave rather as if they were purposeful, and
it has been convenient, as a shorthand, to refer to genes in the language of
purpose. For example, when we say “genes are trying to increase their
numbers in future gene pools,” what we really mean is “those genes which
behave in such a way as to increase their numbers in future gene pools tend to
be the genes whose effects we see in the world.” … The idea of purpose is
only a metaphor, but we have already seen what a fruitful metaphor it is in the
case of genes. We have even used words like “selfish” and “ruthless” of genes,
knowing full well that it is only a figure of speech.11
Of course it’s legitimate to use figures of speech, and they are bound to resemble
what they model only to an imperfect degree. But what kind of theory is it that
constantly uses certain metaphors as integral parts of its explanation while at the same
time denying those same metaphors? Even to speak of “behav[ing] in such a way as to
increase their numbers” implies some purpose and intent, in the behavior if nothing
else. In most of his book, Dawkins goes much further. The British philosopher Mary
Midgley chides him for his “habitual rhetoric in elevating the gene from its real
position as a humble bit of goo within cells to a malign and powerful agent.”12
Even if we can and must remove the clockmaker God from our explanations of the
universe, it is not so easy to take away intelligence or design. The apostles of
scientism insist over and over again that the forces of nature — natural selection,
genes, “algorithmic design-trying,” and so on — are mindless, but they can’t even
speak coherently about these things without using the concept of mind in some form.
It’s said that, to a man who has only a hammer, everything looks like a nail. By
the same token, to a philosopher armed only with Occam’s razor, every proposition
looks like something to cut. Standard evolutionary theory wants to trim away the
supposedly unnecessary hypothesis of intelligence in the origin of species, but it is
then left holding only, in Dennett’s words, “a massively parallel, and prodigiously
wasteful, process of mindless, algorithmic design-trying” to explain everything. This
move may not be as simple and elegant as it might first appear. After all, cases
commonly cited as proofs of the evolution of species by natural selection often don’t
involve the development of new species at all. Consider the celebrated case of the
peppered moth in the industrial Midlands of nineteenth-century England. Before the
Industrial Revolution, these moths were light gray with dark gray speckles, a color
that served as camouflage when the moths rested on the bark of trees. After industrial
pollution turned many of these trunks black, the peppered moth adapted by changing
color: most of the moths were now dark gray with light gray speckles. No less an
authority than the BBC website hands down the word from Cambridge professor

Mike Majerus: “The rise and fall of the peppered moth … provides the proof of
evolution.”13 Does it? It does prove adaptation by natural selection, but it doesn’t
prove that such adaptation produces new species; after all, both light- and dark-gray
moths remain part of the same species, Biston betularia.14 So much for the elegance
and economy of evolutionary theory. As Mary Midgley writes, “False economy is
very common among people who rely too readily on it. As we are seeing,
extravagance is not eliminated merely by becoming anti-religious, and thoughts which
are designed to be sternly reductive often compensate by strange, illicit expansions
elsewhere. In fact when we encounter a specially harsh reduction, officially launched
in the name of parsimony, our first question should be: ‘and what are these savings
being used to pay for?’”15
Here, then, is the strange impasse we face at the beginning of the twenty-first
century — theologians who cannot quite believe in God, and militant materialists who
cannot quite do without intelligence, design, or purpose. There have been many
attempts at finding a middle ground. One of the best known of these can be found in
the work of John Shelby Spong, a retired Episcopal bishop who has published several
books calling on Christianity to update its shopworn worldview. Indeed Spong
equates his own program with Bonhoeffer’s “religionless Christianity.”16 In his book
A New Christianity for a New World, Spong writes:
Could we not begin to envision a transcendence that enters our life but also
calls us beyond the limits of our humanity, not toward an external being but
toward the Ground of All Being including our own, a transcendence that calls
to a new humanity? Is there not a new maturity that can be claimed by human
life when we cease the search for a supernatural being who will parent us, take
care of us, watch over and protect us? Is there not a new human dignity that
can be found in the rejection of those groveling patterns of our past through
which we attempted to please the theistic deity in the early years of
evolutionary history? In place of that groveling, are we not now able to open
ourselves in new ways to discover the Ground of Being that is met and known
in the self that is emerging as expanded consciousness? 17
Finally, it would appear, someone is striking a balance between reactionary
atheism and naive theism. To speak of a Ground of All Being instead of a petulant
personal deity would seem to be not only more rational but more profoundly
experiential than the stale Christianity of sermons and liturgies. Such classics as
William James’s Varieties of Religious Experience, Evelyn Underhill’s Mysticism, and
Aldous Huxley’s Perennial Philosophy offer many testimonies to the profound truth

of this Ground as witnessed and felt by the great mystics of all ages.
Nor are these experiences confined to believers. The British philosopher A. J.
Ayer, the doyen of logical positivism, was such a relentless atheist that the novelist W.
Somerset Maugham in his last days summoned Ayer to reassure him that there was no
life after death. In a London hospital in 1988, Ayer’s heart stopped for four minutes.
In that time, he later wrote, he saw a red light and became “aware that this light was
responsible for the government of the universe.” The experience did not change his
atheism, but “slightly weakened my conviction that my genuine death — which is due
fairly soon — will be the end of me, though I continue to hope it will be.” Ayer did in
fact die a year later.18
Even if we attempt to view God impersonally — as the Ground of All Being or
the light that governs the universe — the matter is not quite so simple. The human
race does more things before its gods than merely grovel. For those who believe in
him, God is an ever-present support, a shelter in times of trouble, an eternal rock in
which we can hide ourselves — the hymnbooks and psalters offer us countless
images. Curiously, the human race needs God in this sense more than it ever has. In
the old cosmologies, the cosmos was small and man loomed large in it; today we can
no longer take pride in our own centrality. Feeling more alone and helpless in the
universe, we are consequently more in need of a loving entity who will watch over us.
An impersonal Ground of All Being will not give us this comfort.
A still more perplexing problem with a religion centered on a Ground of All Being
is that it does not answer scientistic objections any better than does the notion of a
personal God. After all, if we can explain the workings of the universe without a
divine craftsman, we can do so equally well without a Ground of All Being. There is
no place for either one in the allegedly flawless causal chain of the universe. Although
the experience of this Ground by mystics, visionaries, and even atheists constitutes
strong evidence for its existence, this evidence is necessarily “anecdotal,” and science
has complacently ignored it — or has attempted to explain it away reductionistically
as merely a change in brain states.
Here lies the postmodern discomfort. At the dawn of the third millennium,
religion, science, philosophy, and mysticism remain a hopelessly jumbled patchwork
that no one can fit together. The solution has been attempted so often, with such
inadequate results, that it seems presumptuous to try again. And yet I think an answer
is possible. Like most good solutions to apparently complex quandaries, it is both
self-consistent and comparatively simple. It does not do violence to the findings of
science, and I believe that, if it is taken up to a certain point, even the more strident
materialists may find it acceptable. Taken beyond this point, it offers a way of
approaching a great deal of experience that science does not want to bother with.

If this solution had, like Athena, sprung solely out of my own head, one might
have reason to be suspicious of it. But I believe it is implicit — and sometimes
explicit — in the mystical and esoteric traditions of the world (which are remarkably
similar for being so far-flung). What I propose is not so much a radical new theory as
a fresh perspective based on some extremely ancient traditions. I have proposed
aspects of this view in my previous books, but it is necessary to flesh it out further in
order to apply it more broadly.
The central concept in any portrait of an intelligible universe is consciousness.
And yet consciousness is not easy to define. As we’ve already seen, it’s an entity
elusive even to neurologists, who have been poking and prodding the brain for
decades. Philosophers do no better: you can read any number of books purportedly
explaining consciousness and come away scarcely any better informed. Practically all
the current discussion of the topic amounts to a sort of evasion, saying that the brain
affects consciousness — a fact that was discussed as far back as 400 BC, in On the
Sacred Disease, the Hippocratic treatise on epilepsy.19 But how the brain produces
consciousness — what philosophers call the “mind-brain problem” or the “mind-body
problem” — remains as opaque as ever. The philosopher Colin McGinn has even
argued that the problem of consciousness is fundamentally insoluble, leading some of
his critics to deride him for his “mysterianism.”20 And I’m speaking here purely in
terms of human consciousness; how this might relate to nonhuman consciousness,
divine or otherwise, is even more puzzling.
Let me begin, then, by proposing an extremely simple but extremely fertile
definition: consciousness is that which relates self and other. In terms of human
cognition, this seems obvious. The sense of a self, an I present here versus an other
present there, is central to the concept of consciousness. Knowing that I am present in
my study, sitting at a desk in front of a computer, is essential to my being conscious
here and now. If I were utterly oblivious to these things, I could not be said to be
conscious at all, as, for example, during a state of dreamless sleep.
As soon as we’ve said this much, however, we realize that consciousness admits
any number of degrees and gradations. While dreaming, you are not aware of the
physical world, but some awareness still remains: there is the self that is a character in
the dream, set off against other characters and settings and objects that also appear.
This is not waking consciousness, but still it is consciousness of a kind. If we go
further into dreamless sleep, there is apparently no consciousness of any kind — and
yet below the surface the distinction of self and other does remain. After all, one of
the most universally prescribed remedies for illness is sleep. Sleep, even and perhaps
especially in its dreamless form, helps the “self” of the body fight off the “other” of
the pathogens.

We can go further. Anyone with even the slightest experience of animals knows
that they too are capable of relating self and other. Dogs and cats can’t reason except
in the most rudimentary sense, and yet they have emotional lives that are enough like
our own to be more or less understandable. Can we, then, say they are conscious, not
as we are, but conscious nonetheless? Or should we say, with Descartes, that they are
mere automatons? Not many thinkers have wanted to agree with the great philosopher
on this point. What about more primitive creatures, going down as far as plants and
even protozoans? We may be fairly sure that they don’t engage in Cartesian
introspections, but their fierce attachment to life, to perpetuating their own existence,
indicates that they too have some sense of themselves over and against an external
world. As we have already learned from Richard Dawkins, one could make the same
argument about the naked genes themselves.
Like so many of the discoveries of the past few centuries, these insights seem to
erode the human sense of uniqueness and privilege in being the sole possessor of the
magnificent gift called consciousness, but there are some consolations. The problem
of human consciousness becomes less confounding if we see it not as something
sprung mysteriously out of nowhere but rather as a stage on a continuum. Moreover,
if it is taken to heart, this outlook may even help mitigate the feeling of isolation and
separation that is the unhappy side effect of our arrogant sense of uniqueness.
Where, then, do we draw the line? At inanimate things? That apparently inanimate
objects contain a rudimentary form of consciousness has long been known to the
philosophy of India. The British scholar Sir John Woodroffe explains its views:
The manifestation of consciousness is more or less limited as ascent is made
from the mineral to man. In the mineral world Cit [consciousness] manifests
as the lowest form of sentiency evidenced by reflex response to stimuli, and
that physical consciousness which is called in the West atomic memory. The
sentiency of plants is more developed, though it is … a dormant
consciousness. This is further manifested in those micro-organisms which are
intermediate stages between the vegetable and animal worlds, and have a
psychic life of their own. In the animal world consciousness becomes more
centralized and complex, reaching its fullest development in man, who
possesses all the psychic functions such as cognition, perception, feeling and
will. Behind all these particular changing forms of sentiency or consciousness
is the one formless, changeless Cit as it is in itself.21
This ostensibly Eastern idea appears in the West as well, sometimes in unexpected
places. Here is an excerpt from an 1890 interview with Thomas Edison by George
Parsons Lathrop:

“I do not believe,” [Edison] said, “that matter is inert, acted upon by an
outside force. To me it seems that every atom is possessed by a certain amount
of primitive intelligence. Look at the thousands of ways in which atoms of
hydrogen combine with those of other elements, forming the most diverse
substances. Do you mean to say that they do this without intelligence? …
Gathered together in certain forms, the atoms constitute animals of the lower
orders. Finally they combine in man, who represents the total intelligence of
all the atoms.”
“But where does this intelligence come from originally?” I asked.
“From some power greater than ourselves.”22
Restating the point, we could say that a hydrogen atom “knows” how to recognize
an oxygen atom and, under certain circumstances, how to combine with it to form
water. It can, in a manner of speaking, perceive something outside of it and relate to
it; it is, in a rudimentary sense, conscious. If an atom could not take a stance in the
physical world and draw some kind of line between itself and what is not itself, it
could not exist. Perhaps this is the secret of those tenuous submolecular particles
about which today’s physics speculates so imaginatively. They seem to flash in and
out of existence, or, in certain instances, not to exist at all unless they are observed. It
is as if their sense of themselves is so frail and ambiguous that it takes an external
perceiver to bring them into being, much as the eighteenth-century Anglo-Irish bishop
and philosopher George Berkeley claimed that the universe would vanish if God were
not there to perceive it.
I must digress here to say one thing. Many current thinkers who have grappled
with the subject of consciousness have invoked the findings of twentieth-century
physics as some kind of proof of their ideas. I don’t intend to do this myself; I’m not
trying to make grandiose claims about “quantum consciousness” or anything of that
sort. Several years ago, interviewing Larry Dossey, MD, author of Healing Words and
Space, Time, and Medicine, I asked him about the relation of consciousness to
quantum physics. He replied:
My verdict is out. I often refer to quantum theories, not because they’re going
to give us an explanation for what happens at the human level, but simply
because they provide a kind of permission to think about nonlocality in the
first place.…
It could be that something here might explain how distant effects of
consciousness work; we just don’t know. But I object to people talking about

quantum psychology, quantum prayer, quantum spirituality. We’re dragooned
with the quantum metaphor. And most people do not use it as a metaphor but
think it’s much more than that. I personally don’t believe it is. It may turn out
that way, but we’re a long way from that now.23
Similarly, the parapsychologist Lawrence LeShan writes:
We can decide that, since the science of quantum mechanics is so full of
mysterious concepts, the “explanation” of psi [psychic phenomena] must lie
there. Thus there is really no problem; everything about psi has already been
explained by quantum science, or will be very soon. Forty years ago, I was
one of the people who started the idea that psi could be explained in terms of
quantum mechanics or relativity theory. I now believe that we were wrong,
and I regret my part in it. Dignity, love, loyalty, awe, and psi must be dealt
with on their own terms in a science built on these observables, not one built
on the observables of subatomic particles.24
Dossey’s and LeShan’s points are important and often overlooked. The human
mind forges many chains for its own enslavement. These include metaphors that have
overstepped their proper bounds. Scientific discoveries as “proofs” of spiritual truths
seem to be among the most common form of this abuse at present. To say what I am
saying here, on the other hand, does not rely on the truths of a particular scientific
worldview — Newtonian, Einsteinian, or any other. After all, to speak of an object of
any kind is to delineate it from the background of the rest of the world, to set it off as
itself and not something other. And if things are to exist objectively and not merely as
subjective impressions in one’s head, they must stake out their own place in relation
to the universe. That is, they must take a stance as self as opposed to the other that
constitutes the rest of reality. So they are endowed with consciousness, however
unlike our own it may be.
If we grant all this, we are left asking precisely what the relation is between self
and other, between consciousness and experience, between “I” and the world. This is
the most subtle and profound question that we can pose, because to go beyond this
point renders us unable to say anything at all. To explore this issue, we might best
start off not with science or philosophy but with myth. And one of the most powerful
myths to address this relationship between consciousness and experience is the
strange and haunting tale, well-known in India, obscure in the West, of the game of
dice that the god Shiva plays with his consort, Parvati.

O
CHAPTER TWO
THE GAME OF CONSCIOUSNESS
ne day the embraces of the Hindu god Shiva and his consort, Parvati, who have
spent eternity rapt in lovemaking, are interrupted by a sinister yogi named
Narada. Narada says he can show them something that is even more delightful
than love. It is a game of dice — an ancestor of today’s Parcheesi.
Intrigued by his offer, the divine couple begin to play. Each of them cheats as
much as possible, but no matter how long they play, the outcome is always the same:
Shiva loses and Parvati wins. Shiva may have the advantage for a round or two, but he
can never win a game.
At one point Shiva is ahead; he has won a couple of Parvati’s jewels, enraging her.
Noticing that the angrier she grows, the more beautiful she becomes, he coaxes her
into continuing. Parvati agrees to play if Shiva will wager his chief attributes: his
trident, the crescent moon, and a pair of earrings.
Of course Shiva plays and loses. But he refuses to accept this fact; after all, he is
Shiva, the lord of the universe. “No living being can overcome me,” he tells her. She
replies, “No living being can overcome you, it’s true — except me.” In spite, she
leaves him. She takes not only the trident and the moon and the earrings but a pair of
snakes and even his last item of clothing, his loincloth.
Shiva is not troubled by this outcome. He withdraws to the wilderness and leads
the life of an ascetic, free from the preoccupations of the world, meditating in solitary
peace. Parvati, on the other hand, feels lonely and frustrated without him. Intent on
winning him back, she takes the form of a lovely tribeswoman (an untouchable in the
Hindu caste system) with red lips, a graceful neck, and magnificent full breasts. She is
so beautiful that even the bees in the forest are overcome with love.
Shiva, roused from his meditation by the noise of the bees, sees Parvati in the

guise of the tribeswoman and is overcome with desire for her. Coquettishly she says,
“I am looking for a husband who is omniscient, who is free and fulfills all needs, who
is free of mutations and is the lord of the worlds.”
Shiva says, “I am that one.”
Parvati replies, “You shouldn’t talk to me that way. I happen to know that you
have a wife who won your devotion by many austerities, and you left her in a flash.
Besides, you are an ascetic, living free from duality.”
“Even so, I want you.”
Parvati says that he must ask permission of her father, Himalaya, the lord of the
mountain chain. Shiva approaches him, but Himalaya says, “This is not right. You
should not be asking me. You are the one who gives everything in all the worlds.”
At this point Narada reappears and tells Shiva, “Listen. Infatuation with women
always leads to mockery.”
“You’re right,” Shiva replies. “I have been a fool.” And Shiva withdraws to a
remote part of the universe where even yogis cannot go.
At this point Narada convinces Parvati and Himalaya to implore Shiva to return,
and they do so by praising him lavishly. Mollified, Shiva comes back, and he and
Parvati resume their reign in unity.1
Contrary to Einstein, this myth seems to be saying that God not only plays dice
with the universe but constantly loses. Why should Shiva, the lord of the universe, be
lured into indulging in a form of strip Parcheesi? How can he lose? Who is his
consort? Why does she win?
By now it’s common knowledge that myth contains meaning that is hard if not
impossible to convey in ordinary discursive language. There are no doubt different
levels of meaning, each with its own import. I will try to tease out the most significant
aspects of this story.
Shiva represents consciousness — what I have been calling variously purusha,
“I,” or “I am” — that is, consciousness in a sense much more universal than mere
human awareness. Parvati represents prakriti, the contents of consciousness:
experience in all its forms, internal and external, what esoteric Christianity calls the
“world.” At the beginning of the myth they are locked in union. There is no
distinction between consciousness and its contents. Therefore there is no world. The
Hindus call this state pralaya, the state of primordial sleep that prevailed before the
universe bestirred itself to manifest. The Hindu scripture known as the Rig Veda
describes it:
Then [before the beginning]

there was neither death nor no-death,
no sign of night or day.
The One breathed, breathless,
through its own impulsion,
and there was no Other of any kind.2
Note that it’s precisely the absence of the “Other” that characterizes this primal
repose. The dice game, introduced by Narada, the personification of discord,
symbolizes the beginning of manifestation. No manifestation can exist without a
distinction between self and other. But as I suggested in the previous chapter, this
distinction is not the bailiwick only of conscious subjects, such as we imagine
ourselves to be. It is the property of everything, because, as I indicated, even an atom
or electron must have some sense of itself simply to cohere at all. It must perceive an
other in order to distinguish itself from that other and so maintain a stable existence.
As weirdly mystical as this idea may sound, it is occasionally echoed even by the
philosophers who are most seminal to the contemporary scientific worldview. One
example comes from An Essay Concerning Human Understanding by John Locke,
one of the grandfathers of the philosophy of “nothing but.” Although Locke made this
statement almost as an aside, it would help inspire the whole trend of philosophical
materialism in the coming centuries:
We have the Ideas of Matter and Thinking, but possibly shall never be able to
know, whether any mere material Being thinks, or no; it being impossible for
us, by the contemplation of our own Ideas, without revelation, to discover,
whether Omnipotency has not given to some Systems of Matter fitly disposed,
a power to perceive and think, or else joined and fixed to Matter so disposed, a
thinking immaterial Substance: It being, in respect of our Notions, not much
more remote from our Comprehension to conceive, that GOD can, if he
pleases, superadd to Matter a Faculty of Thinking, than that he should
superadd to it another Substance with a faculty of Thinking.… For I see no
contradiction in it, that the first eternal thinking Being should, if he pleased,
give to certain Systems of created senseless matter, put together as he thinks
fit, some degrees of sense, perception, and thought.3
Locke himself, later in the same book, argues against the idea that matter can be
conscious.4 Nonetheless, it was his suggestion that matter could possess “some
degrees of sense, perception, and thought” that would eventually lead to the attempt to
equate the mind with the functioning of the brain or to characterize the mind as a mere
epiphenomenon, a side effect, of brain activity.

The materialists can’t have it both ways. They cannot argue both that
consciousness is implicit in matter and that matter is mindless. To do this, they would
have to show how consciousness arises out of unconscious matter, and this is exactly
what none of them have done. As one psychologist remarked, brain activity resembles
the mind about as much as a telephone number resembles its subscriber.
The fundamental dynamic of reality, then, is that of Shiva and Parvati:
consciousness, or self, in all its forms, and experience, or the other, in all its forms.
After all, if consciousness consists of the ability to relate self and other, this polarity is
and must be primary. If there is no self and other, there is no universe.*
In the previous chapter I pointed out that some philosophers, notably Colin
McGinn, have said that the problem of consciousness is fundamentally insoluble.
McGinn is certainly right to the extent that it has not been solved by Western
philosophy, whose
explanations have come to resemble a windup toy that continues to march even
though it’s run up against a wall. But if we see consciousness as the capacity to relate
self and other, the difficulty begins to diminish. Consciousness is now revealed as
being present anywhere and everywhere in the universe; our own consciousness is
simply one particular, and not necessarily privileged, form of it. It is true that we can’t
say much more about consciousness than that it consists of this relation of self to
other, but then we can’t say anything about entities that have no sense of this relation
— that is, which have no boundaries by which to define themselves at all.
These observations lead to another: Nothing in manifest existence is absolutely a
self or an other. They are merely matters of perspective. A hydrogen atom has some
consciousness, demonstrated by its ability to recognize an atom of oxygen and
interact with it under certain circumstances to form water and other compounds. From
its point of view, it is a self and the oxygen atom is the other. To the oxygen atom,
exactly the opposite is the case: the hydrogen atom is the other, just as I am other to
you and you are other to me. This fact indicates that the relation between self and
other, between “I” and the world outside, is a constant, dynamic interplay for all
entities at all scales and levels of complexity. A metaphor for this is the game known
as Othello, or Reversal, which employs disks that are black on one side and white on
the other. Each player takes turns setting them down on a grid, and the player who has
more disks of his own color on the board at the end of the game wins. If, say, you are
the black player and you manage to cap a line of white disks with your own black
disks at both ends, the whole line of white disks flip over to black. In the course of the
game, whole lines of disks flip from white to black and back again. This process hints
at the ever-shifting reversal of self and other that prevails in the universe at all levels.
But to return to the dice game of the myth, where does it fit in? And why does

Shiva always lose?
Shiva represents what one of the Upanishads calls the “seer of seeing.”5 Seeing in
all its forms — that is, consciousness — imparts existence to the world. Nothing
exists unless it is seen. Paradoxically, this includes Shiva’s own attributes. They do
not, strictly speaking, belong to consciousness, which in its pure form has no
attributes; it simply sees. (This may help explain why philosophers are frustrated in
their attempts to define it.) Any qualities that we can ascribe to consciousness are
immediately seen; they are part of the world; and the world is Parvati. And so Parvati
always wins. Her victory strips Shiva down to his pure, naked essence, which is
seeing alone. For all the possible throws of the dice — that is, for all the possible
directions manifestation can take — Shiva will always lose.
Nevertheless, Shiva takes his defeat with aplomb and simply retreats to the forest.
That is to say, consciousness can detach itself from its experience; it can free itself
from its own contents. This detachment is the goal of many forms of meditation. It
suggests why Shiva is characterized as an ascetic.
Consider your own experience now. Most likely you are not aware of yourself,
except as part of a vague background. But if you bring your attention to yourself, you
can feel yourself as an “I” having experiences. Many of these are sensory: this room,
this chair, this book. You can go still deeper. You can be aware of your thoughts and
feelings as they pass over the screen of your awareness (which is generally easier to
do if you close your eyes). If you can be aware of even these most private and
intimate thoughts as somehow “other,” then where is the “I”? Who or what is it? It has
no attributes as such, no qualities; it simply sees. Hence the Hindu sage Sri Ramana
Maharshi said that the question “Who am I?,” taken back far enough, will lead to
enlightenment.
Enlightenment as customarily conceived is a somewhat shadowy concept. About
all one can say of it is that it is a higher state of consciousness than we’re accustomed
to or for that matter usually believe possible. In light of the ideas I’ve sketched out,
however, we might be able to say a bit more. The consciousness that causes the world
to arise is common to all things, human and nonhuman, animate and inanimate; there
is nothing that does not possess it to some degree. But we almost never experience it
in this universal way. On the contrary, it is always me, my consciousness, fenced in
with rigid lines to insulate it from all others. It is precisely this rigid distinction, which
is to a great extent artificial and delusory, that constitutes the sleep of man. In the
words of Sri Ramana Maharshi: “Only one Consciousness, equally distributed
everywhere. You through delusion give It unequal distribution. No distribution, no
everywhere.”6 Or, as the Greek sage Heraclitus says, “Consciousness is common to
all, but most people live as if they had their own private minds.”7

Enlightenment, it would seem, lies precisely in the recognition of this truth, not
through the mediation of concepts but directly and intuitively. It may and often does
come in an instant. Such insight may be dazzling for the one who experiences it, but it
may also not be. For many people, I suspect, it comes “as a thief in the night,” and
they cast it aside in the belief that enlightenment means that the heavens open and one
sees ladders full of angels going up and down, or that one becomes instantly
omniscient.
In any event, this experience of insight — whether we call it enlightenment,
illumination, gnosis, or something else — marks a fundamental shift in an individual’s
orientation. Afterward she is not necessarily immune to the vicissitudes of life: joys
and sorrows and aches and pains come as they always have. But in a subtle way they
have lost their hold on her. They are no longer absolutes, to be taken at face value.
She is aware of a dimension of mind in herself that is above the passing thrills and
irritations of existence. This is supernally real and can never be taken away, and so is
to be valued above all things. “The kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hid in a
field: the which when a man hath found, he hideth, and for joy thereof goeth and
selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field” (Matthew 13:44).8
From a certain point of view, the spiritual path can be divided into two parts. In
the first part, the individual senses that what we customarily take to be reality is no
such thing, that there is something much more to be found. He looks and looks for it;
he reads, studies, meditates, goes to hear the lectures of wise and holy people, and
undergoes many exercises and disciplines and austerities. Then, in an instant, bidden
or unbidden, the realization comes, whether through the whack of a Zen master’s stick
or in a flash of insight that occurs during a humdrum chore. After this, nothing can be
the same again. Even the spiritual path is no longer the same. The individual is not
omniscient or omnipotent, but he now knows something real and true. Study and
practice also become reoriented. They now are aimed not at producing this realization
but at stabilizing it and integrating it into all levels of his life and mind.
Such a person even finds that his attitude toward spiritual literature undergoes a
distinctive change. He begins to discern — among the innumerable books and ideas
available in the marketplace — those that come from genuine knowing and those that
do not. The difference is subtle but remarkably sharp. He may even pick up a book,
glance through it, and find himself saying about the author, “Ah! He almost knows!”
Preoccupation with doctrinal orthodoxies, the truth of “my” religion over all others,
and an arrogant contempt for other points of view almost always indicate that the
writer does not know.
What then of Parvati? She is the world, the sum total of all experience. I use the
word experience because it seems to be the most all-encompassing of the terms

available. Your experience, your world, includes not only your thoughts and emotions
and sensations but your memories, dreams, and imaginations. Present-day knowledge
has a refined set of criteria for determining which things are defined as “real” and
which are not (I spell these out later), but all of your experience is real as experience.
If you are delirious with fever and start to hallucinate, the delusory images you see
have no objective existence, but even so you are still experiencing something.
I might have picked a term other than experience, one that might be more
evocative of previous philosophical outlooks. Had I chosen representation, for
example, what I am saying would immediately reveal its affinities with the thought of
Arthur Schopenhauer. (The equivalent term in Schopenhauer’s German is
Vorstellung.) Schopenhauer writes:
That the objective existence of things is conditioned by a representer of them,
and that consequently the objective world exists only as representation, is no
hypothesis, still less a peremptory pronouncement, or even a paradox put
forward for the sake of debate and argument. On the contrary, it is the surest
and simplest truth, and a knowledge of it is rendered more difficult only by the
fact that it is indeed too simple, and that not everyone has sufficient power of
reflection to go back to the first elements of his consciousness of things.9
Schopenhauer, of all the great Western philosophers, was the only one who
revealed any deep or genuine understanding of the philosophy of India. And yet in our
civilization, his philosophy and others like it, which are broadly grouped under the
rubric of “idealism,” have always occupied a minority position. Why?
Sometimes these theories run aground on the problem of solipsism. They may
appear to reduce the entire universe to my private experience — a counterintuitive
conclusion. After all, I seem to be moving around among other beings very much like
me, who have or say they are having experiences very much like mine; why should I
assume that I alone am a conscious subject?
The idea that I am the only being having conscious experience is so utterly
untenable that practically no one has seriously tried to maintain it. Curiously,
however, it’s an assumption we automatically make about a significant part of our
experience: the dream world. In our dreams we encounter a reality that is in many
ways similar to waking life: there are objects, places, even people. But we
automatically assume we are the only genuine conscious subjects in this world. Some
years ago I had a lucid dream in which I was sitting on a seashore. Next to me was an
eighteen-year-old boy. I became aware I was dreaming, and when I shared this insight
with my companion, he said indignantly, “You mean you think I’m a dream

character?” He was insulted.
The interplay of dreaming and waking life is so mysterious and evanescent that, if
we reflect on it, we may end up repeating the commonplace sentiment that “life is a
dream.” Or, like certain Hindus, we might decide that the only reason we think
waking life is real, while dreams are not, is that we spend more of our time in the
former. Some Tibetan Buddhists practice a rigorous yoga that is intended to maintain
an unbroken line of consciousness from the waking to the dream state, so as to reveal
the essentially empty nature of all phenomena. Even if we don’t go this far, if we have
done a certain amount of introspection we might reach a conclusion echoed in esoteric
teaching: at times in our dreams we stray beyond the boundaries of our private
imaginings and enter a world that, although it is not real in the customary sense, has a
certain subtle substantiality and operates according to laws that are in many respects
like those of waking life.
In any event, Schopenhauer’s position presents other problems as well: for
example, if all the universe is representation, what was there before there was anyone
to perceive it? Much of this argument is based on an unconscious anthropomorphism
— assuming that our consciousness is the only kind, or that consciousness deserves
the name only to the degree that it resembles our own. Schopenhauer again:
Animals existed before men, fishes before land animals, plants before fishes,
and the inorganic before that which is organic; consequently the original mass
had to go through a long series of changes before the first eye could be
opened. And yet the existence of this whole world remains for ever dependent
on that first eye that opened, were it even that of an insect. For such an eye
necessarily brings about knowledge, for which and in which alone the whole
world is, and without which it is not even conceivable. The world is entirely
representation, and as such requires the knowing subject as the supporter of its
existence.10
Schopenhauer is willing to push his definition of a “knowing subject” at least to
the extent of including insects. Nonetheless, it sounds as if the world did not exist
before there was someone to perceive it, even if that someone had six legs. Yet as
Schopenhauer knew, the world existed for immeasurable eons before the appearance
of anything he would regard as a knowing subject. He tries to evade this difficulty by
saying that representation belongs not to things as they are — what, following Kant,
he calls the “thing in itself” — but only to things as they are perceived. Only will
belongs to the thing in itself. And will has always existed: it is eternal, beyond time,
space, and causality, like the Forms of Plato’s philosophy (with which Schopenhauer
explicitly equates his concept of will).11 There was always will, but there was

representation only after the emergence of a knowing subject.
This is a problematic view, not least because it implies that time, space, and
causality (which are characteristics of representation rather than of will) did not exist
before the appearance of a knowing subject. This is hard to credit. Even if we stretch
Schopenhauer’s concept of the knowing subject to include any form of life, life
appeared on earth somewhat under 3.8 billion years ago, while the universe is
currently believed to be around 13.7 billion years old.
The other major Western philosopher to hold that the world is entirely composed
of experience was Bishop Berkeley. According to him, objects consist of nothing
more than a congeries of impressions registered by a conscious mind. “A certain
colour, taste, smell, figure and consistence having been observed to go together, are
accounted one distinct thing, signified by the name apple,” he writes. And nothing
exists unless it is perceived: “Their [that is, objective things’] esse [being] is percipi
[to be perceived], nor is it possible they should have any existence out of the minds or
thinking things which perceive them.”12
The obvious objection is this: Does a tree cease to exist when I turn away from it,
only to reappear when I turn back? Clearly not. Berkeley replies, “When I deny
sensible things an existence out of the mind, I do not mean my mind in particular, but
all minds. Now, it is plain that they have an existence exterior to my mind; since I find
them by experience to be independent of it. There is therefore some other Mind
wherein they exist, during the intervals between the times of my perceiving them; as
likewise they did before my birth, and would do after my supposed annihilation.… It
necessarily follows there is an omnipresent eternal Mind, which knows and
comprehends all things.”13 For Berkeley, who was an Anglican bishop, this
omnipresent eternal Mind is God.
Berkeley’s system no doubt reconciled faith and reason for his own thinking, but
most philosophers since his time have not been so convinced. Berkeley’s God looks
very much like a deus ex machina: having decided that to be is to be perceived,
Berkeley needs to come up with someone who is looking when no one else is. Like
Schopenhauer’s, this approach stumbles on its anthropomorphism: the consciousness
that perceives has to be humanlike. Since the nonhuman and inanimate realms possess
no consciousness of any sort, this supreme, transcendent intelligence has to be that of
a personal God.
Both Schopenhauer’s and Berkeley’s views have much to recommend them. The
world is the sum total of that which is experienced, but not just by human subjects or,
for that matter, by living creatures. Consciousness, the capacity for recognition and
response, is embedded in all things, and nothing could exist without it. As noted in the
previous chapter, Edison says, “Look at the thousands of ways in which atoms of

hydrogen combine with those of other elements, forming the most diverse substances.
Do you mean to say that they do this without intelligence?” Intelligence, or, shall we
say, consciousness, is embedded in all things, and nothing could exist without it. By
taking this step, we need not stretch our imaginations to conceive of how a substantial
world could exist before the arrival of a “knowing subject”; nor must we invoke the
artificial notion of a transcendent deity who exists merely to keep an eye on things.
Consciousness and experience, “I” and the world — or “heaven” and “earth,” as they
are sometimes called symbolically — are revealed as the fundamental axes of reality.
We then find ourselves asking what is real. The answers to this question over the
centuries can be broadly divided into two types. One is the mystical view that only
what is eternal and unchanging is real. Although this idea may look highly “Eastern”
to us today, it actually has a long and distinguished ancestry in Western philosophy —
for example, in Plato. He discusses it in a number of his works, but the best-known
account appears in The Republic, where he contends that, in the world of sensory
appearances, everything is relative. Something is beautiful in one context, ugly in
another; an act that is moral in one set of circumstances is immoral in another, and so
on. None of these things, then, can be counted as really having these characteristics;
in a sense they both do and do not have them. As Plato’s mouthpiece, Socrates, says,
“It is impossible to form a stable conception of any of them as either being what it is,
or not being what it is, or being both, or neither.… The welter of things which the
masses conventionally regard as beautiful and so on mill around somewhere between
unreality and perfect reality.”14
There is a semantic difficulty here that is often overlooked. The word in Plato’s
Greek that is usually translated as “reality” is ousía, literally, “being.” If we
understand this point, Plato’s reasoning becomes much clearer. How can you say
something “is” when you find that, in respect to anything you can say about it, it both
“is” and “is not”? How can you say something is green when it looks green in one
light and yellow or gray in another?
Nonetheless, the English terms are real and reality, and their etymology suggests
how we native speakers of English view the matter. These words derive from the
Latin res, “thing.” In English, reality is inextricably bound up with thingness. We see
as much in the term real estate. When you buy a house, you don’t care that the
materials composing it were not a house in the past and someday in the (let us hope
remote) future will no longer be a house. Nor do you care that in a sense the house
both is and is not white. What matters is that it is a house you can see and touch and
live in now, and that the plumbing is in good shape.
Property matters aside, in the day-to-day world there are, I would suggest, five
criteria that something has to satisfy in order for us to accept it as real:

1.     It must be perceptible to the senses in a stereoscopic way. That is, it must
resemble what it is to all the senses and from all angles. Once when I was
young, I was in my room around twilight, when I glanced across the hall into
my father’s bedroom and saw what looked like a dead mouse in the middle of
the floor. I was puzzled, because I knew we didn’t have mice in the house. I
looked at the object for some time, trying to figure out what it might be, but
no matter how hard I tried, I could not see it as anything other than a mouse.
Finally I got up to take a closer look at it. I found it was a crumpled-up piece
of tissue paper that had missed the wastebasket. In this case, what had looked
like a mouse proved, from a more comprehensive point of view, to be
otherwise. Consequently it was not really a mouse.
2.    The object must have a certain stability. It can’t appear and vanish or change
form in unpredictable ways.
3.    It must be publicly accessible. Anyone who is present must be able to
perceive it. Anyone here principally means a sane, rational, sober adult. The
testimony of children, the insane, and people who are intoxicated is viewed
with much more suspicion.
4.    It must be observed in waking life. Objects in dreams may appear to have
many of the characteristics I’ve described, but even so they are not accounted
as real.
5.    It must obey our preconceptions about what is and is not possible. If you say
you saw something that is supposed not to exist, your testimony will be
seriously doubted. You may even doubt your own senses, the power of whose
evidence is often weaker than that of our preconceptions.
Anything that fits these criteria will generally be taken as real. If something fails
to satisfy even some of these requirements, it will raise doubts. Take the typical
sighting of a ghost. The apparition may not be entirely stable: it may appear and
disappear suddenly. It may not seem substantial to all the senses: you may be able to
see it but may also find that your hand passes through it without resistance. It may not
be perceptible to everyone. One person may see a ghost standing in a corner of the
room, but others who are present may not. Finally and perhaps most important, the
existence of ghosts is highly disputed. Even if the experience satisfies all the other
criteria — say there are several people present who witness the same thing — it will
probably be doubted later by those who were not there (and maybe by some who
were) on the grounds that there is no such thing as ghosts.
The criteria I’ve given seem to be more or less universal, prevailing over most if
not all periods and cultures. What is accounted as real must fit into our

preconceptions. I must add, however, that the content of our preconceptions may
differ according to time and place, sometimes wildly. Many cultures today give far
more credence than we do to such things as ghosts, spirits good and evil, possession,
witchcraft, and similar things. So, for that matter, did Western civilization five
hundred years ago. It’s strange to read court testimonies from the era of the witch
hunts and encounter a man who confesses to turning himself into a toad — along with
a judge and jury who accept his testimony.
We can see how these criteria work by examining cases where the reality of a
thing is subject to doubt. The parapsychologist Andrija Puharich tells of a study of the
Indian rope trick. Long a mainstay of fakirs, the trick runs so relentlessly counter to
our views of reality — and even of what sleight of hand can accomplish — that some
have denied it has ever been done at all.
Puharich describes a demonstration of this trick arranged by some scientists:
Dr. Rudolf von Urban, Dr. Alexander Pilcz, and some colleagues made a study
of the Indian Rope Trick. They were interested in the problem of mass
hallucination and it was their idea that the Indian Rope Trick would serve as a
good experiment for their purposes. They collected several hundred people
and a Fakir to put on the show. They saw the Fakir throw a coil of rope in the
air and saw a small boy climb up the rope and disappear. Subsequently
dismembered parts of this small boy came tumbling to the ground; the Fakir
gathered them up in the basket, ascended the rope, and both the boy and the
Fakir came down smiling. It is astonishing that several hundred people
witnessed this demonstration and agreed in general on the details as described.
There was not a single person present in the crowd who could deny these
facts. However, when the motion pictures of this scene were developed
subsequently, it was found that the Fakir had walked into the center of the
group of people and thrown the rope into the air, but that it had fallen to the
ground. The Fakir and his boy assistant had stood motionless by the rope
throughout the rest of the demonstration. The rope did not stay in the air, the
boy did not ascend the rope. In other words, everyone had witnessed the same
hallucination. Presumably the hallucination originated with the Fakir as the
agent or sender. At no time in the course of the demonstration did the Fakir tell
the audience what they were going to see. The entire demonstration was
carried out in silence.15
How does this fit with our criteria for reality? In the first case, the idea that
someone might throw a rope into the air and climb up it runs contrary to our

preconceptions of how the world is, so this alone would give cause for suspicion.
What proved the trick to be a hallucination was the testimony of the camera, which
gave a more stereoscopic view, in this case presumably because, unlike the minds of
the spectators, it was not prone to suggestion.
For those who might trust in the camera, which is supposedly incapable of deceit,
I might cite a phenomenon discussed on the Internet: orbs. To quote Daniel
Pinchbeck, author of 2012: The Return of Quetzalcoatl, writing on the Reality
Sandwich website: “Orbs are best known as those mysterious balls of light that have
appeared on digital photographs for the last fifteen years, though some claim they can
see them with the naked eye as well. Orbs have spawned an enthusiastic subculture of
people who believe the blobby wisps are not dust particles or lens anomalies, but
angels, spirits, other-dimensional beings and so on.… Most people first discover orbs
when they are trying to photograph something else — friends at a party, a politician,
their cat.”16
In this case, it would appear to be the camera that is suffering from the delusion.
Again the doubt is triggered by our preconceptions: people generally don’t believe
there are orbs of light floating around the air. Moreover, orbs are not stable; they are
evanescent; and they don’t stand up very well to stereoscopic examination.
Sometimes they show up on camera, sometimes they can be seen with the naked eye,
but a rigorous criterion for reality would demand that they appear to both the camera
and the naked eye and, moreover, appear in much the same way to both. A person
who sees an orb, or takes a picture of one that cannot be explained as some fluke of
lighting, may not be persuaded that what he saw was unreal. But someone who hears
about it secondhand will probably be much more suspicious.
Set down on paper, these criteria may seem utterly obvious and pedestrian. So
they should. They underpin practically every move we make. They have been
established as a solid basis for enabling us to function on the plane of existence that
we call the physical world. They have been hashed out over millennia of human life;
no attempt at vindication on my part would validate them any further, and no attempt
at refutation would weaken our reliance on them. Even so, looking at them as a whole,
we might notice one startling fact: a great deal of what we experience is not “real” in
this sense, including thoughts, dreams, fantasies, even ideas and concepts.
I say more about this issue in chapter 5, but to give a quick illustration of what I’m
talking about, think of a green lion. Green lions don’t exist; we can all agree on that.
Yet you can imagine such a thing without too much difficulty. Assume also that you
have some talent for cartooning. You make some sketches of this green lion, and soon
you begin to draft some stories about it. You decide that they’re pretty good, and you
take them to a friend who works for a children’s television network. The network

likes the sketches and invites you to turn them into a series. Pretty soon you have
made millions of dollars out of something that, as we agreed initially, doesn’t exist.
Is money itself real? The overwhelming testimony of the majority of Americans
suggests that it is. In the old days, people used the expression “sound as a dollar.”
While Americans today don’t have the unshakable faith in our currency that we did a
couple of generations ago, we are possibly more prone than ever to account for
everything in terms of its value in dollars and cents. The bottom line is a Moloch to
which everything in our lives is sacrificed. But where is this supposedly real money?
It no longer takes the solid form of gold and silver; much of it no longer exists even as
coins or paper currency. For the most part it consists of nothing more substantial than
lines of numbers in the computers of banks and the Federal Reserve. With the great
financial crash of 2008, we witnessed trillions of dollars evaporate overnight. This
money existed nowhere except in the highly abstract form of putative values assigned
to certain types of debt. When it was discovered or decided that there were no such
values, the money evaporated and large investment houses immediately collapsed.
Hence reality, in the sense I’ve indicated, is only one small part of the panoply of
human experience. And yet we all too often take it as the only dimension of life that is
worth bothering with at all. One of the grimmest personifications of this attitude is
Mr. Gradgrind, the brutally practical industrialist in Charles Dickens’s novel Hard
Times: “A man of realities. A man of fact and calculations. A man who proceeds upon
the principle that two and two are four, and nothing over, and who is not to be talked
into allowing for anything over.… With a rule and a pair of scales, and the
multiplication table always in his pocket, sir, ready to weigh and measure any parcel
of human nature, and tell you exactly what it comes to.”17 This is our civilization in
sum, its industry and its economics and its science, and more and more often its
philosophy and religion as well. We can look at this Gradgrindian world as it has
taken shape around us and see how much we like the result.
Such is the trap the West has fallen into, but it is not the only one possible. Some
more rarefied and abstract sensibilities go in the other direction. Like Plato, they say
that only the eternal is truly real, and everything else is milling around “somewhere
between unreality and perfect reality.” This is also one meaning of a familiar prayer
from the Upanishads:
From the unreal (asat) lead me to the real (sat)!
From darkness lead me to light!
From death lead me to immortality!18
The Advaita Vedanta school of Indian philosophy expresses this attitude in its

very terminology. Consciousness (what the Samkhya school calls purusha) it knows
as Brahman or atman, atman meaning “Self”; prakriti is maya, or illusion. According
to Shankara, the great theorist of Advaita Vedanta, only what is changeless in the
“three times” —past, present, and future —is real; all else is illusory. This is the
version of Hindu philosophy that is best known in the West, but it is not the only one
that exists. Another view, described by Sir John Woodroffe, the great scholar of Indian
religion, is “that the world is Siva’s Experience and Siva’s Experience can never be
unreal.”19 (I say more about the relation between the Samkhya and the Advaita
Vedanta in the next chapter.)
Certainly it would be quixotic to launch a crusade to change the meaning of the
term real as it is used in our civilization. But we need not be enslaved by words.
Simply by acknowledging that experience extends far beyond material substance, we
can step out into new dimensions of life and mind, as the esoteric traditions have
always called us to do. Trees and stones and human artifacts have solidity and obey
certain laws of physics; but in their own realms, so do dreams and imaginings and our
occasional glimpses of transcendent being. Shiva and Parvati play the game of
consciousness on more boards than one.
*   This comment may arouse some doubt in Buddhists, one of whose primary doctrines is anatta, or “no-self.” I
discuss this point further in chapter 6, but for now let me say that this “self-other” distinction is fundamental
to the universe, even if, from a Buddhist point of view, both this type of consciousness and this universe are
delusory.

W
CHAPTER THREE
TWO AGAINST ONE
The Persistence of Dualism
hen Parvati, in the guise of the bewitching untouchable, tries to coax Shiva back
into her embrace, she remarks that he is an ascetic living free from duality.
What exactly does she mean by this? And why should duality be a good thing to
avoid?
The number two is widely regarded as an ill omen. Because two is the first
number to break away from unity, it is the number of the devil, and forked or two-
pronged objects are frequently associated with him. Indeed deuce is often a
euphemism for the devil. Jewish and Christian mystics noted that in Genesis the
second day of creation was the only one that God did not pronounce good, and the
unclean beasts went two by two into Noah’s ark, while the clean ones entered by
sevens.1 And in craps, the two, or “snake eyes,” is a losing throw.
This unfortunate number has proved no more auspicious for the philosophical
systems associated with it. The term dualism has been applied to several different
theories in different fields, all of them generally discredited. In the philosophy of
mind, it refers to René Descartes’s view that the mind and the body are two utterly
separate and distinct entities, running on parallel courses and connected only at the
pineal gland in the center of the head. Descartes had his own ingenious reasons for
making this claim: for example, the fact that I can imagine myself without a body, but
I cannot imagine myself without a mind, since the very fact of imagining means that I
have a mind. Nevertheless, few philosophers have accepted Descartes’s view, partly
because it seems to do little justice to the exquisite interaction between body and
mind. If the two are so separate, why should the one affect the other at all? Yet as we
all know, when the body drinks, the mind gets drunk.2

Originally, the word dualism was not meant to refer to Descartes’s philosophy. It
was coined around 1700 to characterize certain religious teachings which held that the
world is produced by the contention of two more or less equal forces, the good and
the evil, or the light and the dark. In the purest dualistic systems, such as
Manichaeism, these two forces are fundamentally irreconcilable: they do not spring
from the same source and can never be harmonized. The ultimate redemption of the
universe comes, not from integrating the two or even destroying the evil, but from an
elaborate form of cosmic purification in which the hidden particles of light are filtered
out from the darkness of matter that ensnares them.
Manichaeism, named after its founder, a prophet named Mani who lived in
Mesopotamia in the fourth century AD, flourished for almost a thousand years in
regions from China to North Africa. It probably (this claim is controversial) gave rise
to the medieval heresies of Bogomilism and Catharism. But Manichaeism and its
heirs failed to catch on in the long run. The reasons are complex — for one thing,
these movements were severely persecuted by their rivals — but had a great deal to
do with their gloomy exclusivism and their belief that the manifest world was
irredeemably evil. By approximately 1400, they were for all purposes extinct.3
Dualistic religion may have been easy to eradicate, but dualistic thinking is not so
easily avoided. My late friend Dr. Frederic Spiegelberg, emeritus professor of religion
at Stanford University, was fond of saying that most people are Manichaeans without
knowing it, making rigid and categorical distinctions between good and evil, us and
them, and so on. The Russian philosopher P. D. Ouspensky makes a similar
observation about the “formatory center,” which is his name for the mechanical aspect
of the intellect: “The formatory center can only count up to two. It always divides
everything in two: ‘bolshevism and fascism,’ ‘workers and bourgeois,’ ‘proletarians
and capitalists,’ and so on. We owe most modern catchwords to formatory thinking,
and not only catchwords but all modern popular theories. Perhaps it is possible to say
that at all times all popular theories are formatory.”4 More recently, psychologist
Stephen Larsen has pointed out that this kind of either-or thinking is prompted and
enhanced by irrational fear: “If you wish to induce a state of compliance in your
would-be constituency, it is clearly an advantage to frighten them. First induce the.…
fear response, and then offer them a loaded choice: be saved or be damned; convert or
die.” Larsen links the worldwide epidemic of fanatical fundamentalism to this habit of
mind.5
Then there is theological dualism: the belief in a creation that is radically other
than its creator, so that the gulf between God and his creatures can never be crossed.
Christianity in its most common forms is dualistic in this sense. Here is a more or less
typical statement of the prevailing view, in the words of the Presbyterian moderator of

the Soc.religion.christian newsgroup: “Christianity conceives of God as One. But it is
not an isolated One. Rather, God is a person, who is capable of affecting and being
affected by others.… In contrast to pantheist and related concepts, the creation is
genuinely distinct from God. The world has a genuine existence of its own. God cares
about and interacts with the creation. Human beings are responsible to God. As the
creator, God is responsible for the world and its history. While … the world is distinct
from God, it is not completely independent. God is thought of as continuously
sustaining the world.”6 Contrast the foregoing with this view, stated on the website of
the Florida-based Center for Non-Dualism: “Non-Dualism is the orientation that there
is one absolute reality without a second, and that each of us, although an individual
person, is one with that reality, just as a wave is not separate from the ocean.”7 Most
Christian theologians would find it hard to agree with this statement.
Even attempts to transcend dualism often end up doing unwitting obeisance to it.
In his book The Coming of the Cosmic Christ, the renegade Dominican monk
Matthew Fox lashes out in denunciation of dualistic thinking: “War is by definition
anthropocentric dualism carried to its logical conclusion: I kill you; you kill me; we
kill them; they kill us.” But in order to save us from this mentality, he gives a list of
things we must move away from and toward — all set out in a helpful two-column
format.8 What could be more dualistic than that?
These types of dualism are not my focus here, but I’ve mentioned them because,
while dualism is frequently attacked, it is not always clear which form is the target.
The type of dualism that I discuss here is the sort typified by the Samkhya and certain
other forms of traditional philosophy. I bring attention to it not out of some arcane
interest in obscure Eastern systems but because it touches profoundly on our notions
of — and experience of — reality.
First, however, it’s probably necessary to say something about the Samkhya. It is
considered to be one of six “orthodox” darshans, or perspectives, on the Hindu sacred
texts known as the Vedas. Of the other five, one, Yoga, is a household word in the
United States, but the traditional Yoga is not an array of stretching exercises; it is a
rigorous system of meditative practice that is meant to confer moksha, or spiritual
liberation. Another of the six darshans, Vedanta, is well known to students of Eastern
philosophy (I will say more about it later); the other three, Mimamsa, Nyaya, and
Vaisheshika, are recondite schools dealing mostly with logic and cosmology and are
all but unknown here.
Samkhya in Sanskrit means something like “enumeration” but might be better
rendered as “analysis.” It is a system that analyzes reality into its fundamental
components, not for the sake of mere speculation, but as a means of spiritual
liberation. Although I’ve just said that the Samkhya and Yoga are two separate

perspectives on the Hindu sacred tradition, this was not always the case. Heinrich
Zimmer, the great scholar of Indian religion, points out, “These two are regarded in
India as twins, the two aspects of a single discipline.” He comments:
As we read in the Bhagavad Gita: “Puerile and unlearned people speak of
‘enumerating knowledge’ (sankhya) and the ‘practice of introvert
concentration’ (yoga) as distinct from each other, yet anyone firmly
established in either gains the fruit of both. The state attained by the followers
of the path of enumerating knowledge is attained also through the exercises of
introvert concentration. He truly sees who regards as one the intellectual
attitude of enumerating knowledge and the practice of concentration.” The two
systems, in other words, supplement each other and conduce to the same
goal.9
Originally, then, the Samkhya was regarded as the theory and Yoga as the practice.
It’s particularly striking to realize that the Sanskrit root of yoga is yunakti, “to yoke”
(cognate with our own word yoke). If we render the word as integration, the two
perspectives together are defined as “analysis” and “integration” and are revealed to
be complements of each other. Something must be broken down and something else
integrated, rather as in the old alchemical formula “Solve et coagula”: “Dissolve and
coagulate.”
The origins of the Samkhya are lost in the remote past. Traditionally its founder
was held to be one Kapila, a sage about whom nothing is known. He is sometimes
identified with a monk of that name in the Indian epic cycle, who slew the sixty
thousand warrior sons of a king with one glance. (The nineteenth-century esotericist
H.P. Blavatsky explains the myth: “The 60,000 Sons, brutal, vicious, and impious, are
the personification of the human passions that ‘a mere glance of the sage’ — the Self
who represents the highest stage of purity that can be reached on earth — reduces to
ashes.”)10
In any event, the first ideas resembling those of the Samkhya can be found in the
Katha Upanishad, dated to as early as the fourth century BCE, and, as we’ve just seen,
in the Bhagavad Gita, dated roughly to between 500 and 200 BC.11 The period of the
classical Samkhya, however, is AD 300–600; its crowning text is the Samkhyakarika
of Ishvarakrishna, which must have been well known by AD 560, as it was translated
into Chinese around that date.12
Whether the Samkhya still survives as a living philosophical tradition in India is
unclear. A couple of years ago I asked this question of a Hindu scholar with whom I
happened to be chatting; he told me that it did not survive, that it had been absorbed

by other philosophical schools, particularly the Vedanta. The scholar K.B.
Ramakrishna Rao, writing in the 1960s, asserted, “The Samkhya is an out-moded
[school of] thought now.… If at any time Samkhya is mentioned, it is only as an
adversary.… It has only a historical value and its influence as a philosophy has
practically disappeared.”13
But this may not be entirely the case. Gerald J. Larson, perhaps the foremost
scholar of the Samkhya in the West, writes, “I had been under the impression that
Samkhya was no longer a living tradition in India,” but then he discovered a
monastery by the name of Kapila Matha in the Indian state of Bihar that claimed to be
practicing Samkhyayoga.14 Probably the best-known presentation of the Samkhya in
the West is in To Live Within, a highly regarded memoir by Lizelle Reymond about
her studies in a Himalayan hermitage with the Samkhya master Sri Anirvan (1896–
1978) in the middle of the twentieth century.15
Living or defunct, the Samkhya, as I’ve said, is a philosophical teaching that is
meant to confer spiritual liberation. What is it liberation from?
From the conventional, limited, and delusory view of reality. This view is
represented in every transitive sentence. There is a subject and an object — two
separate things — linked by an action represented by a verb:
Subject → Verb → Object
This stance is so apparently rock-solid that it can be difficult to shake oneself free
from it. Meditation in its many forms is one way of doing so, but there are others,
including, of course, spontaneous insight.
To taste the experience of liberation, simply close your eyes while remaining alert.
Watch the thoughts flicker across the screen of your mind like images on a film. At
first you may feel attachment or aversion to some of these images. They are
emphatically “mine” or “not mine”: that is, they are accepted or rejected depending on
any number of factors. But if you can begin to relax these automatic responses, you
can watch these impressions more impartially, neither clinging to them nor pushing
them away. You realize that they come and go on their own; there is not much you can
do to stop them. At the same time, this very realization opens up a certain amount of
space between you and these thoughts, no matter how intensely you ordinarily
identify with them. You recognize that they are not you. You begin to intuit the fact
that you are actually the silent, nameless, qualityless watcher that observes all these
things. Your experience begins to take this shape:
Watcher → Impressions

The “watcher” is what the Samkhya calls purusha. Here is how the
Samkhyakarika characterizes purusha: It is “(a) a witness; (b) possessed of isolation
or freedom; (c) indifferent; (d) a spectator; (e) and inactive.” The stream of
impressions is prakriti. It is not conscious, but “because of the proximity (or
association) of the two — i.e.,prakriti and purusa — the unconscious one appears as
if characterized by consciousness.”16
To glimpse this truth — that what is conscious in us is distinct from what it
experiences, even internally — gives a profound insight into human nature and
destiny. As Larson writes, “Man’s deepest selfhood, according to classical Samkhya,
is not his empirical ego structure or even his intelligence. Man’s deepest selfhood is
rather the very fact of consciousness.”17
The relationship between purusha and prakriti, between consciousness and its
experience, is subtle. Indeed the disputes on this point mark some of the principal
differences among the various Hindu schools of philosophy and between these
schools and Buddhism. It’s important to touch on some of these differences because
of the light they cast on the nature of mind.
To begin with, as we’ve already seen,prakriti is not conscious. Why? Because it is
by definition that which is seen — it is in its entirety the contents of consciousness.
But as noted in the quoted text, because of the presence of purusha “the unconscious
one appears as if characterized by consciousness.” Prakriti acquires a kind of
fictitious consciousness because purusha is identified with it. (Or as the myth puts it,
Parvati cheats Shiva out of his attributes.) As paradoxical as this may sound, it is
nothing more than you can see with even a little meditative experience. Usually you
believe that the stream of thoughts and feelings that course through your mind are
you; you identify with them. But if you step back and look at them, you can see that
they are not you. Actually the very fact that you can see them from a distance proves
that they are not you. What is you is the silent witness that is ever present, ever
seeing, and ever still.
Prakriti, by contrast, is unconscious but perpetually active. It is the source of all
the movement, energy, and dynamism of the universe. As you know, you can’t stop
the movement of the universe for a single second. In fact you can barely stop the
movement of your own thoughts for a single second. This is the power of prakriti. In
Hindu philosophy, this power has a name of its own: shakti, the primal energy that
animates all things. The occult philosophers of the European Renaissance had a
similar concept: they called it anima mundi, “the soul of the world.” Shakti is the
source and substance of the endless doing that constitutes so much of our lives and
indeed of the universe.
The Samkhya does not speak of shakti as such. Rather it divides the action of

prakriti into three gunas, or “strands.” One is rajas, the source of all movement. The
second is tamas: inertia. The third is sattva, the force of balance and equilibration.
Everything in manifest existence is made up of these three forces in varying degrees
of admixture.18
It is not hard to see in the gunas the sacred ternary that under-girds many esoteric
traditions. Gurdjieff spoke of three forces, which he called “Holy Affirming,” “Holy
Denying,” and “Holy Reconciling.” These can be related to rajas, tamas, and sattva,
respectively. So can the traditional Chinese trinity of Heaven above, Earth beneath,
and Man, the entity that connects the two. Even the Christian Trinity resembles this
schema, with the ever-begetting Father, the ever-begotten Son, and the Holy Spirit,
the Comforter or reconciler. Nor should this surprise us: if these truths are universal,
they must have been discovered and known universally, no matter about the
differences in names and nuances.
The next phase of insight is more difficult. It requires you to see not only your
thoughts but your own actions, and your impulses toward action, as external to the
Self. Now it is not so much “I want to move,” but rather “the impulse to move arises.”
This impulse arises out of prakriti. Action may well follow: you get up. But here too
the entirety of the action — the impulse toward movement, as well as the action itself
— can be revealed as nothing more than a collection of impressions. The silent
watcher does not “do” them; rather it watches these impulses, the activity of the
gunas, arise and cohere and dissolve; it is, as the Samkhyakarika says, “inactive.”
The watcher, then, turns out to be rather passive. It has been characterized that
way by other traditions as well. Esoteric Christianity — which is not so far from the
Samkhya as one might think — frequently speaks of “passions.” These are not the
same as the passions that we ordinarily think of when we consider the term; probably
the best word for them in present-day English is impulses, which has something of the
impersonal and quasi-external connotation that is necessary. Our word passion is
derived from the Latin pati, “to suffer”; it has the same root as passive, as is obvious
on the printed page. Passions are not something that consciousness does; rather they
are something it experiences, it suffers in every sense of that word.*
In the Samkhya, the whole process of spiritual liberation is kaivalya, or “isolation”
— the detachment of purusha, or primordial mind, from its experience.19 You are not
your thoughts; you are not your feelings; you are not even your actions. This
realization in expressed in the myth of the dice game: Shiva, having “lost” all his
attributes to Parvati, goes off, unruffled, to the forest to live the life of an ascetic.
Purusha has no attributes; they all belong to prakriti; that is why purusha always
loses the game. But since these attributes are not part of it to begin with, it loses
nothing in actuality. Here is how the Samkhyakarika characterizes this state:

Then, the purusa, comfortably situated like a spectator, sees prakriti whose
activity has ceased due to the completion of her purpose, and who has turned
back from the seven forms.…
(Says the) indifferent one (or spectator), “I have seen (her)”; the other
ceases saying, “I have been seen.” Though the two are still in proximity, no
(further) creation (takes place).20
Although in this passage purusha is “comfortably seated like a spectator,” the
ultimate Samkhya goal of isolation, the utter and irreversible divorce of consciousness
from all of its experience, does not offer an attractive prospect to the Western
sensibility or, possibly, to any sensibility. In fact the Samkhya may have gone into
eclipse partly for this reason. “The description of the state of salvation as kaivalya
(‘isolation’) is a stark, austere mode of religious thought, which obviously would
exercise little popular appeal,” as Larson observes.21
There are other likely reasons for the decline of the Samkhya. Some are of little
concern here: political instability in India in the late first millennium AD; the
increasing ossification of the Samkhya into a standardized system that allowed little
room for original thought; and its reluctance to generate religious institutions.22 But
this stark and nihilistic picture of salvation must have been one of the most crucial
factors. To many, the Samkhya goal of kaivalya must have looked as dispiriting as
agnostic materialism did to me at Oxford.
Another element in the Samkhya’s decline may have been its teaching that there
are many purushas. That is to say, there is not one great consciousness in which all
partake but any number of atomized bits of consciousness that can only be liberated
and sent into ultimate isolation. This too was no doubt dispiriting. Moreover, the
reasons posited for it in the Samkhya are not convincing:
The plurality of purusas is established,
(a) because of the diversity of births, deaths, and faculties;
(b) because of actions or functions (that take place) at different times;
(c) and because of differences in the proportions of the three gunas (in
different entities).23
This argument is easily refuted. If, as the Samkhya says, purusha and prakriti are
radically and ultimately distinct and have nothing to do with one another, how could
all these actions, functions, births, deaths, gunas, and so on have anything genuine to
do with purusha? They too are elements of prakriti. Therefore the concept of the

plurality of purushas collapses, and we are left with one, single, indivisible purusha,
one universal consciousness that, because of its mistaken self-identification with the
doings of prakriti, imagines itself to be plural.
The Vedas, the sacred scriptures from which all orthodox Hindu systems claim
their authority, portray purusha as Man, the cosmic human, or, in the words of
Heinrich Zimmer, “the living entity behind and within all the metamorphoses of our
life in bondage.”24 A Vedic hymn says:
The Man [literally purusha] as a thousand heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand
feet. He pervaded the earth on all sides and extended beyond it as far as ten
fingers.
It is the Man who is all this, whatever has been and whatever is to be. He
is the ruler of immortality.…
Such is his greatness, and the Man is yet more than that. All creatures are a
quarter of him; three quarters of him are what is immortal in heaven.25
Purusha is not a familiar term even among many Westerners who are interested in
Hindu philosophy. A more common word is atman, often rendered as “Self” (usually
capitalized). This usage comes from the Advaita Vedanta, which is by far the best
known of all Hindu philosophies in the West, largely because many of the most
illustrious Hindu mystics of the past century and a half — such as Sri Ramakrishna,
Swami Vivekananda, and Sri Ramana Maharshi — belonged to this school. Advaita
means “nondual.” (There are dualistic and semidualistic forms of Vedanta, but they
are almost unknown in the West.)26 Unlike the Samkhya, Advaita Vedanta teaches
that mind consists not of an infinite number of atomistic purushas but of one single
atman. Moreover, atman is Brahman, the supreme creator. There is no dualism — that
is, there is ultimately no distinction between the Self that lies embedded in each of us
(located in the heart and no bigger than a thumb, according to one of the
Upanishads)27 and the creator of the universe.
This view, taken to its logical conclusion, overturns even some of the doctrines
often associated with Hinduism. My friend Dr. Spiegelberg once told me of a
conversation he had with Ananda K. Coomaraswamy, the great scholar of Indian
religion. Dr. Spiegelberg asked Coomaraswamy if he believed in reincarnation.
Coomaraswamy said nothing for a painfully long time — perhaps five minutes.
Finally he replied, “No. It is all Brahman. It is all one.” To Coomaraswamy, even the
concept of an individual self that reincarnates was, in an ultimate sense, false. All
beings are mere manifestations of Brahman, the creator and soul of the universe. This
may not be much consolation to those who want to be assured of personal survival,

but then it is saying that personal survival is not necessary. Personal survival is
ultimately only an obstruction to the knowledge of the immortal and indestructible
Self.
Illusion, maya in Sanskrit, plays a crucial role in Advaita Vedanta, for reasons that
may already be plain. If everything is actually one, where does the multiplicity of
things come from? Multiplicity can’t be so in fact; it must be merely appearance.
Hence the manifest universe is illusory — but not in the way we customarily
understand that word. To us, a mirage is an illusion; it is an image of something that is
not there. Maya to the Vedantins is different. As Hans Torwesten explains in his
introduction to the Vedanta philosophy:
Where this maya-mirage obtains — and for most people it is very much there
— it is not only taken for real but also for the totality of reality. Yet the
moment enlightenment occurs the whole mirage vanishes in a flash. The
comparison with someone waking from a dream is obvious. We may laugh
about it afterward. Over and over in Vedanta literature we find enlightenment
and illusion compared to a rope taken for a snake in insufficient light. For the
person experiencing this, the illusionary snake is very real indeed — but in
bright light the imagined snake is instantly revealed to be just a rope.28
The rope-snake analogy resembles the incident mentioned in chapter 2 in which I
mistook a crumpled piece of tissue for a mouse. But the thrust of the Vedanta
metaphor is different: Everything we see is like a rope mistaken for a snake. We
misunderstand the fundamental nature of everything. As Coomaraswamy says, “It is
all Brahman. It is all one.”
In this discussion we must avoid the semantic trap hidden in the words real and
reality. As I’ve already pointed out, in English these words are very closely tied to
thingness. To say a thing is unreal, then, is very much like saying a thing is not a
thing: an obvious contradiction. The Vedanta does not say that. Rather, it says we fail
to recognize that all things are manifestations of the One. In the words of Shankara,
the greatest exponent of the Advaita Vedanta, “Man drinks the wine of Maya,
becomes deluded and begins to see things as separate from each other, so that he talks
of ‘you’ and ‘I.’”29 Perceiving the world as a series of separate, isolated entities is
maya, and realizing the truth is enlightenment. Shankara also writes, “All the things
which we perceive exist here within (in our Self … ). Within is the whole of this
universe. By Maya it appears as external, like one’s own body in a mirror.”30
In his most renowned work, The Crest-Jewel of Discrimination, Shankara
discourses on the nature of maya:

She has no beginning. She is composed of the three gunas, subtle, beyond
perception. It is from the effects she produces that her existence is inferred by
the wise. It is she who gives birth to the whole universe.
She is neither being nor non-being, nor a mixture of both. She is neither
divided nor undivided, nor a mixture of both. She is neither an indivisible
whole, nor composed of parts, nor a mixture of both. She is most strange. Her
nature is inexplicable.31
There is another sense in which the Vedanta contends that the world is illusory:
when you awaken from it, the world ceases to exist. Another classic Advaita text, the
Yoga Vasistha, says, “As soon as we come to know our true nature (the Supreme
Reality), all sensations, perceptions and conceptions.… wither away. With the direct
knowledge of the Supreme Reality, we directly cognise their absence.”32
Although Shankara took great pains to refute the Samkhya philosophy, the
difference between the Samkhya and his Advaita Vedanta are comparatively small and
subtle. As the Vedantin Swami Prabhavananda has observed, the “concept of Prakriti
corresponds, more or less, to Shankara’s concept of Maya — but with this important
difference: Prakriti is said to be other than, and independent of [,] Purusha (the
absolute Reality) while Maya is said to have no absolute reality but to be dependent
on Brahman.”33
This makes sense as far as it goes, at least if we interpret it to mean that there can
be no experience (maya or prakriti) without an experiencer (Brahman or atman in the
Vedanta, purusha in the Samkhya). All the same, much of the Advaita Vedanta is
frustrating. Like many nondualistic views, it stumbles at this question: if everything is
Brahman and Brahman is all-knowing — indeed Brahman is knowing — how did this
delusion known as maya come to exist in the first place? How did pure knowing give
rise to not-knowing?
The Vedanta’s answer is more than a little vague. Shankara writes, “The sun’s rays
bring forth layers of cloud. By them, the sun is concealed; and so it appears that the
clouds alone exist. In the same way, the ego, which is brought forth by the Atman,
hides the true nature of the Atman; and so it appears that the ego alone exists.”34
Swami Prabhavananda adds, “We are forced to conclude, as Shankara does, that
Maya, like Brahman, is without any beginning. Ignorance as the cause and world-
appearance as the effect have existed always and will always exist. They are like seed
and tree. The ‘coupling of the real and unreal,’ produced by our ignorance, is a
process universally evident in our daily lives.”35 But none of this really tells how or
why the ego is “brought forth by the Atman” — that is, how not-knowing can be
produced by pure knowing.

Moreover, if all is Brahman, all is one, then we might expect the Advaita Vedanta
to espouse a version of what some Christian theologians call the via positiva, or
“positive way” — in this context, a total identification of all things with Brahman,
since all things are Brahman. The Vedanta’s mystical techniques would involve
ecstatic union rather than radical detachment, which one might identify with dualistic
philosophies such as the Samkhya.
But the thrust of Advaita Vedanta is quite the opposite. Constantly it preaches
detachment. To the question “Who is free?” Shankara replies, “He who is
dispassionate.” Elsewhere he says:
Kill this deadly attachment to body, wife, children and others. The seers who
have overcome it go to that high dwelling-place of Vishnu, the all-pervading.
This body, which is made up of skin, flesh, blood, arteries, veins, fat,
marrow and bone, is full of waste matter and filth. It deserves our contempt.36
Hardly a prescription for ecstatic union. This peculiar emphasis on the ultimate
unity of all things, combined with a remorseless urge to detachment, helps explain
why Sri Anirvan could say, “Modern India … follows intellectually a philosophical
religion which is composed for the most part of Samkhya with a little Vedanta. Every
cultured person knows it.”37 Although Sri Anirvan was a Samkhya master, I suspect
that this judgment was more than just special pleading.
To go any further into these issues would take us deeper into the thickets of Indian
philosophy than would be useful here, so let’s step back and take stock of what we’ve
surveyed.
In the first place, dualism is not so easy to avoid. There seems to remain the
fundamental distinction between consciousness and its contents — that which sees
and that which is seen, at all levels and in all dimensions. That which is seen is by
definition unconscious. Hence the Samkhya’s emphasis on the blind nature of
prakriti. Moreover, purusha, consciousness, has no characteristics other than pure
cognition. Strictly understood, it is neither infinite nor finite, neither individual nor
collective. It can assume any or all of these features or none. That is why the Samkhya
sees it as particular and the Vedanta as collective.
Purusha is both devoid of characteristics and endlessly mutable. All possibilities
are open to it — including being bound to its own experience and confusing itself
with what it experiences. It can become, or seem to become, what it beholds. This is
one meaning of the Greek myth of Narcissus, who drowns while admiring his own
reflection in the water. Consciousness “drowns” in this way. As paradoxical as this
may sound, it loses consciousness by being identified with its own reflections, its own

experience. This is the meaning of maya or, to use another Sanskrit term, avidya —
“ignorance” or, more accurately, “obliviousness.”
For consciousness to lose consciousness is, of course, a contradiction in terms
(which also may help explain why the Vedanta regards it as illusory). But in the world
as we know it, this situation happens often and, for practically the entire human race,
inevitably. Some kind of liberation is necessary, whether we call it enlightenment,
illumination, “isolation,” gnosis, or some other name. This liberation necessarily
requires the detachment of consciousness from its contents, in a way suggested by the
exercise I sketched earlier. Regardless of what one experiences, one needs to detach
the Self from what it mistakenly believes itself to be. In the language of the myth, no
matter how the dice are thrown, Shiva loses to Parvati. He must lose. Everything he
takes himself to be in fact belongs to her.
The result of this loss is, surprisingly, bliss. Shiva goes off contentedly to live the
life of a forest ascetic. This is the stage that the Samkhya equates with “isolation.” It
is not a stark, barren, nihilistic kind of isolation of the sort experienced by the heroes
of existentialist novels, but the bliss of perfect freedom and equanimity. You can
encounter it at times in meditation, which can produce a state of samadhi — a kind of
consciousness without contents that is both peaceful and blissful.
Even this phase is not the complete story. Parvati goes off in search of Shiva
again, and eventually they reunite. That is, after detaching itself from its experience,
consciousness reunites with it, but this time in a lighter, more balanced fashion.
Purusha is no longer, like Narcissus, submerged in prakriti. As noted earlier, the
Samkhyakarika puts it this way: “Though the two are still in proximity, no (further)
creation (takes place).” Consciousness is aware of all it experiences — thoughts,
feelings, even passions come and go — but is not enslaved by these things, does not
cling to or identify itself with them.
We could go through the myths and scriptures of many traditions and find
countless expressions of these truths. In Egyptian myth, Osiris — the personification
of what the Hindus call purusha — is slain and cut into pieces by his brother Set, who
represents the force of oblivion.38 Osiris’s wife, Isis, the force of awakening, collects
the scattered pieces of his corpse and reassembles and restores life to them. In short,
consciousness is dismembered by its own attachment to and identification with
multiplicity. Esoterically understood, this is death. The esoteric meaning of the story
of Christ is much the same. The God-man descends to earth; he is crucified on a cross
of time and space, but he rises again on the third day to new life. Consciousness takes
form in the world, where it is crucified by the vicissitudes of its own experience, but
in the end it does not matter. Because it is immortal and indestructible, even its
apparent death is unimportant, as it will rise from the dead in a new and more glorious

form. The similarity of these and many other death-and-resurrection myths indicates
that this truth, perhaps the central one of human life, has been universally recognized
and handed down over millennia.
The myths may explain how this all happens, but they are considerably less
explicit about why. Why should it be like this, and not some other way? The Kabbalah
says that the universe was created so that God could behold God in his own reflection.
Of course, insofar as this reflection is seen, insofar as it is the object of knowledge, it
cannot at the same time and in the same way be the subject. That is, knowing must of
necessity bring about not-knowing. As I emphasized in chapter 2, there is no absolute
stance of knowing or not-knowing; the knower is, or can be, known. But insofar as it
has the aspect of the known — and everything in the manifest world has this aspect to
some degree — it is mindless and unseeing. This is the source of the maya and the
avidya of which the Indian philosophers speak. It is also the samsara, “delusion,” of
the Buddhists. A text attributed to Padmasambhava, the legendary wizard who
brought Buddhism to Tibet in the eighth century AD, reads, “Realize that sentient
beings, from the moment they are experienced, do not possess any true existence and
therefore that samsara is the primordial purity of nonarising.”39 Prakriti, maya,
samsara — which are essentially different words for the same thing — are built into
the framework of the universe as we know it, and the universe can hardly be imagined
without them. They are also built into each molecule and atom and quark of our own
being.
*   Esoteric Christianity does not, of course, use the word purusha. Its equivalent in Greek, the language in
which esoteric Christianity was formulated, is nous, sometimes translated as “consciousness” or
mistranslated as “intellect.” The Greek equivalent for passions,pathe, has an etymology and connotation
similar to those of the English and Latin words.

T
CHAPTER FOUR
CONSTANT CONJUNCTION
The Problem of Causation
here is one philosophical problem that surpasses all others in difficulty. At the
same time it’s so important that it can make even the nature of being and the
existence of God look like mere side issues.
I’m speaking of causation — the idea that certain events have certain verifiable
and repeatable effects, and that these constitute the bedrock of reality. Plato summed
up this concept: “Everything that becomes or is created must of necessity be created
by some cause, for without a cause nothing can be created.”1
As we saw in chapter 1, God or the gods have often been invoked to serve as
causes of phenomena that people did not otherwise understand. As the philosopher
Henri Frankfort says of the worldview of ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia, “The gods
as personifications of power among other things fulfil early man’s need for causes to
explain the phenomenal world.”2 Later, philosophers such as Aristotle posited God as
a First Cause on these grounds: since everything seems to have a cause that has
preceded it, and since the chain of cause and effect cannot extend back forever, there
must have been, as Aristotle puts it, “some prime mover, whether singular or plural,
that is eternal and not itself movable.”3 God has usually been cast in this role.
Invoking God as the cause of the world in this way presupposes the existence of
cause and effect as we normally understand them. At first there doesn’t appear to be a
problem with this: the relationship of cause and effect looks like the most rudimentary
common sense. But in fact commonsense views of causation are, as philosophers have
long known, extremely difficult to justify or even comprehend. As far back as 1913,
the British philosopher Bertrand Russell wrote, “The law of causality, I believe, like
much that passes muster among philosophers, is a relic of a bygone age, surviving,

like the monarchy, only because it is erroneously supposed to do no harm.”4
The first complete investigation of the subject goes back to Aristotle. He
described four causes, all of which, he said, provide possible answers to the question
of why a thing should be as it is. For a statue of Apollo, for example, you could say,
“This is marble.” This is the material cause; the nature of the matter dictates in part
why a thing should be as it is. You could also say of the statue, “This was made by
Phidias,” Phidias being the sculptor who actually made it. This is the efficient cause.
Another response would be: “This was made to be put in the Temple of Apollo,”
which would explain the purpose of its existence. This is the final cause. Finally, you
could say, “This is Apollo,” which would explain why it has the shape it has. This is
the formal cause.5
Practically every modern person who reads Aristotle’s account has the same
response: Most of these things are not causes in any sense in which we would
understand that term. The marble caused the statue? The form of Apollo caused the
statue? In fact the efficient cause is the only one that we would acknowledge today as
a cause in the familiar sense.
The Greek word that Aristotle used was aitía, and while cause is the best one-
word equivalent for it in general (our word comes from the Latin causa, which was
used by the medieval Scholastic philosophers to expound Aristotle’s four causes), it is
not, perhaps, the best translation for aitia here. A more idiomatic rendition would be
“reason”: the reasons that this statue is as it is include its material, its shape, its
purpose, and its creator.6 (“Reason” in this sense does not necessarily imply conscious
purpose.) This helps us get closer to what Aristotle was trying to say.
In any case, one of Aristotle’s four causes has been rigorously excluded from the
concept of causation in current physics and biology: the final cause. Science,
particularly in the past few generations, has obstinately insisted that there is no
purpose in the universe or in any part of it; all things are simply the mindless and
mechanical results of previous circumstances. Why has science taken this tack?
Because to acknowledge a purpose is tantamount to acknowledging some sort of
being who would have that purpose. This comes too close to the notion of God for
science to accept.
Nevertheless, as we’ve seen in chapter i, the concept of purpose, particularly in
living organisms, is hard to exclude entirely. It’s difficult, for example, to accept that
you simply happen to have a hand and that it happens to be useful for grasping and
making things. Purpose finds its way in as part of an explanation, whether that
purpose belongs to the Almighty Creator or to those humble bits of goo known as
DNA.

As science took shape in the seventeenth century and began to exclude the final
cause from its worldview, it had to find a substitute. That substitute was determinism.
The contemporary Dutch philosopher Menno Hulswit writes, “Probably the most
radical change in the meaning of cause happened during the seventeenth century, in
which there emerged a strong tendency to understand causal relations as instances of
deterministic laws. Causes were no longer seen as the active initiators of a change, but
as inactive nodes in a law-like implication chain.”7 According to this view, something
causes something else to happen as a result of certain invariable natural laws. The
laws of thermodynamics are among the best-known examples.
This determinism was challenged in what may be the most influential discussion
of causation since Aristotle. It appears in A Treatise of Human Nature, published in
1739–40 by the Scottish philosopher David Hume. Hume begins by saying that, as he
looks over the whole range of things that are called causes, he can find no one
characteristic they have in common. There are millions of things that are causes, but
there is no one quality that all of them share; being a cause is not a property like color
or size or shape. Similarly with effects.8 He then goes on to say that cause and effect
must therefore involve a relation. Its nature is this:
We remember to have had frequent instances of the existence of one species of
objects; and also remember, that the individuals of another species of objects
have always attended them, and have existed in a regular order of contiguity
and succession with regard to them. Thus we remember to have seen that
species of object we call flame, and to have felt that species of sensation we
call heat. Without any farther ceremony, we call the one cause and the other
effect, and infer the existence of the one from that of the other.…
Thus in advancing we have insensibly discover’d a new relation betwixt
cause and effect.… This relation is their CONSTANT CONJUNCTION.9
Causation, then, consists of nothing but “contiguity,” “succession,” and “constant
conjunction.” One event follows another; it must follow close on; and this sequence
must occur several times, more or less invariably.
Philosophers have objected to Hume’s argument by contending, for example, that
not every cause immediately precedes its effect, and that we sometimes infer cause-
and-effect relationships from one occurrence rather than many. Such objections are
legitimate but not fatal, and Hume’s theory can be refined in order to cope with them.
The human mind is sophisticated enough to infer, for example, that smoking is
“constantly conjoined” with lung cancer even though you never see a person smoking
a cigarette and then immediately coming down with cancer. Our entire sense of

causation does seem to come from this “constant conjunction,” even if cause and
effect are separated by other things and events between. Consider this string of digits:
53535353535//2439209821529398799585354735053 …
If you look at this string only up to the point of the double slashes (//), you may
decide that, in this string, 3 always comes immediately after 5. You would be
surprised to find that 2 was the first digit to come after the slashes. If you read the
string all the way across, you would come to the more accurate view that 3 always
appears as the third digit after 5, hence: 5293 … 5853 … and so on. This holds true no
matter what two numbers fall between. Using this reasoning, you don’t know what the
first number will be if this string of digits continues past the ellipsis (…), but you do
know that the next one after that will be a 3, because there was a 5 three digits before.
The mind is clever enough to recognize patterns like this as well as ones that are
far more complicated. What if you had volumes and volumes of these strings to
analyze, and it were the case that this 5-3 sequence stopped after a certain point, only
to resume exactly one thousand digits later? Could you keep the digits straight enough
in your head so that you could discern this pattern? Probably not without a great deal
of effort (today this kind of task would be relegated to a computer), although it would
still be possible. Now imagine whether you would be able to do this if it were not
merely an abstract exercise but offered some real and palpable benefit to you. Say that
your recognition of this kind of pattern enabled you to find food or avoid a predator.
Say further-more that this is all your mind has to do, and that it was trained to do this
and practically nothing else since you were born. You would probably find that you
are able to recognize even very intricate patterns with very long intervals between
them. And isn’t that what the senses are trained to do? Our system of vision is not
built to recognize digits primarily, but it is capable of detecting far more elaborate
patterns and sequences in the patches of light and color that the eyes transmit to the
brain.
It would seem, however, that this sense of cause and effect involves something
more than mere contiguity in time and space. Hume also says that a cause is “an
object followed by another, and whose appearance always conveys the thought to that
other.”10 It’s this process of association that, according to Hume, creates an
impression of the necessary connection in our sense of causality. Strictly speaking, the
strings of events and things in the world, like the digits set out earlier, do not cause
each other. We simply see similarities of pattern; the mind through its own processing
turns this into a necessary connection. Moreover, our sense of necessity is based on
nothing more than the invariability of these “conjunctions” as observed in the past. If

we’re used to seeing one thing always following another, we tend to say that the first
is necessarily the cause of the next. If this connection appears only occasionally, we
say that one thing may or can cause the next.
The fact that events following one another are often seen as having a cause-and-
effect relationship raises the issue of time, notoriously the most difficult thing to
define next to consciousness itself. Augustine, writing in his Confessions, says,
“What, then, is time? I know well enough what it is, provided nobody asks me; but if I
am asked what it is and try to explain, I am baffled.”11 Nevertheless, time is
sometimes defined as the measure of change, and this is reasonably satisfactory. Take
this sequence of digits:
3188495094832848959209320485896093090 …
Assuming that the sequence continues in its present fashion, we will have a 3
recurring at every eleventh space. This give us a gauge by which to measure the
somewhat random occurrence of numbers in between. Here we have a sense of time
in its most basic form: the measuring of more random occurrences (events in our
lives, weather patterns, wars) in terms of reasonably constant ones (the circuit of the
earth around the sun, the rate of decay of certain molecules).
Without an immediate gauge to measure it, time takes on a highly subjective
quality. The days pass in a very different way for someone confined alone in a
windowless cell than they do for someone who is free to see the sun. Similarly the
amount of time that appears to pass in a dream may have nothing to do with hours and
minutes on a clock. The same holds true for certain drug-induced experiences. A
friend of mine told me about a time when his father was put under nitrous oxide while
in the dentist’s chair. He was at once transported into another life, complete with a
wife and children and a house. Years seemed to pass. At one point in this other
existence, he was sitting on the porch of his house, talking with a friend. Suddenly he
came to in the dentist’s chair. This entire alternate life had taken place within a minute
or so of clock time. We could go further and say that all altered states of
consciousness in one way or another distort the familiar sense of time. This is why the
British psychiatrist Maurice Nicoll, a pupil of both Gurdjieff and Jung, could frame it
as a rule: “A change in the time-sense characterizes higher degrees of
consciousness.”12
In any event, the discernment of pattern sequences underlies all our experience of
the world, including scientific inquiry. A scientific formula, no matter how brilliant
and intricate, is simply a means of predicting a pattern sequence of a extremely

particular type.
The most influential philosopher of science in the twentieth century was
undoubtedly Karl Popper. For Popper, scientific formulas and the like are not
deterministic laws but hypotheses. Scientists do not posit universal causal laws: they
frame hypotheses on the basis of past experience, that is, research. They then test
these hypotheses against further experience, that is, more research. By this view, a
scientific theory must be falsifiable. Some theories stand up well, such as the law of
gravity or that of electromagnetism, having been tested and retested countless times;
others are far more tenuous. But even the most widely accepted theory remains open
to refutation, and refutation is always possible in the future, at least theoretically.
To understand this point, let’s return to the sequence of digits shown on page 67.
If you read these digits in order, not seeing which one will come next, you would start
out believing that 3 always follows 5. This would be a good and sustainable
hypothesis until you passed the point indicated by the slashes. At that point you would
have to throw your hypothesis out and come up with another, such as one stating that
3 is always the third digit after 5. You might find this to be true for enormous strings
of digits, but you would still have to face the possibility that at some point, however
remote, the sequence will change. So it is with all science. In the words of
parapsychologist Lawrence LeShan, “Science is truth until further notice.”13
Moreover, there is no way of knowing for certain that any of the sequences that
we call the laws of nature will continue in the future. Philosophers sometimes amuse
themselves by speculating what would happen if all natural laws were due to cease
operating after, say, January 1, 2100. Of course we cannot say that this is definitely
not the case. If it were, the past would give no reliable indication of the future beyond
that point. Bertrand Russell put the point wittily when he wrote, “The man who has
fed the chicken every day throughout its life at last wrings its neck instead, showing
that more refined views as to the uniformity of nature would have been useful to the
chicken.”14 Or as investors read in every mutual fund prospectus, “past performance
does not guarantee future results.”
Hume’s portrait of causation as constant conjunction no doubt seemed radical in
his time, when scientists were just beginning to formulate the allegedly invariable
laws of nature that were to lay the foundation for their discipline. His ideas seem less
shocking today, when physicists are describing even the motions of particles in a far
more indeterminate and probabilistic way than their counterparts in the past could
have imagined.
At any rate, it would be hard to overstate the importance of Hume’s discussion of
causation to all subsequent Western philosophy. Kant wrote that his encounter with
Hume “was the very thing which … first interrupted my dogmatic slumber and gave

my investigations in the field of speculative philosophy a quite new direction.” From
his investigations, Kant concluded that we perceive reality not directly but through the
mediation of certain primary structures of experience, or as he put it, “concepts which
I was now certain had not derived from experience … but from the pure
understanding.” Kant called these concepts of “the pure understanding” categories, of
which, he said, there are twelve. They include such things as unity, plurality, totality,
reality, negation, and limitation, but the most important is certainly “causality and
dependence.”15 Causality is central to Kant’s metaphysics. Schopenhauer went so far
as to say that for Kant “the law of causality is the real, but also the only, form of the
understanding, and the remaining eleven categories are merely blind windows.”16
Kant contended that even our concept of time derives from our concept of
causality and not the other way around.17 His theory is corroborated in a curious way
by physics, all of whose laws, according to mathematician Roger Penrose, “are
symmetrical in time. They can be used equally well in one direction in time as in the
other.”18 That is, from the point of view of elementary physical laws, it makes as
much sense for a car to spontaneously assemble itself from disparate pieces as for it to
fall apart into those pieces. But we don’t experience time that way: we experience it
as moving forward in a single direction — the “arrow of time.” Consequently some
other factor must be at play. Kant is saying that this other factor is the category of
cause and effect as it operates in our minds. What the world is really like — what
Kant called the Ding an sich, or the “thing in itself” — apart from the categories as
they operate in the human mind, was, he believed, ultimately unknowable.
One could write a history of Western philosophy centered on how these concepts
have fared over the centuries. The medieval Scholastics defined truth as adaequatio
rei et intellectus: roughly, a correlation between the thing and one’s understanding of
it.19 This corresponds to the commonsense view that there is a world of objects, and
that we match words up with them more or less accurately. For Kant in the eighteenth
century, the object is almost completely occluded by the concept: the Ding an sich is
at a far remove from our direct apprehension. As time passed, the Ding, the “thing,”
would disappear almost entirely — from Continental philosophy, at any rate — to be
supplanted by the sign. Already in the eighteenth century, Johann Heinrich Lambert, a
German philosopher and naturalist who was a correspondent of Kant’s, not only
coined the word phenomenology but also proposed to “reduce the theory of things to
the theory of signs.”20 For twentieth-century postmodernists, reality is more or less
equivalent to textuality: there are no objects and there is no real world, merely
signifiers that have meaning only within a particular text. Invoking Heidegger,
Jacques Derrida, the doyen of postmodernism, writes, “Fundamentally nothing
escapes the movement of the signifier and … in the last instance, the difference

between signified and signifier is nothing.”21 Hence also the dictum of the French
psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan that the signifier represents the subject to another
signifier. The signified has been so completely obliterated that postmodernists regard
it as naive to believe in it at all. While we can see how this philosophy arose in recent
generations, with their Orwellian capacity to detach the meanings of words from
objects at the whim of a despot or an advertiser, we can wonder how valid the
postmodernist view is beyond the few patchy insights it offers. Certainly in the
English-speaking 
world, 
with 
its 
Gradgrindian 
insistence 
on 
thingness,
postmodernism has always been an exotic transplant, able to survive only in the
hothouses of higher education.
The history of the influence of Hume’s and Kant’s ideas makes them appear to be
highly at variance. Hume launched the great impulse of skepticism that would shape
(and at this point cripple) Anglo-American philosophy for over two centuries. Kant’s
thought would lead to German idealism and to its descendant, postmodernism, with
all their extravagances. At the core, however, these two philosophers said nothing
radically different. Kant’s formulation of the categories must have been influenced at
least to some degree by these reflections about causality in Hume’s Treatise of Human
Nature: “And how much must we be disappointed, when we learn that this connexion,
tie, or energy [of causation] lies merely in ourselves, and is nothing but that
determination of the mind, which is acquir’d by custom, and causes us to make a
transition from an object to its usual attendant, and from the impression of one to the
lively idea of the other?”22 What Hume called a “determination of the mind” Kant
would refine into the theory of the categories.
These speculations involving strings of digits, categories, and so on may seem dry,
so let’s look at the matter from a different angle. Consider the celebrated allegory of
the cave in Plato’s Republic. In this passage, Plato’s mouthpiece, Socrates, tells a
story of people who have been chained in a cave from birth, with their heads fixed so
that they can see only in front of them. Behind them is a fire that casts its light on the
wall. People behind the prisoners are passing back and forth in front of this fire,
“carrying all sorts of artefacts, … human statuettes, and animal models carved in
stone and wood and all kinds of materials.”23 The ones who are chained, however, can
see only “the shadows cast by the fire on to the cave wall directly opposite them.”
At some point, one of these unfortunates is released from his chains. Finally he is
able to turn his head and see the objects and the fire that has cast the shadows. He
then goes up to the surface of the earth, where he can see objects in the full light of
the sun. Eventually he makes his way back down to the cave to enlighten the other
prisoners. Socrates goes on to say, “Suppose that the prisoners used to assign prestige
and credit to one another, in the sense that they rewarded speed at recognizing the

shadows as they passed, and the ability to remember which ones normally come
earlier and later and at the same time as which other ones, and expertise at using this
as a basis for guessing which ones would arrive next. Do you think our former
prisoner would covet these honours and would envy the people who had status and
power there?”24
Like Hume’s discussion of causation, this allegory is one of the most famous texts
in all of Western philosophy. Few, however, have noticed that these two passages are
essentially making the same point. Hume speaks of “constant conjunction,” Plato of
benighted prisoners who confer honors for guessing which of the shadows is going to
come next on the basis of the previous ones. In both cases, there is no causation —
not, at any rate, in the familiar sense of the term. There are merely strings of events
whose relation to one another is more or less arbitrary. It’s merely the regularity of the
sequence that we call causality; for the correct guessing of this sequence, we confer
honor and status and power. Nobody, of course, is interested in forecasting the
sequence of shadows on a cave wall, but if you view the matter in terms of scientific
discoveries or of predicting the direction of the stock market, the situation takes on a
different light.
There is, however, at least one more difficulty with Hume’s view. To a great extent
it portrays events in the world as discrete and separable entities, like the digits in the
strings I gave earlier. And what reason do we have for supposing that events in the
world are really that way? Aren’t we just as right to assume that there are actually no
distinct events, that the world is instead a seamless flow of one event into another?
Why should we think the world is made up of dots on a line rather than of waves on a
sea?
In the end, there is probably no good reason for choosing one set of metaphors
over another; each one has its own particular value in highlighting certain aspects of
the world as we apprehend it. There is even a curious analogy between these
speculations and the scientific conundrum of why light behaves at times like a wave
and at other times like a particle. Whatever the reality is behind these appearances —
and any number of philosophers from Plato to Kant have contended that it’s difficult
if not impossible to perceive in a pure state — it can present any number of guises.
Parvati can take the form of Shiva’s divine consort and of an enticing untouchable.
This fabric of causal events — which we subdivide into discrete sections called,
for example, the birth of the universe, the appearance of life on earth, the course of
human history, the humdrum pattern of our own small lives, or for that matter, the
sequence of terms and images that some call signifiers — is the garment of Parvati, or
rather it is Parvati. In the language of the Samkhya, it is prakriti, the substance of
nature, the sum total of what is perceived by consciousness in all dimensions and

from all angles. As I noted earlier, the occult philosophers of the Renaissance called
prakriti the anima mundi, the “soul of the world.” It is how consciousness experiences
the world, or rather it is what consciousness experiences as the world; it is how Shiva
consorts with Parvati.
But haven’t we painted ourselves into a corner here? I have just said that
consciousness can experience the world in any number of ways, but I have also
invoked Plato and Kant, both of whom stressed the mind’s limitations in
apprehending reality. It would seem that consciousness is multiform and illimitable,
and yet very much circumscribed and even deluded.
The contradiction is only apparent. Let’s grant that consciousness, purusha, has
the freedom to experience the world from an infinite number of perspectives and
dimensions. If we take this to its logical conclusion, then the range of possibilities
available to it will include partial, incomplete, and even delusory states.
Consciousness is not limited in any respect. It enjoys the freedom even to deceive
itself, and even truth cannot fully contain it.
A far more difficult problem arises out of Hume’s concept of a “determination of
the mind” and Kant’s theory of categories. Up to now in this book, I have
characterized all that exists by carving it up into two entities: that which experiences,
purusha, and that which is experienced, prakriti. Now we see that the matter is not
quite so simple. There is not only the experiencer and the experience but also the
mode of experience — the way in which mind apprehends the world. For Hume the
key factor here is the law of association; for Kant it is the categories. As Kant
understood, you will find it very hard to imagine a world apart from these categories.
A world without unity or plurality? A world without limitation or negation or
causality? Even the wildest science-fiction writer has never attempted to portray an
alternate reality so incommensurably unlike our own. Similarly it’s almost impossible
to conceive of an intelligence of any sort that does not somehow make use of
associations, as Hume no doubt would have acknowledged.
As soon as we begin to look into these modes of awareness, however, we realize
that they are double-edged. They both enable consciousness to perceive the world and
limit that very perception. Kant did not believe it possible ever to experience what he
called the noumenon, the Ding an sich or “thing in itself,” that exists apart from the
categories. Plato believed in the ideas or forms, the archetypes of all things that exist
in the world of pure intelligence far above the realm of sensation. This world of pure
intelligence is, in the allegory of the cave, the surface of the earth to which the freed
prisoner is led with some reluctance. Plato certainly considered it possible to
experience the forms cognitively, through logic and dialectics and perhaps through
other means, but he didn’t say it was easy to accomplish. Until we can do this, he

contended, we remain chained in the cave, bewitched by shadows.
This throws us back on another theme we’ve already touched on: the idea of
maya, or illusion, or as the Buddhists call it, samsara. For the Advaita Vedantins,
maya consists of experiencing this world in discrete bits, isolated from the atman, or
Self, of cognition, rather than as the harmonious whole that it is (at least
theoretically), in which perceiver and perceived are one.
How does this illusion arise? As we’ve already seen, if consciousness is
illimitable, it paradoxically retains the capacity even to be deluded and deceived by
maya. Although the precise mechanism of how this happens is extremely subtle and
hard to grasp, it has been described by a number of sacred traditions, particularly
those of India. And it casts the issue of causation in a new and entirely different light.
In the beginning, all is consciousness. At the same time, all is unconsciousness.
Why? If we define consciousness as the capacity to define self and other, at this
primordial stage there is no self or other. Hence mystics have frequently used opaque
and paradoxical language to describe this condition. Here is one example, from the
creation hymn of the Rig Veda:
There was neither non-existence nor existence then; there was neither the
realm of space nor the sky which is beyond. What stirred? Where? In whose
protection? Was there water, bottomlessly deep?
There was no distinguishing sign of night nor of day. That one breathed,
windless, by its own impulse. Other than that there was nothing beyond.25
From a superficial point of view, this is merely mystical mumbo jumbo, but from the
point of view of what we’ve just been examining, it’s relatively clear. Without self
and other, there is “neither non-existence nor existence”; neither is there death and
immortality, or day and night. The book of Genesis, too, speaks of the time before
creation when “the earth was without form and void; and darkness was on the face of
the deep” (Genesis 1:2). It would be easy to add examples from countless other sacred
texts.
At some point — and this is not a historical event that occurred once in the
unfathomable past but something that takes place moment by moment, with each
sliver of experience — a distinction arises. Genesis puts it in terms of dividing the
“waters above” from the “waters below” and of separating night and day (a curious
parallel to the Rig Veda’s “no distinguishing sign of night nor of day”; indeed, there
are a number of parallels between this Vedic hymn and the opening of Genesis). Out
of the primordial abyss a slight, subtle, almost embryonic distinction begins to arise.
There is an experience; with it comes almost instantaneously an experiencer:

consequently we have self and other, and consciousness. As the Samkhyakarika puts
it, “From prakriti (emerges) the great one (mahat or buddhi); from that (comes)
ahamkara.”26 Buddhi means cognition or understanding; ahamkara literally means “I
am—ness” — that is, a sense of “I” or self. Out of the experience of prakriti by
purusha comes the duality of self and other: “the only cause is for the sake of the
purusa.”27
To disentangle some sense from this thicket of words, we can start by saying that
purusha is extremely passive. It potentiates prakriti by cognizing the world, but it
does nothing else. So how can it affect the world? Only by its cognition. All action, all
movement, all of what calls itself will is the ceaseless dynamic of prakriti, the
motivating energy of which the Hindu philosophers call shakti. Purusha bestows this
power by its mere act of cognition, and it does nothing else. This act instantaneously
produces a pure and immediate distinction of self and other, which the Samkhya calls
buddhi.
Buddhi is usually translated as “intellect” or “intuition,” but these are bad choices.
In fact there is no good English equivalent. Buddhi is much subtler and more
profound than either intellect or intuition in their usual senses. Perhaps the best way to
give some notion of buddhi is through a Kabbalistic concept that I believe is very
closely related: Binah, the third sefirah (or principle) of the Kabbalistic Tree of Life.
Usually this is translated as “understanding,” but again this is not quite right. The
Kabbalists say that Binah is derived from the Hebrew preposition ben, which simply
means “between.” Consequently Binah is the primordial distinction, the primordial
“between.” This primordial distinction is between self and other. With this cognitive
step, a certain polarity, a sense of “here” and “there,” begins to gel, and, in the words
of James Joyce, “a world that was not comes to pass.”
The most common experience of buddhi occasionally occurs immediately after
waking in the morning. You sometimes find that you are alert and feeling refreshed.
There is a sense that everything is all right. There are no problems, no difficulties. All
is clear and new. There is consciousness, there is a sense of self and other, of here and
there, but it is unimpeded; it presents no problems. But very soon — and I am talking
about seconds rather than minutes — you realize something is missing, and you begin
groping for it, as if you knew you could not get up without it. You remember where
you are in the world; your problems, hopes, appetites, duties all come flooding in on
you. Your sense of self, your “I-formation,” has been restored. In the language of the
Samkhya, you have moved from buddhi into ahamkara or “I am—ness.” For the most
part, it is not a pleasant experience. To use the language of esoteric Christianity, it is a
fall into a world that will present you with plenty of both good and evil.
Buddhi, then, gives rise to ahamkara, the fundamental sense of “I.” At this point

your experience congeals into what is usually called the ego; the freshness of
consciousness at the moment of wakening freezes into a personality with wishes and
desires and problems. As one scholar says, it is “the mind as active I becoming the
standing me.”28 Now purusha is fixed by its identification with prakriti. It clutches
onto a small segment of prakriti’s measureless stream and calls it its own — or rather,
calls it me. Like Narcissus, it falls in love with its own reflection in the ceaselessly
churning world of experience and is drowned. Or, like Ialdabaoth, the second-rate
deity whom the Gnostics say molded our defective universe, it says, “I am and there is
no other beside me.” Experience becomes my experience.
Buddhi produces ahamkara: the distinction between self and other generates an
“I.” This gives rise to events in the psychic realm: thoughts, images, mental
constructs. The Samkhya calls this manas, which is mind as we usually understand it.
The English word mind is derived from the Latin mens. Even on the printed page,
manas and mens look remarkably similar, and in fact they come from the same Indo-
European root. Manas is the sum total of thoughts, emotions, cognitions, images, and
dreams, conscious and unconscious, that pass across the screen of the psyche.
Manas is your customary state of mind, and it arises whenever ahamkara is
present. In terms of moment-to-moment experience, manas is the stream of thoughts
that the ego produces as a strategy for self-perpetuation. The thoughts that go through
your mind are almost entirely means used by ahamkara, the ego, to hold itself
together. Some of these are basic survival strategies: Where will I get my next meal?
How can I make more money? Others are concerned with the ego’s status in the
world: What do they think of me? How can I look good in these circumstances? Such
is manas in waking life. But even in dreaming, if we believe Freud and his school, a
great deal of the activity of the dreaming mind is in service to the ego’s self-concept.
As soon as ahamkara and manas arise, they become problematic and even painful.
The Samkhyakarika alludes to this fact in its opening verse: “Because of the torment
of the threefold suffering, (there arises) the desire to know the means of removing
it.”29 Buddhists will recognize a powerful echo here of the Four Noble Truths: the
existence of suffering, the cause of suffering, the fact that suffering can be ended, and
the means of ending it. Moreover, the “threefold suffering” looks very much like the
Three Poisons of Buddhism: desire, anger, and obliviousness. The resemblances are
so strong that the Samkhya is accounted as one of the chief influences on the
Buddha’s teaching.
Why is suffering threefold? Why are there three poisons and not two or four? The
answer is simple: once you have constellated the world into this dichotomy of self and
other, you (the “self”) have only three ways of responding to the other: you can move
toward it; you can move away from it; or you can do neither. These are the only

possibilities available in the world as we know it. In the language of Buddhism, the
first is desire, the second aversion, and the third obliviousness.
The Samkhya does not portray this ternary in exactly the same way, but it comes
close. It speaks of the three gunas: sattva, equilibrium; rajas, excitement; and tamas,
inertia. The Sanskrit word guna is usually translated as “quality,” although it also
means “rope”: the gunas are the ropes that bind consciousness to its own
experience.30 According to the Samkhya, these gunas generate the entirety of
manifest existence, just as the Buddhists say that all of samsara results from the
operation of the Three Poisons, and Christians believe that the universe is created by
the Trinity.
This intricate chain of manifestation can seem remote to us. As a matter of fact, it
is the opposite; as the prophet Muhammad said of Allah, it is closer than your jugular
vein. You do not see this process because it happens instantaneously, on a moment-
by-moment basis, and you take it utterly for granted. In the most mercilessly literal
sense, you don’t know what you would be without it. This is partly why the sages
have insisted so strongly on meditation as a necessity for awakening. By stilling and
calming the mind, meditation slows down this process of I-formation so that some of
its steps can be seen and thereby loosened, and so that purusha, pure consciousness,
can begin to be freed. (The sages of the Samkhya did not agree that meditation was
necessary, by the way; they held that mere cognitive insight into the situation was
enough to ensure liberation.)
The sages of the Samkhya would agree with Hume that the phenomenal world is
merely a string of occurrences that, strictly speaking, have no causal connection with
one another.31 What is causative are the gunas, which in turn arise ultimately out of
the dynamic between purusha and prakriti, between Shiva and his capricious bride.
But the gunas cannot be apprehended in their pure form. You can never see pure
sattva or rajas or tamas: they are visible only in their manifestations and
combinations, just as in Christianity the Trinity cannot be seen except in the mirror of
creation.
This whole discussion reveals causation to us in two guises. One, the conventional
view, is totally flat and linear: it amounts to nothing more than recognizing sequences
of events. Metaphorically, it is the discernment of repeating digits in a string of
numbers, or guessing which out of a series of shadows will appear next on the cave
wall. The human mind has become extremely clever in perceiving causation in this
sense. It can predict when apples on a tree will ripen or where a particle will go if it is
struck with a certain amount of force. But as Hume saw, this kind of causation is
nothing more than an elaborate sense of constant conjunction. If we understand these
conjunctions thoroughly enough, we will understand causation of the familiar sort. At

the same time, nothing in this titanic string of events gives us any clue to why or how
the string came about to begin with. Aristotle’s First Cause, an unmoved mover who
in some incomprehensible way began the sequence without having a beginning
himself, is no more plausible an explanation than the Samkhya’s view that this string
is beginningless and endless.
Such is the conventional type of causation. It does not and cannot offer any real
notion of God, because God here could be nothing more than another cipher in the
string of events. As we’ve seen, God has sometimes been inserted into this string as a
placeholder, an unseen agent intervening between events that cannot otherwise be
explained. But this cannot be God in the real meaning of the word, if only because a
simpler and more immediate agency can usually be found. After electricity was
discovered, we no longer needed Zeus to stand in as the creator of thunder. God will
not be found in this causal chain.
If, however, we see causation in a deeper sense as the ceaseless interplay of
purusha and prakriti, the matter takes on another guise. Buddhi, ahamkara, and the
gunas arise out of this interplay, and they are the true causes of manifestation. While
the Samkhya enumeration is by no means identical to Kant’s theory of the categories,
they share one crucial element: both of them focus on how the world — our world,
the world we see and take for granted as real — is generated by the limits and
structures of consciousness. For Kant, these include such things as identity, unity, and
causation; in the Samkhya, they are the capacities for thought and sense and action
generated by a consciousness that has fallen into a frozen and isolated sense of itself.
Where, then, is God? As we saw in the previous chapter, God can be experienced
both as self ( purusha) and as other ( prakriti). Ultimately, however, the true God is
beyond and above both self and other; God is the unfathomable reality that gives rise
to this divine game. The Samkhya does not speak directly of this unfathomable
reality; consequently it is sometimes (and not entirely accurately) characterized as
atheistic. Other traditions, however, do make mention of this reality. God is the
Urgrund, the “primordial ground,” of the medieval German mystic Meister Eckhart;
the Ain Soph, or “infinity,” of the Kabbalists; the Nirguna Brahman (“Brahman
without qualities”) of the Hindus. That this reality has been encountered and
described so many times by so many great visionaries is one, but only one, testimony
to its truth.

T
CHAPTER FIVE
PATTERNS IN HER GARMENT
The Chain of Associations
he reflections in the previous chapter have raised a complication. Up to that point
the scheme that I’ve been outlining had a remarkable simplicity: all that there is
consists of consciousness and experience. Now we have found that something else
is involved: the modes or ways in which consciousness engages with its experience.
We may think of these modes in terms of Kant’s categories, of the Samkhya
enumeration, or of any number of other systems. But the upshot is the same: mind as
we know it is structured to experience the world in certain ways. This fact imposes
certain limitations upon it.
Mystical literature tends to decry these limitations, insisting that mind is born free
but is everywhere in chains. The nature of maya, according to the Advaita Vedanta,
centers on this truth. Maya makes us see the world as a heap of separate and isolated
objects, when in fact they are all one. Similarly the Samkhya says that ahamkara, I-
formation, is the cause of the apparent bondage of purusha to its own experience.
Consider your moment-to-moment experience. Right now you are reading a book.
To the extent that you’re paying attention to what you’re doing, you are unaware of
any number of other things that are going on around you. If you are in a room, your
awareness of the furniture, the light, and the atmosphere is dimmed. If you are at the
seashore, you are comparatively blind to the ocean, the wind, and the sand. But if you
turn your attention to these things, you will lose your awareness of the book you’re
reading. It would seem that you can’t have it both ways.
The capacity of consciousness to limit itself must be accompanied by the
corresponding capacity to expand, since a consciousness that could only limit itself
without expanding would be forced, in the short or long term, to dwindle away to

nothing. So these are two properties of consciousness: expansion and limitation. You
can easily see this too in your moment-to-moment experience. Assuming you are
completely focused on this book, again raise your eyes and take in your surroundings.
Previously you were more or less unaware of them as you were reading; now your
consciousness expands to include the whole of your environs. You can also easily let
this awareness drop and focus on the book again. This process of limiting and
expanding consciousness is something we do every instant, almost always without
being aware of it.
Various forms of meditation are designed to hone the mind’s capacity for
expansion and contraction. To be able to focus — that is, limit — the mind is the
essence of concentration. Concentration is fixing your mind on a particular point to
the exclusion of all others. Although it is a constraint, it’s also an extremely valuable
skill to have, since the mind is usually restless and distracted; to some extent we are
all prone to attention deficit disorder. Practices aimed at overcoming this
distractedness include focusing the attention on a mantra, a prayer, a visual image, the
breath, or the sensations of the body to the exclusion of all else. The mind is given an
extremely limited area in which it’s free to move. If you do these practices well, you
will be unaware of many more things than you are aware of. This is extremely
difficult to do: for all but the most advanced practitioners, any number of irrelevant
thoughts and feelings will constantly intrude. Two Tibetan lamas write:
Of course, it naturally happens when you meditate that thoughts suddenly arise
and lead you in different directions. When you see that happening, rather than
following the thoughts, immediately bring the mind back through mindfulness.
The reason you need to meditate is because concepts have covered up the
natural state [of the mind]. If thoughts did not cause confusion, you would not
need to meditate. However, you should not be upset or sad when thoughts
arise. It is quite normal for thoughts to arise during meditation. The main point
is not to follow the thoughts.1
The mind that is focused in this way becomes sharp and intense like a laser. In Tibetan
Buddhism, one of the most common metaphors for this power of mind is the
diamond: something perfectly clear and pure and hard, something capable of cutting
through all other things without itself suffering damage.
By contrast, meditative practices that are intended to expand the range of
consciousness are not as numerous, perhaps because they’re still more difficult and
usually presuppose some expertise in concentration. Methods of expanding
consciousness include Zen sitting and the rigpa practice of the Dzogchen tradition of
Tibet, in which one simply rests in pure awareness. The mind focuses on nothing and

excludes nothing; thoughts and sensations may come and go like reflections on a
crystal mirror. The spirit of this practice is expressed in the brief Dzogchen text
known as the Six Vajra Verses:
The nature of phenomena is nondual,
but each one, in its own state, is beyond
the limits of the mind.
There is no concept that can define
the condition of “what is”
but vision nevertheless manifests:
all is good.
Everything has already been accomplished,
and so, having overcome the sickness of effort,
one finds oneself in the self-perfected state:
this is contemplation.2
Another property of consciousness is implied by the definition I gave at the
beginning of this book. If consciousness is the ability to relate self and other, this must
entail the capacity to distinguish, to say “this” and “not this.” This capacity is not
limited to the primordial distinction between self and other; it can also distinguish
many “others,” which it then sees as separate things and events. Collectively these are
what we call the world.
The property complementary to this ability to distinguish is the capacity to see
similarities, to liken. If you are able to look up at a tree and recognize it as a tree, this
is largely because you have seen trees before and know what they are. Recognition,
along with memory, is largely a function of the capacity to see similarities. If you’d
never seen a tree before, you would be able (probably) to perceive it as distinct from
its background, but you would not know it as a tree.
This principle is illustrated in stories of primitive tribes confronted with the
artifacts of civilization. Supposedly only the wise men of the Arawak tribe in the West
Indies were able to see the ships of Columbus as they appeared on the horizon in
1492; at first, tribesmen of ordinary intelligence, having never seen such things as
ships before, could not see those of Columbus. I’m reminded of another story about
some Bedouins who had never seen representative drawing. When a European
traveler drew a sketch of one of them, the Bedouin could make nothing of it at all.
The European pressed him a little, and finally, seeing the vaguely rounded shape of
his own head on the paper, the Bedouin guessed that it might be a camel. Clark
Wissler, an early-twentieth-century anthropologist of American Indians, describes a
similar experience:

The old Indian of my day experienced difficulty in recognizing any kind of a
picture. This seems strange to us, brought up amidst pictures, but I recall how
when one of these old timers was shown his photograph he scowled at it,
turned it first one way and the other, finally in desperation biting it. I came to
the rescue by putting the card in the correct position, then pointing out the
eyes, nose, mouth, etc. After a time he seemed to grasp it, but was obviously
disappointed by so poor a representation.3
As weird as these stories may sound, we can wonder how our own preconceptions
limit our perception. Take the countless sightings of UFOs, monsters, spirits, and
beings from other realms. Is it possible that our explanations of these things are so
contrived and implausible because we can’t relate them to our own memories of
objects in the world we know? Some liken these apparitions to the nearest objects in
their experience — hence “flying saucers” — while others of perhaps lower
intelligence simply fall back and deny that these things exist at all.
In any case, these modes — the ability to expand and contract, to distinguish and
liken — are among the most basic features that consciousness possesses. If
Schopenhauer were alive, we might be able to convince even him that these features
are not merely blind windows. As I’ve already pointed out, much of what I say in this
book echoes Schopenhauer’s thought, and if he had titled his magnum opus The World
as Consciousness and Representation instead of The World as Will and
Representation, he and I might have been close to saying the same thing. But the fact
that he called his work what he did brings up another, more problematic aspect of
these issues. While Schopenhauer did admit the presence of a universal subject —
what the Samkhya calls purusha — he was far more interested in will, that is, how
this subject acts or appears to act in the world. The views I’ve sketched out here, by
contrast, may make consciousness appear passive: they explain how it apprehends the
world, but they don’t go far toward explaining how it acts in the world.
It’s not my purpose to give a detailed critique of Schopenhauer; I’m merely
mentioning him to suggest how what I am arguing compares to his thought. But this
question of how consciousness acts in the world leads to its final and most
problematic feature as I understand it. This is the capacity to identify with its
experience. As Gerald J. Larson says in discussing the Samkhya, “If consciousness is
only a contentless passive presence, it can only appear as what it is not, passively
taking on all content (whether subjective or objective) as a transparent witness.”4 This
content would of course include activity, so purusha, under the delusion of ahamkara,
comes to believe that it possesses will. But all activity and will belong to prakriti.
Consciousness does not act. It only seems to act.

Nevertheless, there are degrees of identification. The more purusha is identified
with its experience, the more deluded and impotent it is. The less it is identified, the
more enlightened and empowered it becomes. The degree of identification can vary,
and these degrees sift experience into different strata.
This brings our discussion to the different levels of existence — one of the central
themes of nearly all esoteric literature. Moreover, the descriptions correspond in a
general way even if they differ on details. The Samkhya’s enumerations (which
extend far beyond the basic twenty-five that I described in the previous chapter) are a
bit dry and analytical and may not be as illuminating as others. The Kabbalah, for
example, speaks of four worlds: Atziluth, the divine world; Briah, the world of
creation; Yetzirah, the world of formation; Assiyah, the world of physical action. But
merely to set out these terms, and even to explain them, may seem artificial to the
reader who is not already disposed to believe in them. They’re easily written off as
mystical mumbo jumbo. For this reason, it’s useful to approach the matter from
another angle — by going back to the features of reality as conventionally understood,
which I outlined in chapter 2. As I said there, to be taken as real, an experience must
be stable, stereoscopic, publicly accessible, encountered in waking life, and more or
less in accord with our preconceptions.
However tenuous or delusory it may ultimately prove, this is the world of “reality”
that we take for granted. If we analyze it fully, it ends up being more or less identical
with the physical world. In fact, as I’ve already stressed, reality and “thingness” are,
to our everyday mentality, practically identical. As soon as we’ve said this, however,
we’re forced to admit that there is a whole realm of experience that is characterized as
unreal because it refuses to answer to one or more of the familiar criteria for reality.
There is a paradox here. What is real in the ultimate sense, according to the
esoteric teachings, is, from the naturalistic point of view, unreal, and vice versa. “Lead
us from the unreal to the real,” says a prayer in the Upanishads.5 “What we see when
our eyes are open is death; what we see when we dream is waking life,” says the
famously obscure Greek philosopher Heraclitus.6
But to avoid confusion, let’s stay with the conventional view, at least for now.
What to do with the “unreal” dimension of subjective life is far from clear, at least to
the contemporary Western mind. On the one hand, it is not accepted as “true” in the
sense that physical phenomena are. On the other hand, we can’t dismiss it entirely.
Dreams, hunches, intuitions, hallucinations, visions, encounters with gods and devils
— these are the stuff of human experience every bit as much as are sticks and stones
and dollar bills. Reductionistic explanations have never accounted for them; if they’ve
tried to, the explanation inevitably sounds forced and factitious. You had a dream
because your brain cells were firing in a certain way during REM sleep — very well,

what does that amount to? When you were awake, you saw a tree outside because
your brain cells were firing in another, quite different way; why should the same
explanation invalidate the experience in one case and not in the other? Recent years
have seen various attempts to similarly explain away religious experience. There are
evidently certain areas of the brain that you can prod with an electrode so that the
subject will see God. Again, very well; but there are other centers you can poke that
will make the subject see stars or flashes of light, and no one concludes from this that
visual phenomena as a whole are unreal. Quite the opposite: the capacity in the brain
to have such experiences would, prima facie, count as stronger evidence for the
existence of the phenomena associated with those experiences than against it. We
have light receptors in the brain because there is such a thing as light. Perhaps we
have “God” receptors in the brain because there is such a thing as God.
All this is to say that the “unreal” cannot be explained away so easily. These
allegedly unreal experiences are the product of certain brain states; but then, so are the
explanations that endeavor to refute them. It might be wiser not to dismiss these
“unreal” experiences but to try to understand them — and this of course requires
applying a set of laws and concepts different from the one we would apply to physical
phenomena.
The esoteric philosophies of the world have devoted an enormous amount of
literature to this realm of the “unreal.” They have also given names to it. The name of
the lowest level (apart from the purely physical) has already appeared in this chapter:
Yetzirah, the Kabbalistic name for the world of forms, which can include anything
from dreams to mental images to experiences with ghosts and spirits. Certain streams
of Western esotericism call it the astral realm, on the premise that the subtle stuff of
which these images are made (which are far too tenuous to register even on the most
sensitive scientific apparatus) has some affinity with the stars and planets. Buddhists
speak of this realm as that of rupa, or “form,” as opposed to the physical world, the
world of kama, “desire.” The most universal name for it in our civilization is the
psyche. Your psyche consists of the totality of thoughts, images, and feelings that
have ever registered, consciously or unconsciously, on the screen of your mind.
Nearly all esoteric schools postulate levels of reality beyond even this
comparatively familiar realm. The Kabbalists, as we’ve seen, have Briah and Atziluth;
for the Buddhists, these constitute the arupa, or “formless” realm, which is so subtle
that, as its name suggests, its contents do not have form, although they still possess a
tenuous sense of self and other that places them in the sphere of manifestation. But
these dimensions are so far out of the range of ordinary experience that we should set
them aside for now.
We can see that these many levels of being are based on precise calibrations of the

primordial capacities of consciousness that I have sketched out. We are capable of
expanding and contracting our field of attention, but only to a degree; we are capable
of seeing both differences and similarities, but only within highly circumscribed
limits, and so on. If these settings, so to speak, are changed even a little, the state of
consciousness changes dramatically.
Take the most familiar of the altered states of consciousness: the dream state. This
bears a certain resemblance to waking awareness. There is a sense of self and other, a
sense of similarity and dissimilarity, and so on, but these are all set just differently
enough that the dream state is wildly at odds with waking life. It’s the commonest
thing in the world to hear someone say, “I had a strange dream last night”; but no one
ever says, “I had a perfectly normal dream last night.” In the words of one authority
quoted by Freud, “Out of every ten dreams, the content of at least nine is absurd.”7
Probably even this is a conservative estimate. Some of this absurdity is
unquestionably due to differences in the calibrations of consciousness.
Perhaps the most important of these differences is in the capacities to distinguish
and liken. These are not the same in dreams as in waking life. In the latter, the law of
the excluded middle prevails. Everything either is or is not. Either the stove is on or it
isn’t. Either that is a tree or it isn’t. Either something is green or it is not (even
something that’s just a little bit green is still green). Most critically, you are not me,
nor are you the same as another, third person. In the dream state, this is not the case.
Most people can find examples from their own experience, but here is one from
literature. At the opening of Tolstoy’s Anna Karenina, Prince Stepan Oblonsky wakes
up on a sofa in the study, where he has had to sleep after a fight with his wife.
“Let’s see, let’s see, how was it?” he said to himself as he tried to recall his
dream. “How was it, now? Ah, yes! Alabin had us to dinner in Darmstadt; no,
not Darmstadt … something American … no, this Darmstadt was in America!
That’s it, Alabin gave a dinner on glass tables and — I’ll be dashed if the
tables didn’t sing! Il mio tesoro, no, not Il mio tesoro … something even better
… and pretty little wine-glasses … and the wine-glasses were ladies … ” he
recalled.
Oblonsky’s eyes twinkled merrily and he smiled as he gave himself up to
his dream. “Very jolly. Very. Lots of other nice things too, but you can’t put it
all into words or even thoughts, can’t express it when you wake up.”8
This is the dream state, where Darmstadt can be in America and wineglasses can also
be ladies. If we calibrate the mind so that “different” and “same” are construed to be
even the tiniest bit at variance with what we consider normal, very strange things start

to happen.
The dream world — the most familiar world in which this slightly different notion
of “different” and “same” applies — can be equated with the astral plane, Yetzirah, or
the Buddhist realm of rupa, form. The dream world is merely a subsection of this
plane. As I pointed out in the previous chapter, the Samkhya says that, when the force
known as sattva predominates, it produces events of this kind in the realm of manas.
One of the most common and universal symbols for this realm is water, because,
unlike the physical realm, which has a comparatively high amount of stability and
predictability, this subjective realm is highly fluid and unstable. An image both is and
is not something else, or it can easily change into something else, as everyone, like
Prince Oblonsky, has experienced in dreams. This fact helps explain the elusive and
many-faceted nature of symbols, which exist in this realm.
Much of the magical and occult traditions — which make great use of symbols —
has to do with familiarizing oneself with the Yetziratic plane. If this is a difficult
enterprise, it is largely because of the mind’s own fluidity and resistance to holding on
to any given form. If I were to ask you to imagine a red rose, you would have little
trouble doing so, but if I were to ask you to keep that image steadily on the screen of
your mind for even five minutes, chances are you would find it hard or impossible.
You would be irresistibly tempted to drift off into thinking of something else that the
rose reminded you of — the rose you sent to a girlfriend once, which in turn would
lead to memories of that girlfriend, which would lead to the time of your life when
you were involved with her, which would lead to thoughts of where you were living
then, and so on. Only a few seconds would need to pass before you would utterly
forget your initial task and your mind would wander far afield. Everyone who has
tried to meditate can readily verify these facts.
This characteristic of manas leads us to formulate the principal rule by which it
operates, which is as fundamental to this realm as the elementary laws of physics are
to the world of materiality. This world of forms is organized by associations, though
of an apparently more fluid and chaotic sort than govern the realm of physical
causality. In the world of images, one thing is connected to another — one thing
indeed may be another, as in Oblonsky’s dream — by this process of associations,
some of which are highly personal and individual, some of which are collective or
possibly universal.
The chief authorities I could invoke here are Freud and Jung, whose psychologies,
profound as they are, are in sum little more than elaborate investigations of the
process of association. The pages of Freud’s masterwork The Interpretation of
Dreams are filled with intricate descriptions of the chain of association in the dreams
of Freud and his patients. The material analyzed by Jung is more universal, because

he was investigating images that have significance for humanity as a whole — hence
his term the “collective unconscious” — but the same principle still holds.
For another seminal twentieth-century figure, G.I. Gurdjieff, associations are
manacles that shackle the mind of man to the waking sleep of everyday life. To
understand what Gurdjieff means, again we need do nothing more than examine our
own moment-to-moment experience. You are driving on the highway and you pass a
billboard advertising a certain brand of vodka. Entirely without intending to, your
mind drifts off to your thoughts about this brand. You may think it’s overpriced, in
which case your mind may lead you into a long, inner tirade about the ubiquitous
commercialism and greed of our sorry age. Or you may remember that you haven’t
had a martini in weeks and decide that a martini might taste very good now, so you
may start thinking about the next time you will go to a bar or make a cocktail for
yourself at home. Or you may remember how you binged on vodka when you were in
college, got horribly sick, and have never wanted to touch the stuff again. This
process can easily become so absorbing that your driving becomes automatic and
you’re barely thinking about what you are doing. Usually this works well enough
(much of our routine activity being automatic anyway), but if you’re unusually
absorbed in this chain of thoughts, you could miss your exit or get into an accident.
Such is the sleep of man. On the other hand, if you make a point of concentrating on
what you’re doing, paying attention to every movement your hands and feet make
with the wheel and pedals, you may become extremely bored and drift off to sleep.
The momentum of associations is the chief engine firing the engine of the psyche, and
when it slows down, sleep in the literal sense may step in. But more likely something
else on the road will catch your attention, and the chain of associations will
recommence. We use the term chain of associations as a kind of metaphor for endless
linking of one thought to another, but thoughts are a chain in another sense too: they
constitute the chief form of bondage for the mind.
Many spiritual traditions, including Buddhism and Gurdjieff’s own teaching,
recommend mindfulness or self-remembering as a way to counteract the mind’s
propensity to daydream. But even someone who has worked for a long time to
strengthen her attention may well find that at best she will be able to interrupt this
chain of associations and “be here now” only momentarily before the endless surge of
images and thoughts commences again.
Of course the point of such practices is not to stop the flow of thoughts and
images, which is probably no more feasible than stopping the tides of the sea. Instead
it’s frequently a matter of subtly detaching your consciousness, purusha, from the
eternal flow of prakriti’s images and illusions. Normally, of course, we think they are
our images, but this is part of the illusion. With a certain amount of practice, you can

watch them impartially, as a film that passes before the mind’s eye, and realize that
they are no more you than the stream of images that flowed before your eyes last night
when you went to the movies. The Self is not its experience; it can stand back and
watch that experience, so it must be something different. This is one of the
fundamental lessons of most esoteric teachings, and many of their texts are hard to
understand unless you grasp this point.
In light of the previous chapter, this account of associations may have a familiar
ring. After all, what we saw there as the mainstay of causation — “constant
conjunction” — is little more than a specialized version of the law of associations.
This fact is remarkably revealing. Even our understanding of cause and effect —
without which all scientific theories, however rigorous, collapse into dust — is merely
a result of the mind’s capacity to associate. Moreover, the mind cannot help
associating. As we have already seen, it’s practically impossible to stop the flow of
thoughts for more than a few seconds at a time. Associations, whether they take the
form of the haphazard flow of images across the screen of the mind, or of the
ostensibly rigid laws of cause and effect, are the primary mode by which our minds
structure reality.
We could take this argument in the direction of scientific materialism. We could
say that the mind forms associations because of the way neurons are linked to one
another or because this proved to be a successful strategy for biological survival. This
is no doubt true to a great extent. But it’s more interesting to reflect that this process
of association forms one of the chief filters by which consciousness is constricted in
life as we know it. These modes of apprehension — such as the capacities to liken and
to distinguish — give the mind a means of understanding the world, but they also
block it from understanding the world more deeply.
Astrophysicists have been telling us in recent years that as much as 97 percent of
the universe is composed of dark matter and dark energy, whose gravitational
influences on galaxies can be observed, but which cannot themselves be observed by
any known means.9 That is, only 3 percent of the mass of the universe can be
perceived by human senses or by extensions of them (such as telescopes and so on).
Whatever the nature of this dark matter may be, these facts show that what our minds
and our senses apprehend is only a tiny fraction of what actually exists. Even here we
have some oblique notion of dark matter, and possibly science will someday explain
it. But what else exists that is so far beyond the limits of the mind that we can have no
inkling of it whatsoever?
Science is, of course, agnostic about such things. But it’s sobering to consider that
the very structures of the mind that have enabled it to understand physical reality as it
does may in the end make a more comprehensive understanding of it impossible.

Causation can explain the world only to a highly limited degree. If it were the only
mode by which the mind could perceive, causation would be an impassable barrier.
Nonetheless, the entire collective experience of the human race suggests that the
realm of physical cause and effect is only one of innumerable levels of reality — and
the capacity to think in terms of cause and effect is only one of innumerable ways of
apprehending reality. The mind can go further, but it does so at the risk of losing its
explanations. These take the form of words and sentences or mathematical formulae.
And these are of necessity cast in terms of the associative reasoning that created them.
If we are to free our minds to explore the universe in a more comprehensive way,
these are the chains that we must cast off.
The principal means of freeing the mind is meditation. Of course, meditation is a
broad category encompassing a number of practices whose purposes often differ
greatly from one another. We already saw as much in this chapter when we looked at
practices that either focus or expand the mind. Certain other types — and there are
many — are intended to detach the mind from its own experience. Such practices may
achieve similar results even when they work from diametrically opposed theories.
Gurdjieff’s tradition has a type of meditation known simply as “sitting,” which
focuses the attention on the sensations of the body. On the surface, this practice may
look as if it were designed to do anything but promote detachment, and yet long
experience of it can lead to awareness of what Gurdjieff called “real I,” which can
witness the sensations of the body without being identified with them. The vipassana
(insight) meditation of Theravada Buddhism is very similar — so similar that
Gurdjieff’s followers are occasionally described as practicing vipassana. But
Gurdjieff’s teaching emphasizes integration of the consciousness with the body rather
than detachment, which is generally seen as one of the objectives of vipassana. For
me personally, it was the practice of Gurdjieffian sitting over the course of several
years that led me to insights that, as this book testifies, are very similar to those of the
Samkhya.10 (The Samkhya does not have a meditative practice as such; rational
inquiry into the “enumeration” is supposed to confer liberation, at least according to
the textbooks.)
To grasp some of the dynamics of meditation, we might return to a point made
earlier in this chapter: the degrees of identification constitute our experience of reality.
If this is so, and if meditation is designed to weaken this identification, the meditator’s
consciousness will pass through many stages of experience — “many mansions,” in
the words of Christ — as he continues the practice. This is exactly what happens.
Meditation, in fact, is so closely connected with altered states of consciousness that
many believe this is the sole purpose of the practice. But it is not. Because
meditation’s purpose is often the detachment of purusha (however that’s understood),

teachers often instruct their students to ignore any phenomena that may arise, no
matter how alluring or apparently holy. One story tells of a Buddhist master whose
student ran into his room crying, “I was meditating just now, and I had a vision of the
Buddha!” “Just keep meditating and it will go away” was the reply.
If the purpose of the practice were to see the Buddha, the master would never say
such a thing. But because its purpose is to take consciousness past the many stages of
identification, anything seductive or “interesting” — even a vision of the supreme
master himself — is a distraction and a snare.
All the same, the collective experience of mystics over the centuries has produced
a huge amount of material describing these planes. Shamanism has its upper and
lower realms; Christianity has its hells and purgatories and heavens; the Buddhists
have their six lokas, or realms of existence: those of the gods, asuras or “titans,”
humans, animals, beings in hell, and pretas or “hungry ghosts.” Some remarkable
individuals have generated their own cosmologies. The eighteenth-century Swedish
visionary Emanuel Swedenborg produced lengthy and verbose accounts of his visits
to heaven, hell, and the realm of spirits in between. More recently, the indefatigable
out-of-body traveler Robert Monroe not only chronicled his experiences in the astral
realms in several books but also established the Monroe Institute in Faber, Virginia, to
teach others how to do the same.
Among the strangest and most haunting visions in recent times are those of Daniel
Andreev (1906–59). The son of a noted Russian playwright, Andreev was accused of
plotting against the Stalinist state in 1947 and sentenced to the gulag. During his ten
years in prison, Andreev experienced a number of visions in which he attained what
he called “transphysical knowledge.” His widow, Alla Andreeva, has summarized his
worldview: “For Andreev, the universe is many layered. The plane inhabited by
humanity, Enrof, in Andreev’s terms, is the middle plane. Above stretch the shining
Worlds of Enlightenment, while the dark Worlds of Retribution oppose them from
below. All religious cosmologies contain a structure of the universe of this kind: for
instance, the Vale of Life, Hell, and Paradise in Christianity; Midgard, Niffleheim, and
Asgard of Scandinavian mythology; and the Seven Heavens of Islam. Andreev’s
Worlds of Enlightenment and Retribution develop the same structure.”11
It would be pointless to try to summarize the whole of Andreev’s extravagant,
baroque, and sublime vision; it’s set out in his Rose of the World, first published in
Russia in 1989, thirty years after his death. Nonetheless, a few details are relevant
here. This is his description of one of his purgatories, or “Worlds of Retribution”: “In
the meantime the mouth of the stream can be seen up ahead. The stream itself, and the
entire tunnel-shaped world, breaks off just as a subway tunnel breaks off where a
trestle begins. But the water does not fall anywhere: the water and the banks and the

vaults — everything — dissolves into a great, featureless void. Nobody can exist
there, and there is not even a hint of any kind of ground or atmosphere. Only one
thing does not disappear here: the spark of self-consciousness.” In an even lower
purgatory, “a spark of consciousness flickers to the end, and the magnitude of its
suffering surpasses even the imagination of the demons themselves.”12
For Andreev, even in the most hellishly constricted dimensions, “a spark of
consciousness” flickers. So it must: what could suffer if there were no consciousness?
If liberation is the detachment of the purusha from its experience, hell consists of its
becoming so inextricably enmeshed with its own experience that it seems to have no
escape. This explains the colossal sense of stagnation that characterizes Andreev’s
Worlds of Retribution. Swedenborg’s descriptions of hell give a similar impression.
We could multiply examples from the religious and mystical literature of the
world. In sum, they all tell us that the plane of existence that we call physical reality is
not the only plane there is. Far too much evidence has accrued over the centuries that
tells us otherwise. The other planes, both higher and lower, seem to be characterized
by the degree of identification between purusha and prakriti. The parameters in each
particular realm are extremely narrow; to go past them is to move to another plane.
Even according to Hinduism and Buddhism, which hold that liberation is possible in a
human body (according to some, only in a human body), ultimate liberation, moksha
or parinirvana, is usually said to come only at death.
All this said, we come to a question that is unusually hard to answer. Again it
involves causation. Granting that these different planes of reality exist, what kind of
connection do they have? Do they sit one atop the other, separate and detached, like a
set of plates, or do they interpenetrate? If they do interpenetrate, do events in one
level cause events in another?
These questions are of no relevance to materialism, which claims that there is only
one plane of reality, but they are extremely important to the esoteric traditions, most
of which do say that there is such an interchange. It is symbolized by Jacob’s vision at
Bethel: “And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it
reached to heaven: and behold the angels of God ascending and descending on it”
(Genesis 28:12). To Kabbalists, the ascent and descent symbolize this interpenetration
between worlds. Moreover, events on higher, subtler levels somehow cause those on
lower levels, just as your mental conception of the cake you are about to bake
precedes and causes the manifestation of the cake.
So it would seem, but is this right? Or are we merely dealing with a more
specialized and intricate form of constant conjunction? Let’s create two strings of
digits:

34859803160898489593162058795424579321 …
50809085283210074715327652930000113590 …
These are similar to the strings we looked at in the previous chapter, except that now
the sequence interlocks between two lines. Every time we have a 3 in the line above,
there is a 5 in the line below. Are we justified in saying that the 3 in the line above
somehow “caused” the 5 to appear in the line below? It would not seem so.
This kind of causal sequence is different from the one-dimensional material
causation analyzed by Hume. It has to do, for example, with relations between strings
of events in the psychological, or “astral,” world and strings of events in the physical
world. To take a simple example, say there is a seer who has prophetic dreams. Every
time she dreams of a major airplane crash, such a crash occurs the next day. Even if
the correlations between dreams and crashes were infallible, we still could not say that
the dreams caused the crashes. All we could say would be that there is a
correspondence between the two.
In all fairness, this is ultimately what the esoteric traditions are saying. They
rarely speak of causation, but they frequently speak of correspondence. The most
famous axiom is from the Emerald Tablet of Hermes Trismegistus: “What is above is
like that which is below, and what is below is like that which is above” (usually elided
to “As above, so below”). Antoine Faivre, the distinguished French scholar of
esotericism, has even said that the doctrine of correspondences is one of the central
elements of esotericism as a whole.
Probably the most famous instance of the doctrine of correspondences is
astrology. Most scientists today treat astrology with contempt, but they forget that this
ancient art was originally (and to a great extent still is) as empirical and inductive as
science itself. It began with the Sumerians and Babylonians, who, after millennia of
scrupulously recording the movements of the planets, came to see certain correlations
between these movements and events on earth. (In those days natal astrology —
reading the birth chart of an individual — had not been invented; the art was used to
foretell the patterns of weather and the rise and fall of nations.) Certain planets,
especially Jupiter and Venus, were correlated with luck; others, particularly Saturn
and Mars, were equated with ill fortune.
Does astrology work? It works well enough. To take a fairly recent example, in
the fall of 2000, astrologers could see that the U.S. elections were due to take place
when the planet Mercury was moving retrograde. This usually indicates delay,
confusion, and sometimes deceit, and few astrologers would advise anyone to make a
major decision under its influence. The week before the election, I received emails

from various astrologers suggesting that there would be some sort of problem with the
electoral results, even accusations of fraud. The excruciating aftermath of the ballot
proved them right. Even more peculiarly, Mercury was due to station (that is, stand
still in the skies from the earth’s point of view) and go direct around 9:45 PM on
election day Eastern time. Watching the returns on television, I was struck by the fact
that the networks took Florida, the crucial state, out of the Democratic column at
almost exactly that time.
Astrology employs the doctrine of correspondences: there is a correlation between
events on earth and those in heaven. Nevertheless, both types of events are physical:
one type — the movements of the planets — is correlated to another — certain events
on earth. Hence astrology is empirical and inductive. It has been discarded by science
because the latter can find no causal mechanism that would explain the connection of
planets and events on earth, but if Hume is right, any causal connection is merely one
of conjunction. There is no a priori reason to discard astrology any more than there
was to discard the theory of evolution in, say, 1870, before Mendelian genetics was
devised to explain how traits are inherited. Practically the only man who tried to make
a serious and objective scientific analysis of astrology, the French psychologist
Michel Gauquelin, did find statistically significant correlations between the positions
of planets in the natal chart and success in careers such as medicine and sports. Even
though his findings did not entirely jibe with conventional astrology, the scientific
community refused to accept Gauquelin’s conclusions. Some scientists replicating his
studies found that their results corroborated Gauquelin’s. Unable to accept this
outcome, they falsified their own data.13
But even astrology does not require us to radically revise the notion of causation
as I’ve set it out here. We notice sequences: certain events accompany or follow upon
others; it remains a case of constant conjunction. These are all elements of experience;
they are patterns in the garment of prakriti.
Other attempts to go past causation in this sense have met with no more success.
The foremost of these is C.G. Jung’s concept of “synchronicity,” an “acausal
connecting principle” that supposedly explains what Jung calls “meaningful
coincidences.” Jung describes a famous case in point:
A young woman I was treating had, at a critical moment, a dream in which she
was given a golden scarab. While she was telling me this dream I sat with my
back to the closed window. Suddenly I heard a noise behind me, like a gentle
tapping. I turned round and saw a flying insect knocking against the window-
pane from outside. I opened the window and caught the creature in the air as it
flew in. It was the nearest analogy to the golden scarab that one finds in our

latitudes, a scarabeid beetle, the common rose-chafer (Cetonia aurata), which
contrary to its usual habits had evidently felt an urge to get into a dark room at
this particular moment. I must admit that nothing like it ever happened to me
before or since, and that the dream of the patient has remained unique in my
experience.14
Such events are common, and I could cite any number of examples of
synchronistic occurrences from my own and from others’ experiences. For Jung,
synchronicity is the principle that connects two events that are themselves not
causally related. Jung is not saying that the woman’s narration of her dream caused
the arrival of the beetle, or vice versa. But what he is saying is not altogether clear.
Sometimes he implies that these events are unrelated and that the only connection
they have is the meaning the individual ascribes to them. More often, he suggests that
a certain hidden cause is responsible for both of these apparently coincidental
occurrences. This cause is the archetypes — primary forces that underlie the human
psyche, or, as Jung defines them, “formal factors responsible for the organization of
unseen psychic processes,” for example, dreams — and synchronistic occurrences.
“Meaningful coincidences … seem to rest on an archetypal foundation,” he writes.15
Jung is saying, not that there is no causal connection between these events, but rather
that the true cause for both is an unseen occult or psychic factor: the archetype.
Jung tries to avoid any causal implications of his theory: “As soon as [the
observer] perceives the archetypal background he is tempted to trace the mutual
assimilation of independent psychic and physical processes back to a (causal) effect of
the archetype, and thus to overlook the fact that they are merely contingent. This
danger is avoided if one regards synchronicity as a special instance of general acausal
orderedness.”16 But his attempts are not altogether convincing. He seems to be saying
that the archetype did not cause the events associated with it (for example, the dream
of the scarab, the appearance of the beetle at the window), and that they are simply
associated with it contingently. He appears to be assuming that all causal relations are
necessary rather than contingent (that is, they must have caused their associated
effects, rather than merely having happened to cause them), but this is not true. Many
causal relations are purely contingent. A man’s child leaves its toy on the stairs; the
man trips on it and falls down. In this case the toy on the stairs caused the fall, but it
was not strictly necessary: the man could have stumbled and fallen even had the toy
not been there. Consequently the archetype could, in some sense, have caused the
physical phenomena associated with it even if it did not do so necessarily.
It’s easy to see why Jung was so evasive about this point. By the eighteenth
century, science had drummed all occult causes out of its worldview, so, as a scientist,

Jung could hardly be expected to embrace them. On the other hand, he was honest
enough to grope with phenomena that reductionistic science did not acknowledge. As
a result he was forced to create the theory of synchronicity, which is something of a
halfway measure between occult philosophy and a modern rationalistic explanation.
I discuss synchronicity at such length because it is a word that is thrown about
today though often poorly understood. But from the point of view of causation, as I
have described it here, the outcome remains the same. Even if there is an archetypal
cause that underlies these two apparently unconnected events, it is still a case of
constant conjunction. The only real difference is that the archetype is never directly
visible; it makes itself manifest only in its effects — in a dream or an intuition or the
toss of some coins in a reading of the I Ching.
To sum up these insights, we could return to the helpful although simplistic
metaphor of strings of digits. Let’s say there is not one but many strings of digits, each
of which represents a certain bandwidth of manifestation. If consciousness is able to
step back — to detach itself — from these to some extent, it may well be able to
correlate certain patterns in one string (for example, the psyche) with those of another
(physical reality). This would go far toward explaining the apparently superhuman
powers of telepathy and clairvoyance attributed to spiritual adepts. But this
circumstance does not really force us to change the theory; it is still a matter of
discerning patterns in the garment of prakriti.
At any rate, by this view no item in the pattern, strictly speaking, causes another,
any more than the letter i in the word it causes the letter t. The cause is, as Jung
intuited, hidden, but it may go deeper even than the archetypes. It may lie in this
intricate dynamic between purusha and prakriti, between consciousness and
experience, or (as the old occultists used to call them) spirit and matter. One element,
certainly, is the degree of enmeshment between the two. How this comes about can be
glimpsed, but it can only be glimpsed. As H. P. Blavatsky writes, “The ‘Causes of
Existence’ mean not only the physical causes known to science, but the metaphysical
causes, the chief of which is the desire to exist.… This desire for a sentient life shows
itself in everything, from an atom to a sun.… According to esoteric teaching, the real
cause of that supposed desire, and of all existence, remains forever hidden, and its
first emanations are the most complete abstractions mind can conceive.”17
A “sentient life” is impossible without sensation, and sensation is impossible
without consciousness — the capacity to relate self and other. So the root of all
existence is the primordial distinction between self and other. Blavatsky is right in
saying that “the real cause of that supposed desire … remains forever hidden.” The
Rig Veda implies as much at the end of its famous creation hymn: “Whence this
creation has arisen — perhaps it formed itself, or perhaps it did not — the one who

looks down on it, in the highest heaven, only he knows — or perhaps he does not
know.”18
For a taste of this mystery, simply close your eyes, calm your breathing, and try to
still your mind. This will be next to impossible; thoughts and feelings will come up
regardless. The calmer your mind is, the more disconnected and arbitrary will be the
thoughts that arise. Images will appear out of nowhere, things you had long ignored or
forgotten. If you are attentive, you will begin to notice a kind of blank space, a deep
silence in the mind, out of which the thoughts arise. The most common name for this
silence in Western esotericism is the Abyss. The Yogachara school of Buddhist
philosophy has called it alayavijnana — “the ground of consciousness”; the
equivalent term in Tibetan is kun gzhi. The Tibetans also call it ma rigpa — the
primordial loss of awareness that gives rise to all phenomena.
Could it be that, contrary to all I’ve said up to now, it is in this dark space of
being, this space between thoughts, that God inserts himself into the chain of
causation? It is possible, maybe probable. But if so, it is very far from causation in
any accepted scientific or theological sense.
In any case, it’s paradoxical that what we call consciousness should arise out of a
primordial loss of consciousness, and I must admit that it is a mystery I don’t fully
understand. Maybe it’s foolish to believe that you can understand it if, as the Rig Veda
says, even the supreme deity may not understand it either. Nor for that matter do we
remember the moment of our conception. There is something in our origins that
remains, and perhaps must remain, veiled from our sight.

I
CHAPTER SIX
A JUST UNIVERSE?
n chapter 1, I mentioned a study of comparative attitudes toward fairness in humans
and in our close relatives the chimpanzees. The study showed that a chimp will take
a bad deal, because anything is better than nothing, whereas a human will not. A
human will walk away from an unfair deal even if he goes away empty-handed.
The implications of this study may be more far-reaching than they appear. What if
a human were to take this stance toward that most treacherous of all deals, which is
life itself? Other animals accept what life dishes out; they will fight to stay alive no
matter what. Humans don’t behave the same way, at least not always. There are those
who decide to walk away from what they perceive as the unfair deal of life. This
would explain why humans sometimes commit suicide, while chimps don’t.
Suicide, like so many things in human behavior, transgresses the limits of what is
natural. If life, stripped down to its core, is pure survival, what are we to say of
someone who doesn’t want to survive? While there are extreme circumstances that
would justify such an act — those of individuals who have painful terminal illnesses,
or of concentration camp internees who make a desperate run for it — most suicides
don’t take place in such situations. Nor is it always a matter of privation. In the United
States as of 2008, the general suicide rate was about 11 per 100,000. Among middle-
aged white women, the rate was 8.2 per 100,000; for black women in the same age
group, the rate was only 2.5 per 100,000.1 If suicide were entirely, or even mostly, due
to hardship, one might imagine that the rate of suicide among black women, whose
poverty level is much higher, would also be higher, whereas the opposite is the case.
No doubt there are clinical reasons for suicide — depression and so on — but
sometimes assigning such a label looks like an instance of the naming fallacy:
slapping a label onto something in order to pretend you have understood it. What if,
for many people, the root lies deeper? What if it is a way of stepping away from a

deal they don’t think is fair?
A research psychologist could probably find a way of testing this hypothesis (“of
100 individuals who attempted suicides, 45 agreed with the statement ‘Life is unfair,’
as opposed to the control group, of which only … ” and so on), but as I’m not a
research psychologist, this is not a direction I will take. Instead I’m led to reflect on
the extremely powerful need in the human soul for justice — and justice, moreover, in
the universe as a whole, not merely in human society. Without this sense of justice, it
is difficult to see meaning or purpose in life.
Granted, it’s not always easy to believe in the fundamental justice of the cosmic
order. The Japanese director Akira Kurosawa titled an early film of his The Bad Sleep
Well, and often this seems to be true. In fact it’s extremely hard to believe in the
justice of the cosmos if we take life at face value. The wicked prosper, the good
suffer; “the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong” (Ecclesiastes 9:11).
Hence people have resorted to many explanations, particularly religious ones, to
balance the accounts.
One of the most far-reaching attempts to create a theodicy (a theory of divine
justice) came from the Hebrew prophets in the eighth to sixth centuries BC. Its
context was God’s covenant with Israel. The conditions were clear: “And it shall
come to pass, if thou shalt hearken diligently unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to
observe and to do all his commandments which I command thee this day, that the
Lord thy God will set thee on high above all nations of the earth: And all these
blessings shall come on thee, and overtake thee, if thou shalt hearken unto the voice
of the Lord thy God.… But it shall come to pass, if thou wilt not hearken unto the
voice of the Lord thy God, to observe to do all his commandments and his statutes
which I command thee this day; that all these curses shall come upon thee, and
overtake thee” (Deuteronomy 28:1–2, 15). A long list of afflictions follows.
The nation did not meet the requirements, and the afflictions came. The prophets
had no doubt about who was responsible. Isaiah declaimed, “Through the wrath of the
Lord of hosts is the land darkened, and the people shall be as the fuel of the fire”
(Isaiah 9:19). By that time Israel was divided into two kingdoms. The northern
kingdom, known simply as Israel, was destroyed by the Assyrians in 722 BC. The
people, deported en masse, vanished from history (hence the Ten Lost Tribes of
Israel). The southern kingdom of Judah was crushed by the Neo-Babylonian empire
under Nebuchadnezzar in 587 BC, the Temple of Solomon was sacked, and the people
were removed to Babylon. This time they did not lose their identity but nursed hope
of a return to their home. This hope came to fruition: after Babylon was in its turn
overthrown by the Medes and Persians, their king, Cyrus, issued an order in 539 BC
stating that the people of Judah — the Jews — could return and rebuild their temple.

In a sense, all was well again, and the Jews enjoyed almost four hundred years of
peace under the Persians and their heirs, the Hellenistic monarchs. And yet a nagging
doubt remained: did the people’s sins really warrant such terrible afflictions? The
second part of the book of Isaiah (generally dated to the time of Cyrus’s restoration)
hints at this question: “Comfort ye, comfort ye, my people; speak ye comfortably to
Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is
pardoned: for she hath received of the Lord’s hand double for all her sins” (Isaiah
40:1–2; my emphasis). Somehow the punishment seemed out of proportion to the
crime.
The most famous of all inquiries into divine justice is also dated to this era. The
story of Job is too well known to rehearse here, but we can see that the dramatic, as
well as the theological, tension in the book comes from one underlying question: why
should the righteous suffer? Job, from the land of Uz (probably in today’s Jordan), is a
Gentile, so he is out of the range of Israel’s retributions. After the long interchange
between Job and his so-called comforters, which occupies the greatest part of the
book, the Lord himself appears out of the storm cloud to answer (if it can be called
answering): “Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? … Who hath
laid the measures thereof, if thou knowest?” (Job 38:4–5).
Some commentators, notably Jung in his Answer to Job, have seen the divine
response as a show of force: the Lord displays his overwhelming power and Job must
submit. But, like most interpreters, I think the text’s real import lies elsewhere. It is a
question not of superior force but of superior understanding. “My thoughts are not
your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord” (Isaiah 55:8). Divine
justice is not commensurable with human justice.
Even so, there is a rough correlation between the two. Having received “from the
Lord’s hand” double for all their sins, the Jews return to Jerusalem. Job, yielding in
humility, has his goods and chattel restored to him; new children are born to replace
the ones who were killed. But after the number of sins has been tallied up against the
number of retributions, we are still left with a remainder, and it has nagged at the part
of the human mind that will not submit to an unfair deal. Do the sins really match the
punishment? Does Job’s new set of children wipe out the memories of those he has
lost? Is justice dealt out fully in earthly life?
The answer of the Hebrew prophets was eschatological. Justice will be
accomplished in the end — but only in the end. At that point, the prophets foretold,
the Lord himself will stand against the wicked and set the whole world right: “And
the Lord shall be king over all the earth: in that day shall there be one Lord, and his
name one” (Zechariah 14:9).
It would be hard to overstate the influence of this answer. Every signboard worn

by every street-corner fanatic, every fraudulent bestseller proclaiming the end of the
“late, great planet Earth,” every convoluted calculation demonstrating when the Lord
shall return is a direct descendant of this prophetic vision. They are all, in effect,
delivering the same message: divine justice does not manifest fully in the world we
know; the world will have to come to an end to set the accounts straight. To this day,
the half of the human race that adheres to one of the Abrahamic faiths accepts some
version of this belief.
Yet its grip is weakening. It is hard to believe in imminent apocalypse when we
know that the earth was not created in 4004 BC but is billions of years old. It is hard
to believe the prophets when prophets have been crying wolf for the past twenty-five
hundred years. The strident and vicious apocalyptic preaching of recent years sounds
more like a death rattle than the voice of resurgence.
Even if the prophecies come true, we could wonder how a Last Judgment really
could set everything right. Would it repay humanity for all its sufferings? Many of
these, it is true, have been inflicted by humans on other humans, but at least as many
— disease, starvation, earthquakes, storms — have been wrought by the impersonal
hand of nature. I’m reminded of a science-fiction story (I don’t know the author’s
name) in which Jesus Christ returns at the Last Day only to find the planet empty.
Delving into a vault in the earth, he finds a sign that reads: “We were here. Where
were you?”
Blasphemous, perhaps, but still a haunting statement. Even Christianity has not
felt satisfied with a theodicy that depends entirely on the Last Judgment. In addition
to this “general judgment,” as theologians call it, there is the “particular judgment”
that takes place upon the death of each individual and will determine whether she is
sent to heaven or hell. These two judgments have never entirely jibed: why should
everybody have to be judged twice? The answer, in historical terms at any rate,
probably has to do with the hybrid origins of Christianity: it took the apocalyptic
vision of a Last Judgment from its Jewish roots, and the heaven and hell of an afterlife
from Greek and Egyptian mystery religions, and has attempted to paper over the
inconsistency with theologizing.
Setting aside this issue, we can ask whether the afterlife of conventional
Christianity will satisfy our hunger for a righteous universe. The obvious answer is
no: what sort of justice sentences a person to an infinity of torments in hell for a finite
number of offenses in a lifetime? Even the greatest monsters of history did not inflict
an infinite amount of damage in the few short decades of their lives.
There is no good answer to this question. It may be true that God’s ways are not
our ways, but aren’t God’s ways supposed to be better than ours? Eternal torment in
hell is not the work of an infinitely loving God; it is the work of a God who is

tremendously more vindictive than the typical human being. Theologians usually
reply by murmuring something about the need to balance divine love with divine
justice, or the extent of the punishment having to do with the infinitude of the one
offended. Here is one version, by the twentieth-century theologian Reinhold Niebuhr:
The classical Christian idea of Atonement emphasizes that God is both the
propitiator and the propitiated. The Father sends the Son into the world to
become a sacrifice for sin. But it is also the wrath of the Father which must be
propitiated. There can be no simple abrogation of the wrath of God by the
mercy of God. The wrath of God is the world in its essential structure reacting
against the sinful corruptions of that structure.… The mercy of God represents
the ultimate freedom of God above His own law; but not the freedom to
abrogate the law.2
You could turn this passage into an atheist’s jibe: can God make a law so powerful
that he can’t abrogate it?
One alternative admits the existence of heavens and hells but does not portray
them as infinite. This is the standard doctrine of Buddhism, which says that the six
lokas of existence constitute a cycle. As monumental as the sufferings of the hell
realms are, they do come to an end. By accumulating good karma, beings climb up the
ladder of these realms until they reach the heavens of the gods, who are immeasurably
long-lived by human standards but not immortal. When their merit has been
exhausted, these beings fall back into the hell realms to start the cycle all over, and so
it will continue unless they are freed by enlightenment. The wheel is endless, and we
have all followed it from beginning to end in an uncountable series of recurrences.
Each of us has been a god, each of us has been in hell countless times. The thirteenth-
century Tibetan sage Longchenpa writes:
All the tears you have shed would be more (than the water) in the four oceans,
And the amount of molten metal, foul blood, and excrements
You have consumed when your mind had become a denizen of hell or a spirit
Would not be matched by the rivers flowing to the end of the world.3
Similarly, Andreev’s Worlds of Retribution are not endless; even the Torquemadas
will eventually work off the evil they have done.
The only major figure in Christian theology to have embraced a theory like this
was the church father Origen (circa 185 to circa 253), who held that “the soul-like
condition comes from the angelic and archangelic condition, and the daemonic and
human from the soul-like; and that conversely from the human come angels and

daemons, and that each order of the heavenly powers is made up either wholly of
those below or from those above, or else both from those above and those below.”4
Here we see something like the Buddhist doctrine. Being a Christian, however, Origen
did not see the cycle as endless. Instead he believed that all beings would be
reconciled to God in the end; even the devil had the chance of being saved.
The Origen passage that I’ve quoted, incidentally, does not necessarily consist of
Origen’s own words. It is taken from an anathema issued by the Second Council of
Constantinople in 553, which, three hundred years after his death, denounced Origen’s
teaching about the preexistence of souls. The wording may or may not be Origen’s
exactly, but scholars believe that it accurately represents his doctrine. In any event, the
anathema itself reveals how this teaching fared in Christian dogma.
Because Origen’s concept of the preexistence of souls is sometimes taken as
equivalent to that of reincarnation or transmigration, I should say something here
about the place of this teaching in Christian doctrine. Many New Age writers say that
reincarnation was taught in early Christianity and was suppressed only later by one or
another church council. Origen is sometimes held up as an early champion of
reincarnation. But he did not teach the idea of reincarnation or transmigration; in fact
he opposed it: “The doctrine of transmigration … is foreign to the Church of God, and
not handed down by the apostles, nor anywhere set forth in the scriptures.”5 Nor did
any of the other church fathers embrace reincarnation. Some have speculated that the
doctrine did exist in early Christianity, and probably it did in certain Gnostic sects; but
to all appearances, it has never had a place in the protocatholic church or its
descendants, Catholicism, Orthodoxy, and Protestantism. The reason is summed up by
the Franciscan Pat McCloskey on his website: “Reincarnation denies the need to
convert, about which Jesus spoke often. If souls keep recycling, won’t they all end up
in the same place eventually? If so, why are our decisions today important?”6
Nonetheless, the church’s rejection of a doctrine does not make it untrue. Nor is it
a convincing argument to deny a teaching just because it might lead some to put their
salvation off till the next life. Many American Catholics apparently agree: a Harris
poll taken in November 2007 indicated that about 24 percent of them believe in
reincarnation (a slightly higher percentage than that of the populace at large, which is
21 percent).7
In fact an enormous amount of material indicates that there is some truth to the
doctrine of reincarnation. The late Ian Stevenson, who headed the department of
psychiatry at the University of Virginia, did extensive research on past-life memories
and published his findings in four volumes titled Cases of the Reincarnation Type.
The Jungian psychologist Roger Woolger, author of Other Lives, Other Selves, has
built a worldwide practice on healing individuals from past-life traumas. These

findings are empirical, even if they are of the anecdotal type that quantitative analysts
treat with such contempt. But if we are going to be truly and rigorously empirical, we
must consider the full body of evidence and not just the small quantity that can be
classified as repeatable results. Anyway, what sort of experiment could you devise
that would indicate anything about the afterlife one way or the other?
We could say the same about life after death as a whole. A tremendous body of
firsthand experience points toward the survival of consciousness after the body’s
demise. When I was editor of Gnosis, a journal of the Western spiritual traditions, I
received quantities of first-person accounts by ordinary people of encounters with
dead relatives, angels, and other spiritual entities. Gnosis did not publish this type of
story, but people sent them anyway, to the point where I came to regard them as a
nuisance. Most were believable; often they were written by people who previously
had had no interest in religion or the paranormal. Furthermore, there was a sharp line
separating this material from intricate paranoid fantasies, crudely scrawled missives
by the Supreme Being, and other offerings that were clearly insane. (We received our
share of these as well. Jay Kinney, founder of the magazine, created a “nut drawer” to
preserve the wildest of them.)
Well, then, which is it? Heaven and hell or reincarnation? There is no reason to
embrace one exclusively at the expense of the other. Let me go back to a model I
mentioned in the previous chapter, in which the many levels of existence are
differentiated by one variable: the degree to which purusha is enmeshed with prakriti.
Each plane is defined by a specific degree of this admixture (though this is almost
certainly impossible to define in quantitative terms). If this is correct, then upon death
an entity could move to a “higher” or “lower” level or, alternatively, could remain on
the same plane for another life, depending on any number of factors. One of these is
likely what Emanuel Swedenborg called your “ruling love.” According to
Swedenborg, your condition in the afterlife is not based on the record of your sins as
interpreted by Saint Peter, or on the weight of your heart on the scales of justice, as
the ancient Egyptians believed. You go where you will in the next life on the basis of
your affinities. “We are our love and intention after death,” writes Swedenborg. “All
heaven is differentiated into communities on the basis of differences in the quality of
love, and every spirit who is raised up into heaven and becomes an angel is taken to
the community where her or his love is.… The same applies in hell. There too, people
associate according to loves that oppose heavenly ones.”8
C. S. Lewis, in his allegory The Great Divorce, suggested something similar: The
communication lines between hell and heaven are open all the time; anyone in hell
can go to heaven anytime he wishes. But those who are in hell do not like heaven and
do not feel comfortable there; the very blades of grass cut their feet.

From all this, we can begin to tease out a picture of the afterlife that is both
reasonable and concordant with justice as we understand it. There are “many
mansions,” as Christ said, encompassing levels of reality that stretch beyond the
vision of even the mind’s eye. We go where we go after we die not after some ruling
by a celestial criminal justice system; rather it is a question of where we want to be.
Or, to put it in a more sophisticated way, the purusha in us — that fragment of the
cosmic Self that animates our being, that is our being — is drawn to the realms with
which it has the most affinity.
The Eastern traditions do not speak of ruling loves or affinities; they characterize
the fate of the soul in terms of karma. Karma — from a Sanskrit root meaning “to act”
— has a number of meanings in the East, and it has become a popular word in the
West as well. My friends in San Francisco used to say someone had “parking karma”
if she was good at finding spaces for her car in that notoriously congested city. There
it seemed to mean “good karma,” probably from an unconscious association with the
English word charm. But the most universal sense of the word — and the one that
concerns us most here — is as defined by the Indian scholar Pandit Rajmani Tigunait:
Each school of Indian philosophy accepts the immutable law of karma, which
states that for every effect there is a cause, and for every action there is a
reaction. A man performs his actions and receives remuneration for them. If he
becomes attached to the results of his actions, then he becomes a victim of his
own karmas because it is attachment to the results, or fruits, that then
motivates or conditions a person to perform future actions. The fruit has arisen
out of the action, and the action out of the fruit. This cycle is referred to as the
wheel of karma. To act with the motive of gaining fruits invites bondage, but
to relinquish this motivation frees one from all miseries. All schools of Indian
philosophy agree that this concept of karma is the only satisfactory
explanation for the existence of suffering. The apparent good fortune of
nonvirtuous people and bad fortune of virtuous people can be explained only
through the law of karma, which explains the reason and purpose for a
person’s existence in his present life. According to this law, nothing is
accidental; whatever happens in one’s life is because of karmas performed in
this life or in a past life.9
Most discussions of Indian religion define karma more or less this way. (By the
way, when Tigunait speaks of “all schools of Indian philosophy,” he is including
Buddhism as well as the Hindu schools, since Buddhism originated in India, even
though it’s no longer practiced widely there.) Compared to the standard Christian
view, in which the wildly disparate fortunes of individuals on earth can only be

ascribed to the capricious will of God (since the soul did not exist before birth and so
could not have done anything good or bad), it is at least a rational account of the good
and evil that comes to us in life. Moreover, it appears just: you are repaid for an action
in proportion to the benefit or harm you have caused. Not surprisingly, it accords well
with the Samkhya philosophy. Attachment, as Tigunait calls it, is precisely the
entangling of consciousness in its contents, of ensnaring purusha in prakriti. The
remedy is to perform one’s actions dispassionately and without expectation of results.
The divine Krishna gives similar advice in the Bhagavad Gita: “When all a man’s
emprises are free from desire [for fruit] and motive, his works are burnt up in
wisdom’s fire, then wise men call him learned. When he has cast off all attachment to
the fruits of works, ever content, on none dependent, though he embarks on work
[himself], in fact he does no work at all.”10 The Sanskrit word here translated as
“work” is karma, so the last line is also saying, “He generates no karma at all.”
Nevertheless, the justice of karma is almost as problematic as that of conventional
Christianity. Suppose that around the year 1500 an inquisitor in Spain ferrets out
dozens of Jews for torture. He dies in old age, not only unpunished but honored by his
church and country. Four hundred years later, that same inquisitor is reborn as a Jew
in Poland. When the nation is conquered by the Nazis, he is shipped off to Auschwitz
and is exterminated after suffering unimaginable agonies. The inexorable law of
karma has been served. But is it just? The Jew has no memories of his previous life as
an inquisitor; he dies in despair at the injustice of the world, utterly unaware that he
has brought this fate upon himself by his own evil karma. It would be as if the state
were to sweep a man off the street one day and execute him for a murder without
bothering to tell him why. In fact it’s worse, because the murderer might at least have
some inkling of why his fate has befallen him, whereas the Jew in Auschwitz has
none.
In all fairness, the proponents of the law of karma are not exactly saying that it is
just; they are simply saying that one thing leads to another. By its logic, the Jew in the
case I’ve described could be reborn in the next life with karmic dispositions toward
persecution as a result of the traumas of the concentration camp, and the whole
process could start all over again. In fact, that’s what’s likely to happen, and that’s
why Tigunait can speak of the “cycle” or “wheel of karma.” The remedy is not
virtuous acts in themselves, because these will simply create good karma. This will
bring good fortune to an individual, but once the karma is exhausted, he will have to
pick up where he left off. The true solution is virtuous acts performed selflessly and
dispassionately, without attachment to results.
I have more to say later about the connection between virtue and liberation, but
for now let’s go back to another point that Tigunait makes in the passage quoted. The

law of karma “states that for every effect there is a cause, and for every action there is
a reaction.” Most definitions of karma make mention of cause and effect, and
sometimes karma is even defined simply as the law of cause and effect. This can be
confusing for Westerners, whose view of causality probably resembles those I
discussed in chapter 4. But there is a crucial difference. Karmic causation makes no
sense unless we grant one supposition: that similar causes have similar effects. The
Western view makes no such presuppositions; it is completely empirical. Concerned
only with discovering which kinds of effects are conjoined with which causes, it does
not presuppose whether the cause is “like” its effect.
It’s striking that the spiritual traditions of India should have portrayed the moral
structure of the universe in such a deterministic way, but it makes sense if we look at
the situation more closely. For Hinduism and Buddhism, unlike orthodox Christianity,
the Absolute is impersonal. Although it may take the form of personal gods (even a
singular, quasi-monotheistic God known as Ishwara), these are merely guises for
something that can never be constrained by any form, no matter how overweening.
Relying much less on a personal God to enforce cosmic justice, these traditions have a
greater need to portray this justice in the form of deterministic law. By contrast, the
West, which has always had its God in the background to say, “Vengeance is mine; I
will repay” (Romans 12:19), has not needed to impart this function to causality.
Consequently it has had more liberty to look for empirical results as they are, instead
of adopting a preconceived notion of what they should be. It would be fascinating to
see whether the concept of karmic causality in Hindu and Buddhist philosophy
impeded the advance of empirical science in those civilizations, but I suspect this
would take a lifetime’s study.
The law of karma is problematic in other ways as well. If there is no conscious
connection between the persecuting inquisitor and his later incarnation, the persecuted
Jew, who or what exactly is carrying the karma? The problem is heightened for
Buddhism.
Based on the doctrine of anatta, or “no-self,” Buddhism claims that the very notion of
a self is delusory. Anatta literally means “no atman.” Here Buddhism diverges from
Hinduism, which teaches the existence of the transcendent Self known as atman, or
purusha. At bottom this often seems to be the only real difference between Hinduism
and Buddhism at all.
Buddhist answers to the conundrum of what carries karma are often vague. The
typical answer is by analogy to waves that follow one upon another in the ocean.
There is no connection between the waves; one simply gives rise to another through a
sort of inertia. But applied to the survival of consciousness after death, this analogy is

not very illuminating or even accurate. After all, the waves presuppose the existence
of the ocean, but it is the very existence of this ocean that the Buddhists deny.
Not all Buddhists deny the existence of a self or “I” completely, at least in a
relative sense. The Dalai Lama observes, “There is indeed a conventionally posited,
valid I — a self that is the doer of action, that is the accumulator of karma, and that is
the person undergoing the pleasure and pain that are the fruit of those actions.
However, when we examine the mode of apprehension of the mind when the I
becomes a troublemaker, we find that we are conceiving a self-instituting I that is an
exaggeration beyond what actually exists.”11
He goes on to give a standard Buddhist proof: this “I” is dependent on “the
aggregates of mind or body.” That is, if you take apart the bundles of your sensations,
thoughts, emotions, and so on — and much Buddhist meditation is designed to do
exactly this — you will find nothing there behind them, no “I” that is real or
substantial. Logically, this is fallacious. You can disassemble your automobile into an
“aggregate” of parts and supplies, but it does not follow from this that there is no
automobile at all.
Moreover, the automobile in its fully constructed form is something beyond what its
parts would be if they were just piled up in your driveway. So it is with the “I.” The
fact that it can be dissected does not prove there was nothing to dissect.
Ultimately the Hindu doctrine of atman, or Self, and the Buddhist doctrine of
anatta, or no-self, may not be nearly as far apart as their names imply. In fact these
apparently opposite terms may refer to the same thing. The Chinese Buddhist master
Hui-neng says, “The Buddha-nature knows neither decrease nor increase, whether it is
in the Buddha or in common mortals. When it is within the passions, it is not defiled;
when it is meditated upon, it does not become purer. It is neither annihilated nor
abiding; it neither comes nor departs; it neither dies nor is born. It remains the same
all the time, unchanged in all its changes. As it is never born, it never dies.”12
Compare this to the description of the Self in the Hindu Brihadaranyaka Upanishad:
[Atman, or Self,] is neither big nor little, neither long nor short, neither
burning like fire nor flowing like water; without shadow, without darkness,
without wind, without air, without attachment; without touch, taste, sight,
smell; without hearing, speaking, thinking; without breath, without face,
without energy, without measure, without inside or outside; it consumes
nothing; nothing consumes it.…
Who without knowing this Root, meditates, sacrifices, practises austerity,

though for thousands of years, does what passes away. Who dies without
knowing this Root, is pitiful; who leaves this world, knowing it, is wise.13
The principle of which these two passages speak appears to be the same, whether we
call it atman or anatta, Self or no-self. It is Self in that this principle of consciousness
constitutes the very core of our being. It is no-self in the sense that it far surpasses the
very limited sense of self with which we usually identify.
Something similar is true when we look at the “accumulator of karma,” which in
many Hindu schools is ahamkara, or ego. Most Buddhist traditions do not give it a
specific name, since that would suggest it is “real,” but as we’ve seen from the Dalai
Lama’s remarks, the concept is somewhere in the background. In any event, purusha,
the true Self, and ahamkara (to use the Samkhya terms) are very much distinct. The
first is consciousness in a pure, unbounded form; the second is consciousness that has
fixated on its experience, on its own contents, and imprisons itself by calling them
mine. This very fixation is the glue that attaches ahamkara to the fruits of its action.
In the end, karma is a shadowy entity. Sometimes it appears to work; sometimes it
does not; sometimes it is instantaneous; sometimes it takes centuries to fulfill itself. If
there is cosmic justice in this process, it is impossible for a human being to
understand, much less rely on. Moreover, we have always been told — and rightly —
that to be good out of fear of punishment is a low motivation. This must hold true
whether we are afraid of the policeman or of the machinery of karma. If there is a
moral component to the universe, it has to run deeper than this.
And it does. To best approach it, we can turn back to a detail that I mentioned in a
previous chapter. The Samkhya says that purusha is manifold, that there are many
purushas rather than just one. The proof is factual: if purusha is singular and one
individual attains enlightenment, wouldn’t that mean that everyone else automatically
would as well? A singular purusha would mean that either everyone has attained
enlightenment or nobody has.
The French esotericist René Guénon, whose understanding of Hindu thought was
more lucid and profound than that of practically anyone else in the West, makes this
reply: purusha is “a multiple principle only so long as it is considered in relation to
separate existences.”14 Purusha is only relatively multiple; it is so on our plane of
reality but not on all. Taking this a step further, we could say that purusha is plural
only insofar as it is fixated on ahamkara, on the ego. In fact it is this very sense of the
multiplicity of purushas — the apparently rigid division between self and other, or
between selves and others — that binds us most rigidly to this plane.
The solution, of course, is to let these barriers drop. Meditation, again, has been
proposed as a means to this end, but meditation alone can become somewhat

solipsistic. The boundaries of identity have to be loosened in other ways as well, and
the most powerful way to do this is by ethics in its deepest sense.
The self as an ego is separate and isolated. Trafficking in debts and obligations
and duties and karma, it operates by a kind of double-entry accounting system: assets
must balance out liabilities, whether we are thinking in terms of torts and crimes or of
giving Christmas gifts. This is no doubt necessary in ordinary human society, but at
bottom it seems cold and calculating. We distrust others when we find them acting
this way, and when we find ourselves acting this way, we feel ashamed. This is
because intuitively we know there is something deeper going on, even if we’re
unaware of it consciously. In my Conscious Love I call this “transactional love.”
Nearly everything we call love in this world is of this kind.
It can be depressing to think of love this way, and this is largely because we know
love should be something more. It is this higher love, which Christianity calls agape
and I call “conscious love,” that reflects the insight that the Self at the center of one’s
own being is exactly the same as the Self that lies at the core of everyone else’s as
well, human and nonhuman, animate and apparently inanimate. Christ commands us
to love our neighbors as ourselves because our neighbors literally are ourselves.
I won’t develop this line of thought further because I’ve done so at great length in
Conscious Love. But even the small amount I’ve said here shows how neatly and fully
the project of kindness and compassion dovetails with that of individual liberation.
The entire history of Buddhism reflects this. Originally, liberation was for the
individual: “Work out your salvation with diligence,” said the Buddha on his
deathbed. This idea is still the core of the Theravada branch of Buddhism. Five
hundred years later, the message began to change with the advent of Mahayana, the
“Great Vehicle” of Buddhism, which teaches that liberation for oneself alone is
incomplete. The true saint, or bodhisattva, renounces his ascent to nirvana until all
sentient beings are liberated as well.
This too looks merely like a high-minded sentiment until we see that it reflects the
truth about the universe. Purusha is one, so none are truly liberated until all are
liberated. We are to love our neighbors as ourselves not because God will punish us
otherwise but because the bond that links all of us is violated when hatred and harm
are present. There are many good souls who grasp this truth intuitively and act
according to it without understanding why, but there are others, those who want to
know, who need to grasp it with their minds as well as their hearts. And until both
mind and heart do grasp it, our minds will be restless and our hearts unsatisfied.

T
CHAPTER SEVEN
BEYOND THE COPPER MOUNTAIN
The Dimensions of Faith
he Sufis, the mystics of Islam, tell a story about three men who have heard of a
mountain of gold that lies in a remote country. The men decide to make a journey
to find it. They go for a very long way, and have almost given up hope, when they
reach a mountain of copper. They debate among themselves about whether the legend
misled them and was really speaking of this copper mountain. Finally one of them
says, “Well, in any case, copper is quite valuable. I could mine this copper and
become rich.” So this man stays at the copper mountain, and the other two go on.
They journey for a long way — two or three times the distance they covered to
reach the copper mountain — and they have almost given up hope when they come to
a silver mountain. Again, the two men ask themselves whether this was really what
the legend was talking about when it spoke of a mountain of gold. One of them says,
“In any case, silver is extremely valuable. I could mine this silver and become rich.”
He stays behind, leaving only one of the original three to go on.
The last man has to travel a very long time — three or even four times as long as
it took to reach the silver mountain, and often he curses himself for not having the
sense to have stayed behind with his fellows. But he goes on until all his supplies are
gone and he has nothing left. He is almost dead of starvation when he finally spies the
mountain of gold.
Why does one man stop at one point, and why does another go on? Should the two
men who stopped have gone on to their original goal? Why, for that matter, did they
start on the journey? What were they really seeking? And why did they believe the
legend to begin with?
One thing this parable is talking about is faith. It is hard to go far in thinking about

religion without coming up against this monumentally difficult subject. What I have
said so far in this book requires little faith in order to be accepted. But it’s a different
matter when we take up the issue of a personal God. Since such a God is invisible and
apparently imperceptible in the world as we know it, faith suddenly becomes vitally
important — except, it seems, no one can quite agree about what this faith is or what
it should be based on. Immediately we find ourselves floating on a sea of discord, and
like squabbling sailors on a sinking ship, we discover that our divisions only make
things worse.
To speak of faith is to invoke Christianity, because no other religion in the world
has placed such emphasis on faith or made so many demands on it. However post-
Christian our civilization may be at this point, if we bring our thoughts to bear on
faith, we will probably do so in terms of Christian concepts and categories. So it’s
worth devoting some attention to these.
Probably the oldest form is faith through authority. You believe because someone
or something you look up to — your church, scripture, master, tradition — tells you
to. Leslie D. Weatherhead, a British Methodist minister writing in the 1960s, gives an
example in his provocatively titled book The Christian Agnostic.
A Methodist youth had fallen in love with a Roman Catholic girl, and as his
parents disapproved of such a marriage, he wrote a naïve letter asking me if I
would interview them both and, to use his own words, “convert the girl to
Methodism“! I was happy to interview them both to see what would happen.
That girl had been well instructed. Whenever she was confronted with a
difficult situation, she fell back on the phrase, “Well, our church teaches so
and so.” In effect, she said to me this: “Who am I, a young, uninstructed,
uneducated girl, to decide what is to be believed? For hundreds of years the
great theologians, the great scholars of my church, adequately educated and
magnificently equipped, have wrestled with these problems and come to
certain conclusions. I, an untrained girl, can only accept what they say. I
believe in what my church teaches.” As Dr. Vincent Taylor [another Methodist
minister] once said, “No wonder Rome makes converts. It is all so simple once
we have committed mental suicide by agreeing that the church cannot err.”1
It’s tempting to dismiss the girl’s ingenuousness until we realize that we do the
same thing all the time. There are any number of areas in which we have no
competency to make decisions and have to trust experts. If your washing machine
breaks and the repairman comes to fix it, you put your faith in what he tells you about
how it is to be fixed. If you fall ill, you go to the doctor and (usually) trust her
diagnosis. Why should we imagine that the situation should be different with religion,

where the evidence is all the more ambiguous and the difficulties all the more subtle?
Nevertheless, faith in authority has diminished enormously over recent centuries.
It was easier, no doubt, to maintain it in medieval Europe, when there was one church
in which all spiritual authority was concentrated. It is not so easy today, when there
are countless religions, each of which constantly insists the others are wrong.
Furthermore, we live in an age of suspicion. We find it hard to naively assume that
the authorities are making their pronouncements solely with our benefit in mind. This
distrust pervades most fields of human life. More and more often we view our leaders
as mere politicians who are eager to lie for the slightest advantage, our doctors as
minions of the obscenely profitable pharmaceutical industry, and the very journalists
who bring us news of these things as flunkies of the rich and powerful. Religious
authority, for a large segment of the population, evokes at least as much distrust.
Some of it may be misplaced or exaggerated, but in any case the spell has been
broken. We now feel cut adrift, forced to rely on our own judgment, but free to make
our own mistakes.
The second type of faith is the faith of reason. Here you believe because you have
been rationally persuaded to do so. This is faith as known through the theological and
philosophical proofs and refutations — the ontological argument, the argument from
design, and so on. Anyone who has read an elementary textbook of philosophy is
familiar with these strategies. Unfortunately they have not worn well over time.
The ontological argument, for example, devised by the medieval theologian
Anselm of Canterbury, states that, since God is defined as the best and greatest being
one can imagine, God must necessarily exist. It is clearly better, Anselm contends, to
exist than not to exist, so a nonexistent God would not, by definition, be the best and
greatest being imaginable. Hence God necessarily exists. Although Anselm’s proof
has been much admired for its ingenuity, it has not convinced most philosophers.
They recognize that the argument involves a circularity, even though the exact nature
of this circularity has been notoriously hard to pinpoint.
The argument from design has fared no better, even though it has been recently
resurrected under the name “intelligent design.” It’s becoming easier and easier all the
time to understand the order of the universe without having to invoke a conscious,
personal designer who created this order; like Laplace, science has no need of that
hypothesis.
That reason is not necessarily the smoothest path to faith has long been
acknowledged, and Christianity from its earliest times has invoked the opposite: faith
through absurdity. Paul set the tone:
For the preaching of the cross is to them that perish foolishness; but unto us

which are saved it is the power of God.
For it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to
nothing the understanding of the prudent.
Where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer of this world?
hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world?
For after that in the wisdom of God the world by wisdom knew not God, it
pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. (i
Corinthians 1:18–21)
There is a strange beauty in these paradoxes, which speak to the part of the mind that
realizes the world is not all that reason makes it out to be. Whether Paul meant to take
his point further than this is not clear; at any rate, later Christian apologists certainly
did. We have already encountered Tertullian’s “Prorsus credibile est, quia ineptum
est” — usually rendered as “Credo quia absurdum”: “I believe because it is absurd.”
The ultimate step toward absurdity was taken by the Danish philosopher Søren
Kierkegaard in the nineteenth century. In his journal he writes, “The believer,
therefore, is the man of character, who, in absolute obedience to God, regards it as a
duty not to want to understand.” And: “All this world history and the reasons and
proofs for the truth of Christianity must be suppressed. There is only one proof, one
alone: that of faith.”2 At times Kierkegaard sounds like the girl in Weatherhead’s
story. It’s not surprising that his critics have sometimes accused him of verging on
Catholicism.
Kierkegaard’s most famous treatment of faith is his Fear and Trembling, which
focuses on Abraham’s sacrifice, or near sacrifice, of his son Isaac on Mount Moriah
(Genesis 22:1–15). Abraham “believed by virtue of the absurd, for human calculation
was out of the question, and it was indeed absurd that God, who demanded [the
sacrifice] of him, in the next instant would revoke the demand,” Kierkegaard writes.
He goes on to say that “the movement of faith must constantly made by virtue of the
absurd.”3 For Kierkegaard, faith is faith precisely because it is absurd. (His use of this
word deliberately invokes the formula “Credo quia absurdum.”) If it weren’t, faith
would simply be rational knowledge.4
This argument proves something, but possibly not what Kierkegaard intended.
Let’s grant that we are to believe in the absurd. Which absurdity, then, shall we
choose? There’s virtually an infinite quantity to pick from. Kierkegaard, trained as a
Lutheran divine, was bound to see it in Christian terms. What impels us toward faith
to begin with is the pervasive notion of sin. Here is another passage from
Kierkegaard’s journal: “There is only one proof for the truth of Christianity, and that

is precisely the pathological proof: when the anguish of sin and the pangs of his
conscience force a man to cross the narrow dividing line which separates the despair
bordering on madness and … Christianity. There lies Christianity.”5
This may have had some force in Kierkegaard’s time, when a pervasive notion of
sin — especially original sin — had saturated the mental atmosphere precisely
through the influence of Christianity. Paul claimed that this knowledge of sin had
come through Jewish law: “I had not known sin, but by the law” (Romans 7:7). The
pathological “anguish of sin” was, however, the creation not of Judaism or its law but
of Paul and his Christianity. Paul proposes Christ as the remedy for this pervasive
sense of sin that, it would seem, he himself has invented. It is as if a man were to go
to a doctor who told him he had some disease that the doctor himself had thought up
— for which, of course, only the doctor could have the cure. Could orthodox
Christianity, starting with Paul, have created this pathological sense of sin so that it
could proffer itself as the remedy?
All of this leaves us wondering which absurdity we should believe in. Perhaps, as
Kierkegaard thought, the naked condition of man in a state of sin before God. Or
perhaps, as the existentialists would later claim, the exact opposite: the naked
condition of man alone in a universe without God. Kierkegaard, the devout if
tormented Christian, is often seen as the first existentialist. It’s odd that his ornate
chain of paradoxes, strung together to lead toward faith, should have helped create a
philosophical school that has been among the most relentlessly atheistic of all time. It
would appear that one’s choice of absurdities is a matter of taste.
In the end, then, faith by virtue of the absurd must take its place alongside the
other rational or quasi-rational arguments, which are plausible to the exact degree that
one is disposed to believe them at the outset.
This issue leads us to what may be the central type of faith, at least in its
conventional form — volitional faith. Here one believes as a matter of will, maybe
even of choice. Kierkegaard has sometimes been classed among theologians who hold
to this view, although he probably did not. In his Philosophical Fragments, he writes,
“It is easy to see … that faith is not [merely] an act of will: for all human volition has
its capacity within this scope of an underlying condition.… If I do not have the
condition[,] … all my willing is of no avail.”6 That is, you can believe all you like,
but if there is no underlying reality to correspond to your belief, it is “of no avail.”
A purer form of volitional faith is offered by the great American psychologist and
philosopher William James. In his 1896 lecture “The Will to Believe,” James argues
that in situations where you can’t find certitude, it is not only your privilege but your
duty to choose on pragmatic grounds: you choose the system of beliefs that makes
your life better and more complete.

In truths dependent on personal action, … faith based on desire is certainly a
lawful and possibly an indispensable thing.… To preach scepticism to us as a
duty until “sufficient evidence” for religion be found, is tantamount therefore
to telling us, when in presence of the religious hypothesis, that to yield to our
fear of its being error is wiser and better than to yield to our hope that it may
be true.… Dupery for dupery, what proof is there that dupery through hope is
so much worse than dupery through fear?
James goes on to say that “we have the right to believe at our own risk any
hypothesis that is live enough to tempt our will.”7 As extreme as this may sound,
James makes it clear that he is talking about assertions — such as the existence of
God — for which the evidence is equivocal. In these cases, why not let your desire
choose? Unfortunately James seems to assume that your level of knowledge will
remain static: if you can’t make a determination about the truth of faith at one point,
you will never be able to. Therefore you might as well make your decision now. This
is not a terribly comforting position. What if new information comes along that
challenges your belief? In many areas of life, it’s acceptable and even desirable to
change your position as new knowledge is presented, but it is awkward in the realm of
faith, which, as the theologian Paul Tillich observed, has to do with matters of
“ultimate concern.”8 You can change your mind about computer brands or presidential
candidates with some equanimity, but if your “ultimate concern” slips away from you,
you are lost. As Schopenhauer writes, “Actually it would be a bad business if the
principal thing in a man’s life, his ethical worth that counts for eternity, depended on
something whose attainment was so very much subject to chance as are dogmas,
religious teachings, and philosophical arguments.”9
The various strategies for justifying faith — rational, emotional, volitional — all
run aground on the same shoal: the stupendous human capacity for self-deceit. None
of these approaches can stand against the mind’s own power to lead itself astray —
not merely to be mistaken but to want to be mistaken. James is right to say that
negative dupery is no better than positive dupery and very likely worse, but is there
any way we can hope not to be duped at all?
As far as I can see, there is only one way out. The Epistle to the Hebrews alludes
to it in a famous verse: “Now faith is the substance of things hoped for; the evidence
of things not seen” (Hebrews 11:1). This is a paradoxical utterance, rather like
Kierkegaard’s clever extravagances, although much more profound. Faith is both
substance and evidence; that is, it has a palpable aspect, even though (as the verse also
makes clear), it is not palpable in the ordinary sense of the term. Nevertheless, in
some way and at some level, faith must be based on experience. A person who has

faith does so not because of authority or reason or desire but because, however
obscurely, he senses an unseen reality that is drawing him in its direction. This is the
only way that faith can be immune to self-delusion.
The rest of Hebrews 11 gives a list of Old Testament exemplars of faith. The
passage is a piece of magnificent sermonizing and has inspired quantities of
magnificent sermonizing in the millennia since it was written, but its argument seems
strangely beside the point today. The figures that the author* sets before us are indeed
a lofty set — Abel; Enoch, the antediluvian patriarch who walked with God; Noah;
Abraham; Sarah, who “received strength to conceive seed.” Noah was “warned of
God of things not seen as yet”; Abraham was called “to go out into a place which he
should receive for an inheritance”; Sarah “was delivered of a child when she was past
age, because she judged him faithful who had promised” (Hebrews 11:7, 8, 11).
These figures, as presented by the epistle, differ from us in one crucial respect.
They had faith in the promises made by God. But in order to hear these promises, they
had to have some experience of God, and that is what a person who faces the question
of faith today probably lacks. A modern person might object that she might well
believe in God’s promises if God himself appeared to make them. Indeed that is the
vital question now: not whether God’s promises come true, but whether a God capable
of making such pledges exists in the first place.
The author of Hebrews seems aware of this problem: “He that cometh to God
must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him”
(Hebrews 11:5). But the Old Testament exemplars did not have to take that first step:
they didn’t have to “believe that he is” — that he exists. All of them had direct
communication from God almost as a thing taken for granted. Of course I’m not
claiming that the biblical stories are factually true in any sense by which we would
normally understand those words. But even taken as mere types of faith, their
example is wanting.
Well, then, are we merely to sit stupidly in front of the television before God takes
the trouble to appear in the living room? Of course not. The real answer to the
question of faith lies in the opening verse of this chapter of Hebrews, which does
express a powerful truth. There is “evidence of things not seen” and a “substance of
things hoped for.” In terms of the story of the golden mountain, it is that dim yet
compelling intuition that leads a man to go out of his house and travel on an endless
journey.
In his book The Sovereign Soul: Sufism, a Path for Today, Phillip Gowins, a
contemporary Sufi teacher, describes his own spiritual awakening:
One night when I was twenty-six, I was lying in bed next to my wife (my first

wife, I mean), waiting to fall asleep, when a sensation like a traveling electric
shock swept down through my body.
I thought nothing of it until it happened again. It happened a third time,
then kept on happening at three- or four-second intervals. It was like a pulsing
hoop of energy that started at my head and coursed down through my entire
body — like a wave front hitting the beach again and again.
I was puzzled, then alarmed, then frightened, then finally scared, until I
was begging it to stop. But it just went on and on. It seemed to be happening
on some psychic level, maybe in my aura (though I didn’t know what an aura
was then), and despite my pleading I remember thinking that it was really all
right, that no actual harm was being done to me. And then, just when I thought
it was over, another wave came crashing down, exploding, enlivening,
energizing me. Then it stopped.
The next morning Gowins saw nothing new in himself, “only the same old
frightened loser who looked back from the mirror at me every day.” On the surface,
nothing changed in his life. He continues:
The next stage in my spiritual odyssey (though I didn’t yet know that I was on
one) took place when I was sitting in a state of reverie on the living room floor
of our house in Oregon (I may have been stoned), gazing out the window at a
very tall, very green pine tree. I was thinking about how the world was a big
objective whole and not just the series of disconnected perceptions we all have
of it. This way of looking at things may be very familiar to some, but it was
new to me, and I was much enamored of it. It had also dawned on me that this
objective whole might be a conscious, living entity — alive like myself — and
that if I wanted to be of use to this dynamic, living world, then I should
seriously dedicate myself to being a conscious, aware part of its single-entity
aliveness.
And then, suddenly, I took a vow to whatever cosmic forces rule. I vowed
that whatever I could do or however those forces could use me to be of service
to the world, I would be at their disposal.
This was something that came from so deep inside me that it surprised
even me. But I knew I truly meant it.
Gowins’s life then fell apart. His wife left him, taking their children with her, and
he ended up living in a spare room in his brother’s house. He spent a couple of years
drifting, idly looking at the occasional book on meditation or spirituality. It was only
when he chanced to attend a lecture by the Sufi teacher Pir Vilayat Inayat Khan that

he came to see his true path. “When I caught my first glimpse of Pir Vilayat, I knew I
had come home.”10
The point is, of course, not that Sufism is the true path for everyone — Gowins
emphasizes this point repeatedly in his book. It’s simply that the path took this form
for this particular man.
Here is another example, from a very different figure: Maximilian Kolbe, a Polish
priest who died in Auschwitz and was later canonized by the Catholic Church. One
night when he was young, after being scolded by his mother, he recollected, “I asked
the Mother of God what was to become of me. Then she came to me holding two
crowns, one white, the other red. She asked me if I was willing to accept either of
these crowns. The white one meant that I should persevere in purity, and the red that I
should become a martyr. I said that I would accept them both.”11
On the face of it, these two accounts could hardly be more different. One is from a
Catholic saint, the other from a self-described “frightened loser.” One is laden with
theological content; the other is virtually devoid of any such thing. One involves some
very specific — and excruciatingly stiff — requirements; the other entails nothing
more than an apparently vague wish. And yet if we go past the level of the obvious,
we can see their essential similarity. Both are grounded first and foremost in
experience. No one is signing articles of faith or marching to the podium at the end of
some evangelical entertainment. It is only out of experience that commitment arises.
It would be easy to multiply other such cases; the mystical literature is full of
them. But are these experiences free from the risk of self-deceit?
This question takes us to the arcane philosophical issue of how mystical
experience is to be understood. Hard-bitten scoffers write it off as fantasy or delusion.
Not long ago it was even fashionable among psychologists to attempt to diagnose the
pathologies of specific mystics: Teresa of Avila was nothing more than a hysteric,
Joan of Arc a schizophrenic.12 But the typical schizophrenic can barely keep her own
life together; she is not likely to arise out of total obscurity and drive an army of
powerful invaders from her land. Hysterics (or what used to be called hysterics) do
not found great monastic orders or write spiritual classics. Consequently this approach
explains nothing.
A more subtle attempt at discrediting mystical experience lies in what is called the
contextualist view. Contextualism arose in reaction to the thought of philosophers of
religion — William James the foremost among them, although a similar view was
expressed more recently by W. T. Stace in his Mysticism and Philosophy — that some
essential mystical experience is universal and ultimately, as James put it, “ineffable.”
This latter view is often called essentialism.

By contrast, contextualism argues that very little, if anything, is genuinely
universal in mystical experience; rather, it is heavily conditioned by the culture and
religion in which it takes place. The most prominent advocate of this perspective is a
contemporary philosopher named Steven T. Katz. In one essay he writes regarding
mystical experiences in the Kabbalah: “The entire life of the Jewish mystic is
permeated from childhood up by images, concepts, symbols, ideological values, and
ritual behaviour which there is no reason to believe he leaves behind in his
experience. Rather, these images, beliefs, symbols, and rituals define, in advance,
what the experience he wants to have, and which he then does have, will be like.”
After going on to evaluate mysticism in other religions, Katz concludes, “Our
investigation suggests what it suggests — a wide variety of mystical experiences
which are, at least in respect of some determinative aspects, ideologically
grounded.”13
Certainly Katz is right to a degree. After all, it is a rare Muslim who has a vision
of the Buddha, and the Catholic Maximilian Kolbe saw the Virgin Mary rather than
Parvati or Kwan Yin. But contextualism runs the risk of simplistically concluding that
mystical experience is totally preprogrammed: you see what you expect to see and
there is nothing more to it than that. This is not entirely true, as we see from the case
of Phillip Gowins. His experience was not culturally determined; he was not looking
for anything and did not have the words or concepts to define what he felt. It may be
that if he had been raised in the atmosphere of a particular faith, his experience would
have taken that form, but he wasn’t and it didn’t.
The same holds true even more powerfully for those experiences that directly
counter what an individual might have expected or wanted. These are reasonably
common; we’ve already seen A. J. Ayer’s encounter with the red light in chapter i. For
a far better-known example, we can turn to the most famous mystical experience in all
of Western history: Paul’s conversion on the road to Damascus (Acts 9:1–9). Because
Paul himself says he had this experience (see 1 Corinthians 15:3–9), we can’t write it
off as a quasi-mythical element later tacked on to the story of his life. But the whole
point of this experience — where he is confronted by a vision of the risen Christ, who
asks, “Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?” — is that it overturns his previous
perspective. It is the opposite of being “ideologically grounded.”
For a contemporary example, there is the weird story in Howard Storm’s My
Descent into Death. The author tells of how he fell dangerously ill during a trip to
Paris and lapsed into a coma. He had a harrowing near-death experience in which he
was being carried off by demons until he was somehow able to jabber a nonsensical
prayer cobbled together from a few scraps of religious-sounding phrases he had
learned in his childhood, including the Twenty-third Psalm, “The Star-Spangled

Banner,” and the Pledge of Allegiance. At this point Christ appeared, drove the
demons away, and showed Storm a vision of heaven. By Storm’s own account, he was
an avowed atheist before this time, so again his ideological grounding would have
been weak or nonexistent.
There is a delicate balance to be struck between contextualism and essentialism.
Spiritual experience is universal and displays many common features (for James, they
included such characteristics as ineffability and a “noetic quality”) across different
cultures.14 At the same time, those who have these experiences strongly tend to
express — and even perceive — them in terms of more or less familiar images. This
seems to be a deeply rooted tendency in the human mind: to clothe new experiences
in the forms and structures of old or familiar ones. For Howard Storm, who was raised
in a Christian culture, his sojourn in the afterlife took the form of seeing demons and
being rescued by Jesus. A Tibetan might see the manifestations of wrathful deities
instead of demons, and Chenrezig (the Tibetan god of compassion) instead of Christ.
Xenophanes, a Greek philosopher of the sixth century BC, put the point strongly:
“But if cattle and horses or lions had hands, or were able to draw with their hands and
do the works that men can do, horses would draw the forms of the gods like horses,
and cattle like cattle, and they would make their bodies such as they had
themselves.”15
But, you may reply, isn’t this what contextualism is claiming? Not quite. The
contextualists often seem to be saying that most or all of religious experience is a
matter of self-suggestion, of “dupery,” to use James’s word. But actually it seems that
there is genuine religious experience, and even that it is universal or practically so, but
that the mind will process and describe it in different ways depending on the mind’s
conditioning.
An example from a different arena may illustrate what I’m trying to say. All
human beings with normal vision see the same range of the color spectrum, but the
terms in which these experiences are expressed may be quite different. Languages
with comparatively rich color vocabularies (such as English) divide the spectrum into
narrow bandwidths, each with its own name; consequently, in the blue-green range,
we may distinguish teal from aqua from turquoise. Languages with fewer color terms
tend to break the spectrum into broader bands. Ancient Greek, for example, was
comparatively poor in words for colors. Hence Xenophanes (whose views on
anthropomorphism we’ve just encountered) could break the rainbow down into three
colors: purple, red, and yellow-green.16 Ios was black, blue-black, or purple. “Yellow-
green,” chloros, had to do for covering the range of the colors that we break up into
green and yellow. Reading Homer, you can come across an apparent reference to
“green honey.” Did the Greeks have green honey? Almost certainly not. (Something

being called green honey was sold recently in the Philippines, but this turned out to be
sugar syrup with food coloring added.)17 The poet probably meant to speak of what
we would express as “yellow honey.”18 And Xenophanes may have actually seen
three colors in the rainbow where we might see seven or more. Nevertheless, these
differences have not led even the most merciless skeptics to assert that the experience
of light or color is delusory.
Something similar may be going on with the images that clothe religious
experience. The experience is not self-delusion, but it tends to be cast in language and
images familiar to the person in question. A mystical experience of compassion may
be personified in the mind of one individual as Avalokiteshvara or Kwan Yin, in
another as the Virgin Mary.
It has been proved over and over again: the human mind processes its experiences
in certain patterns and structures — Kant’s categories. All the same, the mind is
experiencing something: the world is not the dream of a solipsist. How and whether
we can isolate what used to be called “raw sense-data” from the process of
interpretation and categorization will be a subject for debate for a long time to come.
But this does not entitle us to conclude that the mind’s experience is total dupery. This
is true whether we are talking about the color spectrum or manifestations of the
divine.
All this said, let’s look now at how the divine actually manifests itself and what
clue these manifestations give to its nature. To return to the primordial duality I’ve
been exploring in this book, there is that which experiences and that which is
experienced: “I” and the world, purusha and prakriti. The divine can manifest in
either or both of these guises. How it does will determine its appearance and even its
apparent location.
Let’s begin with the divine as it manifests in that which experiences. Clearly if we
are going to have any sense of this, we must turn to that which experiences in us, that
which says “I.” We will also have to take this “I” in a wider and more comprehensive
sense than we usually do. To many people, the “I” is indeed God. But it is the “I” of
the ego, the personal self, their own wishes and desires and urges. It is an unstable
entity: suspicious, fearful, obsessed with dangers (usually imagined), status, power,
and so on. The ego is not God in any ultimate sense, but it can act as if it is. It then
becomes, in the language of Christ’s parable, the steward who oppresses the other
servants in the master’s absence (Matthew 24:45–51).
But then there is the master himself or herself — the “true I,” the Self that is
beyond the level of worldly preoccupation. This Self — which is emphatically not the
lower self or the ego — is at the core of our being. It is not, strictly speaking, God, but
it is the place in us where we connect with God. It is the immanent God: “And they

shall call his name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us” (Matthew
1:24; compare Isaiah 7:14). This true “I” — the consciousness that looks out at the
world through each of us as through so many windows — has many names. Esoteric
Christianity calls it the Son; the Logos; Sophia, or “wisdom”; or the kingdom of
heaven. For the Hindus it is atman; the Dzogchen tradition of Tibetan Buddhism
speaks of it as rigpa, “pure consciousness”; other Buddhists call it “Buddha nature” or
simply “mind.” You can never see it, because it is that which sees. Francis of Assisi
alluded to this when he said, “What we are looking for is what is looking.”
The most explicit equation of this “I,” or true Self, with God appears in the
Advaita Vedanta, and most people who have read something of this tradition will find
this concept familiar. Sri Ramana Maharshi was once asked if God is personal. He
replied, “Yes, He is always the first person, the I, ever standing before you. Because
you give precedence to worldly things, God appears to have receded into the
background. If you give up all else and seek Him alone, He will remain as the ‘I,’ the
Self.”19 Another twentieth-century Advaita master, Sri Nisargadatta Maharaj, says,
“My state is: I am, without parents. I am the Unborn. Similarly, I understand you as
such only. You are also the Unborn, without parents.”20
As I’ve stated both here and elsewhere in my works, this teaching is implicit, and
sometimes explicit, in esoteric Christianity, and the words of Christ ultimately do not
make a great deal of sense without it. At the same time, exoteric Christianity has been
excruciatingly uncomfortable with such concepts and has backed away whenever it
has come close to them. At one point Sri Ramana Maharshi was interviewed by a
French Jesuit. The priest asked him, “I come from God. Isn’t God distinct from me?”
Ramana Maharshi replied, “Who asks this question? God does not. You do. So
find who you are and then you may find out whether God is distinct from you.”
“God is infinite and I am finite,” said the Jesuit. “I have a personality that can
never merge into God. Isn’t that so?”
“Infinity and perfection do not admit of parts,” said Ramana Maharshi. “If a finite
being is apart from Infinity, the perfection of Infinity is marred. Thus your statement
is a contradiction in terms.”
The conversation ended inconclusively, with the Jesuit abruptly leaving to catch a
train.21 But the entire interchange reflects the deep divide between those who say that
ultimately God and the Self are one, and those who say that the chasm between the
two can never be bridged. Conventional Christianity has almost always insisted on the
latter claim.
Christianity is not the only monotheistic religion to emphasize this point. In the
world of Islam, the ninth-century Sufi mystic Mansur al-Hallaj said, “I have seen my

Lord with the eye of my heart, and I said: ‘Who are You?’ He said, ‘You.’” Al-
Hallaj’s most famous utterance was “Ana’l-haqq”: “I am the Truth.”22 Since alhaqq,
“the Truth,” is one of the traditional ninety-nine names of Allah, this statement was
denounced as blasphemy. Al-Hallaj was arrested, imprisoned, and finally executed by
the caliph of Baghdad in AD 922.
Why should these traditions insist so vehemently on the radical and unbridgeable
gap between God and man? Certainly there is some danger in equating the “I” with
God. To say “I am God” or “I am the Truth” with the petty egotistic self in mind
(consciously or unconsciously) is to fall into one of the most dangerous of all spiritual
traps.
Nonetheless, we may wonder if the authorities are insisting on this radical
cleavage between the divine and the human entirely with our best interests in mind. If
we are ultimately one with God, then this unity is our inalienable birthright, and
religion exists only as a midwife to higher realization; no authority has the right to
insert itself between us and our deepest essence. But this is precisely what religion has
so frequently tried to do — with remarkable success. One of its most common
strategies has been to insert a set of propositions — doctrines and dogmas — between
the individual and God: you must first believe certain things about God or you will
not be allowed access to him. Of course Christian apologists have frequently said that
faith is far more than mere assent to a set of propositions, and they are right. But
somehow assenting to those propositions is always part of the process, and it is not
optional.
Consider this case. A man, confronted by existential anguish, cries out from the
depths of his soul to God. And God answers. The man feels the answer in as palpable
and profound a way as he felt the doubt, and he comes to have faith. To reinforce it,
he turns to religion. Soon he learns that religion orders him to believe in a whole set
of dogmas that make no sense to him rationally or emotionally, but which he is told he
must believe in order that his faith might not be in vain. For a while he forces himself
to accept these, but sooner or later he sees that they are nonsense. He casts off the
dogmas and the religion, but at the same time he comes to discount the profound
experience of the divine that had originally impelled him to believe. And the last state
of that man is worse than the first.
This is a composite case. It is the story of no one, and it is the story of dozens of
people I have met and dozens more that I have read about. It’s so common that, when
I meet someone new and begin to discuss spirituality with him or her, I can almost
always expect to hear some variant of it.
Conventional religion provides comfort and guidance for hundreds of millions of
people, and there is no reason to denounce it wholesale. But for those who want

something deeper, it may be possible to go back to the primordial dichotomy that I
have been exploring in this book. God is purusha, Self, that which sees; it is that
which is most profoundly and intimately “I.” God is also other, prakriti, the “world,”
that which is seen. How the divine is revealed is a matter, almost, of the stance from
which we see it. Even Ramana Maharshi did not wholly repudiate the personal God,
as we see in this reply to one devotee who claimed to be a sinner:
Why do you say you are a sinner? Faith in God is enough to save you from
rebirth. Cast all your burden on Him. In the Tiruvachakam it is said: “Though I
am worse than a dog, You have graciously undertaken to protect me. The
delusion of death and birth is maintained by You. Is it for me to sit and judge?
Am I the Lord here? Almighty God, it is for You to roll me through many
bodies, or keep me fixed at Your feet.” Therefore have faith and this will save
you.23
Consequently we see a dual perspective even in the purest forms of nondualism.
God is both wholly Self and wholly other. To put it more comprehensively still, God
is the ultimate source out of which this duality of self and other arises.24 There are
times when, in moments of rare clarity, you can perceive the pure mind of divine
consciousness peering out at the world through your own limited vessel; there are also
times when you feel helplessly isolated from this consciousness, when it is perceived
as wholly other, and you are left with no alternative other than to “cast all your burden
on Him.” The focus shifts along with the arbitrary tides of mood and circumstance,
but there are any number of ways of viewing and experiencing this reality, and there is
always farther to go. The golden mountain itself may not be the final destination.
*   The epistle is traditionally attributed to Paul, but very few scholars today believe he wrote it; various
candidates have been suggested, but none have won general acceptance, so it’s best to regard the author as
anonymous.

A
CHAPTER EIGHT
THE CONSCIOUS CIVILIZATION
s I think about the implications of the ideas in the previous chapters, I’m struck
by the traps that lie in wait. Among the most pernicious is the temptation to
sound the call for a new religion. A streamlined Samkhya, say, where people go
to services to hear readings from the Samkhyakarika, with a giant mural of Shiva and
Parvati in the background, and have intense theological discussions about the
singularity versus the multiplicity of purusha and other such matters.
One could do this. Marketed the right way, it could prove lucrative for New Age
entrepreneurs, a crowd that seems to be doubling every week. Many people have
grasped the truth of L. Ron Hubbard’s dictum that, in order to make a lot of money, all
you have to do is start your own religion (which he proved by creating the Church of
Scientology). But given the discord that each new religion provokes, at this point
anyone who tries to add another to the list probably does not have humanity’s best
interests in mind.
And yet while the demise of the old faiths is predicted as frequently as the second
coming of Christ himself, they will be with us for the foreseeable future. For this
reason, it makes sense to ask how religions can move beyond the stockades of their
own peculiar revelations without invalidating or diluting themselves.
One of the principal dynamics, as we’ve seen in the previous chapter, is between
the personal and the impersonal God. To paint a picture with an extremely broad
brush, the Eastern traditions have always stressed the ultimate impersonality of the
divine, while the Western, Abrahamic faiths — particularly Christianity — have
insisted on God’s ultimate personhood. To the Christian, states of nonpersonal
illumination or transcendence as experienced by the mystics of Asia are treacherous
detours or, at best, mere way stations on the path to the personal God who has
revealed himself in Jesus Christ. Conversely, to the Asian, the personal God is only a

way station to the ultimate impersonal truth.
It’s unwise to rush to any hasty conclusions about this point, or to smugly assume
that “my” religion has the truth and all others are false or at best incomplete. Sooner
or later such an approach ends in people breaking one another’s heads, as Gurdjieff
once remarked. In the end, we will have to see the fundamental truth of all
perspectives, each in its own place.
In sum, this means that the divine is beyond all concepts and images. Practically
all traditions admit as much. But they are rarely willing to admit that their own
concepts and images are useful only insofar as they provide access to a higher reality.
If they refuse to take this step, they bring to mind Christ’s statement “Woe unto you,
scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye shut up the kingdom of heaven against men:
for ye neither go in yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in”
(Matthew 23:13). Most religions ask humility of their followers, sometimes to the
point of self-abasement, but humility is a virtue that practically none of these religions
have as institutions. It may be time they acquired it.
What this will mean for Hinduism and Buddhism is not clear to me (since I’m
only distantly familiar with their day-to-day practices). For Christianity, it will
probably mean granting what it has never wanted to grant: that the revelation of God
through Jesus Christ is true and valid but not the sole or final or possibly even the
most complete revelation of God to man. Still more importantly, Christianity will
have to acknowledge that God is wholly self as well as wholly other, and that external
forms of faith — including faith in Jesus Christ — are useful only as preliminary
steps to this realization.
“No man cometh unto the Father, but by me,” Jesus says in the Gospel of John
(John 14:6) — a verse that has probably caused as much harm as any in the Bible. My
own view of this statement, as with all the “I am” statements made by Jesus in this
enigmatic text, is that it refers not to Jesus the man but, esoterically, to that which says
“I am” in us, which is ultimately the true Self, purusha, or atman. The Father, then,
would be that which lies beyond even purusha, beyond even the Self — in Hindu
terminology, Brahman as opposed to atman. “I and my Father are one,” says Jesus
(John 10:30): as the Hindus say, Brahman is atman. And yet Jesus also says, “my
Father is greater than I” (John 14:28). The Father — Brahman, the transcendent God
— is greater than the Son — atman, the immanent God.1
Christ says, “I am the door” in the same esoteric sense (John 10:9). But the fact
that “I am” is the doorway to God is something that Christian theologians have not
wanted to touch. Consider this verse: “The kingdom of God is within you” (Luke
17:21). So reads the King James Version, which, for all its faults, in many ways
remains the most intellectually honest of all biblical translations: the translators did

their best to render what they thought the text actually said rather than what they
thought it ought to say. Most modern versions are more disingenuous, and this verse is
a case in point. The Revised Standard Version reads, “The kingdom of God is in the
midst of you.” The New Jerusalem Bible has: “The kingdom of heaven is among
you.” The New English Bible says, “The kingdom of God is in your midst.” But the
Greek reads entòs humôn, which literally means “within you,” as the King James
Version has it. The Greek word entós never means “among” or “in the midst of”;2
other prepositions, such as en or parà, would have been used had that been its
meaning.
This may seem like a pedantic point, but it shows up mainstream Christianity’s
discomfort with the idea of the God within. Yet the divine is, as we’ve seen, both
wholly self and wholly other; by emphasizing the second at the expense of the first,
Christianity has misled people not only theologically but also psychologically. For
many, it has barred the gateway to their own “I.”
Philip Pullman’s fantasy novel The Golden Compass takes place in an alternate
reality in which the soul of a human being takes the form of a “daemon,” an animal
with a palpable physical existence. A person is never separated from his or her
daemon. But one character, the sinister Mrs. Coulter, is connected with a scheme to
kidnap children and, by means of some advanced technical device, sever their
daemons from them. (The closest analogy in our world would be a lobotomy.) The
children subjected to this procedure are little more than walking shells. In the novel,
to sever someone from her daemon is a crime beyond all imagining, but it provides an
apt metaphor for what much of Christianity has been doing to its adherents for
centuries. No wonder the visceral hatred for Christianity in the West seems to grow
stronger every year.
It’s obvious why Christianity has taken the position it has. Insisting more than any
other religion on the personhood of God, it has constantly avoided anything that might
imply that the individual Self could be merged into the greater, collective Self that is
“God with us.” (Mystics who have said otherwise, such as Meister Eckhart in
fourteenth-century Germany, have usually fallen afoul of the authorities.) But this is
an incomplete and distorted teaching, and it has caused untold damage. Kept ignorant
of and isolated from the deepest layers of the Self, most people were docile adherents
of the church for many centuries, but in recent generations they have fallen prey to
anything that lays claim to authority: fascism, communism, fundamentalism, even a
mindless and compulsive commercialism that has ravaged our souls and our
civilization as well.
And yet to realize the Self, to know this “I am” that is the gateway to purusha if
not purusha itself, is not an easy task. Most people are not interested in it. They think

this is all very abstract and metaphysical and removed from their day-to-day concerns.
But how can your “I,” your own very essence, be removed and abstract?
These considerations raise the problem of esotericism in the true sense: dealing
with a type of knowledge that is not for everyone because not everyone wants it. A
brutally egalitarian American culture will call such a stance elitist, and so it has to be.
But it’s not a matter of a socioeconomic or even educational elite. (Most of my old
friends from Harvard and Oxford have little interest in these subjects, and when I’m
socializing with them, I usually find it more enjoyable to talk about something else.)
The esoteric elite consists of those who want to know the truth and are not afraid to
throw away their preconceptions — even those about their own nature and identity —
for its sake. The people I’ve known of this type come from any number of
backgrounds and social classes; some are well educated by conventional standards,
some are not.
All this granted, who will decide who is to have access to this knowledge? For the
individual, it’s a process of self-selection. You stroll through a bookshop. On its
shelves are romance novels, volumes of low-fat recipes, and guides on how to snare
that special someone, as well as books containing the immeasurable wisdom of the
ages. Which one attracts you says something about who and where you are. While
sometimes a person has the sense of being tapped on the shoulder by a higher power
and pushed toward a particular book or teaching or teacher, this is not decided by
ordinary human criteria.
For the individual seeker, this simply means that you need to remain open to
guidance and intuition as you find it. For religious authorities, the matter is not so
clear-cut. The problem is compounded by the fact that most of these authorities —
clergy, theologians, and so on — have no more sense of higher realities (and
sometimes less) than the people they are supposed to lead. In the language of the
Gospel, they “neither go in themselves, neither suffer them that are entering to go in.”
If religion is to continue as anything more than a mere simulacrum, it must be guided
by those who are willing to “go in themselves,” by those who are at least
comparatively awake, rather than by those who are merely well trained in theological
jargon. I can’t predict the future of Christianity or any other religion, but I believe that
it will belong to those faiths that are most truly committed to connecting people with
this “I am,” with purusha, rather than displacing it onto some external object or
person, no matter how apparently holy.
For the religion of the third millennium, the task is to acknowledge that the barrier
between God and Self is not sharp or rigid: that which says “I” in us is the very point
at which we connect with the larger reality of the divine. This may be why the
Gospels call it the “kingdom of God.” In the language of the Samkhya, ahamkara,

egohood, is the gateway to purusha, to the spark of consciousness that sits at the
center of our being like a jewel in a lotus. (Like all gates, it can either let us in or keep
us out.) The otherness of God, which Christianity has harped on for so long, must be
met with the equally valid truth of the immanence of God — not as a spook hovering
around in the atmosphere, but as the very consciousness that perceives at all. As A
Course in Miracles, one of the greatest spiritual texts of the twentieth century, puts it,
“God is the Mind with which I think.”3
How institutional religion will accomplish this task is not for me to say. Instead let
me turn to the institution that, far more than any religion, is regarded as the central
authority of our time. Anything that wants to be taken seriously in our age must
confront the edifice of science. Science is the great myth of our time, in both senses of
the word: like the myths of the great world religions that preceded it, it provides a
background of meaning for a civilization; and also like the myths of the world
religions, its claims will, I suspect, ultimately be found to be not entirely true in an
objective sense. But this discovery probably won’t occur within our lifetimes.
As I stressed in chapter i, I’m highly skeptical of today’s innumerable attempts at
reconciling science and religion, whether these take the form of “intelligent design,”
Zens and Taos of physics, or the nebulous entities that are touted as quantum
spiritualities. These are intellectual gimmicks. At their best, they stimulate the
creative imagination of both the scientist and the philosopher, but finally they will
prove to be dead ends. The reason ought to be obvious: metaphysics is not physics;
metaphysics literally means “beyond physics.”* Sometimes it refers to esoteric
philosophy (as you see when you go to a bookstore and pass an aisle marked “New
Age; Metaphysical”), sometimes to the deeper questions of existence as conventional
philosophy has tried to address them. Both forms have very little connection with
science. Even so, there ought to be some meeting ground where science and
metaphysics can sniff each other out. I think it’s possible to sketch out how this might
occur.
To begin with, why should there be many things rather than only one? As we’ve
seen, the world arises when a self perceives an other, just as an infant begins to
become conscious by distinguishing what is self versus what is not. If there is no self
and no other, there is no world. At the same time this primordial distinction is only
apparently true. Purusha experiences prakriti; purusha is conscious, prakriti is not.
This would imply that in this process there is something that is not conscious: that
which is experienced. But this is only apparently the case (hence, perhaps, the
Vedanta’s insistence that the world is maya). There is no place where consciousness is
not present; one entity does not vacate the premises occupied by the other. As difficult
as this may be to grasp, it has important consequences. There is a self perceiving an

other; but all the while the other remains conscious too. Therefore the first self
becomes an other to the second self; it is not a static relationship but a dynamic
interchange. In the language of the twentieth-century philosopher Martin Buber, we
may think of the other as an “it,” but it is really a “thou.” Or we may go a step further
and say with Freud, “Wo Es war, soll Ich werden”: “Where It was, there shall I be.”4
Suddenly, instead of one self and one other, we have two of each. But the process
does not stop there. To perceive anything, as Heidegger understood, is to pick it out of
a background; this is the root meaning of the word logos, which has had such a rich
and compromised history in Western thought.5 So now the self has not only one other
to perceive but also a second one, the background. It’s like the drawing of the optical
illusion in which a vase can also look like a pair of silhouetted faces, depending on
which you see as figure and which as ground. Hence there are two others. But the
second other (in which consciousness is also present) perceives the first two, so that
now there are three selves and three others; and the process continues indefinitely.
And so multiplicity arises.
So far nothing I have said accounts for the single most crucial thing in the
universe: change. Even granted that a self should perceive an other, what keeps the
two from being frozen in an eternal embrace, as Shiva and Parvati are at the beginning
of the story of the dice game?
The answer, in the language of the myth, is Narada, the malign yogi. Narada
symbolizes separation. But it is not just a matter of separation. As we’ve already seen,
one of the main characteristics of purusha is its capacity to identify with its
experience. This implies the corresponding capacity to separate itself from
experience, as happens when Narada introduces his version of strip Parcheesi. It is
this dynamic — purusha’s capacity to both identify with and detach itself from
prakriti — that gives rise to the world in all its forms. We might even say that this is
the only real variable in the universe; all others are dependent on it.
Up to this point I’ve discussed this interplay mostly in terms of human
consciousness. Naturally: this book is written by a human for other humans, and our
own minds and experiences are of central importance to us. But what if we were to
view this interplay in somewhat broader terms, say, as it might operate in supposedly
inanimate matter?
To begin with, we have to recognize that change is not, or not entirely, random. It
proceeds along a path that is predictable and consistent, at least to a degree. We might
say that, in a given circumstance, purusha identifies with and separates from prakriti
within a narrow frame and with a certain rhythm: it goes in and out in a reasonably
consistent pattern. If this is the case, it might explain the principle we call vibration,
which is, of course, known not only to science but to esoteric thought as well.

(“Nothing rests; everything moves; everything vibrates,” according to The Kybalion,
an esoteric text from the early twentieth century.)6 If this vibration is sufficiently
rapid, it might appear to an observer as a solid, just as a fan spinning very fast looks
like a solid plate. Hence our notion of matter as a set of particles.
If this is the case, the vibrations of purusha and prakriti will have to extend not
only beyond the range of our scientific apparatus but also beyond the limits of the
mind, even of a mind like Swedenborg’s or Andreev’s. Consequently everything we
call real, and even everything we call unreal, is merely an infinitesimally small slice
of a continuum so much larger that it’s impossible for our limited cognition to grasp,
just as an ant will never be able to comprehend the biology of its own nature.
It’s possible for a scientific imagination to use these ideas for inspiration (much as
Einstein is said to have kept a copy of Blavatsky’s Secret Doctrine on his desk), but a
scientific imagination is something I don’t have. In any event, it’s of very little value
for anyone outside to tell science what to do or think. Science is not a doctrine or a
dogma but a method — specifically a method that relies on empirical evidence to
learn about physical reality. It will reach its own conclusions in its own time. It will
only be constrained and impeded by dogmatists, whether they take the form of
evangelists hawking a rehashed creationism or materialistic camp followers who want
to turn Darwinism into the next new faith. Writing in the New York Times on the two-
hundredth anniversary of Darwin’s birth, Carl Safina, president of the Blue Ocean
Institute, argues, “Our understanding of how life works since Darwin won’t swim in
the public pool of ideas until we kill the cult of Darwinism.”7
In any case, the scientific enterprise seems to be converging on a single point.
Anthropologists are investigating how many of our most cherished characteristics are
simply those of highly developed apes; cognitive scientists are poking the brain to see
how it constructs the homunculus of the self; and physicists are studying how and in
what way the observer affects the phenomenon. Whatever these disciplines conclude
about their particular subjects, in each case the enterprise is leading toward one
central point: the nature of consciousness.
The most obvious case is psychology. The beginning of this discipline in its
current form is often dated to 1900, with the publication of Freud’s The Interpretation
of Dreams. Strictly speaking, Freud’s chief concern was not with consciousness but
with its opposite: the unconscious drives and fears that truly motivate our actions and
for which the ego has to make excuses as it can. Jung, building on Freud’s insights,
posited that these unconscious drives are universal and are revealed in myth and
religious symbolism. Today comparatively few psychologists would describe
themselves as pure Freudians or Jungians, but practically no one will deny that these
unconscious forces operate at a deep level and often dictate behavior more urgently

than do conscious choices.
Neither Freud nor Jung claimed, however, that these deeper reaches of the psyche
were irrevocably unconscious, or that consciousness could not make progress in
examining them; indeed, that was the whole point of their therapies. In one case, a
female analysand was afraid of going outdoors. Her reason, she said, was her fear of
falling down and having people see her lying in the street. Through analysis, she was
able to see that she was actually guilty about her sexual adventures in the past and was
afraid of repeating them; she was, both literally and metaphorically, afraid of
becoming a “fallen woman.”8 Presumably the simple fact of this realization was
enough to help her overcome her phobia or, at any rate, to take away some of its
power over her. In any case, it’s safe to say that a person who has this kind of insight
into her behavior can never see it in quite the same light again.
Contemporary psychotherapy, the heir to Freud and Jung, is prone to fads and
absurdities; it is also a slow and clumsy method, and even successful practitioners are
not always able to articulate what they actually do to help their clients. Nonetheless, it
has been of tremendous benefit to millions of people, and much of this benefit has to
do with making the unconscious conscious.
Gurdjieff’s practice of self-observation differs from psychotherapy, but some of
the points he makes about self-observation apply here as well:
By observing himself [a man] throws, as it were, a ray of light onto his inner
processes which have hitherto worked in complete darkness. And under the
influence of this light the processes themselves begin to change. There are a
great many chemical processes that can take place only in the absence of light.
Exactly in the same way many psychic processes can take place only in the
dark. Even a feeble light of consciousness is enough to change completely the
character of a process, while it makes many of them altogether impossible.9
Parallel to this psychology of introspection is the trend toward probing into the
physical mechanisms of consciousness. This includes not only neurobiology and
neurochemistry but also genetic research. In the New York Times Magazine, Harvard
psychology professor Steven Pinker explains why he decided to have his personal
genetic sequence mapped out and published on the Internet. Part of it was a quest for
self-knowledge. “The plunging cost of genome sequencing,” he writes, “will soon
give people an unprecedented opportunity to contemplate their own biological and
even psychological makeups.” The actual value of these genetic maps for self-
awareness is moot: Pinker admits that he found himself using his own psychological
insights to interpret the genetic readouts rather than the other way around.10

Despite this caveat, even the clinical and soulless procedures of genetic mapping
have a goal that is not far from that of the introspective approaches: they are meant to
increase our understanding of how consciousness manifests in us. The point is not that
scientists or philosophers or humanity as a whole will ever totally agree about how the
mind operates, but simply that it is becoming a large-scale project of civilization to
explore this question.
Then there is computer science. According to the contemporary philosopher John
R. Searle, theorists tend to describe the mind in terms of the dominant technology of
their time: Freud portrayed it as a kind of hydraulic or electromagnetic system, with
the drives of the id harnessed by the superego in service to the ego. Others have seen
it as a telegraph or a switchboard. Today one of the most fascinating forms of
technology is computers, so there has been no end of philosophers who have
described the mind merely as a hypersophisticated computer.11 In his book Rapture
for the Geeks, Richard Dooling offers some fairly standard reflections in the wake of
his visit to Firefly, a supercomputer housed in Omaha:
Even if Firefly can’t yet think for itself, what about ten or twenty Firefly
supercomputers networked together? What about a billion computers …
harnessed by a company like Google? Would those be capable of mimicking
human intelligence, assuming someone, or some supercomputer, came along
and wrote the proper software?
Other questions soon follow: If a supercomputer ever does “think” the way
human brains do, how will we know it? Will it be “conscious” in the same
way we are? Do these questions make sense given the trouble we’ve had over
the centuries describing human or animal consciousness?12
Some have no doubts about the answer. Douglas R. Hofstadter, author of Gödel,
Escher, Bach, insists, “Minds exist in brains and may come to exist in programmed
machines. If and when such machines come about, their causal powers will derive not
from the substances they are made of, but from their design and the programs that run
in them. And the way we will know they have those causal powers is by talking to
them and listening carefully to what they have to say.”13 This passage comes from
Hofstadter’s reply to Searle’s essay “Minds, Brains, and Programs,” which argued the
opposite: that a computer program, no matter how sophisticated, can’t replicate the
intentionality of brain-based cognition, even if it appears to do so. Philosophers like
Hofstadter, who argue for “strong AI” — the idea that a computer can be developed
with cognition like our own — do so on the grounds of verification. If a computer
responds in such a way that it can’t be distinguished from a human, it can be said to

be conscious. (This, incidentally, is called the Turing test, after the British computer
pioneer Alan Turing, who came up with the idea.)
Of course this supposed verification is purely speculative: no computer has been
developed with anything close to this capacity. Even if a computer were to pass the
Turing test, other philosophers have doubts about what this would really prove. Searle
mentions a curious computer program called ELIZA. First written in 1966 by Joseph
Weizenbaum, it parodies the responses of a therapist. Today it’s easily accessible on
the Internet,14 and for some reason Macintosh OSX comes bundled with a bug-ridden
version of it. Here’s a sample conversation with ELIZA:
ELIZA: Hello. How can I help you?
RS: I’m feeling lonely.
ELIZA: Does it please you to believe i [sic] am feeling lonely?
RS: No, not really.
ELIZA: You are being a bit negative.
RS: I’m just trying to find out what you mean.
ELIZA: Does it please you to believe i am just trying to find
out what i mean?
RS: No, not really.
ELIZA: You are being a bit negative.
As you can see, ELIZA is a crude piece of software. Despite this, and despite the
fact that it was written as a joke, large numbers of people (somewhat alarmingly) have
found it helpful. If ELIZA’s bland redundancies seem simpleminded, many human
therapists don’t do much better. The website I visited to create the sample dialogue
displays the slogan “ELIZA — a friend you could never have before.”
The point is that you could find ELIZA helpful, and you might even come to think
of it as a person, but you would be hard-pressed to argue that this program (or even a
much improved version of it) could possess anything like human consciousness.
Searle seems to be right when he says that our biological makeup bestows an
intentionality on us that a machine could never replicate. Moreover, advocates of
“strong AI” frequently talk as if the human mind does nothing but compute. But a
large quantity of the mind has to do with irrational elements — dreams, fantasies,
mystical experiences — that science does not fully understand and is not even close to
being able to simulate. And what about that most human characteristic of all —
conflict? The ancient Roman poet Catullus writes, “I hate and love. ‘Why do you do
this?’ you may ask. / I don’t know, but I feel it happen and am in anguish.”15 This is
not the kind of response you can easily replicate with strings of ones and zeros, but it
may be far more integral to human consciousness than is the ability to find the best

move on a chessboard.
All this is to say that theorists who warn of an imminent “technological
singularity” — in which we will have to confront machines that are smarter than we
are — are probably about as deluded as prophets of most stripes. We already have
computers that are better than we are at tallying stock market data and playing chess.
But it would be extremely difficult to ascribe consciousness of any human sort to
these machines, much less argue that they are about to become our masters.
All this said, the problem of artificial intelligence is not quite as acute for the
theory presented in this book as it is for most types of philosophy, for the simple
reason that I have not posited a radical, unbridgeable barrier between animate and
supposedly inanimate consciousness. While a computer has a very primitive capacity
to relate self and other, it does possess consciousness of a kind. But then, as we’ve
seen, so do hydrogen atoms and water molecules. I’m not arguing for a kind of ghost
in the machine here. Rather I’m saying that the mere capacity to recognize and
respond is a form of consciousness, no matter how rudimentary and automatic
compared to our own. We utilize it in every tool we make. It’s such a fundamental
part of the universe that we rarely notice it.
Such are the scientific implications of the ideas in this book, at least in extremely
broad terms. In any event, they go some way toward suggesting how consciousness,
rather than being an anomaly or an epiphenomenon, is integral to the structure of the
universe — at least of any universe that is knowable to us.
These reflections all suggest that the aims of both science and religion are finding
a point of convergence: the centrality of consciousness. For religion, particularly
Christianity, the task is to abandon the conceptual barricades that separate the “I” of
the inner self from the “I” of God. For science, the task is to break down its
conceptual barrier between human consciousness and all other kinds. After all, it’s
difficult to conceive of anything that exists without a basis in the polarity of self and
other. And this, as we’ve seen, implies consciousness in some form.
Indeed consciousness may become the focal point of civilization in the third
millennium. Since the eighteenth century, Western civilization has been living in a
kind of spiritual interregnum. Christianity, which a few centuries ago dominated all
intellectual life in the West, has waned to the point where it is only one of a number of
worldviews that vie for allegiance. The same is true for the other great religions in
their own contexts — Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, and so on. What has largely
replaced the religious vision is a civilization of utility, in which political, economic,
and technological concerns have been the chief forces holding society together. While
humankind has made tremendous gains in these areas, ultimately these gains will not
be enough to give purpose and meaning to life. As Nietzsche saw, man needs to

overcome himself, and this requires him to reach beyond the narrow limits of his own
self-concepts. A few individuals throughout the ages have done this, but it is a goal
that civilization as a whole has hardly sought at all. Of previous civilizations, some
were focused on propitiating the gods through sacrifice; some (medieval
Christendom, for example) were meant to serve as placeholders for the coming
kingdom of God; and others, such as ancient Rome and imperial England, claimed
that their ideal was to spread justice and order to the undomesticated sections of
humanity. Hindu and Buddhist civilizations may have the aim of self-knowledge in
the background, but this knowledge has been reserved for a few adepts. Today,
however, civilization as a whole — and I mean the world civilization that is emerging,
not the West or the developed world alone — is moving toward the aim of exploring
consciousness, whether this manifests through psychological introspection,
neurological research, or work with artificial intelligence.
My intent here is not to hoist any flags or lead any charges up hills. I’m not saying
that civilization should have this aim — although it is a good one — but rather that
it’s already moving in this direction willy-nilly. If we need to justify it pragmatically,
delving into the nature of consciousness may help us avoid any number of mistakes
both in our personal lives and in society at large. Understanding the nature of love
could prevent much of the pain that afflicts the human heart whenever it opens itself
to another. Knowing how we behave in terms of labor and interchange can help us
plan our economies, personal and national, more smoothly and effectively — and so
on.
In the end, however, the quest to know ourselves outstrips any pragmatic
applications. To all appearances, we are the only creatures who seek knowledge for its
own sake, not just because it could help us find richer sources of food or mate with
better specimens. The serpent in Genesis told the primordial couple that if they ate the
fruit of knowledge, they would be as gods, knowing good and evil. The serpent did
not lie. He did not, it’s true, spell out all the consequences of this act — for to know
good and evil is to know the world as we have it, with its interwoven joys and pains.
Even so, if we were collectively given the choice, we might well do the same
thing all over again. Hence the ancient Gnostics could see the serpent as a figure not
of evil but of liberation. Odysseus too chose to know what the Sirens’ song was like
even though it caused him immeasurable anguish to hear it. I’ve often thought that the
purpose of humanity is to collectively experience the full range of possibilities
available on this earth. Certainly it seems that, if you can think of anything that is
physically possible, however sublime or however foul, there is someone somewhere
who has tried to do it. When the human race finally departs from this planet, it may be
that we will do so having collectively exhausted the possibilities of knowledge and

experience that it has to offer. Ultimately, as the sages remind us, the individual
purusha will pour itself out into the ocean of limitless mind.
Does all of this imply progress or evolution? There is the temptation, when
spreading out grand perspectives, to invoke these concepts, but I don’t know that they
are anything more than imaginary constructs that we use to motivate ourselves.
Sometimes we seem to be progressing, sometimes not; sometimes our very progress
seems to make things worse. And while evolution seems to have some direction —
toward greater complexity if nothing else — the Darwinian theory may be right in
saying that there is no purpose in it, that it is merely the result of adventitious
adaptations by quintillions of organisms across the ages. Or as the Samkhya might
say, the gunas interact endlessly without beginning or end. Regardless of whether we
progress or whether the cycle perpetuates itself endlessly, in the midst of it all remains
consciousness, awake or asleep, enlightened or deluded, everywhere cramped and
constrained yet also eternally infinite and unstained, just as Shiva perpetually loses
the dice game while actually losing nothing.
*   The genesis of the word metaphysics is peculiar. It originally derived from the title of Aristotle’s
Metaphysics. Practically all his surviving works consist of lecture notes edited by his pupils after his death.
Organizing this collection, they put his treatments of such things as being and existence (subjects that
Aristotle himself called “first philosophy,” “theology,” or sometimes “wisdom”) after his Physics: hence they
called this collection tà metà tà physikà biblía, or “the books after the Physics.” Physics, tà physiká, means
“things that have to do with nature.” The Greek preposition metá can mean both “after” and “beyond,” so in
medieval times, “metaphysics” came to mean “that which lies beyond nature.” See The Encyclopedia of
Philosophy, ed. Paul Edwards (New York: Macmillan, 1967), 5:289.

NOTES
CHAPTER 1. The Light That Governs the Universe
1. The letter is to be found in Dietrich Bonhoeffer, Letters and Papers from
Prison, ed. Eberhard Bethge, trans. Reginald Fuller et al., rev. ed. (New York:
Touchstone, 1997), 324-29.
2. W. W. Rouse Ball, A Short Account of the History of Mathematics, 4th ed.
(1908); 
Trinity 
College 
Dublin 
School 
of 
Mathematics,
www.maths.tcd.ie/pub/HistMath/People/Laplace/RouseBall/RB_Laplace.html,
accessed on Oct. 16, 2007.
3. Immanuel Kant, Critique of Practical Reason, quoted in “The Cambridge
Companion 
to 
Kant 
and 
Modern 
Philosophy,”
http://cco.cambridge.org/extract?
id=ccolo52182303X_CCOLo52182303XAooi, accessed on Oct. 17, 2007.
4. “Patience, Fairness, and the Human Condition,” The Economist, Oct. 6, 2007,
93-94.
5. Ibid.
6. Bonhoeffer, 360.
7. Tertullian, On the Flesh of Christ, §5. This statement is often quoted as “Credo
quia absurdum”: “I believe because it is absurd.” On this point see H. Richard
Niebuhr, Christ and Culture (San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1951), 77; also
see ch. 7 below.
8. Daniel Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea (New York: Simon & Schuster,
1995), 184–85. Emphasis added.
9. Christof Koch and Susan Greenfield, “How Does Consciousness Happen?”
Scientific American, Oct. 2007, 76. Emphasis here and in other quotations is

in the original unless otherwise noted.
0. Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea, 63.
1. Richard Dawkins, The Selfish Gene (New York: Oxford University Press,
1976), 210–11.
2. Mary Midgley, Evolution as a Religion, rev. ed. (London: Routledge, 2002),
144–45.
3. 
BBC 
Manchester 
home 
page,
www.bbc.co.uk/manchester/content/articles/2008/06/04/040608_peppered_moth_fe
accessed on March 13, 2009.
4. Richard Milton, Shattering the Myths of Darwinism, 2nd ed. (Rochester, Vt.:
Park Street Press, 1997), 130–31.
5. Midgley, 94.
6. John Shelby Spong, Jesus for the Non-Religious (San Francisco:
HarperSanFrancisco, 2007), 275.
7. John Shelby Spong, A New Christianity for a New World: Why Traditional
Faith Is Dying and How a New Faith Is Being Born (San Francisco:
HarperSanFrancisco, 2002), 54.
8. Eric Pace, “A. J. Ayer Dead in Britain at 78; Dean of Logical Positivism,” New
York 
Times, 
June 
28,1989; 
http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?
res=950DEEDB1730F93AA15755C0A96F948260&sec=&spon=&pagewanted=2,
accessed on Oct. 25, 2007.
9. Hippocrates, On the Sacred Disease, trans. Francis Adams; Spirituality and the
Brain website, www.shaktitechnology.com/hippocrat.htm, accessed on Oct. 27,
2007.
20. See, for example, Daniel C. Dennett, review of Problem of Consciousness, by
Colin McGinn, Times Literary Supplement, May 10, 1991; Tufts University
website, http://ase.tufts.edu/cogstud/papers/mcginn.htm, accessed on Feb. 12,
2008.
21. John Woodroffe, The Serpent Power, 7th ed. (Madras: Ganesh, 1964), 30. Cit is
also transliterated as chit or chitta.
22. George Parsons Lathrop, “Talks with Edison,” Harper’s New Monthly
Magazine, Feb. 1890, 435.
23. Richard Smoley, “Toxic Prayer: An Interview with Larry Dossey,” Gnosis 47
(spring 1998): 31.
24. Lawrence LeShan, A New Science of the Paranormal: The Promise of

Psychical Research (Wheaton, 111.: Quest, 2009), 15.
CHAPTER 2. The Game of Consciousness
1. For this myth, I rely on Don Handelman and David Shulman, God Inside Out:
Siva’s Game of Dice (New York: Oxford University Press, 1997), 17–20.
2. Rig Veda 10.129.2, trans. David Shulman; in Handelman and Shulman, God
Inside Out, 46. Bracketed insertion is Shulman’s.
3. John Locke, An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, ed. Peter H.
Nidditch (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975), 4.3, §6.
4. Ibid., 4.10.
5. Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, 3.4.2; Thirteen Principal Upanishads, rev. ed.,
trans. R. E. Hume (London: Oxford University Press, 1931), 112.
6. “Who,” in Maha Yoga, or the Upanishadic Lore in the Light of the Teachings of
Sri Ramana Maharshi, 4th ed. (Tiruvannamalai, India: Sri Niranjananda
Swamy, Sri Ramanasramam, 1950), 127–28.
7. Heraclitus, fragment 2; in G. S. Kirk and J. E. Raven, The Presocratic
Philosophers (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1957), 188. My
translation.
8. Biblical quotations in this book are taken from the Authorized King James
Version.
9. Arthur Schopenhauer, The World as Will and Representation, trans. E. F. J.
Payne (New York: Dover, 1966), 2:5.
0. Ibid., 1:30.
1. Ibid., 1:129–30.
2. George Berkeley, A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge,
§1, 
3; 
University 
of 
Oregon 
website,
www.uoregon.edu/~rbear/berkeley.html#treat, accessed on Feb. 17, 2008.
3. George Berkeley, Third Dialogue between Hylas and Philonous, in Charles
William Eliot, ed., The Harvard Classics, vol. 37: English Philosophers of the
Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries: Locke, Berkeley, Hume (New York: P.
P. Collier, 1910), 267.
4. Plato, Republic, trans. Robin Waterfield (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1993), 4790—d.
5. Andrija Puharich, Beyond Telepathy (London: Souvenir, 1974), 33–34.

6. 
Daniel 
Pinchbeck, 
“Absorbing 
Orbs,” 
Reality 
Sandwich 
website,
www.realitysandwich.com/absorbing_orbs, accessed on Sept. 23,2008.
7. Charles Dickens, Hard Times, ch. 2.
8. Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, 1.3.28. Sat and asat literally mean “being” and
“nonbeing,” so the thrust of the prayer is very much like Plato’s argument in
The Republic.
9. Woodroffe, The Serpent Power, 291–92.
CHAPTER 3. Two against One
1. Richard Cavendish, The Black Arts (New York: Putnam, 1967), 75–76.
2. For a brief survey of the issues surrounding dualism in the philosophy of mind,
see Kwame Anthony Appiah, Thinking It Through: An Introduction to
Contemporary Philosophy (New York: Oxford University Press, 2003), 5–12.
3. For more on these movements, see my book Forbidden Faith: The Secret
History of Gnosticism (San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco, 2006), chs. 3 and
4.
4. P. D. Ouspensky, The Psychology of Man’s Possible Evolution (New York:
Knopf, 1972), 109.
5. Stephen Larsen, The Fundamentalist Mind: How Polarized Thinking Imperils
Us All (Wheaton, 111.: Quest, 2007), 42.
6. Soc.religion.christian newsgroup, http://geneva.rutgers.edu/src/index.html,
accessed on March 3, 2008.
7. Center for Non-Dualism, www.centerfornondualism.org/, accessed on March 3,
2008.
8. Matthew Fox, The Coming of the Cosmic Christ (San Francisco: Harper &
Row, 1988), 233, 134–35.
9. Heinrich Zimmer, Philosophies of India, ed. Joseph Campbell (London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1952), 280. The quotation is from the Bhagavad
Gita, 5.4–5. Zimmer’s transliterations of Sanskrit terms, like most scholarly
versions, include diacritical marks that I have omitted here. Hence the
differences in spelling between Sanskrit terms in direct quotes and in my own
usage (sankhya vs. samkhya, for example). My transliterations are English
phonetic equivalents of the Sanskrit that are close enough for the purposes of
the general reader. Parenthetical insertions here and in other quotations are in
the original.

0. H. P. Blavatsky, The Secret Doctrine, 3rd Point Loma ed. (Point Loma, Calif.:
Aryan Theosophical Press, 1925), 2:571.
1. Gerald J. Larson, Classical Samkhya, rev. ed. (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass,
1979), 96; R. C. Zaehner, ed. and trans., The Bhagavad-Gita (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1969), 7.
2. Larson, Classical Samkhya, 4.
3. K. B. Ramakrishna Rao, Theism of Pre-Classical Samkhya (Prasangara, India:
University of Mysore, 1966), 3.
4. Larson, Classical Samkhya, 278.
5. For the dates of Sri Anirvan’s life, see Lizelle Reymond, To Live Within
(Portland, Ore.: Rudra Press, 1995), xviii.
6. Ishvarakrishna, Samkhyakarika, 19, 20; in Larson, Classical Samkhya, 262.
7. Larson, Classical Samkhya, 13.
8. Ibid., 10–11.
9. Ibid., 93.
20. Samkhyakarika, 65–66; in Larson, Classical Samkhya, 275. Parenthetical
insertions are the translator’s.
21. Larson, Classical Samkhya, 135.
22. Ibid., 134–35.
23. Samkhyakarika, 18; in Larson, Classical Samkhya, 261.
24. Zimmer, Philosophies of India, 285.
25. The Rig Veda, ed. and trans. Wendy Doniger O’Flaherty (London: Penguin,
1981), 10.90; pp. 30–31.
26. See P. N. Srinivasachari, The Philosophy of Visistadvaita (Adyar, India: Adyar
Library and Research Centre, 1943), for a discussion of some of these.
27. Shvestashvarata Upanishad, 3.13.
28. Hans Torwesten, Vedanta: Heart of Hinduism (New York: Grove Weidenfield,
1991), 125.
29. Shankara, Shankara’s Crest-Jewel of Discrimination, trans. Swami
Prabhavananda and Christopher Isherwood (Hollywood: Vedanta Press, 1947),
98.
30. Sankaracharya [sic], Dakshinamurti Stotra, trans. Alladi Mahadeva Shastry, 3rd
ed. (Madras: Samata, 1978), §8. Depending on the transliteration of the
Sanskrit, the philosopher’s name is variously spelled as “Sankaracharya” and

“Shankaracharya.” Often it is abbreviated to “Shankara” or “Sankara.” He is
generally thought to have lived in the late eighth and early ninth centuries. But
possible dates range from AD 650 to 800. See Natalia Isayeva, Shankara and
Indian Philosophy (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1993), 75–87.
31. Shankara, Shankara’s Crest-Jewel of Discrimination, 49.
32. Quoted in Kshitish Chandra Chakravarti, Vision of Reality (Calcutta: Firma K.
L. Mukhopadhyay, 1969), 180.
33. Shankara, introduction to Shankara’s Crest-Jewel of Discrimination, 18.
34. Shankara, Shankara’s Crest-Jewel of Discrimination, 55.
35. Shankara, introduction to Shankara’s Crest-Jewel of Discrimination, 15.
36. Shankara, Shankara’s Crest-Jewel of Discrimination, 134, 43.
37. Reymond, To Live Within, 63–64.
38. On this point, see Krishna Prem, The Yoga of the Bhagavat Gita (Shaftesbury,
Dorset, U.K.: Element, 1988), 146.
39. Quoted in Marcia Binder Schmidt, The Dzogchen Primer: Embracing the
Spiritual Path according to the Great Perfection (Boston: Shambhala, 2002),
209. Emphasis added.
CHAPTER 4. Constant Conjunction
1. Plato, Timaeus, 28a. For a good summary of the various views of causation in
Western philosophy, see Menno Hulswit, “A Brief History of ‘Causation,’”
University 
of 
Toronto 
Libraries 
website,
www.library.utoronto.ca/see/SEED/Vol4-3/Hulswit.htm, accessed on June 23,
2008.
2. Henri Frankfort et al, Before Philosophy (Harmondsworth, Middlesex, U.K.:
Pelican, 1949), 26.
3. Aristotle, The Physics, ed. and trans. Philip H. Wicksteed and Francis M.
Cornford (Cambridge, Mass.: Loeb Classical Library, 1934), 8.6, 258b.
4. Bertrand Russell, “On the Notion of Cause,” 1; quoted on Stanford
Encyclopedia 
of 
Philosophy 
website,
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/causation-process/, accessed on July 16,
2008.
5. Aristotle, Physics, 2.3, 194b23–195a3; Metaphysics, 7.7, 1032a11— 1032b23.
6. Some philosophers suggest explanation or other terms. See Anthony Kenny, A

New History of Western Philosophy, vol. 1: Ancient Philosophy (Oxford:
Clarendon, 2004), 190.
7. Hulswit, “A Brief History of ‘Causation.’”
8. David Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature, ed. David Fate Norton and Mary
Norton (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), 1.3.2.
9. Ibid., 1.3.6.
0. David Hume, Enquiries Concerning the Human Understanding and
Concerning the Principles of Morals, ed. L. A. Selby-Bigge, 2nd ed. (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1902), 7.2.
1. Augustine, Confessions, trans. R. S. Pine-Coffin (New York: Dorset, 1986),
11.14.
2. Maurice Nicoll, Living Time and the Integration of the Life (London: Vincent
Stuart, 1952), 142.
3. Lawrence LeShan, A New Science of the Paranormal: The Promise of
Psychical Research (Wheaton, Ill.: Quest, 2009), 124.
4. Bertrand Russell, The Problems of Philosophy (1912; reprint, New York:
Barnes & Noble, 2004), 42.
5. Immanuel Kant, Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics, trans. Paul Carus
(Indianapolis: Bobbs, Merrill, 1950), 8. For a list of the categories, see
Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, trans. J. M. D. Meiklejohn (New
York: Wiley, n.d.), 111–12.
6. Schopenhauer, The World as Will and Representation, 1:446.
7. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, 197 ff.
8. Roger Penrose, The Emperor’s New Mind (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1989), 302.
9. The definition was popularized by Thomas Aquinas. Thomas attributed it to a
tenth-century Jewish philosopher named Isaac Israëli, but scholars have not
been able to find it in Israëli’s works. See History and Theory of Ontology
website, www.formalontology.it/veritas.htm, accessed on Jan. 26, 2009.
20. Quoted in Jacques Derrida, Of Grammatology, trans. Gayatri Chakravorty
Spivak (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1976X49.
21. Ibid., 22–23.
22. Hume, Treatise of Human Nature, 1.4.7.
23. Plato, Republic, trans. Robin Waterfield (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1993), 514b—c.

24. Ibid., 516c—d.
25. The Rig Veda, ed. and trans. Wendy Doniger O’Flaherty (London: Penguin,
1981), 10.129.
26. Samkhyakarika, 22; in Larson, Classical Samkhya, 194.
27. Samkhyakarika, 31; in Larson, Classical Samkhya, 207.
28. K. C. Bhattacharya, in Samkhya: A Dualist Tradition in Indian Philosophy, ed.
Gerald J. Larson and Ram Shankar Bhattacharya, vol. 4 of Encyclopedia of
Indian Philosophies (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1987), 70.
29. Samkhyakarika, 1 ; in Larson, Classical Samkhya, 257.
30. Larson and Bhattacharya, 387.
31. See ibid., 68–72.
CHAPTER 5. Patterns in Her Garment
1. Khenchen Palden Sherab and Khenpo Tsewang Dongyal, Opening to Our
Primordial Nature, 2nd ed. (Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion, 2006), 74.
2. Namkhai Norbu, Dzogchen: The Self-Perfected State, trans. John Shane
(Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion, 1996), 81.
3. Clark Wissler, Red Man Reservations (New York: Collier-Macmillan,
1972X203.
4. In Larson and Bhattacharya, 81.
5. Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, 3.27.
6. Heraclitus, fragment 21 DK; in M. Marcovich, ed. and trans., Heraclitus
(Merida, Venezuela: Los Andes University Press, 1967), 247. My translation.
7. C. Binz, quoted in Sigmund Freud, The Interpretation of Dreams, trans. Joyce
Crick (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999), 49.
8. Lev Nikolayevich Tolstoy, Anna Karenina, trans. Margaret Wettlin (Moscow:
Progress, 1978), 1:30.
9. 
See, 
for 
example, 
NASA’s 
website,
http://universe.nasa.gov/press/2003/03052ib.html, accessed on Oct. 13, 2008.
0. For a valuable account of the relation of the Samkhya to Gurdjieff’s teachings,
see Lizelle Reymond, To Live Within (Portland, Ore.: Rudra Press, 1995).
1. Alla Andreeva, foreword to The Rose of the World, by Daniel Andreev, trans.
Jordan Roberts (Hudson, N.Y.: Lindisfarne, 1996), xiv.
2. Andreev, The Rose of the World, 230, 235.

3. Guy Lyon Playfair, “Has CSICOP (Committee for the Scientific Investigation
of the Claims of the Paranormal) Lost the 30 Years’ War?,” Media Watch
website; 
www.skepticalinvestigations.org/observer/30yearswar_2.htm,
accessed Dec. 12, 2008.
4. C. G. Jung, Synchronicity: An Acausal Connecting Principle, trans. R. F. C.
Hull (Princeton: Princeton/Bollingen, 1973), 22.
5. Ibid., 20, 24.
6. Ibid., 100.
7. Blavatsky, The Secret Doctrine, 1:44.
8. The Rig Veda, ed. and trans. Wendy Doniger O’Flaherty (London: Penguin,
1981), 10.25.7.
CHAPTER 6. A Just Universe?
1. Denise Gellene, “U.S. Suicide Rate Is Up,” Los Angeles Times, Oct. 21, 2008;
www.latimes.com/news/science/la-sci-suicide21-2008oct21,0,838216.story,
accessed on Dec. 17, 2008.
2. Reinhold Niebuhr, The Nature and Destiny of Man (Louisville, Ky:
Westminster/John Knox, 1964), 2:56.
3. Longchenpa, Kindly Bent to Ease Us, trans. Herbert V. Guenther (Berkeley,
Calif.: Dharma), 1:30.
4. In G. W. Butterworth, ed. and trans., Origen: On First Principles (New York:
Harper & Row, 1966), 126.
5. Origen, Commentary on Matthew, 13:1; quoted on the Catholic Answers
website, www.catholic.com/library/Reincarnation.asp, accessed on Dec. 22,
2008. This page quotes a valuable selection of excerpts from the church
fathers on reincarnation.
6. 
St. 
Anthony 
Messenger 
website,
www.americancatholic.org/messenger/Mar2000/Wiseman.asp, accessed on
Dec. 22, 2008.
7. 
See 
Harris 
Interactive 
website,
www.harrisinteractive.com/harris_poll/index.asp?PID=838, accessed on Dec.
29, 2008.
8. Emanuel Swedenborg, Heaven and Hell, trans. George F. Dole, rev. ed. (West
Chester, Pa.: Swedenborg Foundation, 2000), §479 (p. 364); also §58 (pp.
115–16).

9. Pandit Rajmani Tigunait, Seven Systems of Indian Philosophy (Honesdale, Pa.:
Himalayan Institute Press, 1983), 24.
0. Bhagavad Gita, 4:19–20; in R. C. Zaehner, ed. and trans., The Bhagavad-Gita
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1969), 59. Bracketed insertions are
Zaehner’s.
1. Dalai Lama, The Meaning of Life: Buddhist Perspectives on Cause and Effect,
trans. Jeffrey Hopkins (Somerville, Mass.: Wisdom, 1992), 45.
2. D. T. Suzuki, The Zen Doctrine of No-Mind, ed. Christmas Humphreys, 2nd ed.
(London: Rider, 1969), 36.
3. Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, ch. 6; in W. B. Yeats and Shree Purohit Swami, The
Ten Principal Upanishads (New York: Macmillan, 1937), 143.
14. René Guénon, Introduction to the Study of the Hindu Doctrines, trans. Marco
Pallis (New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 1993), 262.
CHAPTER 7. Beyond the Copper Mountain
1. Leslie D. Weatherhead, The Christian Agnostic (London: Stodder & Houghton,
1965), 28.
2. Quoted in Louis Dupré, Kierkegaard as Theologian: The Dialectic of Christian
Existence (New York: Sheed & Ward, 1963), 113, 122.
3. Søren Kierkegaard, Fear and Trembling, ed. C. Stephen Evans and Sylvia
Walsh (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006), 29, 31.
4. Cf. Dupré, 132–33.
5. Quoted in ibid., 123.
6. Kierkegaard, Philosophical Fragments, ch. 4; quoted in Dupré, Kierkegaard as
Theologian, 203.
7. William James, “The Will to Believe,” James Madison University website,
http://falcon.jmu.edu/~omearam/ph101willtobelieve.html, accessed on May
15, 2008.
8. Paul Tillich, Dynamics of Faith (New York: Harper & Row, 1957).
9. Schopenhauer, The World as Will and Representation, 1:368.
0. Phillip Gowins, The Sovereign Soul: Sufism, a Path for Today (Boca Raton,
Fla.: New Paradigm, 2006), 8–13.
1. Carl A. Anderson, A Civilization of Love: What Every Catholic Can Do to
Change the World (San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco, 2008), 123–24.

2. Cf. James, “The Will to Believe,” 13.
3. Steven T. Katz, “Language, Epistemology, and Mysticism,” in Katz, ed.,
Mysticism and Philosophical Analysis (New York: Oxford University Press,
1978), 33, 66.
4. William James, The Varieties of Religious Experience (New York: Longmans,
Green, 1902), 380.
5. Xenophanes, fragment 15; in G. S. Kirk and J. E. Raven, The Presocratic
Philosophers (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1957), 169.
6. Xenophanes, fragment B32; in Kirk and Raven, Presocratic Philosophers, 173.
7. “Fake Medicinal ‘Green Honey’ Sold in the Philippines,” Apitherapy News,
March 
28, 
2008, 
http://apitherapy.blogspot.com/2008/03/fake-medicinal-
honey-sold-in.html, accessed on June 14, 2008.
8. See Eleanor Irwin, Colour Terms in Greek Poetry (Toronto: Hakkert, 1974), for
an extensive discussion of this point; also Rebecca Bird, “Language and
Perception of Color among the Ancient Greeks,” Cooper Union website,
www.cooper.edu/classes/art/hta321/99spring/Rebecca.html, accessed on June
14, 2008.
9. Quoted in Arthur Osborne, ed., The Teachings of Bhagavan Sri Ramana
Maharshi in His Own Words (London: Rider, 1962), 48.
20. Nisargadatta Maharaj, The Experience of Nothingness, ed. Robert Powell (San
Diego: Blue Dove, 1996), 35.
21. The interchange appears in Osborne, 47–48.
22. Quoted on Fordham University website, www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/all-
hallaj-quotations.html, accessed on June 17, 2008.
23. In Osborne, Teachings of Bhagavan Sri Ramana Maharshi, 43. The
Tiruvachakam is a work of Tamil devotional literature of which Ramana
Maharshi thought very highly.
24. For a similar view, see Plotinus, The Enneads, trans. Stephen MacKenna
(Burdett, N.Y.: Larson, 1992), 3.8.8.
CHAPTER 8. The Conscious Civilization
1. For further discussion of these points, see my Inner Christianity: A Guide to
the Esoteric Tradition (Boston: Shambhala, 2002), chs. 2 and 4.
2. Henry George Liddell and Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, ed. Henry

Stuart Jones (Oxford: Oxford at the Clarendon Press, 1968), s.v. (entós).
3. A Course in Miracles (Tiburon, Calif.: Foundation for Inner Peace, 1975), 2:71.
4. Quoted in Jacques Lacan, Écrits: A Selection, trans. Alan Sheridan (New York:
Norton, 1977), 128.
5. Martin Heidegger, Early Greek Thinking, trans. David Farrell Krell and Frank
A. Capuzzi (New York: Harper & Row, 1975), 59–66.
6. Yogi Publication Society, “Three Initiates,” The Kybalion (N.p.: Yogi
Publication Society, 1908), 25.
7. Carl Safina, “Darwinism Must Die So That Evolution Can Live,” New York
Times, Feb. 9, 2009, www.nytimes.com/2009/02/10/science/10essa.html?
pagewanted=i&_r=1, accessed on Feb. 15, 2009.
8. Philip Hill, Lacan for Beginners (New York: Writers & Readers, 1997), 10.
9. P. D. Ouspensky, In Search of the Miraculous: Fragments of a Forgotten
Teaching (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1949), 146.
0. Steven Pinker, “My Genome, My Self,” New York Times Magazine, Jan. 7,
2009; 
www.nytimes.com/2009/01/11/magazine/iiGenome-t.html?
_r=i&ref=science, accessed on Jan. 12, 2009.
1. John R. Searle, Minds, Brains, and Science (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1984), 44.
2. Richard Dooling, Rapture for the Geeks: When AI Outsmarts IQ (New York:
Harmony, 2008), 2.
3. Douglas R. Hofstadter and Daniel Dennett, eds., The Mind’s I: Fantasies and
Reflections on Self and Soul (New York: Bantam, 1981), 382.
4. For one version, see the website Eliza: A Friend You Could Never Have
Before, www-ai.ijs.si/eliza-cgi-bin/eliza_script, accessed on Jan. 13, 2009.
5. Catullus, 85; my translation.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Anderson, Carl A. A Civilization of Love: What Every Catholic Can Do to Change
the World. San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco, 2008.
Andreev, Daniel. The Rose of the World. Translated by Jordan Roberts. Hudson, N.Y.:
Lindisfarne, 1996.
Anselm. Basic Writings. Translated by S. N. Deane. 2nd ed. LaSalle, 111.: Open
Court, 1968.
Appiah, Kwame Anthony. Thinking It Through: An Introduction to Contemporary
Philosophy. New York: Oxford University Press, 2003.
Aristotle. The Basic Works of Aristotle. Edited by Richard McKeon. New York:
Random House, 1941.
______. The Physics. Edited and translated by Philip H. Wicksteed and Francis M.
Cornford. 2 vols. Cambridge, Mass.: Loeb Classical Library, 1934.
Augustine. Confessions. Translated by R. S. Pine-Coffin. New York: Dorset, 1986.
Besant, Annie. A Study in Consciousness. 2nd ed. Adyar, India: Theosophical
Publishing House, 1999.
Blavatsky, H. P. The Secret Doctrine. 3rd Point Loma ed. 2 vols. Point Loma, Calif.:
Aryan Theosophical Press, 1925.
Boman, Thorleif. Hebrew Thought Compared with Greek. Translated by Jules L.
Moreau. New York: Norton, 1970.
Bonhoeffer, Dietrich. Letters and Papers from Prison. Edited by Eberhard Bethge.
Translated by Reginald Fuller et al. Rev. ed. New York: Touchstone, 1997.
Burkert, Walter. Greek Religion. Translated by John Raffan. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1985.
Burnett, John, ed. Platonis opera, tomus IV. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1901.

Butterworth, G. W., ed. and trans. Origen: On First Principles. New York: Harper &
Row, 1966.
Catalina, Francis V. A Study of the Self Concept of Sankhya-Yoga Philosophy. Delhi:
Munshiram Manarholal, 1968.
Cavendish, Richard. The Black Arts. New York: Putnam, 1967. Chakravarti, Kshitish
Chandra. Vision of Reality. Calcutta: Firma K. L. Mukhopadhyay, 1969.
A Course in Miracles. 3 vol. Tiburon, Calif.: Foundation for Inner Peace, 1975.
Dalai Lama. The Meaning of Life: Buddhist Perspectives on Cause and Effect.
Translated by Jeffrey Hopkins. Somerville, Mass.: Wisdom, 1992.
Damiani, Anthony. Astronoesis: Philosophy’s Empirical Context, Astrology’s
Transcendental Ground. Burdett, N.Y.: Larson, 2000.
Dasgupta, Surendranath. A History of Indian Philosophy. 5 vols. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1922–55.
Dawkins, Richard. The Selfish Gene. New York: Oxford University Press, 1976.
Deikman, Arthur J. The Observing Self: Mysticism and Psychotherapy. Boston:
Beacon, 1982.
Dennett, Daniel. Breaking the Spell: Religion as a Natural Phenomenon. New York:
Penguin, 2006.
_____. Darwin’s Dangerous Idea. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1995.
_____. Sweet Dreams: Philosophical Objections to a Science of Consciousness.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2006.
Derrida, Jacques. Of Grammatology. Translated by Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1976.
Deutsch, Eliot, and Rohit Dalvi, eds. The Essential Vedanta: A New Source Book of
Advaita Vedanta. Bloomington, Ind.: World Wisdom, 2004.
Doniger, Wendy, ed. Purana Perennis: Reciprocity and Transformation in Hindu and
Jaina Texts. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1993.
Dooling, Richard. Rapture for the Geeks: When AI Outsmarts IQ. New York:
Harmony, 2008.
Dupré, Louis. Kierkegaard as Theologian: The Dialectic of Christian Existence. New
York: Sheed & Ward, 1963.
Eliade, Mircea. The Two and the One. Translated by J. M. Cohen. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1965.
_____. Yoga: Immortality and Freedom. New York: Pantheon/Bollingen, 1958.
Eliot, Charles William, ed. The Harvard Classics. Vol. 37: English Philosophers of
the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries: Locke, Berkeley, Hume. New York: P.

P. Collier, 1910.
The Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Edited by Paul Edwards. 8 vols. New York:
Macmillan, 1967.
Fordyce, C. J., ed. Catullus. Oxford: Clarendon, 1961.
Fox, Matthew. The Coming of the Cosmic Christ. San Francisco: Harper & Row,
1988.
Frankfort, Henri, et al. Before Philosophy. Harmondsworth, Middlesex, U.K.: Pelican,
1949.
Freud, Sigmund. The Interpretation of Dreams. Translated by Joyce Crick. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1999.
Goswami, Amit. The Self-Aware Universe: How Consciousness Creates the Material
World. New York: Tarcher/Putnam, 1993.
Gowins, Phillip. The Sovereign Soul: Sufism, a Path for Today. Boca Raton, Fla.:
New Paradigm, 2006.
The Greek New Testament. Edited by Kurt Aland et al. New York: United Bible
Societies, 1966.
Griffiths, Bede. Vedanta and Christian Faith. Clearlake, Calif.: Dawn Horse, 1973.
Guénon, René. Introduction to the Study of the Hindu Doctrines. Translated by Marco
Pallis. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 1993.
_____. Man and His Becoming according to the Vedanta. Translated by Richard C.
Nicholson. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 1981.
Handelman, Don, and David Shulman. God Inside Out: Siva’s Game of Dice. New
York: Oxford University Press, 1997.
Heidegger, Martin. Early Greek Thinking. Translated by David Farrell Krell and
Frank A. Capuzzi. New York: Harper & Row, 1975.
Hill, Philip. Lacan for Beginners. New York: Writers & Readers, 1997.
Hofstadter, Douglas R., and Daniel Dennett, eds. The Mind’s I: Fantasies and
Reflections on Self and Soul. New York: Bantam, 1981.
Hume, David. Enquiries Concerning the Human Understanding and Concerning the
Principles of Morals. Edited by L. A. Selby-Bigge. 2nd ed. Oxford: Clarendon,
1902.
_____. A Treatise of Human Nature. Edited by David Fate Norton and Mary Norton.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.
Irwin, Eleanor. Colour Terms in Greek Poetry. Toronto: Hakkert, 1974.
Isayeva, Natalia. Shankara and Indian Philosophy. Albany: State University of New
York Press, 1993.

Iswara Krishna. The Sankhya Karika, or Memorial Verses on the Indian Philosophy.
Translated by Henry Thomas Colebrook and Horace Hayman Wilson. London:
Oxford University Press, 1837.
James, William. The Varieties of Religious Experience. New York: Longmans, Green,
1902.
Janet, Paul. Final Causes. Translated by William Affleck. New York: Charles
Scribner’s Sons, 1883.
Johnston, E. H. Early Samkhya: An Essay on Its Historical Development according to
the Texts. London: Royal Asiatic Society, 1937.
Jung, C. G. Synchronicity: An Acausal Connecting Principle. Translated by R. F. C.
Hull. Princeton: Princeton/Bollingen, 1973.
Kant, Immanuel. Critique of Pure Reason. Translated by J.M. D. Meiklejohn. New
York: Wiley, n.d.
_____. Dreams of a Spirit-Seer and Other Writings. Edited by Gregory R. Johnston.
West Chester, Pa.: Swedenborg Foundation, 2002.
_____. Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics. Translated by Paul Carus.
Indianapolis: Bobbs, Merrill, 1950.
Katz, Steven T., ed. Mysticism and Philosophical Analysis. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1978.
Kenny, Anthony. A New History of Western Philosophy. Vol. 1: Ancient Philosophy.
Oxford: Clarendon, 2004.
Kern, Stephen. A Cultural History of Causality: Science, Murder Novels, and Systems
of Thought. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2004.
Kierkegaard, Søren. Fear and Trembling. Edited by C. Stephen Evans and Sylvia
Walsh. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006.
Kirk, G. S., and J. E. Raven. The Presocratic Philosophers. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1957.
Klostermaier, Klaus K. A Survey of Hinduism. 3rd ed. Albany: State University of
New York Press, 2007.
Kunhan Raja, C. Some Fundamental Problems in Indian Philosophy. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1960.
Lacan, Jacques. Écrits: A Selection. Translated by Alan Sheridan. New York: Norton,
1977.
Langer, Ellen J. Mindfulness. Cambridge, Mass.: Perseus, 1989.
Larsen, Stephen. The Fundamentalist Mind: How Polarized Thinking Imperils Us All.
Wheaton, Ill.: Quest, 2007.

Larson, Gerald J. Classical Samkhya. Rev. ed. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1979.
Larson, Gerald J., and Ram Shankar Bhattacharya, eds. Samkhya: A Dualist Tradition
in Indian Philosophy. Vol. 4 of Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1987.
LeShan, Lawrence. A New Science of the Paranormal: The Promise of Psychical
Research. Wheaton, Ill.: Quest, 2009.
Liddell, Henry George, and Robert Scott. A Greek-English Lexicon. Edited by Henry
Stuart Jones. Oxford: Clarendon, 1968.
Lindorf, David. Pauli and Jung: The Meeting of Two Great Minds. Wheaton, Ill.:
Quest, 2004.
Locke, John. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. Edited by Peter H.
Nidditch. Oxford: Clarendon, 1975.
Longchenpa (Klong-chen rab-’byams-pa). Kindly Bent to Ease Us. Translated by
Herbert V. Guenther. 3 vols. Berkeley, Calif.: Dharma, 1975-76.
Mackie, J. L. The Cement of the Universe: A Study of Causation. Oxford: Clarendon,
1974.
Mahadevan, T.M.P., ed. and trans. The Hymns of Sankara. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass,
1980.
Manjusrimitra. Primordial Experience: An Introduction to Dzogs-chen [sic]
Meditation. Translated by Namkhai Norbu and Kennard Lipman. Boston:
Shambhala, 1983.
Marcovich, M., ed. and trans. Heraclitus. Merida, Venezuela: Los Andes University
Press, 1967.
Merton, Thomas. The Asian Journal of Thomas Merton. Edited by Naomi Burton et
al. New York: New Directions, 1973.
_____. The Seven Storey Mountain. New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1948.
Midgley, Mary. Evolution as a Religion. Rev. ed. London: Routledge, 2002.
Milton, Richard. Shattering the Myths of Darwinism. 2nd ed. Rochester, Vt.: Park
Street Press, 1997.
Monroe, Robert A. Far Journeys. New York: Broadway, 1985.
_____. Journeys out of the Body. New York: Broadway, 1971.
_____. Ultimate Journey. New York: Broadway, 1994.
Muller, Max. Six Systems of Indian Philosophy. London: Longmans, Green, 1912.
Nicoll, Maurice. Living Time and the Integration of the Life. London: Vincent Stuart,
1952.

Niebuhr, H. Richard. Christ and Culture. San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1951.
Niebuhr, Reinhold. The Nature and Destiny of Man. 2 vols. Louisville, Ky.:
Westminster/John Knox, 1964.
Nikhilananda, Swami. The Upanishads: A New Translation. 3rd ed. 4 vols. New
York: Ramakrishna-Vivekananda Center, 1990.
Nisargadatta Maharaj. The Experience of Nothingness. Edited by Robert Powell. San
Diego: Blue Dove, 1996.
Norbu, Namkhai. Dzogchen: The Self-Perfected State. Translated by John Shane.
Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion, 1996.
Osborne, Arthur, ed. The Teachings of Bhagavan Sri Ramana Maharshi in His Own
Words. London: Rider, 1962.
Ouspensky, P. D. In Search of the Miraculous: Fragments of a Forgotten Teaching.
New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1949.
_____. The Psychology of Man’s Possible Evolution. New York: Knopf, 1972.
Penrose, Roger. The Emperor’s New Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989.
Plato. The Collected Dialogues. Edited by Edith Hamilton and Huntington Cairns.
Princeton: Princeton, NJ../Bollingen, 1961.
_____. Republic. Translated by Robin Waterfield. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1993.
Plotinus. The Enneads. Translated by Stephen MacKenna. Burdett, N.Y.: Larson,
1992.
Popper, Karl. Popper Selections. Edited by David Miller. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 1985.
Prem, Krishna. The Yoga of the Bhagavat Gita. Shaftesbury, Dorset, U.K.: Element,
1988.
Puharich, Andrija. Beyond Telepathy. London: Souvenir, 1974.
Rao, K. B. Ramakrishna. Theism of Pre-Classical Samkhya. Prasangara, India:
University of Mysore, 1966.
Reymond, Lizelle. To Live Within. Portland, Ore.: Rudra Press, 1995.
The Rig Veda. Edited and translated by Wendy Doniger O’Flaherty. London: Penguin,
1981.
Robinson, James M., ed. The Nag Hammadi Library in English. 1st ed. San
Francisco: Harper & Row, 1977.
Row, T. Subba. Notes on the Bhagavad Gita. Point Loma, Calif.: Theosophical
University Press, 1934.

Russell, Bertrand. Our Knowledge of the External World as a Field for Scientific
Method in Philosophy. Rev. ed. London: George Allen & Unwin, 1926.
_____. The Problems of Philosophy. 1912. Reprint, New York: Barnes & Noble,
2004.
Sankaracharya. Dakshinamurti Stotra. Translated by Alladi Mahadeva Shastry. 3rd
ed. Madras: Samata, 1978.
Schmidt, Marcia Binder. The Dzogchen Primer: Embracing the Spiritual Path
according to the Great Perfection. Boston: Shambhala, 2002.
Schopenhauer, Arthur. The World as Will and Representation. Translated by E.F.J.
Payne. 2 vols. New York: Dover, 1966.
Searle, John R. Minds, Brains, and Science. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1984.
Shankara. Shankara’s Crest-Jewel of Discrimination. Translated by Swami
Prabhavananda and Christopher Isherwood. Hollywood: Vedanta Press, 1947.
Sharma, Arvind. Advaita Vedanta: An Introduction. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2004.
Sherab, Khenchen Palden, and Khenpo Tsewang Dongyal. Opening to Our
Primordial Nature. 2nd ed. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion, 2006.
Smoley, Richard. Forbidden Faith: The Secret History of Gnosticism. San Francisco:
HarperSanFrancisco, 2006.
_____. Inner Christianity: A Guide to the Esoteric Tradition. Boston: Shambhala,
2002.
Spong, John Shelby. Jesus for the Non-Religious. San Francisco: Harper-
SanFrancisco, 2007.
_____. A New Christianity for a New World: Why Traditional Faith Is Dying and
How a New Faith Is Being Born. San Francisco: Harper-SanFrancisco, 2002.
Srinivasachari, P. N. The Philosophy of Visistadvaita. Adyar, India: Adyar Library
and Research Centre, 1943.
Stewart, Matthew. The Courtier and the Heretic: Leibniz, Spinoza, and the Fate of
God in the Modern World. New York: Norton, 2006.
Storm, Howard. My Descent into Death: A Second Chance at Life. New York:
Doubleday, 2005.
Suzuki, D. T. The Zen Doctrine of No-Mind. Edited by Christmas Humphreys. 2nd ed.
London: Rider, 1969.
Swedenborg, Emanuel. Heaven and Hell. Translated by George F. Dole. Rev. ed.
West Chester, Pa.: Swedenborg Foundation, 2000.
Taylor, John G. The Race for Consciousness. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1999.

The Thirteen Principal Upanishads. Rev. ed. Translated by R. E. Hume. London:
Oxford University Press, 1931.
Tigunait, Pandit Rajmani. Seven Systems of Indian Philosophy. Honesdale, Pa.:
Himalayan Institute Press, 1983.
Tillich, Paul. Dynamics of Faith. New York: Harper & Row, 1957.
Tolstoy, Lev Nikolayevich. Anna Karenina. Translated by Margaret Wettlin. 2 vols.
Moscow: Progress, 1978.
Torwesten, Hans. Vedanta: Heart of Hinduism. New York: Grove Weidenfield, 1991.
Weatherhead, Leslie D. The Christian Agnostic. London: Stodder & Houghton, 1965.
“Who.” Maha Yoga, or the Upanishadic Lore in the Light of the Teachings of Sri
Ramana Maharshi. 4th ed. Tiruvannamalai, India: Sri Niranjananda Swamy, Sri
Ramanasramam, 1950.
Wissler, Clark. Red Man Reservations. New York: Collier-Macmillan, 1972.
Woodroffe, John. Sakti and Sakta: Essays and Addresses. 6th ed. Madras: Ganesh,
1965.
_____. The Serpent Power. 7th ed. Madras: Ganesh, 1964.
Yeats, W. B., and Shree Purohit Swami. The Ten Principal Upanishads. New York:
Macmillan, 1937.
Yogi Publication Society. “Three Initiates.” The Kybalion. N.p.: Yogi Publication
Society, 1908.
Zaehner, R. C., ed. and trans. The Bhagavad-Gita. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1969.
Zimmer, Heinrich. Philosophies of India. Edited by Joseph Campbell. London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1952.

PERMISSIONS ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I gratefully acknowledge the Theosophical Publishing House, Wheaton, Illinois, for
permission to use excerpts from Phillip Gowins’s The Sovereign Soul: Sufism, a Path
for Today; Dharma Publishing, Berkeley, California, for permission to use an excerpt
from Longchenpa’s Kindly Bent to Ease Us, vol. i; and Snow Lion Publications,
Ithaca, New York, for permission to use an excerpt from Namkhai Norbu’s Dzogchen:
The Self-Perfected State.

INDEX
A
Abel, 144
Abraham, 140, 144
absurdity of faith, 139–42
Abyss, 113
action, 92
Advaita Vedanta school
maya and, 54–55, 87
reality in, 39–40
Samkhya and, 56–59
Self in, 39–40, 53, 153
See also Vedanta
afterlife, 120–21, 125–26
agape (higher love), 133–34
ahamkara (ego; “I amness”)
emergence from buddhi of, 79, 81–82
purusha and, 87, 132, 163
Ain Soph (“infinity”), 85
aitía (cause or reason), 65
alayavijnana (ground of consciousness), 113
Al-Hallaj, Mansur, 154
Allah, 83
analysis, 45–46
anatta (“no-self”), 130, 131–32

Andreev, Daniel, 104–5, 122
Andreeva, Alla, 104
animals, 14, 104
anima mundi, 49, 76
Anirvan, Sri, 47, 57–58
Anna Karenina (Tolstoy), 96–97
Anselm of Canterbury, 138
Answer to Job (Jung), 118–19
anthropomorphism, 30, 32
apocalypse, 119–20
Arawak tribe, 90–91
archetypes, 110–11
Aristode, 63–64, 64–65, 84
artificial intelligence, 170–72
arupa (formless realm), 95
“as above, so below,” 107
ascetics and asceticism, 20, 25, 59
Assiyah, 93
association(s)
law of, 77
in mind, 98–99, 100–101
astral realm, 95, 97, 104
astrology, 107–9
asuras (“titans”), 103–4
atman (Self), 39–40, 53, 130, 131
atoms, consciousness in, 15–16, 24, 61
attachment, 47, 126, 127
attributes
as belonging to prakriti, 51
of Shiva, 19, 25
Atziluth, 93, 95
Augustine, Saint, 69
authority, 136–38, 162
aversion, 82
avidya (ignorance), 58
Ayer, A.J., 11, 149

B
Babylon, 117–18
Bad Sleep Well, The (Kurosawa), 116–17
being, 33, 95–96
Berkeley, George, 16, 31–32
Bethge, Eberhard, 1–2
Bhagavad Gita, 45, 46, 127
Bible
on creation, 41, 79
on faith, 139, 140, 143–45
on higher reality, 158
on history of Jews, 117–18
on Jacob’s ladder, 106
on justice, 118–19, 129
on knowledge, 175
on mystical experience, 149
on sin, 140–41
on true Self, 152–53
translations of, 159–60
Binah, 80
Blavatsky, H.P., 46, 112, 167
Bogomilism, 42
Bonhoeffer, Dietrich, 1–2, 4–5, 10
Brahman
all as, 54, 55, 57
as atman, 39–40, 53, 159
as experiencer, 56
without qualities, 85
brain
consciousness and, 13
experience of God and, 12, 94
mind and, 23
unreal experience and, 94–95
Briah, 93, 95
Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, 131

Buber, Martin, 165
Buddha, 134
Buddha-nature, 131, 153
buddhi (cognition), 79, 80–81, 85
Buddhism
Four Noble Truths and, 82
ground of consciousness in, 113
impersonal absolute in, 129
liberation and, 105
no-self in, 130
power of mind and, 89
realms of existence in, 95, 103–4
six lokas of, 121
Theravada and Mahayana, 134
Three Poisons and, 82
Tibetan, 29, 89, 153
vipassana and, 102
C
Cases of the Reincarnation Type (Stevenson), 124
categories
of Kant, 72, 74, 77, 85, 151
Catharism, 42
Catullus, 172
causality, 31, 72
causation
characteristics of, 12, 69–70, 84
constant conjunction and, 66–67, 71, 75, 84
God/gods in, 63
gunas and, 83–84
karmic, 128–29
limitations of, 101–2
synchronicity and, 110–11
types of causes and, 64–65
cave allegory, 74–75, 78

Center for Non-Dualism, 44
change, 165–66
cheating in dice game, 19, 49
chimpanzees, 2–3, 115
Christian Agnostic, The (Weatherhead), 136–37
Christianity
dualism and, 43–44
faith in, 136–38
God and Self as separate in, 154
God in, 129, 136, 156, 158, 160–61
justice and, 127
origins of, 120
paradox in, 5
realms of existence and, 103, 104
reincarnation and, 123–24
sin in, 140–41
Trinity in, 50, 83
worldview of, 10
civilization, 157–76, 173–74
clockmaker, God as, 7, 8
cognition, 58, 166, 170–73
“collective unconscious,” 98
color spectrum, 150–51
Coming of the Cosmic Christ, The (Fox), 44
computers, 169–73
concentration, 88–89
Confessions (Augustine), 69
Conscious Love (Smoley), 133, 134
consciousness
altered states of, 96, 103–4
as Brahman or atman, 39–40
as capacity to distinguish, 90
computers and, 170–73
continuum of, 14–15
contraction of, 88^)2
detachment and, 25

dreams and, 13–14, 29
ego as gateway to, 163
enlightenment and, 25–26
expansion of, 89–90
exploration of, 174–75
in Indian philosophy, 15
limits and, 77, 78, 85, 88–92
of matter, 15–16, 22–23, 24, 32
as omnipresent, 32, 164–65
primordial capacities of, 95–96
quantum physics and, 16–17
relating self and other, 13–14
as seeming to act, 92
self as, 23
study of, 167–69
time-sense and, 70
See also purusha
constant conjunction
astrology and, 108–9
of cause and effect, 66^7, 77
cave allegory and, 75
Hume and, 71, 84
law of associations and, 100
synchronicity and, 111
contextualism, 148–51
Coomaraswamy, Ananda K., 54, 55
correspondences, 107–9
cosmology, 2, 11
Course in Miracles, A, 163
creation, 41, 43–44, 79, 112
Crest-Jewel of Discrimination, The (Shankara), 55–56
D
daemon, 160
Dalai Lama, 130–31

dark matter and dark energy, 101
darshans (Hindu perspectives), 45
Darwin, Charles, 6, 167
Dawkins, Richard, 8, 14
daydreaming, 99, 100
death-and-resurrection myths, 60
Dennett, Daniel, 6–7, 9
Derrida, Jacques, 73
Descartes, René, 14, 41–42
design
evolution and, 6–7
intelligent, 139
desire, 82
detachment
Advaita Vedanta and, 57–58
as heaven or liberation, 51, 104, 105
meditation and, 25, 102–3
of mind from experience, 51, 59, 100
“determination of the mind,” 74, 77
determinism, 65–66
deuce/devil, 41
dice game of Shiva
detachment in, 51
losing in, 25, 59, 176
myth of, 19–22
Dickens, Charles, 39
Ding an sich, 30, 72, 73, 77
distinguishing
consciousness and, 90, 91
in dreams, 96–97
Dooling, Richard, 170
Dossey, Larry, 16–17
dreams and dreaming
associations in, 98
consciousness and, 13–14, 29
distinguishing and likening in, 96–97

time and, 69–70
unreality of, 94–95
dualism
observer/observed in, 58
in philosophy of mind, 41–42
theological, 43–44
duality, 41, 79, 152
Dzogchen tradition, 89–90, 153
E
Eckhart, Meister, 85, 161
Economist, The, 2–3
Edison, Thomas, 15–16, 32
ego, 81–82, 132, 133, 152
Einstein, Albert, 21, 167
ELIZA (computer program), 171–72
Emerald Tablet (Hermes Trismegistus), 107
enlightenment, 25–26, 54–55
Enoch, 144
Enrof(phne), 104
enumerations in Samkhya, 45, 93, 103
esotericism
as elitist, 161–62
levels of reality and, 95
Essay Concerning Human Understanding, An (Locke), 22
essentialism, 150
events
causal, 106–7
as discrete and separable, 75–76
evil, 42–43, 81
evolution, 7, 9
existence
levels of, 92–97, 125
realms of, 103–4, 121–22
as representation, 28

experience
attention to, 25, 88
and experiencer, 77, 92, 152
faith based on, 143–44, 145–48
many stages of, 103
Parvati as, 23, 28
unreal, 93–95
world as, 32
See aho prakriti
F
fairness, 2–3, 115–16
faith
based on absurdity, 139–42
based on authority, 136–38
based on experience, 143
based on reason, 138–39
doctrines and dogma in, 155
Sufi parable of, 135–36
volitional, 141–43
Faivre, Antoine, 107
fear, 43
Fear and Trembling (Kierkegaard), 140
Firefly (supercomputer), 170
First Cause of Aristode, 84
“formatory center,” 43
Forms of Plato, 30–31, 78
Four Noble Truths, 82
Fox, Matthew, 44
Francis of Assisi, 153
Frankfort, Henri, 63
Freud, Sigmund, 96, 98, 167, 169–70
fundamentalism, 43

G
Gauquelin, Michel, 108–9
genes, 8
Gnosis (journal), 124
Gnosticism
reincarnation and, 123
sense of self and, 81
serpent as liberation and, 175
God
brain receptive to, 94
as clockmaker, 7, 8
existence of, 138–39
experiencing, 144
as First Cause, 63–64
as hypothesis, 1–2, 4–5
as immanent, 152–53, 163
justice and, 121
need for, 11
as omnipresent eternal Mind, 31
as One, 43–44
as other, 85, 163
perception of universe by, 16, 60
as person, 43–44, 161
personal, 12, 129, 136, 153, 158
as unseen causative agent, 84
Gödel, Escher, Bach (Hofstadter), 170
gods, as causes, 63
gold, mountain of, 135, 156
Golden Compass, The (Pullman), 160
good and evil, 42–43, 81
Gowins, Phillip, 145–46, 149
Great Divorce, The (Lewis), 125
Greenfield, Susan, 7
Ground of All Being, 10–11, 12
Guénon, René, 132–33

gunas (strands), 49–50, 83–84, 85, 176
Gurdjieff, G.I.
on associations, 98–99
on self-observation, 168–69
sitting meditation and, 102–3
on three forces, 50
H
Hard Times (Dickens), 39
Healing Words (Dossey), 16
heaven, 104, 121–22, 125
Hebrew prophets, 117, 119
Hebrews, Episde to, 143–45
Heidegger, Martin, 165
hell, 104, 121–22, 125
Heraclitus, 26, 93
Hermes Trismegistus, 107
Himalaya, 20–21
Hinduism
atman in, 130, 153
darshans in, 45
impersonal absolute in, 129
Nirguna Brahman and, 85
See also Advaita Vedanta school; Samkhya school; Vedanta
Hippocrates, 13
Hofstadter, Douglas R., 170
Homer, 151
Hubbard, L. Ron, 157
Hui-neng, 131
Hulswit, Menno, 66
humans
experiencing possibilities, 175
fairness and, 2–3, 115
realm of, 103–4
Hume, David

on cause and effect, 66–67, 68
constant conjunction and, 71, 84, 10
determination of the mind of, 77
skepticism and, 74
Huxley, Aldous, 11
hypothesis
God as, 1–2, 4–5
research and, 70–71
I
“I”
Dalai Lama on, 130–31
experiences and, 25
as God, 152–53
See also consciousness; purusha; self
I Ching, 111
“I-formation,”81, 83, 87
impressions, 31
impulses, 50–51
Inayat Khan, Pir Vilayat, 146
Indian philosophy, 15, 28, 57–58, 126–27
Indian rope trick, 35–37, 55
insight, 26–27
integration, 46, 102–3
intelligence
in atomic matter, 15–16
in evolutionary theory, 9
realm of pure, 78
intelligent design, 6–8, 139
Interpretation of Dreams, The (Freud), 98, 167
introspection, 168–69
Isaac, 140
Ishvarakrishna, 46
Isis, 59–60
Islam, 104, 154

isolation, liberation and, 48, 51, 52, 59
Israelites, history of, 117–18
J
Jacob’s ladder, 106
James, William, 11, 142–43, 148, 150
Jesus Christ, 60, 125–26, 158, 159
Jews, history of, 117–18
Joan of Arc, 147–48
Job, 118–19
Joyce, James, 80
Jung, C.G.
on associations, 98
on Job, 118–19
on synchronicity, 109–12
on unconscious drives, 167–68
justice, 120–21, 127–28
K
Kabbalah
Ain Soph of, 85
four worlds of, 93, 95
Jacob’s ladder and, 106
mystical experiences and, 148
Tree of Life and, 80
on universe as God’s reflection, 60
kaivalya (isolation), 51, 52
kama (desire), 95
Kant, Immanuel
categories of, 72, 74, 77, 85, 151
Ding an sich of, 30, 72, 73, 77
on heavens and moral law, 2
perception of reality and, 71–72, 76–77
Kapila, 46

Kapila Matha (monastery), 47
karma, 121–22, 126–30
Katha Upanishad, 46
Katz, Steven T., 148
Kierkegaard, Søren, 139–42
Kinney, Jay, 124
Koch, Christof, 7
Kolbe, Maximilian, 147
Krishna, 127
Kurosawa, Akira, 116–17
Kybalion, The, 166
L
Lacan, Jacques, 73
Lagrange, Joseph-Louis, 2
Lambert, Johann Heinrich, 73
Laplace, Pierre-Simon, 2
Larsen, Stephen, 43
Larson, Gerald J., 47, 48, 51–52, 92
Last Judgment, 120
Lathrop, George Parsons, 15–16
LeShan, Lawrence, 17, 71
Lewis, C.S., 125
liberation (spiritual)
at death, 105
Samkhya and, 47, 51, 52, 59
of Self from experience, 58–59
serpent as symbol of, 175
light, 11, 76, 94
likening, 90, 91, 96–97
limitation of consciousness, 88–92
Locke, John, 22, 23
logical positivism, 11
Logos, 153, 165
lokas (realms of existence), 103–4, 121–22

Longchenpa, 122
losing, 19–20, 21, 25, 59
love
conscious, 133–34
“ruling,” 125
transactional, 133
M
Maharshi, Sri Ramana, 25, 26, 53, 153–54, 156
mahat (great one), 79
Majerus, Mike, 9
Man (cosmic human), 53
manas (mind), 81–82
Manichaeism, 42–43
manifestation, 22, 24
“many mansions,” 125–26
ma rigpa (loss of awareness), 113
mass hallucination, 36–37
materialism, 8, 22–23, 106
matter, consciousness in, 15–16, 22–23, 32
Maugham, W. Somerset, 11
maya (illusion)
in Advaita Vedanta, 40, 54–55
as avidya, 58
experience and, 56, 78, 87
nature and origin of, 55–57
McCloskey, Pat, 123
McGinn, Colin, 13, 23–24
meditation
concentration and, 88–89
for integration or detachment, 102–3
liberation of mind and, 47, 83
metaphysics, 164
Midgley, Mary, 8, 9
Mimamsa, 45

mind
causation perceived by, 84
diamond focus of, 89
experiences and, 31, 151–52
limitation of, 87, 88–89, 175
technological models of, 169–73
Mind, omnipresent eternal, 31
mind-body problem, 13, 42
mindfulness, 89, 100
mindlessness,7, 8^), 23, 60, 65
“Minds, Brains, and Programs” (Searle), 170
moksha (spiritual liberation), 45, 105
money, 38–39
Monroe, Robert, 104
moral law, 2–3
Muhammad, 83
multiplicity, 165
My Descent into Death (Storm), 149–50
mysticism, 103–5, 145–48
Mysticism (Underhill), 11
Mysticism and Philosophy (Stace), 148
N
Napoléon, 2
Narada, 19, 20–21, 22, 165–66
Narcissus, 58, 59, 81
natural laws, 66
natural selection, 8, 9
Natural Theology, 6
nature, 8–9
near-death experience, 11
New Christianity for a New World, A (Spong), 10
New York Times Magazine, 169
Nicoll, Maurice, 70
Niebuhr, Reinhold, 121

Nirguna Brahman, 85
Nisargadatta Maharaj, Sri, 153
nondualism,44, 53, 56, 90, 156
noumenon, 77
Nyaya, 45
O
obliviousness, 82
observer/observed, 16, 48, 50, 58, 78, 100
Odysseus, 175
On the Sacred Disease (Hippocrates), 13
orbs, 37
Origen, 122–23
origin of species, 9
Osiris, 59–60
Othello (game; aka Reversal), 24
other
consciousness and, 13
as experience, 23
self and, 18, 22, 24, 165
Other Lives, Other Selves (Woolger), 124
Ouspensky, P.D., 43
out-of-body travel, 104
P
Padmasambhava, 60–61
Paley, William, 6
paradox, 5–6, 139
parinirvana (ultimate liberation), 105
Parvati
dice game and, 19–22
as experience, 21, 28
perceptions of, 76
reunion with Shiva of, 21, 59

passions, 50–51
past-life memories, 124
patterns
causation and, 67–68, 70–71, 84, 106
in prakriti,76, 112
Paul, Saint, 139, 140–41, 149
Penrose, Roger, 72
peppered moth, 9
perception
of dark matter/energy, 101
existence and, 30, 31–32
of other and its background, 165
perceiver/perceived in, 78
perceptibility of reality and, 34
preconceptions and, 91
of universe by God, 16
Perennial Philosophy (Huxley), 11
phenomenology, 73
Philosophical Fragments (Kierkegaard), 141–42
philosophy
Indian, 15, 28, 57–58, 126–27
of mind, 41–42
Pilcz, Alexander, 36
Pinchbeck, Daniel, 37
Pinker, Steven, 169
planetary motion, 2
Plato
on causation, 63
cave allegory of, 74–75, 78
Forms of, 30–31, 78
reality and, 33, 39, 76–77
Popper, Karl, 70
postmodernism, 12, 73, 74
Prabhavananda, Swami, 56
prakriti (“world”)
attributes and, 25, 51

causation and, 85
duality and, 152
emergence of buddhi from, 79
impulse toward action and, 50
as maya, 40, 56
as observed, 48, 49, 56, 76
Parvati as, 21
patterns in, III-12
plurality and, 52–53
purusha and, 21, 48–51, 52, 165–66
as unconscious, 49, 58, 164
See also experience
pralaya (primordial sleep), 21–22
preconceptions, 34, 35, 91
pretas (hungry ghosts), 104
psi (psychic phenomena), 17
psyche, 95
psychotherapy, 168
Puharich, Andrija, 35–36
Pullman, Philip, 160
purpose, 8, 65
purusha (“I”)
ahamkara and, Si, 132
as Brahman, 56
causation and, 85
as conscious, 48–49, 164
duality and, 79, 152
mutability of, 58
as passive observer, 48, 80
plurality of, 52–53, 133
prakriti and, 21, 48–51, 52, 165–66
Shiva as, 21
See also consciousness; “I”; self
Q

quantum physics, 16–17
R
rajas (movement), 49, 50, 83–84
Ramakrishna, Sri, 53
Rao, K. B. Ramakrishna, 46–47
Rapture for the Geeks (Dooling), 170
reality
criteria for, 34–38
as eternal and changeless, 39, 40
features of, 93
Indian rope trick and, 35–37
of money, 38–39
planes or levels of, 101–2, 106
subject and object in, 47–48
thingness and, 55, 93
reason, 138–39
recognition, 90–91
reincarnation, 54, 123–24
religion
future of, 157, 162^4
reconciling with science, 163–64, 173
role of, 155–56
representation, 28, 30
Republic, The (Plato), 33, 74
Reversal (game; aka Othello), 24
Reymond, Lizelle, 47
rigpa (consciousness), 89–90, 153
Rig Veda, 21–22, 78, 79, 112
Rose of the World (Andreev), 104–5
“ruling love” of Swedenborg, 125
rupa (form), 95, 97
Russell, Bertrand, 64, 71

S
Safina, Carl, 167
samadhi, 59
Samkhyakarika (Ishvarakrishna)
on balanced union, 59
on distinction, 79
on purusha as watcher, 48, 50, 51
as Samkhya text,46
on suffering, 82
Samkhya school
ahamkara and, 87
austerity of, 51–52
dream world and, 97
enumeration/analysis in, 45, 93, 103
gunas and, 83–84, 176
history of, 44–47
justice and, 127
as living tradition, 47
in modern Indian philosophy, 57–58
purusha in, 39, 58
Vedanta and, 46, 56–59
samsara (delusion), 60–61, 78
Sarah, 144
sattva (balance), 49, 50, 83–84
Scandinavian mythology, 104
Schopenhauer, Arthur
on causality, 72
on representation, 28, 30, 31
on ultimate concern, 143
will and, 91^)2
science
causation and, 65
hypotheses in, 70–71
limits of mind in, 101
reconciling with religion, 163^4, 173

worldview of, 17, 22, 65–66
Scientific American, 7
scientism, 6, 8
Scientology, Church of, 157
Searle, John R., 169–73
seeing/seen
God and reflection as, 60
Shiva and, 25
self
as isolated, 133
names of, 153
other and, 18, 22, 24, 165
sense of, 48, 81
See also consciousness; “I”; purusha
Self
atman as, 39–40, 53
as connected to God, 152–53
in Hinduism and Buddhism, 130, 131–32
as observer, 100
as sage in Kapila myth, 46
self-deceit, 143
Selfish Gene, The (Dawkins), 8
sensory experiences, 25, 27, 31, 33
serpent, 175
Set, 59–60
Seven Heavens of Islam, 104
shakti (primal energy), 49, 80
shamanism, 103
Shankara, 40, 55–56, 56–57
Shiva
as ascetic, 20, 25, 59
as consciousness, 21
dice game of, 19–22
reality of experience of, 40
reunion with Parvati of, 21, 59
as “seer of seeing,” 25

signifiers, 73, 76
sin, 140–41
Sirens’ song, 175
Six Vajra Verses, 89^)0
Smoley, Richard, 133, 134
Socrates, 33, 74–75
Sophia, 153
souls, 122–24
Sovereign Soul: Sufism, a Path for Today, The (Gowins), 145–46
space, 31
Space, Time, and Medicine (Dossey), 16
Spiegelberg, Frederic, 43, 54
spiritual path, 27
Spong, John Shelby, 10
stability of reality, 34
Stace, W. T., 148
stereoscopic view, 34, 36–37
Stevenson, Ian, 124
Storm, Howard, 149–50
“strong AI,” 170–71, 172
suffering, 82
Sufism, 135–36, 145–46, 154
suicide, 115–16
Sumerians, 107
suspicion, 138
Swedenborg, Emanuel, 104, 125
symbols, 97–98, 175
synchronicity, 109–10, 111
T
tamas (inertia), 49, 50, 83–84
“technological singularity,” 172
Teresa of Avila, 147
Tertullian, 5, 139
theodicy, 117, 120

“thing in itself,” 30, 72, 73, 77
thingness, 33, 55, 73, 93
Three Poisons, 82, 83
Tibetan Buddhism, 29
Tigunait, Pandit Rajmani, 126–27, ^
Tillich, Paul, 143
time
causality and, 72
consciousness and, 70
reality and, 40
representation and, 31
To Live Within (Reymond),47
Tolstoy, Leo, 96^)7
Torwesten, Hans, 54–55
Treatise of Human Nature (Hume), 66, 74
Trinity, 50, 83
Turing, Alan, 171
two (number), 41
2012: The Return of Quetzalcoatl (Pinchbeck), 37
U
“ultimate concern,” 143
Underhill, Evelyn, 11
union
Advaita Vedanta and, 57–58
of Shiva and Parvati, 21, 59
unity and duality, 41
universe
as God’s reflection, 60
as intelligible, 7
mechanistic view of, 4
perception of, 16, 30, 101
Upanishads, 25, 39, 93
Urban, Rudolf von, 36
Urgrund (“primordial ground”), 85

U.S. elections of 2000, 107–8
V
Vaisheshika, 45
Varieties of Religious Experience (James), 11
Vedanta
as Hindu darshan, 45
in modern Indian philosophy, 57–58
Samkhya and, 46
See also Advaita Vedanta school
Vedas, 45, 53
via positiva, 57
vibration, 166
vipassana meditation, 102–3
Vivekananda, Swami, 53
W
wakefulness, 34
water, 97
Weatherhead, Leslie D., 136–37
Weizenbaum, Joseph, 171
will
conscious action and, 92
as dynamic oiprakriti, 80
as eternal, 30–31
faith as act of, 141–43
“Will to Believe, The” (James), 142
Wissler, Clark, 91
Woodroffe, John, 15, 40
Woolger, Roger, 124
world, 21, 32
World as Will and Representation, The (Schopenhauer), 91–92
Worlds of Enlightenment and Retribution, 104–5, I22
worldview(s)

Christian, 10
competing, 173
scientific, 17, 22, 65–66
X
Xenophanes, 150, 151
Y
Yetzirah (world of forms), 93, 95, 97
Yoga, 45–46
Yogachara school, 113
Yoga Vasistha, 56
Z
Zen practice, 89
Zeus, 84
Zimmer, Heinrich, 45, 53

R
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
ichard Smoley is one of the world’s leading authorities on the mystical and
esoteric teachings of Western civilization. He holds a bachelor’s degree magna
cum laude in classics from Harvard and a BA and MA from the Honour School of
Literae Human-iores (classics and philosophy) at The University of Oxford.
Richard served for eight years as editor of Gnosis: A Journal of the Western Inner
Traditions. He is the author of six books. Currently he is executive editor of Quest, the
members’ journal for the Theo-sophical Society in America. In addition, he is editor
of Quest Books, a publisher of books on spirituality and esotericism operated by the
Theosophical Society. His website is www.innerchristianity.com.

NEW WORLD LIBRARY is dedicated to publishing books and other media that inspire and challenge us to improve the
quality of our lives and the world.
We are a socially and environmentally aware company, and we strive to embody the
ideals presented in our publications. We recognize that we have an ethical
responsibility to our customers, our staff members, and our planet.
We serve our customers by creating the finest publications possible on personal
growth, creativity, spirituality, wellness, and other areas of emerging importance. We
serve New World Library employees with generous benefits, significant profit
sharing, and constant encouragement to pursue their most expansive dreams.
As a member of the Green Press Initiative, we print an increasing number of
books with soy-based ink on 100 percent postconsumer-waste recycled paper. Also,
we power our offices with solar energy and contribute to nonprofit organizations
working to make the world a better place for us all.
Our products are available
in bookstores everywhere.
For our catalog, please contact:
New World Library
14 Pamaron Way
Novato, California 94949
Phone: 415-884-2100 or 800-972-6657
Catalog requests: Ext. 50
Orders: Ext. 52
Fax: 415-884-2199
Email: escort@newworldlibrary.com
To subscribe to our electronic newsletter, visit
www.newworldlibrary.com


