

The Book of Audacity
Table of Contents
Acknowledgments
Introduction
What Can Audacity Do?
What This Book Covers
Audacity vs. Ardour
1. Audacity from Start to Finish
Audacity Quick-Start
Audacity in Detail
Managing Audacity Projects
Adding Audio Files: Import vs. Open
Saving Your Work
Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks
Track Panel
Cutting Out Unwanted Chunks
Fade In and Out
Making Quiet Recordings Louder
Timer Record and Sound Activated Recording
Mixer Board
Track Metadata
Final Mixdown
Audio File Formats and Quality Settings
Understanding File Formats
Understanding Bit Depth and Sampling Rate
16/44.1, 24/96, 32-Bit Float
Bitrate, Bit Depth, and File Size
Now What?
2. Building a Good Digital Sound Studio on the Cheap
Getting Sound In and Out of the Computer
An Example Studio
Sorting Out Connectors
Multichannel Recording, PCI, USB, FireWire
USB or FireWire?
Microphones

Polar Patterns
Which Microphones for Which Occasions?
Microphone Cables
Smart Miking
Microphone Preamp
Speakers and Headphones
Your Computer Must Have Muscle and Vast Drawers
Operating Systems
Portable Recording
The Secret of Recording Your Own Great Audio
Visit Appendix A
3. Transferring Vinyl LPs (and Other Legacy Media) to CD
Preparing Vinyl LPs for Copying
Eight Steps to Converting Records to CDs
Audacity Settings
Recording
Fixing Defects
Fade In, Fade Out
Fixing Warps
Fixing Skips and Pops
Finding and Repairing Clipping
Noise Removal
Customizing Dynamic Range Compression
Normalization
Dividing a Long Track into Individual Songs
Exporting to CD-Ready Files, One Long Audacity Track
Exporting to CD-Ready Files, Multiple Audacity Tracks
Writing Songs to a CD
Copying Vintage 78s
Connecting Legacy Devices to Your Computer
Connecting a Turntable to Your Computer
Connecting a Tape Deck
Which Is Better: Vinyl, Tape, or CDs?
The Digital Advantage
Longevity
4. Creating and Editing Live Tracks for CD
Making Good Live Recordings
Portable Digital Recorder
Laptop with Audacity

Multitrack Recording of a Live Performance
Be Nice to the Sound Crews
Audacity Settings for Recording
Setting Recording Volume Levels
Starting, Stopping, and Pausing Recording
Monitoring Your Live Recording
Editing Live Recordings
Editing and Downmixing Multitrack Recordings
Special CD Settings in Audacity
Trimming
Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs
Fixing Clipping and Too-Loud Passages
Noise Removal
Compressing Dynamic Range
Cutting a Single Long Track into Individual Song Tracks
Creating Graceful Breaks Between Songs
Normalization
Optional Track Metadata
Final Export
Writing Your Songs to CD
Labeling Your CD
Mass CD Duplication
Combining Songs from Different Recording Sessions, Fix-its, and
Special Effects
5. Authoring a Compilation CD
Audio CDs
There Is Not a Special Audio CD
Convert MP3s to Red Book CD
CD Writers and Software
Three Ways to Author a CD Compilation in Audacity
One Track per Song Project
Single Audacity Track Compilation Project
Single Audacity Track + CD-Mastering Program
CD Cue Sheets and BIN Files
Fixes and Cleanups
Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs
Normalization
Making Graceful Fades and Song Breaks
Configuring Audacity for Orange Book CDs

Putting an Orange Book CD Collection Together
File Formats and Quality Settings
Computer Media Players
Ripping CDs
Ripping DVDs
6. Authoring Super High-Fidelity Audio DVDs
What Are WAV, AIFF, and FLAC?
DVD-Audio Overview
Creating High-Quality Recordings in Audacity
More Power
What Bit Depth Is Best?
What Sampling Rate Is Best?
Saving Your Masters
Creating 5.1 Surround
Exporting to 16-Bit
DVD-Audio Authoring Software
Transferring Legacy Media
Learn More
7. Creating Podcasts
The Short Story
Making a Simple Voicecast
Audacity Settings
Cleaning Up Your Recording
Reducing Too-Tall Peaks
Fades
Normalization
Export to MP3 or Ogg?
Ogg Vorbis Quality Settings
MP3 Quality Settings
Other Lossy Formats
Exporting Your Podcast
Two-Person Podcasts
Editing a Two-Track Recording as a Single Stereo Track
Editing a Two-Track Recording as Two Mono Tracks
Adding a Background Music Track
8. Becoming an Online Star
File Formats and Audio Quality
The Business of a Recording Artist
Establishing an Online Presence

Online Music Distributors
Self-Hosting
Selling Stuff Online
To DRM or Not to DRM?
Copyrights and Legal Issues
Learn More
9. Multitrack Recording
Tracks, Channels, and Clips
How to Make Multitrack Recordings
Playback Tips and Tricks
Label Tracks
Creating and Managing Labels
Using Labels to Edit Multiple Tracks
Aligning and Moving Tracks
Link Tracks and Track Groups
Time-Shifting Multiple Tracks at the Same Time
Splitting Tracks
Working with Clips
Time-Shifting Inside Tracks
Metronome Track
Overdubbing
Measuring and Fixing Latency
Changing Tempo
NTSC, PAL, and CDDA Frames
Creating Loops
Mixdown to Stereo
Customizing the Mixer Board
Too Loud! Clipping!
Control Your Channel Mapping
Multichannel Surround
10. Making Your Own Ringtones
Customizing Audio for a Mobile Phone
Applying Dynamic Range Compression
Phone Audio File Formats
RTTTL
Proprietary Audio File Formats
How to Transfer Files to Your Phone
11. Audacity Plugins for Special Effects
Cross-Fades

Generate Menu
Sine Wave Example
Frequency Range of Generated Tones
DTMF Tones
Chirps
Generating Noise
Test Tones
Click Track
Pluck
Risset Drum
Effect Menu
Reverberation
Amplify
Auto Duck
Change Pitch
Phaser
Reverse
Sliding Time Scale/Pitch Shift
WahWah
Linux Plugins
Linux LADSPA Plugins
Linux Nyquist Plugins
Windows Plugins
Audio Effects Glossary
12. Fix-its and Cleanups
Split Stereo Tracks
Repeat Last Effect
Noise Removal
Normalization
Remove Clicks and Scratches
Click Removal
Repair
Draw Tool
Truncate Silence
Change Tempo
Change Pitch
Change Speed
Compress Dynamic Range
How Much Dynamic Range?

Compressor Settings
Chris's Dynamic Compressor
Leveller
Equalization
Fix Timing and Latency Errors
Analyze Menu
13. Configuring Linux for Best Audio Quality
Using Distributions with Real-Time Kernels
Specialized Multimedia Linux Distributions
Building a Real-Time Kernel
Latency Is Not That Scary
Sorting Out Linux Audio
Using ALSA
Setting Recording and Playback Levels in alsamixer
Master vs. PCM
Multiple Sound Cards
Adjusting Volume Levels
Hardware Testing with alsa-utils
Testing Speakers
Testing Recording
ALSA Applications
Querying Your Sound Card
Using JACK with Audacity
Connecting a FireWire Recording Interface
Creating Persistent Configurations
JACK Settings
Turning PulseAudio and Phonon Off
Linux System Tweaks
The Tangled History of Linux Audio
Sound Cards
14. Configuring Windows for Best Audio Quality
Enabling MP3 Support
Enabling WMA, M4A/M4P Support
Low-Latency Recording and Audio Driver Fun
Tuning Windows for Best Performance
Tuning Windows XP
Tuning Windows Vista and 7
Configuring Windows Audio Devices
15. Customizing Audacity

Customizing Audacity's Default Options
Devices
Playback
Recording
Quality
Interface
Tracks
Import/Export
Projects
Libraries
Spectrograms
Directories
Warnings
Effects
Keyboard and Mouse
A. Audio Hardware
PCI, PCI-e, PCMCIA Sound Cards
PCI
PCI-e
PCMCIA
USB Recording Interfaces
FireWire Recording Interfaces
Stand Alone ADC/DACs
B. Glossary
A–E
F–J
K–O
P–T
U–Z
C. Seven Myths of Digital Audio
The Myth of the Golden Ear
The Myth of Burn-In
The Myth of Tube Superiority
The Myth of Uber Cables
The Myth of Analog Superiority
The Myth That You Don’t Need Tone Controls
The Myth That Someone Else Knows Better Than You
D. References and Resources
Books

Online Resources
Image Credits
GNU Free Documentation License
0. PREAMBLE
1. APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS
2. VERBATIM COPYING
3. COPYING IN QUANTITY
4. MODIFICATIONS
5. COMBINING DOCUMENTS
6. COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS
7. AGGREGATION WITH INDEPENDENT WORKS
8. TRANSLATION
9. TERMINATION
10. FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE
11. RELICENSING
E. Updates
Index

The Book of Audacity
Carla Schroder
Copyright © 2011
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in
any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,
recording, or by any information storage or retrieval system, without the prior
written permission of the copyright owner and the publisher.
No Starch Press and the No Starch Press logo are registered trademarks of No
Starch Press, Inc. Other product and company names mentioned herein may be
the trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than use a trademark symbol
with every occurrence of a trademarked name, we are using the names only in an
editorial fashion and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of
infringement of the trademark.
The information in this book is distributed on an “As Is” basis, without warranty.
While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this work, neither
the authors nor No Starch Press, Inc. shall have any liability to any person or
entity with respect to any loss or damage caused or alleged to be caused directly
or indirectly by the information contained in it.
No Starch Press

Dedication
Thank you, TJ! It just keeps getting better!

Acknowledgments
Any book is the result of the labors of many people, and this book is no
exception. The Book of Audacity has benefited from the hard work and talents
of:
Tyler Ortman
Alvin Goats
Serena Yang
Travis Peterson
Megan Dunchak
Riley Hoffman
Bill Pollock
The Audacity developer team
All of the wonderful Linux and Free/Open Source developers who made it
possible for me to write this book on my Linux system using Kile, LaTeX,
Kmail, GFTP, Gimp, Digikam, Dolphin, Kate, Firefox, Gnome, LXDE,
KDE, XFCE, Audacity, KSnapshot, Hydrogen, FFADO, Shutter, Brasero,
K3b, Totem, K9Copy, VLC, Amarok, Kaffeine, Image-Magick, JACK,
ALSA, PulseAudio, Phonon, Ubuntu Studio, 64 Studio, Arch Linux, Fedora
and Planet CCRMA, and Debian Linux. (And lots more! Linux rocks!
Thank you!)
Thanks everyone!

Introduction
Audacity is an open source, free-of-cost, cross-platform audio recorder, editor,
and mixer for Linux, Windows, and Mac OS X. It comes packaged in easy-to-
use installers for Mac OS X and all versions of Windows, and Linux users will
find it in the software repositories of their favorite Linux distributions. Visit
http://audacity.sourceforge.net/ for downloads, documentation, and mailing lists.
In this book, we’ll be using Audacity 1.3.12 (and newer) on Ubuntu Studio and
Microsoft Windows XP, Vista, and Windows 7. The stable 2.0 release will
appear soon and should look very much like what you see in this book because
the 1.3.xx series is the run-up to 2.x. This book is based on the very latest
releases as they came out, so it is as current as any book can be. The 1.3.xx
Audacity releases are considerably advanced from the old 1.2.x series. Every
new release is full of wonderful improvements and bug fixes, so if you’re still
using those old 1.2.x versions, you should consider upgrading.
Ubuntu Studio is Ubuntu with a huge set of multimedia applications. It is 100
percent Ubuntu-compatible, and it uses the standard Ubuntu software
repositories. You can download Ubuntu Studio or simply add the Ubuntu Studio
packages and artwork to any Ubuntu installation. There are several excellent
multimedia Linux distributions, which you can read about in Chapter 13. You
can use any Linux version you like; a few important system modifications you
may need to make are covered in Chapter 13.
Windows requires some modifications too, which you’ll find in Chapter 14.
Since Windows XP continues to hang on and refuses to enter retirement, you’ll
find information for Windows XP, Vista, and Windows 7.

What Can Audacity Do?
Audacity is fast and easy to use. What can you do with it? A whole lot:
Work with a wide number of different audio file formats and encodings,
including WAV, AIFF, MP3, FLAC, AU, OKI, MAT4/5, Ogg Vorbis,
WMA, M4A, and AC3.
Record live audio.
Convert legacy analog media to digital.
Make movie soundtracks.
Perform unlimited multichannel recording.
Edit and mix multiple tracks.
Overdub.
Use special effects of all kinds: wah-wah, change pitch and tempo, bass
boost, echo, reverse, phaser, and more.
Add graceful fades, both in and out.
Normalize volume levels.
Fix defects such as hiss, static, pops, and hum.
Perform frequency analysis.
Write your own plugins for special effects.
Cut, copy, splice, and mix sounds together.
Audacity can open and edit audio files faster than most other audio applications
and has nearly unlimited undo and redo.
So, what can’t you do with Audacity? Audacity does not support the RealAudio
format, and it does not support MIDI. While it is wonderful for making mono
and stereo recordings, it is not quite as good at making multichannel surround
sound recordings.

What This Book Covers
In this book, we’ll use Audacity in a number of (I hope) fun and useful audio
projects. In Chapter 1, we’ll plug a microphone into a computer and learn the
basics of recording, editing, playback, and Audacity controls. We’ll also learn
some important digital audio terminology and concepts. If you are new to digital
audio production or new to Audacity, you should go through this chapter first.
In Chapter 2, we’ll go into detail on audio gear, how to select it, how to connect
it, and how not to spend too much money. The world of audio gear is vast and
confusing, but this chapter sorts it all out for you.
If you’re like me and have a hoard of treasured vinyl LPs, 45s, or vintage 78s
that you want both to enjoy and preserve, read Chapter 3 to learn how to copy
them to your computer. From there, you can transfer them to CDs or export to
MP3 or any other digital audio format you want. You can do the same with any
kind of legacy media.
Audacity is a great program for recording live shows or for editing recordings of
live shows made with portable recorders. Chapter 4 shows you how to clean up
and optimize your recordings for compact disc or DVD-Audio.
Chapter 5 goes into more detail on making audio CDs and compilation CDs.
You’ll learn how to normalize different volume levels, break long files into
separate tracks, transition smoothly between tracks, and edit track metadata.
In Chapter 6, we learn how to author super high-fidelity DVD-Audio discs.
DVD-Audio is a special audio standard for DVDs; it is not the same as the audio
formats used on movie DVDs. With DVD-Audio, you can author very high-
fidelity DVDs or load several CDs’ worth of music onto a single DVD.
Podcasts are all the rage, and Chapter 7 tells you how to make podcasts that
sound good and are bandwidth-efficient, and it covers the basics of Internet
streaming audio.
Chapter 8 goes into detail on making the highest-quality audio recordings for
distribution and tailoring your releases for different types of distribution, such as
Internet radio, downloadable formats, and CD. It also offers some guidance on
finding distributors and other business basics.
Audacity handles multitrack recording capably, so Chapter 9 shows you how to

record multiple tracks, mix, dub, edit, and mixdown to your final mono, stereo,
or multichannel surround release. You can play or sing along to an existing track,
record as many tracks at once as your recording interface supports and your
computer can handle, and mix separate recording sessions together.
Don’t pay for ringtones—study Chapter 10 to learn how to make your own
easily. Ringtones need to be not too big and not too small, and they can be any
snippet of music or sounds or even your own voice. Learn some tips for tailoring
your ringtones to sound better on the tiny lo-fi speakers of your phone.
You can go nuts playing with special effects in Audacity—strange noises, sound
effects, echo, wah-wah, bass boost, tremolo, and so on. Chapter 11 introduces
you to a number of them, tells you where to get more, and shows how to learn to
write your own.
In movies and television, ace crime techs take shredded audio remnants and
create detailed, high-quality, beautiful recordings as they natter about their magic
algorithms. It’s all hooey. But you can do a lot to clean up recordings afflicted
with pops, hiss, and other defects, and Chapter 12 tells how.
Chapter 13 details how to select a Linux distribution for audio production, how
to configure it for best performance, and how to troubleshoot and fix common
problems.
Chapter 14 covers the important tweaks Windows users need to make for quality
audio recording.
Audacity is easy to use, but it has a number of options that may not make sense
to anyone who isn’t already an audio engineer, so Chapter 15 goes in-depth into
customization and configuration.
Appendix A is your hardware reference; you’ll find examples of audio hardware
in several price ranges that work on both Linux and Windows.
Appendix B is a glossary of audio terminology written for real people; that is,
people who are not physicists or audio engineers and who appreciate clear
explanations in plain English.
Appendix C debunks popular but silly audio myths and saves you from some
common—and expensive—mistakes.
Note

Audacity is also available as a source tarball. What do you do with a source tarball? It contains Audacity’s
source code in a compressed archive. You can install Audacity from source code if you want and customize
the compile-time options, examine the code, modify it, or even modify and redistribute it. If you’re feeling
adventurous and want to help debug daily builds, you can grab the newest Audacity version from
Concurrent Versions System (CVS) and give it a test-drive.

Audacity vs. Ardour
Another popular audio recording application for Linux (and Mac OS X) is
Ardour, which calls itself a digital audio workstation. Ardour aims to meet the
needs of professionals and competes with the likes of ProTools, Nuendo,
Pyramix, and other expensive commercial audio applications. It has a more
sophisticated mixer than Audacity and some nice audio-for-video tools. It has
advanced dubbing abilities, synchronizes with MIDI sequencers, and supports
control surfaces, which are hardware devices for controlling your software
mixers. It has more automation, as well as a number of useful real-time features
such as changing plugins on the fly and moving samples to different tracks or
timelines while they are playing.
Which one is better? That depends on what you want to do. Both are 100 percent
free software because they are licensed under the GPL, both are excellent, and
both are getting better all the time. For complex multitrack mixing or precise
video soundtrack synchronization, go with Ardour. For recording long tracks
such as live shows, converting LPs and tapes to digital formats, cleaning up files
marred by hiss or hum or other defects, making podcasts, making simple video
soundtracks, and recording in the field, Audacity is an excellent, quality
application with a short learning curve and a lot of useful and advanced features.

Chapter 1. Audacity from Start to Finish
Let’s fire up Audacity and make a recording. We’ll begin with a quick-start
tutorial and make a simple recording to demonstrate basic usage. Then we’ll
cover the fundamental Audacity functions in detail from start to finish:
recording, performing common editing tasks, saving your work, and exporting to
various audio file formats and quality levels.
We’ll deal with fancy audio hardware later; for now, all you need is any Linux or
Windows computer with an ordinary sound card and either a microphone with a
1/8″ mini-plug or a USB microphone or headset. Any microphone will do for
this initial test, even a little cheapo computer microphone. I recommend an
external microphone because built-in computer mics sound pretty bad and are
positioned inconveniently. Of course, if you have something better and know
how to hook it up, by all means use it.
USB devices need to be plugged in before you open Audacity. If you change a
USB device while Audacity is open, you’ll have to close and reopen Audacity
for it to detect the change.

Audacity Quick-Start
Okay then, enough fiddling around (unless you’re going to play a fiddle)! Let’s
make a quick recording, because that is more fun than sitting around reading
about it. Figure 1-1 shows what a new Audacity window looks like before you
make a recording on a Windows PC.
Figure 1-1. A new, blank Audacity window on a Windows PC
Figure 1-2 shows a new Audacity window on an Ubuntu Linux PC. As you can
see, Audacity is nearly identical on both platforms. The only significant
difference is the recording and playback device chooser. The audio subsystems
on Linux and Windows are very different, so the device choosers present
different options.
Select Edit > Preferences > Devices to set up your default recording and
playback devices. These can be overridden easily from the main Audacity
window using the Device toolbar. Figure 1-3 shows a Plantronics USB headset
selected on a Windows PC. (Chapter 15 goes into detail about configuring and
customizing Audacity.)
USB devices always announce themselves by name, so you don’t have to guess.
For example, on both Linux and Windows, the recording device selector will say

“Plantronics Headset.” If you plug a microphone directly into an internal sound
card, you will need to know the name of your sound card’s driver. On Windows
systems, don’t select MME, which is the antiquated, generic Windows audio
interface. You want to select the modern Windows audio subsystem, which in
the Edit > Preferences > Devices dialog appears as “Windows DirectSound” in
the Host line. Figure 1-4 shows what the selections should look like on a laptop
with an onboard SoundMAX audio chipset.
Figure 1-2. A new, blank Audacity window on an Ubuntu Linux PC
Figure 1-3. Select Edit > Preferences > Devices to set your default recording and

playback devices.
On Linux, you’ll have even more choices. “ALSA:default” on the Device lines
will work for an internal sound card (unless you have changed the default sound
device for your Linux system; see Chapter 13 to learn all about Linux audio).
Pick the device name for a USB device. When you’re finished, click OK to close
the Preferences dialog.
Figure 1-4. Selecting your default recording and playback devices on Windows
Vista.
Note
Doing digital audio production on a PC means you’ll have to get very involved with your sound card
drivers and in configuring your PC for good quality and performance. Visit Chapter 13 and Chapter 14 to
learn how to tune your system for audio production and how to manage various operating system quirks for
controlling volume levels, balance, and input and output devices.
Before you start recording, save and name your new Audacity project by
selecting File > Save Project As. It is a good habit to do this right away for
every new recording.
In the next section, we’ll learn all about all the tool buttons. For now, hover your
cursor over the toolbars and buttons to learn their names.

Figure 1-5. Input Level Meter
Now let’s test recording levels before we actually start recording. Go to the Input
Level Meter, shown in Figure 1-5. Click Start Monitoring and start making
noise. Unlike analog recording, with digital audio you don’t need to push your
recording levels right up to the redline. Try recording to a peak of -6 or -9 dB.
You can use the Mixer toolbar to control recording and playback volume, sort of.
It isn’t really a mixer but a recording and playback volume control. This is the
little toolbar with the speaker and microphone icons and volume sliders for each.
It does not control volume on all internal sound cards, because some low-end
sound cards do not have drivers that support volume control. It may not control
volume levels on USB devices either, again depending on what their drivers
support. If this is the case, in Windows go to the Sound module in the Control
Panel to control volume levels. Linux users should use alsamixer. (Remember,
Chapter 13 and Chapter 14 will help with these.) Or you can just make louder or
quieter noises.
The Input Level Meter uses two different shades of red: bright red bars for
displaying the average volume and dark red bars to show the peak volume levels.
The little vertical blue lines mark the highest volume levels attained during the
session, and the little vertical red lines mark the peak volume levels of the last
three seconds. On the right edge of the recording monitor are clipping indicators
that will turn red when your recording level is too loud. They’re pretty small and
stay lit after your recording levels drop, which limits their usefulness. However,
you do need to pay attention to clipping, which occurs when input levels are too
high. Anything over 0 dB creates clipping, and clipping causes distortion.
Now let’s record some sounds. Click the red Record button and keep making
noise. You’ll see something like Figure 1-6. When you’re finished, click the
Stop or Pause button. With the Stop button, a new track starts the next time you
click Record; the Pause button lets you pick up where you left off on the same

track. If you stop when you meant to pause, don’t worry—you can append to an
existing track by pressing the shift key and clicking Record.
Figure 1-6. At last, a recording session! When you see blue waveforms, you
know it’s working.
Naturally, when you’re done recording, you’ll want to hear what you just
recorded, and Audacity offers instant gratification. Click the Play button. If you
don’t hear anything, it’s because you either selected the wrong playback device
or have a volume control set too low. Stop playback before changing the
playback device. The cursor changes to a little hand when you hover over the
Time Scale, and you can click any point on the Time Scale to start playback
again.
In digital audio it is common practice to record to a low peak level, as low as -24
dB. The digital audio decibel scale is measured in negative numbers up to zero.
About the smallest change we can perceive is 1 dB, and -60 dB is as good as
silence for most people, so a practical range to use is -60 to 0 dB. A +3 dB
change doubles the volume, and +3 dB halves it.
A super-low peak such as -24 dB is useful when you’re recording something
with unpredictable levels, such as a live performance. For other, more controlled
circumstances, a good peak level is between -12 dB and -6 dB. Any sound level
over 0 dB will result in clipping, which creates distortion. Avoiding distortion is
very important in digital audio recording. The signal-to-noise ratio is extremely
high, so you don’t need to push your recording levels to the maximum just to
keep noise at tolerable levels.

A low peak level means that your recording won’t be very loud, but that is no
problem. You can easily fix this. Select the whole track by clicking the track
label (Figure 1-7). Then open Effect > Normalize. Check both boxes in the
Normalize dialog and make the maximum amplitude 0 (Figure 1-18).
Figure 1-7. How to select a whole track
Figure 1-8. Normalization uniformly raises (or lowers) the volume level of your

track.
The final step is to export your new recording to a playable audio file. Audacity
uses its own special file format that doesn’t work in anything but Audacity, so
you have to export to an audio file format that works in playback devices. Select
File > Export to export the project as a WAV file, which should be the default
choice (Figure 1-9). Name your export file whatever you want, maybe
something creative like test.wav. The WAV format is almost universal and will
play on nearly any digital playback device or computer software media player.
Now you can play your test.wav file on your computer and hear it in all its glory.
Windows users can use Windows Media Player, which is installed by default, or
choose from a host of third-party programs. Linux users also have any number of
media players to choose from: Amarok, Rhythmbox, VLC, Mplayer, and many
more.
It is best to use WAV as your default export format because it is a lossless,
uncompressed format that provides the highest-quality recordings. WAVs stand
up to a lot of editing without deterioration, whereas lossy formats (such as MP3
and Ogg Vorbis) lose information with each edit. You can always export from
WAV to a lower-quality, lossy format, but you can’t go from low to high quality.
Figure 1-9. Saving your new audio file in WAV format

All righty then, that’s the short story. Read on to get the unabridged version.

Audacity in Detail
Keep in mind that Audacity supports nearly unlimited undo, so it is safe to
experiment. Undo works even after saves; you lose your undo history only when
you close your project file.
When you work on a project, Audacity does not operate directly on your audio
files. Instead, it copies them into a temporary file, chops them into a lot of little
pieces, and converts these to files with .au extensions that play only in Audacity.
You can see this by viewing your project directories in any file manager. There is
a single .aup file for each project; this contains all the metadata Audacity needs
to put these little files back together with the correct settings. When you open an
Audacity project from your file manager, select the .aup file.
Suppose you have a recording of a splendid performance where you outdid
yourself and brought tears to all eyes (of joy, not pain) and this recording is in
WAV format. When you import this WAV into Audacity, it is copied and
converted to Audacity’s internal .au format. Your original WAV is safe and
sound and won’t be changed, as long as you don’t overwrite it by exporting the
project back to the same WAV file.
Converting and splintering your files might sound like an odd thing to do, but
operating on many little files is a lot faster than manipulating a few large files.
Audio files can consume many megabytes and even gigabytes. Audacity has an
automatic crash recovery mechanism, which you will see only if something bad
happens; when you reopen Audacity, it will display a recovery message.
Unsaved data are kept in a temporary file, so Audacity can usually recover them.
Select Edit > Preferences to set an autosave interval; mine is at two minutes.
And, as with everything we do on computers, good backups are essential. Hard
disk space is cheap these days, so don’t pinch pennies on storage.
Let’s start our detailed tour with a look at Audacity’s toolbars. All of the toolbars
have handles on their left sides so you can drag them anywhere you want, even
outside of the Audacity window. If you hover the cursor over the toolbar
handles, the toolbar name pops up. Hover over the buttons to see their names.
Select View > Toolbars to control which toolbars are visible.
Figure 1-10 shows the Control toolbar, which has the Pause, Play, Stop, Skip to
Start, Skip to End, and Record buttons.

Now let’s meet the buttons on the Tools toolbar: Selection, Envelope, Draw,
Zoom, Time Shift, and Multi-Tool (Figure 1-11). These affect the cursor
functions.
Figure 1-10. Control toolbar
Figure 1-11. Tools toolbar
Next to the Tools toolbar is the Edit toolbar (Figure 1-12), which contains the
Cut, Copy, Paste, Trim, Silence, Redo, Undo, Link Tracks, Zoom, Fit Selection,
and Fit Project buttons.
Figure 1-12. Edit toolbar
Table 1-1 lists all the buttons found on the Tools and Edit toolbars with
descriptions of what they do.
Table 1-1. The Tools and Edit toolbar buttons
Button Name
Description
Selection Click to mark a playback starting point. Click and drag to
select a portion of a track. Doubleclick to select a whole
track. Click anywhere on the Time Scale to start playback (it
changes to a little hand).
Envelope Use for fine control of amplitude (volume levels) on a track
and for creating fade-ins and fade-outs. Click to create
control nodes, and then click and drag nodes to increase or
decrease amplitude. Control nodes can be dragged both
vertically and horizontally. Drag nodes past the track border
to get rid of them.

Draw
Click the Zoom In button until you can see individual audio
samples and then use the Draw tool to manipulate them. Use
this for very fine-grained smoothing out of clicks and pops.
Zoom
Left-click to zoom in, right-click to zoom out. Remember the
Zoom buttons! You will probably use them a lot: Use Zoom
In for precise edits and use Zoom Out to make long tracks
manageable. See the View menu for more Zoom commands
and keyboard shortcuts.
Time
Shift
Synchronize tracks by dragging them backward or forward
along the timeline. You can also drag a track or clip into
another track, as long there is enough empty space to hold it.
Multi-
Tool
This is five tools in one, activated according to mouse
position. Get the Selection and Envelope tools by moving the
cursor vertically, the Time Shift tool by hovering over the
track handles at the beginning or end of the track, and the
Zoom tool by moving left into the decibel scale; the zoom
view will center over the decibel number you hover over.
The Draw tool appears when you zoom in far enough to see
individual samples.
Cut
This removes the selection and puts it on the clipboard.
Copy
This copies the selection without removing it and puts it on
the clipboard.
Paste
This inserts the clipboard contents at the cursor position or
replaces a selection.
Trim
This deletes everything but the selection.
Silence
This replaces the selection with silence.
Redo
Audacity supports nearly unlimited undos and redos, even
after saving your project, so it is safe to experiment. The
Redo button reverses an undo action or series of undo actions

in sequence. You can’t skip back to a selected action; you
have to redo all of them in order.
Undo
This undoes your last action, or any number of actions before
that in sequence, even after saving your project. You can’t
skip back to a selected action; you have to undo all of them
in order.
Link
Tracks
This tool has a somewhat misleading name. You might think
it’s for selecting multiple tracks, but its function is to “link
audio and label tracks,” which is quite different. Link Tracks
is enabled by default when you start a new project, and it
keeps your audio and label tracks synchronized when you
modify a track. If you don’t have a label track, it does
nothing. Use it when you make changes that affect the track
length, such as deleting part of a track, inserting silence, or
changing the tempo. Turn off Link Tracks when you copy
and paste entire tracks, because it will mess up your paste.
Link Tracks appears in Audacity 1.3.9, will be inactive in the
2.0 series, and is scheduled to reappear in the 2.1 series.
Zoom In Magnify. You can zoom in far enough to see individual
samples. Click the Selection tool cursor on the point you
want to magnify, and the zoom will center on that spot.
Zoom
Out
Shrink. You can zoom out far enough to see your whole track
at once. As with Zoom In, Zoom Out will center on the point
that you clicked with the Selection tool.
Fit
Selection
You can enlarge the selection to fit the window horizontally.
This tool is a great time-saver when you need to select a
small part of a long track to work on.
Fit
Project
This tool sizes your whole project to fit horizontally in your
Audacity window. Select View > Fit Vertically to fit your
entire project into the window.
Figure 1-13 shows the Meter toolbar, which displays the recording and playback
levels. When it’s squished, the Meter toolbar might not display smaller values on
its scale. In that case, grab it by the handle on its left side, move it somewhere
with more room, then grab it by the resizing handle on the right side, and finally

stretch it out until you can see the whole decibel scale.
Figure 1-13. Meter toolbar
Figure 1-14 shows the Mixer toolbar, which is not really a mixer. Instead, it is
supposed to control the input and output volume levels on internal sound cards.
However, these functions work only if supported by your sound card driver, so if
they don’t, blame your sound card maker. (For more information on operating
system audio controls, see Chapter 13 and Chapter 14.)
Figure 1-14. Mixer toolbar
Figure 1-15. Transcription toolbar
The Transcription toolbar (Figure 1-15) changes the speed of playback. For
example, you can use it to slow down when transcribing lyrics or to sound
sinister and evil. Or you can speed it up for giggles, like Alvin and the
Chipmunks. This toolbar only affects Audacity playback and won’t change your
project file. (Effect > Change Speed behaves the same way, except it changes
your project file. Effect > Change Pitch changes the pitch higher or lower
without changing playback speed, and Effect > Change Tempo changes the
speed without changing pitch.)
Figure 1-16 shows the Device toolbar, where you can select your recording and
playback devices without selecting Edit > Preferences. If you plug in or remove
a USB device, you need to restart Audacity, or it won’t see the change.
Figure 1-16. Device toolbar
Finally, the Selection toolbar, shown in Figure 1-17, offers a number of different
scales for precise timing and selection of portions of your audio tracks and for
setting the correct frame rates for video soundtracks and compact disc audio.

Figure 1-17. Selection toolbar

Managing Audacity Projects
Your first step on a new Audacity project should always be to name it using File
> Save As. Then you can press ctrl-S periodically to save changes or use File >
Save. In addition to the .aup file, which is the project’s master metadata file,
Audacity creates a directory that holds the associated audio files. You can view
these in your file manager; there will be many subdirectories full of files with the
.au extension.

Adding Audio Files: Import vs. Open
Select File > Open to add an existing audio file to a new, empty project. After
that, select File > Import to add more files. Selecting File > Open in a
nonempty project opens the file in a new window.

Saving Your Work
Audacity projects are optimized for use as fast workspaces and are not suitable
for archival storage. There’s no snapshot mechanism for preserving your work at
different stages, and users have reported losing data when projects become
corrupted. I use a belt-and-suspenders approach: I make backups of my Audacity
project files, and I also make studio master files in WAV format, because each
approach has its advantages and weaknesses. First we’ll look at a method for
saving Audacity projects at different stages, and then we’ll look at how to make
studio masters in WAV format.
You can create something akin to project snapshots by creating multiple
Audacity projects from your original project. First, make a directory to hold
related projects so they don’t get mixed up or lost. Then select File > Save
Project As and give the project a name to help you remember what’s in it, such
as Summer-Festival-1, Summer-Festival-2, or something more descriptive like
Summer-Festival-No-Banjos or Summer-Festival-Mondo-Banjos. When you do
this, you’ll see a dialog like Figure 1-18. The crucial question here is “Copy
audio from the following files into your project to make it self-contained?” Say
yes by clicking the Copy All Audio into Project (Safer) button. This duplicates
project files and uses more disk space, but it is the safest option. Sharing files
across multiple projects saves disk space, but the headaches aren’t worth it
because changes in one project affect all projects. Even worse, you lose
redundancy, which is your insurance against any one project becoming damaged
and unusable.

Figure 1-18. Saving a copy of your project under a new project name
You can control this behavior in the Edit > Preferences > Projects dialog:
When saving a project that depends on other audio files. This offers three
choices: “Always copy all audio into project,” “Do not copy any audio,” or “Ask
user.”
To make a high-quality studio master WAV file, export your project by selecting
File > Export. You can do this as many times as you want during your work on
a project, creating multiple masters to preserve your work at different stages (or
until you run out of disk space!). Then you can import a WAV master whenever
you want for further editing, and you can export to any other audio format from
your WAV master. This also gives you the option of importing your WAV master
into another audio-editing program, which you can’t do with Audacity’s project
files.
The default export quality setting for WAVs is 16-bit integer, which is not the
highest quality. Audacity’s default recording quality setting (select Edit >
Preferences > Quality) is a sampling rate of 44.1 kHz and a bit depth of 32-bit
float. (Audacity terminology refers to bit depth as sample format, but bit depth is
the correct term.) You can create a high-quality studio master by exporting to 32-
bit float WAV. Follow these steps:

1. Select File > Export.
2. Select Save as type: Other uncompressed files.
3. Click Options and then select Header: WAV (Microsoft) and Encoding: 32
bit float.
You will see a window like the one shown in Figure 1-19.
Figure 1-19. Exporting your project to a 32-bit float WAV file
The resulting file is not a playable WAV file, except in Audacity and other audio
editors and digital audio workstations that use 32-bit float for editing. However,
it is great for studio masters because you can import and edit 32-bit float WAVs
with very little loss of quality and export them to other audio formats: 16-and
24-bit WAV, Ogg Vorbis, MP3, FLAC, and so on. WAV supports a maximum of
32 tracks in a single file.
However, this has its drawbacks too. It works fine when you have only a few
tracks to manage—my limit is four—because Audacity does not save the track
names but instead renames all of them with the WAV filename. Let’s say you
have a four-track recording and the tracks are named vocal, piano, violin, and
vocal2. Export this project to a single WAV file and name it testwav.wav. When
you import testwav.wav into Audacity, all four tracks are renamed testwav 1.wav,
testwav 2.wav, and so on. It also makes tracks 1 and 2 Right and Left, even if
they were originally mono tracks. Figure 1-20 shows the before and after.

Figure 1-20. Exporting your project to WAV (on the left is the original project
before exporting to WAV, and on the right is shown what happens when the WAV
is imported back into Audacity)
You still have all of your individual tracks, but you lose the track names. On
multitrack projects, I rely very much on track names to stay organized, so
combining them all into a single WAV file doesn’t work for me.
For projects that have more than four tracks, I prefer to save each track as a
separate WAV file. To do this, select the tracks you want to export and then
select File > Export Multiple. (We will discuss selecting tracks in the next
section.) Each track will be saved as a separate file, and the track name will
become the filename of the corresponding file. When I do this, I put them in
their own project directory so they don’t get mixed up with other projects.

Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks
Now let’s learn how to select tracks and parts of tracks. Audacity supports the
usual editing functions computer users are used to—copy and paste, delete,
select, and so on, but it will drive you crazy if you don’t learn how to do them
the Audacity way. A nice feature of Audacity is that it supports keyboard
shortcuts for nearly all functions, so you can use the mouse or keyboard.
First, make yourself a new recording or import an existing audio file by selecting
File > Import so you have some tracks to experiment with. Be sure the
Selection tool is active. If you’re using the Multi-Tool, move it up or down until
it changes into the Selection tool, which looks like a little I-beam.
Track focus and track selection are two different things. A yellow track border
shows which track has focus, but if the Track panel is light colored, then that
track has not been selected. Having focus means that the track is ready to accept
keyboard commands; the cursor line is active in that track, and you can move it
back and forth with the arrow keys.
Figure 1-21 shows two tracks: The bottom track has focus, which is indicated by
a yellow border, and the top one is selected, which is indicated by the shaded
Track panel. The cursor line extends into both but is active in the bottom track.
Having a selected track without focus and an unselected track with focus isn’t
much use. You can select a starting point for playback in the track with focus and
move it back and forth with the arrow keys, but that’s about it.

Figure 1-21. The top track is selected but does not have focus, and the bottom
track has focus, indicated by a yellow border, but is not selected.
When a track is selected, it becomes the target of any editing operations you
perform, such as copying, cutting, or applying effects. These will be applied to
the whole track, even if it doesn’t have focus. There are two ways to select an
entire track: You can double-click anywhere on the waveform, or you can click
the track label in the Track panel (see Figure 1-17).
Most times you won’t have to pay attention to focus and selection because in the
normal course of editing, they’ll be where you want them to be. But sometimes
things behave oddly, and being aware of this distinction should help you
understand what’s going on when Audacity seems to be responding
mysteriously.
You can also select part of a track. Figure 1-22 shows a track with only a
segment, rather than the whole track, selected. Note the difference in shading
between the selected and unselected portions.

Figure 1-22. A segment of the top track is selected. Some laptop screens are not
bright enough for the shading to be readily apparent in the Track panel, so look
at the timeline as well.
ctrl-A selects all tracks, and shift-ctrl-A deselects them all. Doubleclick inside a
track to select just that track, or left-click in the track label. shift-click the track
label to select and deselect multiple tracks one at a time, as well as nonadjacent
tracks. In Figure 1-23, the first and third tracks were selected with shift-clicking.

Figure 1-23. Selecting nonadjacent tracks by holding down the shift key and
clicking the track labels
To select part of a track, click and drag with the Selection tool. To make your
selection bigger or smaller, move the cursor over either boundary of your
selection, where it will turn into a horizontal arrow, and then click and drag that
boundary (Figure 1-24).
You can navigate between tracks and adjust selections with your keyboard’s
arrow keys. Pressing the shift and the left-arrow or right-arrow key enlarges a
selection; pressing ctrl-shift and the left-arrow or right-arrow key makes it
smaller. A slick trick for making a selection across several adjacent tracks is first
to make the selection in the top or bottom track and then to press the up-arrow or
down-arrow key to repeat the selection in the other tracks.

Figure 1-24. Changling the size of a selection by clicking and deagging a
boundary
The Skip to Start and Skip to End buttons in your Control toolbar move the
cursor to the start or the end of the track. Pressing the shift key while clicking
the Skip to Start button selects from the cursor position to the beginning of the
track, and pressing the shift key while clicking Skip to End selects from the
cursor position to the end of the track.
You can also use the Selection toolbar to make precise selections based on
various track parameters, such as time, samples, and various audio and video
frame rates. You can see these parameters by clicking the dropdown menu in any
of the three fields on the toolbar (Figure 1-25).

Figure 1-25. The Selection toolbar supports selections based on a number of
useful track parameters.
Suppose you want to select a 12-second segment that starts 48 seconds from the
beginning of the track. There are several ways to get to the 48-second mark—
click with the Selection tool, navigate with the arrow keys, or use the Selection
toolbar. Set Selection Start: seconds and enter 48. Select the “End” radio button
and enter 60 in the middle box. There is your 12-second segment (Figure 1-26)
Figure 1-26. Using the Selection toolbar to select a precise section of an audio
track
The up-arrow and down-arrow keys also change the numbers, and the right-

arrow and left-arrow keys navigate back and forth.

Track Panel
Figure 1-27. The handy Track panel
The Track panel puts a number of useful shortcuts at your fingertips (Figure 1-
27). The little X on the top left deletes the track. The arrow at the bottom
collapses and expands the track. You can also grab and drag the track borders
with the mouse to change their widths. The Gain slider amplifies or reduces the
track volume without permanently changing it, which is essential when you’re
mixing multiple tracks. The Pan slider controls the left-right balance.
By default, Audacity plays all tracks on a project when you click the Play button.
Use the Solo button to select one track for playback or the Mute buttons to
silence tracks you don’t want to hear. This only affects playback in Audacity and
does not change your project files.

Figure 1-28. Track menu functions
The Track menu has an interesting grab bag of functions (Figure 1-28). You can
use it to create track names—and when you’re working with a lot of tracks, you
definitely want to name them. It also offers different waveform views; lets you
split or join stereo tracks; lets you set mono, right, or left channel; allows you to
move tracks up or down; and lets you change the bit depth (which Audacity calls
the sample format) and sampling rate.
A stereo track is split into two separate mono tracks with Split Stereo Track or
Split Stereo to Mono. With Split Stereo Track, one will be Right, and one will be
Left. With Split Stereo to Mono, two mono tracks are created. To create a stereo
track, place two mono tracks adjacent to each other and then click Make Stereo
Track. in the Track menu of the upper track. Move tracks by clicking and
dragging the track label or by selecting Move TrackUp/Down in the Track
menu.
The vertical scale to the right of the Track panel is your guide to the volume
levels of your tracks. The default display is Waveform, and you can change this
to Waveform (dB), Spectrum, or Pitch (EAC) with the Track menu. Waveform is
a commonly used visual scale for displaying the amplitude (the strength or

volume of a signal) of your track. The Waveform vertical ruler has a linear scale
of +1.0 to -1.0; anything that goes over these values represents clipping, which
means you’re getting some distortion. Linear means that all frequencies are
given equal weight on the scale. Decibels are logarithmic rather than linear, so
this is not a true representation, but it is easy to read.
Waveform (dB) displays amplitude using a logarithmic decibel scale. Without
diving into the mathematical details, logarithmic means that each 3 dB increment
represents a doubling in loudness—hence, a sound measured at 6 dB is twice as
loud as a sound measured at 3 dB, and 9 dB is twice as loud as 6 dB. About the
smallest increment of change that humans can perceive is 1 dB. (Read more
about audio terminology in the glossary.)
There is a special decibel scale for digital audio, the Zero Decibels Full Scale.
This represents the digital audio volume range with negative numbers up to a
maximum of 0. In Audacity you can control the decibel range displayed in the
Waveform (dB) view and on the Meter Toolbar in the Edit > Preferences >
Interface dialog. Click the Meter/Waveform dB Range dropdown menu to see
your options. The smallest scale is -36 dB to 0, and the widest scale is -145 dB
to 0. This only affects the display and does nothing to your audio tracks.
You can use either waveform display to monitor your recording levels; I think
the default waveform display is easiest to read. You’ll notice the displays use
two shades of blue, one lighter and one darker. The light blue represents the
RMS, or root-mean-square, which translated into ordinary English is the average
volume over time. The darker blue represents the peaks, which are the transient
extremes.
Note
RMS and peak ratings are (mis)used in the marketing of audio gear to make you think you’re getting more
than you really are. For example, a set of speakers is rated at 50 watts RMS/150 watts peak. Ignore the peak
value—RMS tells you how much the speakers can handle continuously. The peak value indicates what the
speakers can tolerate in very short (fraction of a second) bursts.
The Spectrum view represents the energy level (amplitude) of the different
frequencies in colors. Red is “hot,” or higher amplitude, and blue is “cool,” or
lower amplitude. If your waveform is mostly blue, it’s not very loud, and if it’s
more red, it’s louder. You can easily test this by selecting a track or a segment of
a track, selecting Effect > Amplify, and giving it a negative Amplification value
of -30 dB. This should make it mostly blue. Give it a value closer to zero to

make it more red.
Pitch (EAC) displays the contours of the pitch of your audio using the enhanced
autocorrelation (EAC) algorithm. The EAC algorithm is interesting for doing
pitch detection; if you are interested in learning more about this, enhanced
autocorrelation and pitch detection are some good Internet search terms to start
with. Audacity’s implementation of this is pretty basic, so if this interests you,
you’ll probably want to find more sophisticated tools.

Cutting Out Unwanted Chunks
You can easily remove parts of tracks that you don’t want. Just select a section
and then press the delete key on your keyboard. If you want to keep only a small
part of the track and remove the rest, select Edit > Trim or click the Trim button
on the Edit toolbar. This saves the part of the track that you have selected and
deletes everything outside of it.
Sometimes you might need to silence a large section of a track while leaving the
track intact. In that case, select the part you want to convert to silence, and then
click the Silence button or select Edit > Silence Audio.

Fade In and Out
When you delete part of a track, you might want to smooth the cut with graceful
fades. Fades are integral to audio editing, and Audacity has two ways to create
fades. The easiest way is to select a portion of a track and then select Effect >
Fade In or Fade Out. You control the length of the fade, and Audacity does the
rest.
The Envelope tool can fine-tune the amplitude levels; it is good for controlling
fades and for fine-tuning amplitude anywhere on an audio track, including over
relatively long segments. Figure 1-29 shows what this looks like. Click different
locations to create control nodes. To get rid of a node, drag it outside the track
border.
Figure 1-29. The Envelope tool creates graceful fades and gives you fine-grained
control of amplitude.
Each node has four handles. The node handles can be moved in any direction.
The outside pair behaves a little differently than the inner pair—use the outside
handles to create more graceful, gradual curves.
The dotted lines on either side of the 30-second mark show where the borders of
the envelope go outside of the track display.
Note
In addition to the Zoom buttons in the Editor toolbar, the View menu has some nice options for
manipulating and navigating your tracks such as Fit In Window and Zoom to Selection, and it shows useful
keyboard shortcuts such as ctrl-2 for Zoom Normal and shift-ctrl-F for Fit Vertically.

Making Quiet Recordings Louder
Suppose your recording is too quiet and you want to amp up the volume. No
problem! Select the part you want to amplify and then select Effect > Amplify.
Audacity automatically calculates how much amplification can be applied
without clipping; that is, without going over 0 dB (Figure 1-30). Don’t check the
“Allow clipping” box unless you are very sure you want to do so.
Figure 1-30. Using Effect > Amplify to raise or lower the volume of your
selection
Another way to amplify a too-quiet recording is to select Effect > Normalize.
Check “Remove any DC offset,” check “Normalize maximum amplitude to,”
and set a maximum level up to zero. DC offset refers to the mean amplitude; if
this is not zero, then normalization won’t be applied correctly because the
amplitude levels will be unbalanced, and it might create some distortion.
The difference between Amplify and Normalize is seen when they are applied to
multiple tracks. Amplify changes the volume on all tracks by an equal amount. If
you amplify volume by +9 dB, a track that peaks at -20 dB will be raised to -11
dB, and a track that peaks at -9 dB will be raised to 0 dB. Normalize, on the
other hand, adjusts all tracks to the same maximum volume level, so some tracks
may be changed more than others.
The default maximum setting for both is zero. It’s useful to lower this to -12 dB
or so on your studio masters in order to leave a bit of headroom for more
tweaking without risking clipping. For example, when you downmix multiple
tracks into a single track, the latter will have the combined amplitudes of all

those tracks and get louder, maybe a lot louder. Experience will tell you how
much headroom you need. Don’t normalize to zero until you are making your
final exports.
Amplify and Normalize can also be used to lower amplitude. In the Amplify
dialog, enter a negative value, like -6. The Normalize dialog uses only negative
values and won’t allow anything higher than zero.

Timer Record and Sound Activated Recording
Both Timer Record and Sound Activated Recording are in the Transport menu.
To use Sound Activated Recording, select Transport > Sound Activation Level
and set the decibel level you want to trigger recording. It may take a bit of trial
and error to figure out a level that balances capturing what you want without also
capturing lot of sounds you don’t want. Then turn on the recording monitor
(Meter toolbar) and click the Play button. When a loud enough sound is
detected, Audacity will automatically create a new track and then use that track
for as long as you leave Timer Record activated. Click the Stop button any time
to stop Sound Activated Recording.
Timer Record is just as easy—just set the start and stop times for recording. You
can use this together with Sound Activated Recording to set a start and stop
range so that you can go away and leave Audacity running without worrying
about it filling your hard drive.

Mixer Board
The Mixer Board is a new feature that first appeared in Audacity 1.3.8 (Figure 1-
31).
Figure 1-31. The Mixer Board puts Pan and Gain controls front and center.
This is a slick little board with volume units (VU) meters for each track, plus
Pan and Gain sliders. It puts your essential mixing controls within easy reach,
without having to make your tracks extra wide so that you can access the sliders
on the Track panels.
To use the Mixer Board, play your tracks in Audacity and adjust the relative
volumes of your tracks with the Gain sliders, which are on the left side of the
VU meter, and the left-right balance of each track with the Pan slider. Then make

your export. The Pan and Gain sliders do not change your project files—they
only affect playback in Audacity and how your exported file will sound. See
Chapter 9 to learn more about multitrack mixing.

Track Metadata
You can preserve useful data in your Audacity projects, such as song titles, date,
artist name, and genre, with the metadata editor. Before your final export, select
File > Open Metadata Editor. You’ll see a window like the one in Figure 1-32.
Fill in any of the Artist Name, Album Title, Year, Genre, and Comments fields,
and these will be applied to each song track. Audacity will fill in the Track Titles
and Track Numbers fields automatically.
Figure 1-32. Using File > Open Metadata Editor to store useful information in
your Audacity project
If you select Edit > Preferences > Import/Export, there is a “Show Metadata
Editor prior to export step” option. If you check this, the metadata editor will
open for each track before it is exported so you can review or edit the metadata.

Final Mixdown
Usually your goal is to mixdown however many tracks you have recorded to a
stereo track. However, Audacity also supports multichannel surround sound,
which is covered in Chapter 9. Before you export, select Edit > Preferences >
Import/Export and select the “Use custom mix” radio button. At export, an
Advanced Mixing Option window appears, which is a simple channel mapper.
Map your tracks to whichever channels you want. Your tracks can go to the left
channel, the right channel, or even multiple channels. Channel 1 is always the
left channel when there are two tracks. (See Figure 1-33 for a simple two-track
example.) When you are using this tool, you will be glad you named your tracks.
Chapter 9 goes into more detail on multitrack mixing and channel mapping.
Figure 1-33. Using Audacity’s mixer to map your tracks to the correct channels

Audio File Formats and Quality Settings
There are many different audio file formats, and Audacity supports a lot of them.
Let’s look at WAV, MP3, FLAC, and Ogg Vorbis. These well-supported, popular
formats serve different purposes.

Understanding File Formats
WAV files are uncompressed, high-quality pulse-code modulation (PCM) files.
They are large. One minute of a CD-quality stereo WAV recording consumes
about 10MB of disk space. WAV is the best-supported format and is the quality
standard by which other formats are measured.
MP3 (MPEG-1 Audio Layer 3, not MPEG-3) is a popular compressed, lossy
encoding format; an MP3 file can be as small as one-tenth the size of a similar
WAV file and still sound pretty good. This means you can cram a lot more music
into a portable player and have faster downloads and better online streaming.
The trade-off is that quality is lost. See Chapter 13 and Chapter 14 to learn how
to enable MP3 support in Audacity.
Although MP3 is extremely popular, it is encumbered with messy patent
problems. A number of different companies in different countries claim they own
patents on MP3, and depending on where you live, you may be expected to pay
licensing fees if you want to distribute music encoded in MP3. The final patents
won’t expire until 2017. However, the patent situation is not clear-cut because
many independent musicians distribute their music in MP3 format without
paying patent royalties, and patents do not apply in all countries outside their
countries of origin.
Free Lossless Audio Codec (FLAC) is an excellent open and free format. This
lossless, compressed format is equivalent in quality to WAV but with file sizes
that are one-third to a half smaller. FLAC is a great format for a PC media
server, because you get great quality without eating up as much hard drive space.
Online music services distribute their highest-quality downloads in FLAC. You
can even use FLAC for your studio masters if you need to conserve storage
space. Although the FLAC format does not support 32-bit float, 24-bit FLAC
files are still very high quality.
Ogg Vorbis was created as a high-quality, free, and open alternative to MP3. Ogg
files range from about the same size as MP3 to about 25 percent larger. Ogg
Vorbis is not as widely supported as MP3 and WAV, though its popularity is
increasing. Linux, Windows, and Mac all have a number of software music
players that support playing both standalone Ogg files and streaming Ogg. The
iPod and Zune do not support Ogg (not a big surprise, coming from the two
titans of lock-in), but a growing number of other playback devices do.

Chapter 7 goes into detail about different quality levels for Ogg Vorbis and MP3,
and Chapter 6 discusses WAV and FLAC.
The next section explains some important fundamental concepts of digital audio
and terminology that you’ll encounter a lot, so grab a cup of tea, put your feet
up, and read on.

Understanding Bit Depth and Sampling Rate
Digital audio production can be summed up as converting analog signals to
digital and back again. In other words, you capture sound from an analog
microphone or electric musical instrument, run it through an analog-to-digital
converter (ADC), and record the digitized bits to a hard drive or solid-state
storage. The ADC can be a sound card, a preamp/ADC, a stand alone ADC, or
some other combination device. Somewhere down the road this digital data will
be retrieved and converted to analog form for playback.
Your computer’s sound card performs digital-to-analog conversion during
playback, and so does an ordinary CD or MP3 player.
Your goal is to convert those analog signals as faithfully as possible. Once they
are in digital form, you have a whole world of tools at your disposal to
manipulate them in all kinds of creative ways, and you have a multitude of
options for playback formats and media.

16/44.1, 24/96, 32-Bit Float
Two common digital audio specifications are referred to as 16/44.1 and 24/96.
Sometimes 16/44.1 is shortened to 16/44. These designations specify bit depth
and sampling rate. Bit depth affects dynamic range, signal-to-noise ratio, and
fidelity. Sampling rate determines the frequency range.
CD-quality audio is defined as 44.1 kHz, 16-bit, two-channel WAV, and 24/96 is
higher-than-CD audio quality, such as digital audio tape (DAT), DVD audio, and
studio master recordings. So, we should just go for the highest numbers to get
the best quality, right? Well, no—there are a number of factors to consider.
Figure 1-34. Audacity waveform, enlarged so that the sample points are visible
Sampling is done by the analog-to-digital converter; it samples the electric
voltage in an analog audio signal at intervals and converts the measurements to
digital form. The more times per second this is done, the more accurate the
digital representation of the signal. So, a sampling rate of 44.1kHz means 44,100
samples per second per channel. This is Audacity’s default. You can see a picture
of this by enlarging a section of any Audacity waveform. This will look
something like Figure 1-34, where each dot represents a single audio sample.

Each audio sample is represented as a numeric value—in computers, everything
is a number. In CD-quality audio, 16 bits is the range of possible values per
sample, and 16 bits = 65,536. This is the bit depth. Each sample is not 65,536
bits in size but is given a single 16-bit value that is equal to or lesser than 65,535
(0 to 65,535.)
For 24/96 recording, which is often used in professional recording, 24 bits gives
16,777,216 possible values. Larger bit depths mean wider dynamic ranges and
finer tonal shadings—and also significantly larger file sizes. One minute of a
stereo recording is about 10MB (5MB per channel) at 16/44.1 and is about
34MB at 24/96.
Theoretically, the dynamic range of 16-bit digital audio is 96 dB, for a scale of
-96 to 0. For 24-bit audio, it is 144 dB, and for 32-bit audio, it is 192 dB. In the
real world, the actual dynamic range is lower because of limitations in electronic
hardware: around 90 dB for 16-bit audio and 115 dB for both 24-bit and 32-bit
audio.
The value of a wide dynamic range is not that you can shock your listeners with
sudden extreme volume changes but in having a very high signal-to-noise ratio,
which is also called “having a low noise floor.” The more signal and less noise,
the better.
As far as adjusting the dynamic range with the listener in mind, a range of 50 dB
to 60 dB in a recording is the maximum most listeners will tolerate, and that is
under ideal conditions with a good system in a quiet environment. A picky
audiophile with good equipment and a quiet listening space will enjoy a
symphony that uses every bit of a 60 dB dynamic range. A live symphony
concert might encompass an 80 dB range.
Someone listening to music in a noisier environment or on lower-quality audio
gear might be more comfortable with a dynamic range of 20 dB or even
narrower. Audacity lets you tailor your recordings to any dynamic range you
want. (See Chapter 6, Chapter 8, and Chapter 11 to learn more about dynamic
range compression.)
There is a famous theorem in the audio world called the Nyquist-Shannon
theorem. It is long and detailed—the part that matters here states that a perfect
digital representation of an analog audio signal is possible when the sampling
rate is at least twice as high as the highest frequency in the signal. The best
human hearing can hear up to 20 kHz to 24 kHz, so a sampling rate of 40 kHz to
48 kHz can (theoretically) reproduce the entire range of human hearing.

Audacity’s default recording bit depth is 32-bit float. Many digital audio
workstations, including Audacity, operate at 32-bit float internally. It is
important to understand that this is 32-bit float, not 32-bit integer. In contrast, the
16-and 24-bit depths represent integer values. As usual, the math is complex,
and audio geeks will bore you to tears telling you about it if you let them, so here
is the oversimplified short story: Integers are whole numbers, and float means
floating decimal point. This 32-bit float number is a 24-bit mantissa plus an 8-bit
exponent. This is significant in terms of audio production—it gives you a
dynamic range of about 1500 dB, which means virtually no noise or clipping,
and you get a smoother, more accurate response curve across the whole range of
your analog-to-digital conversion. (In comparison, the dynamic range of 32-bit
integer is 196 dB.)
Recording and editing at 32-bit float is beneficial even with a 16-bit recording
interface. If you work to a peak of -24 dB, which is very low and safe to avoid
clipping, your available dynamic range will still exceed what any hardware
supports, and you’ll have plenty of extra bits to throw away without harming
quality. That means you’ll be able to edit and manipulate your audio files as
much as you want and still be able to make high-quality 16-bit and 24-bit
exports. The more processing you apply to your recordings, the more you want
all that extra headroom.
You will always export to a lower bit depth because there is no such thing as a
32-bit float playback device. Playable formats must be integer data, so your
exports will always be to 8-bit, 16-bit, or 24-bit integer. (The word linear is
often used instead of integer; they’re referring to the same thing.)
In practice, many factors will affect the bit depth and sampling rate that you
choose: How good is your hearing, how good is your gear, and what are the final
format and playback medium going to be? How good are your recording
techniques? What sort of recordings are you making—nuanced acoustic
instruments and vocals or head-banging rock? Is your computer powerful
enough to process larger audio files, and do you have enough storage for them?
You can get some good bargains on 16/44.1 recorders and ADCs because of the
“bigger is better” mentality. On the other hand, it doesn’t hurt to have the extra
bandwidth—you can always reduce quality and size, but (despite what they
show you on TV crime shows) you can’t recover what wasn’t available in the
first place. When you’re experimenting, my recommendation is to try increasing
the bit depth before increasing the sampling rate. If your hearing and audio gear
are good, you should be able to hear the difference between 16-bit and 24-bit

recordings, though I suspect it will take a side-by-side comparison to make the
differences apparent. I record and save my studio masters at 32-bit float/48 kHz
WAV and export mainly to CD-quality 16/44.1. Going to higher sampling rates
makes no difference that I can hear, and it eats up hard drive space.
Audacity supports recording at 16-bit integer, 24-bit integer, and 32-bit float. For
comparison, professionals record and edit at 24-bit, 32-bit, and even 64-bit
depths.
Note
As we discussed earlier, exporting to 32-bit float WAV is a good option to consider for creating and
archiving studio master files. Then you can import your 32-bit float WAV back into Audacity (or any other
audio editor that uses 32-bit float), process it, and export to 16-or 24-bit without loss of quality.

Bitrate, Bit Depth, and File Size
Bit depth is a term with a specific meaning, which we just learned. Another
common term is bitrate. These two terms mean different things and are often
confused with each other. Bitrate is the amount of data per second needed to
transmit an audio file and is most commonly expressed as Kbps or Mbps;
16/44.1 stereo is roughly 1.4Mbps, and 24/96 is about 4.6Mbps. You can easily
figure this out for yourself:
bit depth × sampling rate × channels = bitrate (bit/sec)
16 × 44,100 × 2 = 1,411,200 bits/sec
24 × 96,000 × 2 = 4,608,000 bits/sec
MP3s (and other lossy formats) are described in terms of bitrates rather than bit
depth/sampling rates. The MPEG-1 Layer 3 standard specifies a range of bitrates
from 32Kbps to 320Kbps. Pretty lo-fi, 128Kbps is a common MP3 bitrate left
over from the early days of slower Internet download speeds and players with
small storage capacities. Now 192Kbps is pretty common, and a person with
good hearing and a decent MP3 player will hear the difference.
Total file size is an important figure to ace recording geeks. Digital audio files
are large, and you can eat up a large hard drive in no time during a busy
recording session with a lot of takes.
You can calculate the approximate file size with this equation:
bit depth × sampling rate × channels × (60 seconds) / 8 = file
size in bytes for a 1-minute recording
One stereo minute at 24/48 kHz is about 17.3MB:
24 × 48,000 × 2 × 60 / 8 = 17,280,000 bytes
You must divide by 8 to get bytes because there are 8 bits per byte.

Now What?
At this point, you should have a good grasp of the basics of Audacity. Audacity
is easy to learn; the hard part is learning audio concepts and terminology. I’ll be
talking about those a lot in the rest of this book, translating them into practical
terms and showing you how to implement them in Audacity.

Chapter 2. Building a Good Digital Sound Studio on
the Cheap
There is a saying in the photography world: The person behind the camera
matters more than the camera. The same applies to making great audio
recordings—the person behind the gear matters more than the gear. This doesn’t
mean that the gear doesn’t matter, because it does. But merely owning the most
expensive, elite audio equipment won’t turn you into Tom Dowd or Rick Rubin
or Quincy Jones or George Martin or whoever your favorite legendary music
producer is. It won’t turn average musicians into stars.
When you’re shopping for audio gear and getting drawn into the “higher specs
and price tags is better!” zone, take a step back and reboot your mind. Take a
deep breath, slow down, and concentrate on learning how to get the best out of
lower-end equipment. Because today’s average digital audio gear is better than
the top-of-the-line analog studio gear of yesteryear, with more accuracy, fidelity,
wider dynamic range, and less noise, it’s a whole lot easier to record, mix, edit,
and apply special effects. You won’t have to fuss so much with learning how to
use your equipment, and you can concentrate more on learning how to make
good recordings with artistic and technical fidelity. Then if you find yourself
yearning for a better preamp, better microphones, better speakers, or what-have-
you, you’ll have good reasons, and you’ll know and appreciate better quality
when you find it.
In this chapter we’re going to turn a PC into a digital audio workstation, and we
won’t break the bank to do it. We’ll also look at portable digital recorders, which
cram amazing fidelity and storage capacity into tiny devices and are endlessly
useful in all kinds of circumstances.

Getting Sound In and Out of the Computer
One of the biggest hurdles with PC-based audio production is figuring out audio
gear. There is a huge and bewildering selection of audio components with every
imaginable combination of features and price tags. In this chapter I’ll discuss the
basic elements of a small recording studio. Appendix A goes into more detail on
hardware, with examples of different models and brands in different price
ranges.
There are several ways to interface audio gear with a computer: a PCI or PCI-E
sound card for a desktop computer; a Cardbus or ExpressCard sound card for
laptops; USB 1.1, USB 2.0, or FireWire audio interface for any computer. You
will need one of these. Which one? For one-or two-track recording, any of them
will do. For heavy-duty multitrack recording, USB 1.1 is not a candidate. But it’s
great for one-and two-track recording, and you’ll have a lot of excellent,
moderately priced devices to choose from. For serious multitrack recording, you
need the faster protocols, especially if you’re going to record at high bit depths
and sampling rates, so we’ll look at their strengths and weaknesses.
The most essential component in digital audio production is the analog-to-
digital/digital-to-analog converter. The ADC/DAC is how you get analog audio
in and out of your computer. It takes the analog signal from a microphone or
instrument and converts it to a digital signal. Then it converts a digital signal to
analog for playback. ADC/DACs come in a multitude of forms: The most low-
end, cheapskate onboard sound chip has one, and of course so do higher-end
audio interfaces. There are all kinds of USB and FireWire recording interfaces
that connect microphones and instruments to your computer, and with them you
don’t need to bother with an internal sound card at all. There are also slick little
portable ADC/DACs for connecting turntables, cassette recorders, and stereo hi-
fi amplifiers to a computer, as well as USB microphones and turntables with
built-in USB ADC/DACs. And for the studio geek with a healthy budget, there
are the more expensive rackmount ADC/DACs.

An Example Studio
Let’s start off with a photo of a basic, moderate-quality computer recording
studio, which just happens to be mine all mine. Figure 2-1 shows the whole
works: The computer is underneath the table. Starting from the left are various
headphones; then on the desk is an external USB CD/DVD writer, a four-port
powered USB hub, an LCD monitor, a color printer, the all-important hot
beverage mug, a turntable, an excellent old Pioneer stereo hi-fi amplifier, a
Behringer powered mixer, and a MobilePre USB preamp/analog-to-digital
converter. In front are two dynamic microphones. Not shown are a pair of nice
JBL speakers mounted up on the wall. You can cram a lot of functionality into a
small space.
Figure 2-1. My own little recording empire (the mics don’t really sit right there
in front of the amp and mixer; that’s a pose just for the photo op)
Also not shown is a nice Focusrite Saffire Pro 26 I/O FireWire multichannel
recording interface. Focusrite makes great audio hardware and supports Linux,
Mac, and Windows. We’ll see more of the Saffire in Chapter 9.
This is how they all fit together:
Recording: microphones and instruments > Behringer mixer > MobilePre >
computer
Playback: computer > MobilePre > Pioneer stereo amp > speakers
For recording, the Behringer mixer has a pair of RCA recording outputs. These
send a stereo signal via an RCA-pair-to-two-1/4″ mono TRS adapter to the two
1/4″ TRS jacks on the MobilePre. The MobilePre connects with a USB cable to
the computer. Everything plugged into the Behringer is then captured in

Audacity.
Note
The terminology for connectors is a bit mixed up, so I am going to refer to the connectors on cables as plugs
and the sockets on mixers, preamps, amps, and so forth that they plug into as jacks. I will also bow to
convention and refer to male and female connectors even though that has always sounded weird to me.
Male and female at least have the virtue of having precise meanings, unlike a lot of audio terminology.
For playback, the MobilePre has a 1/8″ stereo output. This connects with a
stereo-mini-plug-to-RCA-pair adapter to the Aux input on the Pioneer amp. The
MobilePre also has a pair of 1/4″ TRS outputs, so for these I would need 1/4″
TRS-to-RCA adapters. Figure 2-2 shows the plugins on the back of the amp. A
nice amp like this plus a good ADC/DAC makes a great hub for a conversion
studio, because anything that connects to the amp can be recorded on your
computer.
Figure 2-2. This is the back of a treasured old but versatile Pioneer stereo
amplifier. It can connect two turntables (it even has proper ground connectors for
turntables), two tape decks, a microphone, a tuner, another amp, a preamp, and
an Aux connector for a CD player or other input devices.
I could also cut out the Behringer entirely, for example for interviews and
podcasts, and use only the MobilePre in combination with any computer.

When I’m copying vinyl LPs to CD, it goes like this:
Recording: turntable > Pioneer amp > MobilePre > computer
Playback: computer > MobilePre > Pioneer amp > speakers
The turntable plugs into the phono ports on the amp. The amp connects to the
MobilePre from a pair of recording outputs. I could use an RCA-pair-to-two-1/4″
TRS adapter or an RCA-pair-to-stereo-mini-plug, because the MobilePre is
flexible when it comes to making connections.
You can digitize any legacy media with this kind of setup, because whatever
connects to your hi-fi amp or receiver can be copied into your computer.
Both recording and playback are routed through the MobilePre, so I get to hear
the playback on good speakers instead of lo-fi computer speakers. The
MobilePre has a headphone port for zero-latency monitoring during recording,
which is a nice thing to have. The Behringer mixer (Europower 1280S) isn’t
really intended to be a studio mixer; it’s for powering live shows, which it does
most ably, because it is an integrated mixer and 1200-watt amplifier. When I’m
recording a live show, I hook up to it with a laptop and the MobilePre. I also
have a Zoom H2 portable digital recorder, which I can use in place of the laptop
plus MobilePre. The best-quality recordings at live shows come from plugging
directly into the mixer board.
Note
The local old-time country band that I like to listen to and record has a rather eccentric sound system. They
have a nice PA system, but instead of plugging everyone into the mixer board, only the singers’ mics are
connected to the mixer. All of the musicians have to bring their own instrument amplifiers. This makes for a
cluttered stage, and recording is a nightmare—plugging a recorder into the mixer means the only
instruments it hears are whatever the mics pick up. The Zoom H2 has a neat little adapter to mount it on a
mic stand so I can position it anywhere, but it’s not as good as a proper setup with everything routed
through the sound board.
Let’s take a closer look at the MobilePre because it is representative of a lot of
USB recording interfaces. The MobilePre supplies 48v phantom power for
condenser mics and has XLR and TRS jacks, a 1/8″ stereo input, two 1/4″ mono
outputs, and a 1/8″ zero-latency headphone port for monitoring. Both dynamic
and condenser mics can plug into the XLR jacks, as long as they have XLR
connectors. You could also use an XLR-to-TRS adapter to plug a dynamic mic
into one of the 1/4″ inputs. Its built-in ADC supports sampling rates from 8 to 48

kHz at 16 bits, and it draws its power from the USB bus of your computer, so it
doesn’t need its own power cord. It has physical gain control knobs and a
volume control knob for headphones, so you don’t need to dink around with
software controls. (I’d rather twist a knob than fumble around some weirdo
software interface any day.) You should be able to find one for under $150. At
16-bit/48 MHz maximum recording quality, it’s becoming obsolete because
comparable devices support 24-bit recording. Still, it’s a great little device, and
because it is USB 1.1 class-compliant, it runs on any computer without special
drivers.
Figure 2-3 and Figure 2-4 show the front and back of the MobilePre.
Figure 2-3. M-Audio MobilePre, front. From left to right: Channel 1 1/4″ mono
TRS jack, Ch. 1 and 2 gain controls, clip LEDs, headphone port, headphone
volume knob, phantom power switch, phantom power LED, and power LED
Figure 2-4. M-Audio MobilePre, backside. From left to right: USB jack, stereo
line out, 1/4″ mono TRS right and left outputs, stereo mic in, Ch. 2 1/4″ mono
TRS input, Ch. 2 XLR mic jack, Ch. 1 XLR mic jack

Sorting Out Connectors
Where do the terms TRS and come from? TRS is tip-ring-sleeve, which is the
physical description of a TRS plug. Figure 2-5 is a labeled photo of a stereo and
a mono TRS jack.
The origins of XLR are a little more complicated. Cannon Electric was the
original manufacturer of the XLR connector, and some old-timers still call it a
cannon plug. It started out as the “Cannon X” series of connectors. Then later
versions added a latch, so there is the L, and then the contacts were encased in
rubber, for the R. Figure 2-6 shows a pair of three-pin XLR plugs.
Figure 2-5. One stereo 1/4″ TRS plug (left) and one mono (right).

Figure 2-6. Here is a three-pin male XLR plug and a three-pin female XLR plug.
Figure 2-7 shows a collection of plugs and adapters. You can find adapters to
make anything fit anything. However, you must be careful—just because
something fits doesn’t mean it belongs there, so read your product manuals.
Stereo TRS plugs have two black bands near the tip, and mono TRS plugs have
one.
Figure 2-7. Two stereo RCA to 1/8″ TRS plug, 1/4″ mono TRS to two stereo
RCA, 1/8″ to 1/4″ stereo TRS adapter, 1/4″ to 1/8″ mono TRS adapter

Figure 2-8. Behringer dynamic mic showing off its three-pin male XLR
connector
Figure 2-8 shows the three-pin male XLR connector on a Behringer dynamic
mic.

Multichannel Recording, PCI, USB, FireWire
Multichannel recording is done in several different ways. One way is to use a
simple two-track recording interface like the MobilePre. It supports up to six
inputs at once and routes them into two channels. There are no mixer controls, so
this requires some finicking during recording to get a decent balance. A better
way to do multichannel recording with a two-channel interface like the Pre is to
record two tracks at a time, giving each instrument or performer its own
individual track, rather than trying to cram them all through the Pre at once.
Then Audacity is your mixer, and you have individual control of each track.
Another option for two-channel recording is a good-quality two-channel PCI
sound card like the Emu 1616M PCI, which you can find used for under $200. It
comes with a breakout box that supports all kinds of plugins, 24-bit/192 kHz
recording, phantom power, and preamps.
My Behringer 1280S gets pressed into service when I have a larger group over
for recording. Any analog mixer will work as long you have an ADC/DAC to
plug it into. My setup is a bit of a hack job since the Behringer is not really a
studio mixer, but it works and sounds good, and it is an example of how a little
ingenuity goes far in the wild world of audio. Like many mixers, the Behringer
outputs to two-channel stereo, so I need to get the mix right during recording—
I’ll have only two channels to work with in Audacity. I could also record one or
two tracks at a time with the Behringer and then knit them together in Audacity;
there is no rule that says you have to plug in everything at one time. (Though
corralling and organizing musicians can be a bit of a cat-herding experience, and
sometimes you have to take what you can get.)
Audacity from version 1.3.8 supports recording as many tracks at once as your
recording interface supports. Older versions max out at 16. This is where
FireWire and the higher-end PCI sound cards shine, because they allow
recording many tracks at once. The Focusrite Saffire Pro 40 is an example of a
good value in a FireWire recording interface at about $500; this gives you 8 mic
preamps, 20 total inputs and 20 outputs, 24/96 recording, blinky LEDs, and
phantom power on every mic channel. The M-Audio Delta 1010 is a popular
higher-end multichannel PCI sound card that connects to a rackmount breakout
box. It goes for about $600.
A cool new family of devices is USB and FireWire mixers. These give you
everything in one device—preamps, phantom power, mixer board, ADC/DAC,

and direct plug-in to your computer. There are a lot of nice choices in the $300
to $1,000 range. Behringer’s line of Xenyx USB mixers costs between $150 to
$600. They use class-compliant USB 1.1, so they plug into any computer with
no special drivers needed. The M-Audio NRV10 is a nice little FireWire
mixer/preamp that costs about $700.
How to choose which of these to use? USB and FireWire are portable and easy
to hook up. PCI Express is the fastest. One lane of PCI-E moves about 250MBps
both ways at the same time. That’s 250 megabytes, not megabits. Plain old PCI
maxes out at 133MBps. Also, unlike PCI-E, PCI uses a shared bus, so more PCI
devices means more bandwidth contention. Every PCI-E device has its own
dedicated data pipeline, so PCI-E devices don’t have to share bandwidth. USB
1.1 is rated at 12Mbps (megabits per second), and USB 2.0 is rated at about
480Mbps, but both figures are highly theoretical, and in real life you’re likely to
get half that. FireWire is rated at 400Mbps. However, FireWire gives you higher
sustained throughput and better performance than USB, a difference that is
discussed in more detail in the following section.
A common problem with internal sound cards is picking up noise and electrical
interference from hard drives, power supplies, and fans inside your computer
case. This usually isn’t a problem with the better sound cards like Emu, M-
Audio, and RME Hammerfall, but it tends to be more of an issue with consumer-
level and gamer sound cards and low-budget onboard sound. If you are getting
some noise, the first thing to check is all your connections—make sure
everything is hooked up correctly and anything that needs to be grounded is
grounded. Sometimes moving a PCI card to a different slot makes a difference.
Check your motherboard manual to see if you have shared PCI slots; you don’t
want to use a shared slot if the other slot is populated.

USB or FireWire?
If you like the convenience of a USB audio interface, you might also consider
FireWire devices. How do you choose between FireWire or USB? USB devices
usually cost less than FireWire, but the trade-off is you may get poorer
performance because of the differences in the two protocols.
All FireWire interfaces have special controller chips, so they do not add any
extra load to your computer’s CPU. FireWire is a peer protocol, which means
FireWire devices negotiate bus conflicts without using host CPU cycles.
FireWire gives you two operating modes to choose from: asynchronous or
isynchronous. Isynchronous mode means a device can reserve a certain portion
of bandwidth all for itself that no other devices can use. So there are no
collisions, which translates into high sustained throughput.
If your PC doesn’t have a FireWire interface, it’s easy to add one. PCI FireWire
interfaces cost about $50, and many laptops include a FireWire port. When
you’re shopping for FireWire audio interfaces, be sure to check for hardware
compatibility. As one example, the Presonus FP10 has known conflicts with
certain video chipsets, and it has a limited set of FireWire interfaces that it is
known to work well with.
The Future of FireWire
“FireWire is doomed!” is a common cry of late. That may be true, though it is going to be with us for some
years yet. USB 2.0 supposedly offers the potential to equal FireWire performance, and USB 3.0 supposedly
will eclipse it. Audio hardware manufacturers have been slow to release USB 2.0 recording interfaces,
though there are now a respectable number of them. A lot of them rely on custom drivers that are not USB
2.0 compliant, so shop carefully lest you buy one that won’t run on your computer. USB 3.0 is still a work
in progress, and audio hardware manufacturers are not known for moving quickly. If you like FireWire
recording devices, by all means buy and use them, and if FireWire ever does become obsolete, you can still
use your gear because nobody is going to come and take it away from you.
USB operates only in asynchronous mode. Asynchronous means that any device
on the same bus can send data whenever it wants to, so sometimes there are
collisions, which cause latency. USB is host-dependent and puts a load on the
CPU, which can also cause latency. Latency is the enemy of quality audio.
You’ll see a lot of USB audio devices that still use USB 1.1. USB 1.1 has two
speeds: 1.5Mbps and 12Mbps. The latter is also called full-speed. It’s unlikely

that a USB recording interface will be geared down to 1.5Mbps. The number of
channels you can record at once depends on the quality level you want to record
at. CD quality, two channels at 16/44.1, has a bitrate of 1,411,200Mbps. Two
channels at 24/96 equals a bitrate of 4,608,000Mbps, so it seems you could
record four 24/96 channels at once. However, that 12Mbps maximum is
theoretical, and your real-world throughput will be half that or less. Most likely
you’ll be limited to two-channel 24/96 recording at best. Four channels at
16/44.1 or 24/48 are possible if you are careful and have a good, fast multicore
PC and have it tuned for audio production. (See Bitrate, Bit Depth, and File Size
in Bitrate, Bit Depth, and File Size to learn about different bitrates.)
USB 2.0 audio devices require careful shopping, because many of them are not
USB class-compliant and instead supply their own special drivers. Even
Windows users have to do their homework because vendors are slow to release
drivers for new Windows releases. Mac support is decent overall, and Linux,
Unix, and users on other platforms are at the back of the bus as usual. Some
multitrack USB 2.0 devices are getting good reviews. For example, the M-Audio
Fast Track Ultra 8R (eight in, eight out) gets high marks and works on Mac,
Linux, and Windows.

Microphones
The microphones in Figure 2-9 are middle-of-the-road dynamic mics that cost
less than $100 each. The microphone is very important—you won’t get good
recordings from low-quality microphones. There are two common types of
microphones: condenser and dynamic. Condenser mics have a wider frequency
response, are more sensitive, produce louder output, and have a faster transient
response. Transient response is any abrupt change, such as a rim shot, a hard-
strummed guitar, or a singer hitting some hard consonants (and probably
spraying a bit of spit).
Figure 2-9. Audio-Technica stereo condenser mic, Behringer dynamic mic, and
wind sock

Condenser mics require power. This is called phantom power when it is
delivered through the microphone cable, because there isn’t a separate power
cable. They are more fragile than dynamic mics. Condenser mics live mostly in
studios. They are also used onstage in combination with dynamic mics on drum
kits; the condenser mics hang overhead to capture cymbals and transients, and
dynamic mics are placed next to the drums. Figure 2-9 shows an Audio-Technica
stereo condenser mic, a Behringer dynamic mic, and a wind sock. (Experienced
singers know to avoid brightly colored wind socks because they look like clown
noses.)
Condenser microphones that require phantom power typically use XLR
connectors. Dynamic mics use both XLR connectors and TRS plugs. Dynamic
mics do not require phantom power, so make sure that the phantom power is
turned off before you plug one in to a phantom-powered XLR jack. It shouldn’t
damage the mic, but it will change how it sounds. It’s common to see audio gear
with both types of microphone connectors, and newer devices have combination
jacks that accept both.
The little Audio-Technica Pro 24 stereo condenser mic in Figure 2-9 is a
different kind of condenser mic. It is self-powered by a little mercury battery, it
has a built-in cable, and it plugs into any 1/8″ TRS stereo microphone jack, like
on laptops, digital recorders, and camcorders.
There are two types of condenser mics: large diaphragm (LDM) and small
diaphragm (SDM). Both record sounds evenly and accurately across their entire
range, though LDMs have a reputation for creating a “warmer” sound. A large
diaphragm mic has a better low-frequency range than a small diaphragm, but a
small diaphragm mic of the same type has a better high-frequency response.
Low tones are characterized as warmer, and high tones are characterized as
cooler and brighter. You’re going to hear all kinds of characterizations for sound
quality: warm, cold, brittle, soft, hard, bright, dull, and on and on. Trust your
own perceptions, and don’t worry about what other people tell you you should
like.


Figure 2-10. A modern AEA R84 ribbon mic
Dynamic mics have a narrower frequency response and are less accurate than
condenser mics. They are rugged, are moisture-resistant, and don’t need a power
supply, so dynamic mics go on stage and in the field. Dynamic mics generally
cover the human vocal range plus a little bit, so this makes them good for
singers.
Another type of microphone is worth consideration, and that is the ribbon mic,
which is a type of dynamic mic. The guts of ribbon mic are a metal ribbon
suspended in a magnetic field. These are expensive but are prized for their
clarity, spatial depth, and realism. They revolutionized the audio industries back
in the 1930s; ribbon microphones set new standards for realism and accuracy
that the condenser mics of the day could not match. Ribbon mics fell out of favor
somewhat as condenser and dynamic mics improved. They were expensive, the
metal ribbon was fragile, and their output was so low they needed more
amplification than other types of microphones. Modern ribbon mics are more
affordable and durable and produce louder output than their ancestors, so they’re
definitely worth trying (Figure 2-10).
Ribbon mics are natively bidirectional, which means they are sensitive to sounds
from both the front and the rear of the mic in a figure-eight pattern. They are
effective at blocking sound from the sides. The figure-eight pattern is on the
horizontal axis, so you can tip them sideways to get a different effect. A pair of
matched ribbon mics placed next to each other at a 90-degree angle is called a
Blumlein pair, or crossed figure eight. This creates a realistic stereo image. If
you don’t want to capture sounds from one side, for example the audience side,
you’ll have to block it somehow or find a ribbon mic with the capture pattern
that you want.

Polar Patterns
Important considerations for microphones are polar patterns. Polar pattern
describes a mic’s area of sensitivity, as Figure 2-11 shows. These two-
dimensional diagrams don’t show that polar patterns are three-dimensional, so
keep in mind that they’re not flat and horizontal; they encompass areas with
height and depth.
Figure 2-11. Some common microphone polar patterns (Image Credit: Created
by Wikipedia user Galak76, released under the GFDL.)
These are the common polar patterns:
Cardioid
Picks up sound from the front and rejects sounds from the rear. Sub-
cardioid is rather like omnidirectional, with a smaller range to the rear.
Hyper-cardioid and super-cardioid have a narrower range in front, plus
small lobes of rear sensitivity. This is common for stage mics and especially
for vocalists. Different cardioid mics have different levels of sensitivity.
Some have a wide pickup range, so they are good for a performer who
moves around a lot, and some have a small area of sensitivity, so they are

better at not picking up background noises.
Omnidirectional
Picks up sound equally from all directions in a spherical area. Try arranging
your band in a circle with an omnidirectional mic in the middle to get a
spacious, natural sound.
Shotgun
The most highly directional of all with a long, narrow front and smaller rear
pickup range. These are commonly used with movie cameras of all kinds,
from film to digital, professional and consumer, and are favorites of wildlife
photographers.
Bidirectional
Picks up sound equally well from front and back; does not pick up sounds
from the side. (Not pictured in Figure 2-11.)
Half-omnidirectional, or hemispherical
Picks up about a 180-degree hemispherical area. You can get some nice live
recordings with one of these because it has a wide pickup area to the front
and does not pick up noises from behind. (Not pictured in Figure 2-11.)
You might be thinking, why not just use shotgun or cardioid mics for everything
so you zero in on just what you want to record? Do whatever you want; let your
own ears and taste be your guide and select your mics to suit the occasion.
Different brands and models of mics have different levels and types of
sensitivity. For example, some are forgiving of a singer who moves around a lot,
while others do a good capture only up close. Wireless headsets are wonderful
for the energetic performer, and wireless mics mean no tripping over cables.
Some mics emphasize bass frequencies more as you move closer, like radio DJs
that boom forth with exaggerated bass. This is called the proximity effect.
The Cowboy Junkies Trinity Session album was recorded using a single
ambisonic microphone that reportedly cost about $9,000. Ambisonics refers to
surround-sound recording techniques and equipment that are supposed to
produce a realistic, spatially natural sound. An ambisonic mic has multiple
capsules to capture sound from different directions, anywhere from four to
dozens. It’s an interesting niche in audio production; look up ambisonic and
SoundField mics if you are interested in learning more.

Which Microphones for Which Occasions?
There are different microphones for all occasions, such as voice, guitar, drum,
and so on. Vocalists can be especially picky, because different mics color their
voices differently. You’ll find plenty of passionate opinions on this subject. Keep
in mind that there are a multitude of factors that affect how good a recording
sounds to you: how it’s edited, the type of equipment you’re listening to, your
listening location (home, friend’s house, performance hall, outside, vehicle), and
your mood and expectations. We’ve grown up with decades of recorded audio of
all types: acetate, vinyl, different types of tape, and now digital. So what sounds
“right” is heavily flavored by what we’re used to hearing. Some folks still
hanker for the sound of tinny ’60s AM radio or boomy jukeboxes or
quadrophonic eight-tracks. Some believe that vinyl sounds “warmer” than digital
and that tube amps sound warmer than solid-state.
I’ve always wanted to do some blind tests just to see whether the picky
audiophiles in my life can really hear a difference. Number one on my blind
testing wish list is tube amp versus solid-state, and cold tube amp versus one that
has had a 24-hour warm-up, because some of the aforementioned picky
audiophiles insist that tube amps need a long warm-up period or they sound
“cold.”
There are real differences between tube and solid-state. Tube amplifier systems
drive a transformer, which in turn drives the speakers. The transformer
suppresses a lot of transients like spikes, pops, and clicks, resulting in a cleaner
sound. A cold preamp has more noise than a hot preamp. Tubes also have a
singular noise source, whereas semiconductor devices have multiple noise
sources, increasing the amount of noise you might hear. Still, on good-quality
gear it’s going to take some mighty fine hearing to detect the difference.
It is nearly impossible to define a “pure” experience, because even live
performances are colored by their environments and equipment, ambience, and
the way our brains process data. It always surprises me how much worse my
favorite local band sounds on the recordings I make of its performances. During
the shows, I’m having a great time and thinking they sound wonderful. Then
later when I hear the playback, I hear all kinds of flaws: off tempo, out of key,
lackluster, you name it. Maybe I’m too picky and too attuned to listening for
mistakes on recordings; maybe during the live shows my brain is too busy
having fun to notice flaws. Maybe I make lousy recordings.

The moral is sound quality depends on your own ears and experience—what
sounds good and right to you is what matters. You can try for the most realistic
fidelity or try for the best artistic and creative fidelity. It’s all subjective.

Microphone Cables
There are many brands of microphone cables, and you can waste a lot of money
on a snooty brand name. Don’t spend a mint; there are many reasonably priced,
good-quality choices. You may run into some confusion over balanced and
unbalanced cables. In the context of connecting microphones, an unbalanced
cable is a coaxial cable that terminates in a tip-sleeve (TS) connector. It has a
single conductor wire surrounded by a combination shield and ground. These are
effective at blocking external interference but are vulnerable to induced hum and
noise and tend to be noisier than balanced cables. A balanced cable terminates in
either a three-pin XLR connector or a TRS connector. It has two internal wires,
one hot and one cold, surrounded by a shield that is not part of the signal path, so
it supplies a cleaner signal. Balanced cables can run for much longer distances
than unbalanced cables without picking up excessive noise.
Keep in mind that it is the signal that is balanced or unbalanced, and using a
balanced cable will not make an unbalanced signal balanced. However, a TS
cable will convert a balanced signal to unbalanced. You need to match your
cables to your mics and your preamp, amp, mixer, or whatever you might be
plugging into. Condenser mics that depend on phantom power mostly likely use
three-pin XLR balanced cables, and dynamic micsuse balanced cables with both
XLR and TRS connectors. A balanced signal doesn’t care what carries it, so you
can use XLR-to-TRS adapters as needed, provided that whatever you’re
plugging into sends the correct signal.
These days this shouldn’t be something that you have to spend a lot of time
figuring out, since most contemporary audio gear supports balanced mic
connections.
Microphone cables are either stiff or flexible, depending on where they’re going
to be used. Flexible cables are for live performances, and stiff cables usually
reside in studios where they are not moved very often.
Don’t cross electric lines with any of your audio cables if you can help it,
because you may pick up interference. If you have to, cross them at right angles
to reduce the overlap.

Smart Miking
Placing your microphones for best results is an art in itself, and the only way to
get good at it is to practice a lot. You want to be as close as possible but not so
close that you pick up electronic interference or unwanted sounds such as lip
smacks and spit from vocalists. Pop filters are helpful for vocalists, and
windscreens are essential for outdoor recording.
The “3-to-1 rule” is a simple guide for microphone placement for live
performances or in the studio when you have several mics and performers set up
at the same time in the same room. When microphones are placed too close
together, you may get squeals, dips and peaks, or other forms of unpleasant
interference. The 3-to-1 rule means the distance between adjacent mics should
be approximately three times the distance between the mic and the sound source.
If there are multiple amps present, as with my fave local band where every
performer lugs their own amp onstage, these will cause problems too.
Sometimes simply turning an amp to face in a different direction will cure
feedback problems.
Microphone stands are essential—don’t depend on hand-holding. Goosenecks
take up less space and are fast to adjust, but over time they wear out. Boom
stands last forever but take up more space. Some folks prefer tripod feet, which I
always trip over, so I prefer weighted bases. Shock mounts and cages are great
for isolating your mics from vibrations and don’t cost very much.

Microphone Preamp
Microphone preamps are the second most important devices in your audio chain,
after ADC/DACs. As I’ve already talked about in this chapter, I have an M-
Audio MobilePre and a Focusrite Saffire Pro 26. With these I don’t need an
internal computer sound card or separate preamp, because they have their own
built-in microphone preamps. However, even if you prefer to use an internal
sound card or have good external recording interfaces, you may still want to use
a separate microphone preamp. Let’s talk about why the preamp is so important.
A preamp—short for preamplifier—amplifies a low-level signal to line level.
The output from a microphone, a turntable, and many instrument pickups is
lower than line level. Line level is a standard analog audio signal voltage that is
designed for connecting different audio components. What is this voltage? Well,
that’s a good question because even though it is billed as a standard voltage, it
varies depending on the manufacturer. Most are around 1 to 2 volts. A preamp
has a significant effect on audio quality: A low-quality preamp will introduce
noise and distortion. A good preamp amplifies the signal cleanly, without
introducing defects or color.
Note
Audio terminology gets bent in all kinds of ways—many of the preamps you see for home hi-fi systems are
not like microphone preamps because they don’t do any amplification but are just switching units where
you plug everything in.
Preamps range from bare-bones models that supply only gain (amplification)
and phantom power to gaudy delights larded up with all kinds of special effects,
dials, and blinky lights. A lot of audio devices come with gobs of special effects
because it costs practically nothing to add them, and they make you feel like
you’re getting something special. If you like lots of special effects, this is a nice
bonus; just don’t let it distract you from a device’s real quality. At the least it is
nice to have some physical knobs. Debates over which preamps are best almost
take on a religious quality. Professionals might spend thousands of dollars on a
single preamp. You’re welcome to do this, but in my opinion you’re better off
starting out with inexpensive gear and investing in perfecting your recording
techniques. Then when you’re ready to move up to better gear, you’ll appreciate

the difference and know how to get the most out of it.

Speakers and Headphones
Having both speakers and headphones in your audio chain lets you hear your
recordings in different ways. Studio monitor speakers are supposedly dead-flat
and accurate and don’t add any color of their own. They also tend to be
expensive. My own studio speakers are a set of nice JBL three-way speakers.
They’re not real studio monitors, just nice speakers that I like. Headphones are
essential—you need these for monitoring your recordings. Audio interfaces that
include built-in zero-latency headphone ports are perfect for monitoring. I seem
to collect headphones: I have a nice Plantronics USB headset, which is great for
recording podcasts; a set of Sennheiser headphones with an ordinary 1/4″ TRS
plug; and wireless Audio-Technica headphones. My studio speakers are powered
by a nice old Pioneer SA 7500 stereo amplifier. I’ve had it repaired twice, and
I’m going to keep it going as long as I can. It’s rated at 45 watts per channel,
which doesn’t sound like much, but it powers those watts with some serious
amperage. Amps are the real measure of power in an amplifier; that is what
makes the difference between a wimpy amp and a good strong clean amp.
Wattage doesn’t mean all that much—that’s just the number salespeople like to
focus on.
None of this is super-duper hi-fi, at least not according to fussy audiophile
standards, but they’re all good components, and they please me.

Your Computer Must Have Muscle and Vast Drawers
Your computer should be a good modern machine with a high-powered CPU and
a lot of RAM. My studio PC has an AMD Phenom triple-core CPUs with 4GB
RAM. Multicore CPUs make a big difference. A single-core CPU should
perform fine for two-track recording and simpler recordings like podcasts and
interviews. For example, I have an old ThinkPad with an 800 MHz CPU and
256MB RAM running Linux that performs nicely as a field recorder for
interviews. For more than two tracks, multicore is the way to go. Don’t worry
about AMD versus Intel; they’re both fine, so use whichever you like best.
You need as much storage as you can afford. CD-quality audio (44.1 kHz, 16-bit
WAV) uses around 5MB per track per minute. Don’t forget to add up all the
tracks you are using and all the retakes. You can buy terabyte hard drives, and by
the time you read this, they’ll probably be even larger. Another option is to
combine the capacity of several hard drives in a RAID (redundant array of
inexpensive disks) array. The two RAID levels that are useful for audio
production are RAID 0 and RAID 10. RAID 0, also called striping, makes two
hard disks look like one, so two 500GB drives appear as a single terabyte drive.
RAID 0 is very fast but has the same weakness as a single drive—if one drive in
the array fails, you’ll probably lose all of your data.
RAID 10 (using a good-quality hardware controller) is mirroring plus striping,
so you get speed and redundancy. Use a good-quality hardware controller; you
don’t want some cheapie that dumps more load on your CPU but instead one that
handles the load itself. It’s more expensive of disks than the popular RAID 5, but
it’s more reliable and a lot faster—you get faster reads and writes and much
faster recovery from a failed drive. I wouldn’t use RAID 5 or 6 arrays for audio
recording; in fact, I don’t use them at all anymore because they’re too fragile,
they’re too slow for writes, and they propagate parity errors too readily.
I wouldn’t worry about building some super-duper RAID array for recording and
editing with Audacity, unless you find yourself burning through terabyte hard
drives all the time. I use a single large hard drive on my studio PC and am
ruthless with housekeeping and getting rid of unneeded files. I use a nice little
four-disk Linux-powered RAID 10 server for backups.

Operating Systems
In this book I will be covering both Linux and Windows. Each one has its
strengths and pitfalls. If you’re a Windows user, XP is still the most reliable
version even though Vista and Windows 7 have been released. You’ll get the
best hardware and software support and the best performance. Vista presents
special problems because of its own high hardware requirements—it may bog
down your system to the point that you can’t comfortably use it for audio
recording, and driver support for many audio devices is immature. Audio
hardware manufacturers seem a little more interested in Windows 7, but it is still
a hog compared to XP. If you want to upgrade from XP, don’t bother with Vista;
go straight to Windows 7. If your audio hardware and software work well on XP,
then keep them as long as you can.
Linux users have the usual hassles with hardware manufacturers pretending they
don’t exist no matter how many products they buy, hype, and give free support
for. Appendix A will tell you what works well in Linux, and you’ll also find
links to sites with current information on audio hardware support in Linux. If it’s
any consolation, a lot of audio hardware vendors don’t release very good
Windows drivers either. Why? Who knows; it is a mystery that I waste too much
time wondering about. Don’t they want happy customers?
Latency is the enemy of quality audio, so please refer to Chapter 13 and
Chapter 14 for tips on tweaking your operating system for best audio
performance.
Here are system requirements per the Audacity documentation. Assume the
same for Windows 7 as for Vista:
Windows 98, ME
128MB/500 MHz recommended, 64MB/300 MHz minimum
Windows 2000, XP
512MB/1 GHz recommended, 128MB/300 MHz minimum
Windows Vista Home Basic
2GB/1 GHz recommended, 512MB/1 GHz minimum
Windows Vista Home Premium/Business/Ultimate
4GB/2 GHz recommended, 1GB/1 GHz minimum
Linux
“Audacity will run best with at least 64MB RAM and a 300 MHz
processor,” says the Audacity documentation for Linux users. I recommend

a minimum 800 MHz CPU and 256MB RAM for podcasts, interviews, and
two-track music recording and the most powerful three-or four-core CPU
you can afford for multitrack recording and editing.

Portable Recording
There are several good methods for field recording. My two favorites are to fix
up a netbook as a portable recording studio or to use a portable digital recorder.
Netbooks are so cool; I’ve been wishing for netbooks ever since I discovered
computers. Ordinary laptops work fine too, and you get more powerful CPUs.
You have all the same options as you do with a desktop computer—your choice
of preamps, mixers, and other audio interfaces, microphones, software—and you
can do all of your editing on the spot and even burn CDs. You also have a nice
screen and keyboard, instead of the tiny screens and buttons found on portable
digital recorders.
Pocket digital recorders work wonderfully well and are fun. These range from
tiny keychain fobs that are the audio equivalent of sticky notes to little recorders
for good-quality voice dictation to high-quality multichannel recorders. Let’s see
what goes into a high-quality unit.
Figure 2-12. The Zoom H2 with an RCA-to-1/8″ stereo plug adapter for
connecting to a mixer or any other two-channel stereo RCA recording or line
output
There are a large number of them that are priced reasonably, and you can slip
one in your pocket and carry it anywhere. Carry extra batteries and some extra
storage cards, and you’re ready for anything. My personal favorite is the Zoom

Handy H2 (Figure 2-12). It runs on two AA batteries and also has an AC adapter.
It has four built-in good-quality microphones, so you can record either in two-
channel stereo or in four-channel surround. It has no speakers, but it comes with
earbuds, and it can also be used as a USB audio interface on a computer. Its 1/8″
line input can be connected directly to the sound board at concerts, and it also
accepts an external microphone. It uses SD cards for storage and supports both
WAV and MP3 file formats. It costs about $150.
Some other popular and excellent portable digital recorders are the Olympus
LS10, Marantz PMD 620, Marantz PMD 660, Sony PCM-D50, Yamaha
Pocketrak 2G, and Zoom H4. All are under $600, and all have built-in mics.
Ideally you’ll be able to get your hands on them and give them good test drives
before purchase because they share a common weakness—tiny LCD control
panels with complicated menus. You’ll also want to test noise levels, because
some of them are nice and quiet when you use the internal mics but are
scratchety with external mics. Most of them accept external mics—some have
only 1/8″ mini-jacks, and some accept full-sized XLR or TRS plugs. The ones
that have XLR jacks don’t always supply phantom power for condenser mics. A
nice option is to use a battery-powered condenser mic, and then you don’t have
to worry about phantom power.
Note
Devices that supply phantom power usually advertise “48v phantom power.” But few mics actually use 48
volts. They usually use much less—as little as 8 to 10 volts.
Some other things to look at are battery life, type, and size of storage cards. Does
it have any built-in storage, and what audio file formats does it support? Does it
come with useful accessories such as AC adapters, windscreen, earbuds, and
stands?
An interesting variation is the M-Audio Micro Track II. This has no built-in mics
but is a miniature two-channel recording studio meant to be used with high-
quality external mics. It supports both dynamic and condenser mics and supplies
a full 48v phantom power for condenser mics.
I prefer to use a USB card reader for transferring files from a portable recorder
to my computer. Usually it’s faster, and it doesn’t run down recorder batteries.

The Secret of Recording Your Own Great Audio
The “secret” behind making good-quality audio recordings isn’t much of a
secret: The most important factor is blocking out unwanted noises. Our brains
are wonderful at ignoring sounds we don’t want to pay attention to, but
microphones give equal attention to all noises. Blocking unwanted noise is
harder than it sounds because our modern world is very noisy: vehicle traffic,
airplanes, appliances, televisions and stereos, fluorescent lights, $2,000 powered
subwoofers roaming the streets at 120 decibels in $500 cars, construction, and so
forth. High-frequency noises are easier to block than low-frequency sounds, as
we all know from our futile attempts to escape those four-wheeled powered
subwoofers, which pound their way through all barriers.
Computers add their own sounds—it’s common to pick up hard drive and fan
noise. So before you stock up on fancy recording equipment, job one is
preparing your recording studio:
Use a quiet room with sound-absorbing walls or wall coverings. Old carpet
and blankets work as well as spendy acoustic foam.
Place a good directional microphone close to whatever you are recording
and aim it carefully.
Shield your mic from your PC.
Adjust your sound levels carefully, neither too low nor too high.
Mount your microphones in shock cages.
But, you may ask, why go to all that trouble? Why not just fix it later? It’s all
just software anyway. My dear reader, if it were as easy as silly TV shows and
movies portray it, there would be no need for soundproofed music recording
studios, and no one would ever holler, “Quiet on the set!” You can mitigate
problems somewhat in Audacity, but you get better results making as good a
recording as possible and saving the fix-its for problems you can’t avoid. It’s
nothing like crime shows where ace audio techs can clean up any recording, no
matter how mangled, to perfect high fidelity. That’s beyond fiction and well into
fantasy.
Hearing Ranges

People who live in so-called primitive societies, without all of our modern “conveniences,” retain keen
hearing well into old age. I suppose if they wanted to make audio recordings, they wouldn’t have to work so
hard at blocking unwanted background noises.
American Indians and Australia’s Aborigines are reported to have hearing ranges of 10 Hz to 25 kHz. The
average person is on the order of 32 Hz to 18 kHz. The excellent technical reviewer for this book, Alvin
Goats, has an extended hearing range of about 22 kHz. It is not as cool as it sounds because most sounds
above 18 kHz are noise: fans, power supplies, speaker distortions, and such. He is sometimes accused of
being hard of hearing due to all of the extra sounds masking what other people are saying.
Gordon Hempton is a wonderful artist who calls himself the Sound Tracker
(http://www.soundtracker.com/). Mr. Hempton has made a career out of recording the pure sounds of nature,
with no human sounds at all. In 1992 he recorded the chorus of dawn around the globe. In later years he
recorded the sounds of the Mississippi river according to the writings of Mark Twain and the sounds of
Yosemite National Park according to the writings of John Muir. He uses a Neumann KU-81i Dummy Head
(named Fritz) to simulate as closely as possible how we hear sounds. He has a released a number of high-
quality CDs so you can hear what a world without noisy people sounds like.
Mr. Hempton began his recording career in the early 1980s. A lot of the locations that he recorded back then
are now too noisy to record.
Your PC should be dedicated to the job and not used for anything else, neither
gaming nor web surfing nor emailing nor anything, because you want all of your
computer’s power dedicated to recording. If you don’t, you risk generating skips
and stutters. Turn off screensavers, all power management, and any antivirus or
antimalware software. (Windows users, do I need to say, don’t be connected to
the Internet after doing this?) Turn off all unnecessary services, scheduled jobs,
and everything that is not essential.
Your microphone will pick up noise, vibrations, and interference from a
surprising number of sources. If you still have an old cathode ray tube (CRT)
monitor, replace it with a modern flat thin-film transistor liquid crystal diode
(TFT-LCD) monitor, because CRTs emit radiation and noise. Sometimes they
even resonate to certain sounds and create echoes.
You can make an effective sound barrier between mic and computer for cheap by
attaching a piece of carpet to a piece of plywood or particle board. Give it feet so
it stands on its own, and you have the equivalent of an expensive piece of a high-
tech sound barrier. Both laptop and desktop machines should sit on
nonresonating surfaces. In a pinch, you can set your laptop on a coat or a pillow,
being careful to not block its cooling vents.
Don’t Smoke
Smoking is bad for you, and it’s bad for computers and audio gear, especially microphones. It’s nasty for
visitors to your studio—they may not appreciate breathing secondhand smoke and having to shower and

change after they leave.
Although many how-tos advise making your studio as acoustically “dead” as
possible, without any echoes or resonance, feel free to experiment. You might
like how some things sound in a space with some hard surfaces. Psychoacoustics
come into play in professional recording studios; they don’t make perfect
anechoic chambers because those are so flat that they sound unpleasant. There is
no sound reflection, nothing that gives depth to sound. So, professional studios
reduce the amount of random noise while preserving some depth to the sound.

Visit Appendix A
Figure 2-13. Layla and Firecracker waiting for their cues
Now that you have some ideas on what you need, please visit Appendix A for a
sampling of good audio gear in all price ranges. This should help you navigate
the huge and splendid world of audio hardware.
Layla and Firecracker, the official studio dogs, wish you well (Figure 2-13).

Chapter 3. Transferring Vinyl LPs (and Other Legacy
Media) to CD
A great way to preserve and enjoy old recordings is to transfer them from any
legacy medium—vinyl LPs, cassette tapes, reel-to-reel tapes, vintage 78s,
videocassettes, even eight-track tapes—to CD. Or you can transfer them to a
hard drive, solid-state drive, or whatever digital storage medium you prefer.
Transferring phonograph records to CD is in demand, and you might even be
able to get a nice sideline going doing this. A lot of people are still hanging on to
their record collections but are afraid to enjoy them because LPs are fragile. A
lot of great albums have never been released on commercial CDs, or the modern
CD remasters are not done well. Some people simply prefer the sound of their
old records.
Although you can copy any analog media and convert it to any digital audio
format, in this chapter we’ll talk mostly about transferring vinyl record albums
and singles to CDs. Once you have converted your old analog media to a digital
format, Audacity has a number of tools for cleaning up the sound quality. You
may not always be able to perform perfect restorations, but you can reduce hiss,
clicks, pops, and other defects to quite tolerable levels.
You can also customize dynamic range compression to suit your own needs,
which is a nice thing because on modern popular CDs, dynamic range
compression is abused to where it spoils the music. Even if they did it well, it
might not be right for you, so Audacity lets you do it your way.
Finally, we’ll discuss the merits of vinyl versus CD and other media, as well as
the ins and out of connecting your various playback devices to your computer. If
you need help setting up your hardware, skip ahead to the Connecting Legacy
Devices to Your Computer in Connecting Legacy Devices to Your Computer

first.
For those of you with golden ears who are not satisfied with 16/44.1 CDs, the
DVD-Audio format supports up to 24/196. That’s right, 24 bits at 196,000
samples per second. DVD-Audio supports 5.1 surround sound, and so does
Audacity in the 1.3.x releases. If you’re not into surround sound, you can cram
several CDs worth of music at 16/44.1 onto a DVD. We’ll learn about authoring
DVD-Audio disks in Chapter 6.
Okay then, let’s dive into copying, editing, and then making CDs. Please review
Chapter 1 if you need a refresher on the basics of using Audacity.

Preparing Vinyl LPs for Copying
First, clean up your vinyl records as well as you can. Sure, you can do a lot to
clean up digital audio files, but it’s not like on TV where the ace lab tech makes
pristine restorations effortlessly. That’s fiction, my dear readers, and we are
stuck in the real world. It’s better to start with the best-quality recording
possible; it’s less work, and you get better results.
I have my nice old Discwasher brushes from the olden days, and it’s a good
thing because the new ones are inferior. Real Discwasher brushes have a
directional nap—hold them one way to clean the record, and then reverse your
stroke on a clean lint-free cloth to clean the brush. There is an arrow embedded
on the handle that points to the leading edge. You can use a real Discwasher
brush dry or with a wet cleaning solution. The correct way to wet-clean with
Discwasher is to apply the cleaning solution to the leading edge of the brush
only, leaving the rest of it dry. You can clean a record on your turntable while it’s
rotating, but be careful you don’t apply so much pressure that you damage the
motor. Apply the wet leading edge of the brush for three to four turns, and then
roll the brush to bring the dry part in contact with the record for another three to
four turns. Give it time to dry completely before playing it, because playing a
wet record can damage it. (However, on a record that is already in bad, nothing-
to-lose condition, playing it wet might make it sound better. Moisten it carefully
with distilled water or Discwasher D4 fluid, and give it a whirl. It won’t hurt
your stylus.)
A nice thing to have for everyday cleaning is a carbon antistatic brush. These are
always used dry and are pretty good at lifting out dust, lint, and other particles
that try to make a home on your records. But they’re no good for cleaning
fingerprints, sticky goo, or other muck that requires a wet cleaner.
There are all kinds of cleaning solutions, microfiber cloths, brushes, and even
wet power washers. The debates over the best ways to clean vinyl records are
endless and loud; I shall leave it to you to do your own homework and figure out
what you prefer. You can pick up nasty, dirty, nothing-to-lose records to practice
on at thrift shops for cheap. Given the variety of claims over what works best, I
suspect that vinyl is tougher than we give it credit for.
The History of Record Production

The earliest recordings were made on rotating wax cylinders with a needle in the middle of a vibrating
diaphragm attached to a horn, like an old-fashioned ear trumpet. The horn functioned like a microphone.
The needle vibrations cut an uneven groove into the wax. Modern mono recordings were made using the
same principle of a vibrating needle cutting into a softer material, except the needle was moved by a
magnet.
Stereo came about when someone experimented with the angle of the magnet with respect to the needle and
found that it could be controlled precisely enough to cut each side of the groove differently, creating two
stereo channels. The technology for producing vinyl records, even with the advent of CDs and digital audio,
has continued to improve, and some record labels are still producing high-quality vinyl recordings. With all
of these advances, it’s still a single needle doing the recording and playback for two channels, which results
in a bit of crosstalk, so precision tuning of your turntable is required to get the best performance.
Note
Never use any kind of alcohol on vintage 78 rpm records or any acetate or nonvinyl records because it will
damage them. The earliest records were made of wax, and there were many different wax compositions
using carnuba, beeswax, and other materials. People who know about these things recommend not using
liquid cleaners at all. If you have vintage records, I recommend consulting experts who know how to handle
them safely. Solutions containing alcohol are fine for modern vinyl records, and most record cleaners
contain alcohol. Whatever cleaner you use, it must be something that leaves no residue.
You should also invest in a stylus brush and cleaner, because gunk builds up on
your stylus. This is less controversial; I use the Stanton SC-4 brush and cleaner,
and they do the job just fine. Remember, you cannot be too careful when you’re
handling your turntable’s stylus; handle it as gently as you possibly can by its
mounting brace only. Never touch it with your fingers.
Use a stylus gauge to adjust the vertical tracking force of your stylus. High-
quality cartridges require a mere 0.5 to 3 grams. Medium-quality styli, and those
designed for DJs, go as high as 5 grams. Set the tracking force per the
instructions for your particular hardware. Too light and too heavy will both cause
too much wear, so you really want it just right.
Depending on your turntable and tonearm, you may also have antiskate, vertical
tracking angle, and azimuth adjustments. Your turntable documentation should
tell you all about what these are and how to adjust them. The idea is to make
correctly aligned contact without causing asymmetrical wear. It is worth
spending some time tuning your turntable, and you may be surprised at how
much difference tiny adjustments make.

Eight Steps to Converting Records to CDs
First let’s list all the steps and then in the next sections go through them in detail.
Vintage records require some special handling, which we’ll get to in Copying
Vintage 78s in Copying Vintage 78s. If you don’t know how to hook up your
turntable, visit Connecting Legacy Devices to Your Computer in Connecting
Legacy Devices to Your Computer first. These are the steps to follow:
1. Set Audacity’s frame rate to CDDA frames in the Selection toolbar.
2. Set the project rate to 32-bit float/44.1 or 16/44.1.
3. Copy your album into Audacity into one long track.
4. Make any fixes such as removing noise and pops, normalizing,
compressing, and deleting unnecessary bits.
5. Enter metadata.
6. Export the Audacity tracks to CD-ready audio files.
7. Use your favorite CD-writing software to copy your songs to a CD.
8. Pop your new CD into a player and enjoy.
The most time-consuming part is fixing defects. This chapter has some tips for
common fixes, and Chapter 12 is devoted entirely to fix-its and cleanups.
I like to record singles a little differently than in step 3: I prefer to record each
single into its own track, so it looks like Figure 3-1.
Figure 3-1. Putting each song into a separate Audacity track

Use the Track menu on each track to enter the song titles as the track names. At
export, when all the tracks are exported to CD-ready files, each file will take the
track name.
The advantage of using individual Audacity tracks per single is it’s easier to
reorder them, and you can normalize volume levels in one operation. When all
the songs are in one track, normalization won’t bring the quiet songs up to the
same volume as the loud songs. Any variances have to be corrected one song at a
time. But when multiple tracks are normalized, all of them are brought up to the
same volume level in one step.

Audacity Settings
First, set the correct frame rate for CD audio in the Selection toolbar, as
Figure 3-2 shows. This ensures that any splits you make will start and end on a
CD frame. Any audio that lands outside of these frames will be lost and possibly
create clicking noises. You can choose either hh:mm:ss + CDDA frames (75 fps)
or CDDA frames (75 fps). The former shows the time plus CD frames, and the
latter displays only CD frames. Check the “Snap To” box to ensure that stops
and starts are always on the CD frame boundaries.
Figure 3-2. Setting the correct frame rate for CD audio
Then set your quality preferences in the Edit>Preferences >Quality dialog to a
sample rate of 44,100 Hz and a bit depth of 32-bit float. The Red Book CD
Audio standard is 16/44.1, but if you have enough disk space, working in 32-bit
float has a number of advantages. It gives you the largest possible dynamic
range, which means less noise and a lot of headroom for editing, so you can do a
lot of processing with losing quality.
Recording at 16/44.1 works fine if you want to conserve disk space, especially if
you’re doing straight copying with minimal editing. The more manipulation you
do, the better it is to work in 32-bit float.
While you’re in the Preferences menu, review these options as well:
On the Recording tab, uncheck “Overdub: Play other tracks while recording
new one” and “Software Playthrough: Listen while recording or montoring
new track.”
On the Import/Export tab, check “Show Metadata Editor prior to export.”
Make sure the number of recording channels is set correctly (Devices tab),
which is two-channel stereo. Even old mono LPs use two tracks.

Recording
Then click File > Save Project As and give your project a name, start your
record player, and set your recording levels. You have plenty of headroom, so
give yourself some space to avoid clipping. Using a 32-bit float bit depth means
you can record to a peak of -24 dB and still have more dynamic range than your
hardware can use; I usually record to a peak of -9 dB because a record is not
unpredictable like a live show. If it surprises me with a sudden super-loud
passage, I can easily rerecord it. Click View > Show Clipping, and Audacity
will highlight any clipping with a bright red line.
Then click the Record button and start playing your record. There’s nothing
much to do except kick back and enjoy the music until it’s time to flip to side
two. Click the Pause button to pause recording while you flip the record. Every
time you click Record, it starts a new track, so use Pause to keep going on the
same track. If you accidentally hit Stop instead, you can append to your existing
track with shift-Record.
It is a good idea to record some noise, like at the beginning of the record before
the music starts and at the end after the music stops, so you can do some
effective noise removal later. A pure noise sample with no music in it is best.
Save this in a separate track.

Fixing Defects
First do a rough trim to delete any unwanted sections. Don’t cut too closely but
leave some extra, and then apply the finishing touches later. Trimming away
unwanted sections of your tracks is easy; just select the parts you don’t want and
press the delete key, or click the Cut button. Another way to do deletions is to
select what you want to keep and then click the Trim button. This keeps your
selection and deletes the rest.
Deleting part of a track makes it shorter, and sometimes you might not want to
do this but rather keep it the same length. Do this by silencing instead of deleting
—select the part you want to get rid of and click the Silence button. This makes
it silent instead of removing it, and your track stays the same length.
The next step is to fix any clipping or scratches. It is common for defects to be in
only one channel. This is more characteristic of vinyl because the needle is
pushed by the groove, so the side pushing the needle inward gets more wear.
Tapes will also wear unevenly because one track is on the “inside” away from
the edge of the tape. The track closest to the edge will be affected the most by
magnetism, electrical fields, and physical damage from the tape guides.
Note
The definition of track is a bit squishy. An audio track is a single mono track or a two-channel stereo track,
or it’s a single song on a long track with multiple songs.
To fix a defect in only one channel, use the Split Stereo Track command in the
Track panel to break your stereo track into two separate tracks. Then you can
edit each one separately, and when you’re finished, you can use Make Stereo
Track to put them back together. A nice benefit of dividing them is that the
undamaged track will mask less-than-perfect repairs in the other track.
Did you know you can insert silence? If you need to pad a track and make it a
little longer or you need to insert a silent gap, first click to mark the point where
you want to insert some silence. Then click Generate > Silence, enter how long
you it want to be, and click OK. The new silent portion will be inserted to the
right of your mark. Figure 3-3 shows how to create a two-second silence. Note
that it contains a dropdown menu just like the Selection toolbar, with all different

types of values to use: seconds, hours/minutes/seconds, different frame rates, and
so on.
Figure 3-3. Inserting two seconds of silence

Fade In, Fade Out
Fading in and out is done a lot in recordings. In Figure 3-4 I deleted a long
boring stretch of applause and left about a three-second gap, and then I used the
Envelope tool to gracefully fade out to silence and then back in. The Envelope
tool gives you a great deal of control over fades and volume levels. The little
white squares are control nodes. Create new nodes by clicking wherever you
want them, drag them in any direction to raise or lower volume, and drag them
beyond the track borders to get rid of them. Envelope tools are standard in nearly
all audio-editing applications.
Figure 3-4. Fade to silence, then back to normal using the Envelope tool
Another way to apply fades is with Effect > Fade Out and Fade In. Select the
part of your track where you want it to fade, click Effect > Fade Out or Fade
In, and it will automatically apply a graceful, uniform fade for you. You control
only the length of the fade.
Some CD-writing applications automatically create a two-second gap between
audio tracks, so beware. You might not want a gap between songs in a live
performance or a gap added to the one that you created in Audacity. Good CD-
writing applications let you control this behavior.

Fixing Warps
Audacity won’t fix a warped record. A top-quality turntable will track a warped
record more accurately than a low-budget turntable. Many how-tos suggest
flattening the warp by carefully warming the record to soften it—in an oven, in a
sunny window, in a warm vehicle—and then placing it inside a clean paper
sleeve and putting it under a heavy weight. I have tried the warm vehicle method
because the idea of using an oven scares me, and sometimes it works well if you
are careful and finicky about keeping everything clean. Pressing debris into the
soft, warm vinyl won’t improve it any.
You can use Audacity to mitigate some of the bad sounds created by a warped
record, such as clicks, pops, and hiss; see the next section.

Fixing Skips and Pops
You can find any skips or pops caused by scratches or warps pretty easily by
looking at the waveform, as Figure 3-5 shows. They appear as abrupt, slender
peaks. Effect > Click Removal is pretty good at removing clicks in batches
without removing music. It looks for spikes in the waveform that are typical of
the pops caused by scratches, deletes the scratches, and then does a bit of
interpolation to reconstruct the waveform. The Select threshold setting
determines the sensitivity for deciding when a spike is a scratch. Smaller Select
threshold values are more sensitive, and larger values are less sensitive. Too
much sensitivity means something you want to keep might be identified as a
click and removed, such as some percussion effects.
Figure 3-5. The area to the left of the cursor line is between songs and should be
relatively flat, but this example is from a record with a lot of little scratches, so
you see many sudden, slender peaks instead.
The Max spike width value determines the maximum length of a segment, in
milliseconds (ms), that the Click Removal tool will remove. The default is 20
ms, which is longer than most scratches.
Select a small segment of a track that has some scratches on it and try a bit of
trial and error, which goes quickly thanks to the Click Removal effect’s Preview
button. Listen to the preview, and if it doesn’t sound right, change the settings
and try again. The defaults are pretty good, and once you have the settings
tweaked to your satisfaction, go ahead and apply them to the whole track.

Note
The default preview length is three seconds. If that is too short, open the Edit > Preferences > Playback >
Length of Preview dialog and make it longer.
You may want to repair a click or pop manually, especially if there are only a
few of them. It doesn’t take long. One way is to select Effect > Amplify and
lower it to -50 dB, which will silence it. Another way is to use the Repair tool,
which is more surgical. Zoom in until you can see the individual samples, select
a segment to operate on, and click Effect > Repair. The Repair tool operates on
a maximum of 128 samples. Just like the Click Removal tool, it uses
interpolation to reduce and smooth out the edges of the repaired segment, so it
doesn’t leave a gap. (Figure 3-6 shows the before and after.)
Figure 3-6. Using the Repair tool, before and after, to repair some clipping
Note
Remember the Zoom tool—you can magnify your waveform enough to see the individual samples and give
yourself plenty of room to make precise edits. To keep your place when you’re zooming in and out, click to
mark your location on the track, and the Zoom tool will automatically center on your mark.

Finding and Repairing Clipping
Use View > Show Clipping to quickly find any clipped segments. Clipping is
caused when the volume of your recording goes over 0 dB. Clipping is nasty in
digital audio because it causes distortion. An easy way to fix a brief clipped
segment is with the Amplify effect. Zoom in and carefully select the clipped
segment, and then select Effect > Amplify to bring it down a notch or two. Use
a negative value for the Amplification setting, such as -3.0. One decibel is about
the smallest level of change we can perceive, and every 3 decibels doubles or,
when reducing amplitude, halves the volume level. So -3 dB is half as loud as 0
dB, and -6 dB is half as loud as -3 dB. Clipped passages over a few seconds long
should be rerecorded.

Noise Removal
Vinyl LPs, on even the finest systems, are never completely silent. There is
always some sort of background noise: hiss, turntable rumble, tiny scratchy
noises from static electricity or pressing defects in the vinyl. Open the Effect >
Noise Removal effect to get rid of this unwanted noise. It’s not perfect, and
there is always a trade-off between removing noise without causing too much
damage to the music. It works best when you have a good noise profile and the
noise is distinctly different from what you want to keep.
First you need to build a profile of the noise you want to remove, so select a few
seconds of your track that has only noise, such as the very beginning or very end
where the stylus is traveling over the record but not over the music. The longer
your noise sample, the better, from 5 seconds up to 30 seconds or so. Select your
noise sample, and then in the Effect > Noise Removal dialog, click the Get
Noise Profile button. Next, select the segment that you want to apply noise
removal to and click OK. You can use the Preview button to make sure it’s doing
it right before hitting OK. Apply Noise Removal as precisely as you can to
minimize side effects. Hiss, wow and flutter, hum, and low-level scratchiness are
all common defects, and the Noise Removal tool works well if you have a good
clean noise sample.
If you don’t like the results, press ctrl-Z to undo, change some settings, and try it
again. The default noise reduction level is -24 dB, which means segments
identified as noise are attenuated by -24 dB. If this removes too much of the
recording, reduce this and try it again. A similar tactic that often works well is to
go back to your noise sample, reduce its amplitude a few dB, create a new
profile, and try again. You don’t want to erase the noise completely because this
may erase things you want to keep, just lower it to where it’s not bothersome.
The Frequency smoothing and Attack/decay time sliders are more aggressive
when you move them left and less aggressive on the right sides of the scales. A
larger value for frequency smoothing means it treats a wider range of
frequencies as the same, so it makes larger changes. Attack is how hard a note is
hit, and decay is how long it takes to fade away. Since there is only one
Attack/decay time slider, the attack and decay times will always be the same.
Smaller values are more abrupt, and larger values are more gradual.
Another slick trick is to use the Equalization effect (see Chapter 11 to learn
more) to reduce hiss or rumble by reducing the amplitude of frequencies below

500 Hz and above 15,000 Hz. Of course, this will also affect any sounds in this
range that you want to keep, so it’s not always the best solution, but it is one
more thing to try. You can try this in any part of the frequency range that
contains unwanted noise.
Another way to limit a range of frequencies is to use a high-pass or low-pass
filter. A high-pass filter blocks low frequencies and allows high frequencies to
pass, while a low-pass filter blocks high frequencies. You may need to install
some plugins to get high-and low-pass filters for Audacity; look in your Effects
menu to see what is installed on your system. (Chapter 11 tells where to find and
how to install plugins.)

Customizing Dynamic Range Compression
You may want to tailor the dynamic range of your recording for more
comfortable listening in different environments. Because listening to a recording
with a wide dynamic range in a noisy environment like a vehicle or at work
means it’s always too loud or too soft, you can change this with a dynamic range
compressor. Compressors are used all the time in audio production. I think
they’re overused, but the neat thing with Audacity is you can adjust it to please
yourself. A compressor usually attenuates the louder frequencies, reducing the
difference between the soft and loud passages. Some compressors also boost the
quieter frequencies. Compress Dynamic Range in Change Speed tells all about
how to apply compression to your recordings.

Normalization
Now that you are finished with repairs, it is time to normalize the volume for the
whole album. If you copied everything to a single Audacity track, select the
entire track and apply Effect > Normalize. This won’t affect the dynamic range
or change audio quality; all it does is raise the overall volume level. Set your
maximum amplitude no higher than 0.0, which is the maximum for digital audio,
and make sure that “Remove any DC offset” is checked. DC offset refers to the
mean amplitude. If this is not zero, then normalization won’t be applied correctly
because the amplitude levels will be unbalanced, and it might even create a bit of
distortion. When this is finished, you’re ready to go on to the next section.
If you put each song into a separate Audacity track, press ctrl-A to select all
tracks and then apply normalization. Then skip ahead to Exporting to CD-Ready
Files, Multiple Audacity Tracks in Exporting to CD-Ready Files, One Long
Audacity Track.

Dividing a Long Track into Individual Songs
If you copied everything into one long track, you can export this to a 16-bit
WAV file and then copy it to a CD. But you won’t have individual songs;
instead, you’ll have one long track with no way to skip between songs. So here
is how to divide it into individual songs. Start at the very beginning; make sure
you are exactly at the beginning of the track by pressing the home key. Then
press ctrl-B. This will create a new label track under your album track, and the
cursor will be inside a little text box. Type the name of the first song into this
little box and press nter. Then click wherever you want the break to go between
the first and second songs, press ctrl-B, and type in the name of the second song.
Keep going until all the songs have their name labels (Figure 3-7).
Figure 3-7. Dividing one big track into individual song tracks and labeling them

Exporting to CD-Ready Files, One Long Audacity
Track
If you have copied all your songs into one long Audacity track, this is how you
export them to individual CD-ready audio files. First open File > Open
Metadata Editor and enter the album title and artist’s name, as well as any
other information that you want to preserve in the track metadata. Leave the
Track Title and Track Number fields blank, because Audacity will fill those in
for you.
Next, go to File > Export Multiple and choose Export Format: WAV
(Microsoft) signed 16 bit PCM. You’ll see a window like Figure 3-8. I
recommend exporting to a separate directory and not mixing your exports with
your Audacity project files. Select the “Split files based on: Labels” and “Name
files: Using Label/Track Name” radio buttons. Check the “Overwrite existing
files” box only if you are sure you want newly exported files to replace old files
with the same name. Click OK, and you’re on your way.
Figure 3-8. Exporting each song into an individual, CD-ready audio file using
the label names as the filenames
If you enabled “Show Metadata Editor prior to export” in the Edit >
Preferences > Import/Export dialog as I suggested, the Metadata Editor will
appear for every song as it exports. It is okay to turn it off if you don’t need to
review the metadata for every song.

Exporting to CD-Ready Files, Multiple Audacity
Tracks
If you copied each song to an individual Audacity track, this is how you export
them to individual CD-ready audio files. First open File > Open Metadata
Editor and enter any information common to all the tracks, such as date, genre,
or artist’s name. Leave the Track Title and Track Number fields blank, because
Audacity will fill those in for you.
Next, go to File > Export Multiple and choose Export Format: WAV
(Microsoft) signed 16 bit PCM. You’ll see a window like Figure 3-9. I
recommend using a separate directory and not mixing your exports with your
Audacity project files. Select the “Split files based on: Labels” and “Name files:
Using Label/Track Name” radio buttons. Check the “Overwrite existing files”
box only if you are sure you want newly exported files to replace old files with
the same name. Click OK, and you’re on your way. You will end up with each
song in a separate file, and the track names you created will become the
filenames.
Figure 3-9. Exporting each track into an individual CD-ready audio file, using
the track names as the filenames.

Writing Songs to a CD
Now you have a batch of nice individual WAV files, one file per song. Write
your songs to a CD with your favorite CD writer application, and you’re done.
Don’t burn at the maximum speed, but throttle down to half speed to make sure
you get a good disk. Be sure to select “New Audio Project,” or whatever your
particular application calls making a music CD, because this creates a CD in the
proper Red Book Audio format. Don’t make an ordinary data CD because then it
won’t work in standard CD players, like in your vehicle or hi-fi system. Standard
CD players can’t play WAV files. (Computer CD players will handle just about
anything, because it is all done in software media players.)
Watch the order of your song tracks—your CD-writing application may put your
songs in alphabetical order, rather than track order. A quick way to sort them is
by date, if your CD-writing software supports this, since the first song exported
will always be the oldest and the last one the newest.
If you have an inkjet printer that supports printing on CDs and DVDs, you can
get special CD blanks that are made to be printed on. These have either a white
or silver side that is designed to hold ink and not smear. Another newfangled
printable CD/DVD requires a special thermal printer, which can be purchased for
about $100. A third printable disk type is called LightScribe, which requires a
special CD/DVD writer. These are in the same price range as ordinary CD/DVD
writers, about $50.
“Do I need to buy a special audio CD?”
The answer to this commonly asked question is no. All CDs are exactly the same type. Some countries
charge a tax on “audio” CDs that supposedly gets paid to musicians to compensate for lost income from
illegal copying. (If they actually receive a fair share of this tax, I will eat my favorite vinyl LP.) The other
special thing about them is a pressed data flag that is part of the Serial Copy Management System (SCMS)
to control copying protected material. The SCMS encoding controls three states: copy allowed (00), copy
once (11), and copy prohibited (10). It won’t stop you from making copies of an original CD. If the “copy
once” flag is set, it might interfere with putting a copy on a CD writer that attaches to your hi-fi system.
Computer hardware and media are exempt from the laws that mandate SCMS. I use ordinary nonaudio CD
blanks, and they work fine in all CD players.

Copying Vintage 78s
Vintage 78s 78s is shorthand for old monophonic phonograph records made from
about the 1890s to the late 1950s. These are also called short-play records and
wide-groove records. There were no real industry standards until the early 1930s,
so older records played at a variety of speeds, from 60 to 130 rpm. Vintage 78s
are made of shellac mixed with dyes, fillers, and other materials, and they come
in a range of sizes all the way up to 16″ in diameter. Some are laminated and will
come apart if they get wet. Alcohol will dissolve shellac, and even too much
humidity will hurt it.
Vinyl LPs, whether mono or stereo, play at 33 1/3 rpm, and singles play at 45
rpm or 78 rpm. Yes, way back in the olden days there were 78 rpm singles; for
example, these were favored by Disney in the early 1960s. You might also find
some 45 rpm LPs. Two main differences between these and vintage 78s is they
are made of vinyl rather than shellac and they are cut in microgrooves rather
than wide grooves. The coarse-groove records require a 3 mm stylus, while
microgroove records use a 1 mm stylus. You can play old monophonic LPs and
singles with a modern stereo cartridge and stylus, but not vintage records. There
are modern cartridges and styli that are made for playing these old records, such
as the popular Shure M78S.
I’m no expert on vintage 78s, but if you need more information on the correct
ways to store, handle, and play these old-timers, there are a lot of great resources
both online and in the real world. There are many vintage phonograph record
experts, aficionados, and traders, so it’s not hard to find some expert guidance.
Once you have all the hardware and safe handling sorted out, there are a few
things you need to do differently in Audacity. Open the Edit > Preferences >
Devices dialog and set the number of recording channels to 1 (mono). Then go
to Edit > Preferences > Import/Export and select “Use custom mix.” The
reason for doing this is to mix down to two channels from your mono track so
you’ll hear music in both speakers on your stereo system. If you don’t do this,
you’ll get playback from only one speaker. Figure 3-10 shows you what
Audacity’s mixer panel should look like: Move the slider at the bottom to create
two output channels, and then click “Audio Track” (or whatever name you gave
your track) and “Channel: 2” to link them together.

Figure 3-10. Mixing down a mono recording to two channels for playback on
stereo systems

Connecting Legacy Devices to Your Computer
There are several ways to connect turntables and other legacy components to
your computer. First let’s talk about connectors. The terms plug, port, socket,
and jack are thrown around willy-nilly these days. Just to keep it clear and
simple, I shall call the connecters on cables and adapters plugs, and the things
they plug into (like the RCA and TRS sockets on amplifiers) are jacks. Also, in
the interest of honoring standard terminology, I shall refer to plugs and jacks
according to gender, male and female. This is especially important with gender
changers, which are adapters for changing from one connection type to another.
In the olden days everyone used 1/4″ (6.3 mm) TRS plugs, and life was easy.
Then manufacturers started making 1/8″ (3.5 mm) mini-jacks and plugs and the
even dinkier 3/32″ (2.5 mm) micro-minis. It doesn’t matter what your devices
have because there are adapters to fit any situation. In fact, it’s common for
devices with mini-plugs to include 1/4″ adapters, and you can also get adapters
to fit 1/4″ plugs into mini-jacks. Just make sure you have a correctly matched
adapter, either mono or stereo. Mono TRS plugs have one black insulator ring,
and stereo plugs have two.
RCA audio connectors, fortunately, are still the same as they have always been.
RCA plugs come in a rainbow of colors, and each color has a meaning: Red
means right channel, white means left channel or mono channel, and the other
colors are for different surround sound channels. They’re all the same, so it
doesn’t matter if you use the “wrong” colors. There is only one size. They are
also called phono plugs. Figure 2-7 in Multichannel Recording, PCI, USB,
FireWire shows an assortment of TRS jacks, adapters, male and female RCA
connectors, and a dual-RCA-to-single-stereo-plug adapter. Adapters are
inexpensive, and you always need them, so get a grab bag for all occasions.
My favorite way to digitize legacy media is to connect a stereo amplifier or
receiver to an analog-to-digital/digital-to-analog converter (ADC/DAC), which
then connects to the computer. Then every component that connects to the amp
—turntable, tape deck, radio tuner, VCR, CD, DVD—is available to record in
Audacity. (CDs and DVDs can be played and copied directly on your computer;
see Chapter 5 to learn how to do this.)
You probably already have an ADC/DAC on your computer—your computer’s
sound card. If it has a Line In port, you should use that. These are light blue 1/8″

stereo jacks. Depending on your amp or receiver, you should have a pair of
standard RCA outputs you can connect to your sound card, usually called record
out or line out. Flip back to Figure 2-2 in An Example Studio to see the back of
my treasured old Pioneer amplifier.
So, connecting my amp to an internal computer sound card requires a two-RCA-
to-1/8″ stereo mini-plug adapter, as in Figure 3-11.
Figure 3-11. Because of the proliferation of 1/8″ mini-plugs, this is the
workhorse of many a conversion studio.
On surround-sound home theater receivers, consult your manual to figure out the
best recording outputs. For example, I have an Onkyo 5.1 system with a pair of

RCA tape outputs, just like my old Pioneer amp. You have to use the remote
control to select the correct output channels, and then it records whatever is
currently playing.
My favorite recording interface is an M-Audio MobilePre USB, which is a
combination microphone preamp and ADC/DAC. This replaces an internal
computer sound card. The MobilePre supports a number of different connectors,
so I could use the two-RCA-to-1/8″ adapter or a two-RCA-to-two-1/4″ TRS
adapter, as in Figure 3-12.
Figure 3-12. A two-RCA-to-two-1/4″ TRS adapter. Note that the Y-adapter
(bottom right) is not needed for connecting the MobilePre to the Record outputs
on the amplifier. The Y-adapter comes in handy when I need to use a headphone
jack for my recording source.

Connecting a Turntable to Your Computer
There are several ways to connect a turntable to your computer in addition to
connecting through your amplifier connected to your computer. A popular
method is to use a USB phono preamp that lets you connect any turntable, even
cherished old ones, directly to your computer. In fact, you might want to look for
a good old turntable instead of a modern one, because it’s hard to match the
quality of those old turntables without spending a mint. You can pick up decent
USB phono preamps for cheap, such as the ART USB Phono Plus V2 for around
$100. It includes a gain control, a clipping indicator, a monitor port, a USB port,
RCA inputs and outputs, optical ports, and an S/PDIF port. The ADC/DAC
operates at 16/44.1 and 16/48. It even includes a phono ground connector, which
is a must-have for turntables that have ground wires. If you don’t ground them,
you’ll get an annoying hum.
You need a phono preamp and not just any old preamp, because phono preamps
apply the RIAA equalization curve correction. This is very important. The RIAA
equalization curve is an industry standard for attenuating bass frequencies
(below 500 Hz) on a vinyl LP and boosting frequencies above 2,120 Hz. Vinyl
LPs have to be recorded this way or the bass grooves would take up most of the
album, resulting in short playing time, and the higher frequencies would barely
be audible. When you play a vinyl record, your integrated amplifier or receiver
corrects this imbalance with a built-in phono preamp that reverses the RIAA
curve. It sounds tinny with hardly any bass, and you can hear this by turning off
your speakers and placing your ear close to the cartridge while a record is
playing.
Note
Amplifiers and receivers are called integrated because the preamp is built in. Amps and receivers that
accept separate preamps often still have integrated preamps. In the wacky world of audio components, you
may spend more for a bare amplifier that doesn’t have an integrated preamp or radio tuner. The most
expensive stereo amp I ever saw had a completely blank faceplate with only a power switch, power LED,
and volume knob.
The RIAA equalization curve became widely adopted starting around 1955, so
records from before then may have different equalization curves. If you want to
fuss with making your own handcrafted equalization corrections, you can do this

in Audacity. Audacity also has a number of prefab equalization curves, such as
Columbia LP, AES, Decca, and RCA. Use an ordinary preamp instead of a
phono preamp to get an uncorrected signal, copy your album into Audacity, and
then apply your own equalization. Figure 3-13 shows what the RIAA curve
equalizer looks like in Audacity.
Figure 3-13. The Equalization effect allows you to fine-tune equalization any
way you want, and it supports creating custom presets.
A good way to connect a turntable to your recording interface, as mentioned
earlier, is to connect your turntable to your stereo receiver or amplifier in the
usual manner and then connect your receiver to your computer’s recording
interface.
One more option to consider is buying a USB turntable with its own built-in
phono preamp. These are becoming popular as more people want to try
converting their own albums to CD. It’s a great concept and convenience, but a
lot of them are not very good quality, so shop carefully.
My own personal turntable is an Audio-Technica AT-PL120. This is not a sweet
decades-old turntable but a shiny new direct-drive three-speed with its own
internal phono preamp. That’s right, 33 1/3, 45, and 78. It’s designed to be a DJ
turntable, so it comes with an elliptical stylus for playing records both frontward
and backward. (The horror! As if I would do that to a perfectly good LP!) It has
adjustable speed, pitch, antiskate, and feet levelers, and it’s weighty and solid as

a good turntable should be. The internal preamp is switchable, so you can either
connect it directly to a recording interface or switch off the internal preamp and
connect to an external phono preamp. If you want to play vintage 78s, you need
to purchase a special cartridge and stylus, such as the Shure M78S wide-groove
monophonic cartridge.
Note
Our excellent technical consultant Alvin notes that radio DJs used direct-drive turntables so they could
rotate them backward: “You manually adjust the record so that you know where the song begins, then turn
the record back one quarter of a turn. When you hit “play” on those record players, the turntable is at full
speed in the one quarter turn.”
Figure 3-14 shows my own setup at home. I have both recording and playback
routed through my M-Audio MobilePre USB.
Figure 3-14. From the right to left: nice old Pioneer stereo amp, Audio Technica
three-speed turntable, color printer, M-Audio MobilePre, screen, headsets, three-
core CPU wedged into salvaged E-Machine case

Connecting a Tape Deck
Tape decks can connect directly to your computer. Just connect their RCA output
plugs to your recording interface with the appropriate adapter. Your recording
interface might already have RCA inputs.

Which Is Better: Vinyl, Tape, or CDs?
There are endless debates over which has superior sound quality, vinyl LPs or
CDs. I’ve been a serious music fan since I was a wee tot way back in the days of
reel-to-reel tapes and vinyl LPs. My dad was a symphony musician and music
teacher, and to this day I don’t believe he has acknowledged any music made
after the 18th century. (Kidding, Dad! Hugs!) I think CDs are the bee’s knees.
In the olden days before CDs, a lot of music lovers who wanted to preserve their
vinyl played a new LP only once, to copy it to tape. It was no use purchasing
commercially recorded cassettes because of their inferior quality. They used the
cheapest tape and were plagued with hiss, narrow dynamic range, and overall
cruddy tone. By the early ’70s, commercially recorded reel tapes were pretty
much gone from the market, so if you wanted good-quality tape recordings, you
had to do it yourself.
This might sound like a lot of fussiness to readers who are not familiar with
audio tapes and LPs, but there were shortcomings with both media, and neither
one provided a completely satisfactory solution. It’s easier to skip tracks on an
LP and they’re easier to handle than reel tapes, but it’s nearly impossible to keep
them clean and undamaged. Neither one holds very much music. A vinyl LP
holds 16 to 24 minutes per side; modern dance music LPs hold 12 minutes or
less because of the extreme thumping bass, which creates wider grooves. Don’t
even suggest using a record changer—those are for people who like having
mangled records. A 1,200-foot, 7-inch reel of 1/4″ tape, which was common for
home recording, holds 64 minutes per side at 3.75 inches per second (ips) and 32
minutes at 7.5 ips. (In comparison, professional recordings were made at 15 and
30 ips.) Neither one is easily portable, and you can’t play them in cars.
Cassette tapes revolutionized home and portable audio. They were good
compromises among sound quality, portability, and cost, and they were a lot
more rugged than reel tapes or LPs. You can stop a cassette tape at any point and
remove it from the machine; you can’t do that very easily with reel tapes.
Cassettes for the home market travel at 1 7/8 ips, and their tapes are 0.15″ wide.
Sound quality isn’t equal to that of LPs and reel tapes, but if you have a good
recorder and use good-quality Type II or IV tape, it is pretty nice. Whenever I
bought a new vehicle (new to me, that is), the first thing I did was put a good
sound system in it. I made a lot of long trips because I liked going places, and
having a big box of music tapes made those trips even more splendid. Cassette

tapes came in a variety of sizes, and I liked 90-minute cassette tapes because I
could get two LPs on one tape. A dual-well cassette player with auto-reverse
delivered 180 uninterrupted minutes of music. Larger sizes, such as 120-minute
cassettes, were too thin and fragile to use. Thinner tapes stretch; 60-minute,
high-quality tapes are thickest and suffer the least amount of stretch.
Cassette recorders recorders were the salvation of music lovers. My friends and I
liked to make and exchange mix tapes, because even in my youth oh so long ago
commercial radio was pretty horrible, just the same Top 20 dreck played over
and over, with more commercials than music and annoying DJs interrupting the
music. So, trading mix tapes was a great way to discover new music. Another
cool thing was we could copy just the songs we wanted and not suffer through
the filler that plagued so much popular music. Given the continual failures of the
music industry to deliver what would please its customers, it’s amazing that it
survives at all. The bosses at the big labels should give thanks every day to
determined customers who figure out workarounds that let them enjoy
commercially produced music, rather than giving up on it entirely.
A Quick Tip About Tape
Alvin recalls that tape is manufactured very wide and very long: “The outermost edges, and the first and last
lengths of the tape, are the poorest and used for the lowest-grade audio tape. The sections that are higher-
grade become the higher quality audio tape, and the very best became the digital tape for computing.
Because of this you can use most computer tape for audio, which I do. The large quarter-inch cartridge
(QIC) tapes that have gone bad are fantastic reel-to-reel tapes. I have an ancient solid-state Ampex home
audio recorder, circa 1969 (transistors, point-to-point wired like the old vacuum tubes). With no noise
reduction, 1 7/8-, 3 3/4-, and 7 1/2-inch speeds, with RadioShack’s cheapest tape and slowest speed, it
sounds better than cassette metal tape and Dolby C noise reduction.”
Cassette tapes are also given credit for spreading Western pop music, especially
punk and rock, in developing nations and Eastern bloc countries.
There isn’t much nostalgia for cassette tapes. They served a purpose, and some
people still like them. But it’s not easy to find good cassettes anymore because
manufacturing quality has declined.
Neither tape nor vinyl ages well. Tape is a magnetic medium, so it can be ruined
by stray magnetic fields. Tape is less prone to collect dust and scratches than
vinyl, but both suffer physical wear and tear. Both will last decades if they are
handled and stored carefully, but the sad fact is the more you play and enjoy
them, the more they will wear out. They won’t suddenly become unplayable;
they tend to lose the high frequencies first and fade over time like a garment that

is washed too many times.

The Digital Advantage
Lovers of vinyl claim that it sounds warmer, sounds more true to life, and has a
wider and more accurate dynamic range. CD fans claim that LP aficionados are
nostalgic for all the ambience that goes along with playing a vinyl record: the
sounds made by the turntable, the addition of surface noise from dust and
scratches, flipping it to hear the other side, and all the fussiness required to keep
LPs in good condition. I miss the cover art, posters, and generously sized
booklets that came with LPs—you just can’t do much with a tiny CD case. But
no matter how careful you are with keeping LPs clean, handling them carefully,
keeping your stylus clean, and keeping your tonearm optimally balanced and
tracked, it is impossible to avoid causing wear or even damage merely by
playing them, because you’re scraping a diamond stylus with a Mohs’ scale
hardness rating of 10 over a surface with a Mohs’ hardness of 1.
Some LPs survive in better condition than others because they are better
engineered. Vinyl LPs begin life as master tapes. These are copied to the master
disk, which is made of metal or lacquer. Cutting a record is an exercise in
compromise. Quiet passages can’t be too quiet or they will be lost in noise, but if
they are too loud, the grooves will overlap and create skips. Louder volume also
results in less playing time, so there is as much artistry in the engineering as
there is the in music itself. Unfortunately, all LPs are not created equal. As the
industry matured, a multitude of demands were placed on the master recording
engineers, who were often told to make the master tapes also serve as masters
for cassettes, and butchered for radio play. The vinyl itself became thinner. In
other words, the lowest common denominator reared its mediocre head. Older
LPs are beloved because they’re better made.
CDs have most of the technical advantages. The biggest advantage of digital
audio is that copies are equal to the originals. This is not true of analog audio,
which loses something with each generation. By the time you get to a copy of a
copy of a copy, you know it’s a long way from the original.
A CD offers as much as a 96 dB dynamic range, range, whereas the best vinyl
delivers maybe 75 dB and, more typically, in the 50s. So, the CD offers a
superior signal-to-noise ratio, plus something that even the best LP system is
hard-pressed to deliver, and that is absolute silence in the silent passages. True,
this absolute silence is largely theoretical because some sound will probably be
created somewhere in your audio chain—a bit of hum, a touch of electrical

interference—but the CD itself is dead silent. Vinyl wins on frequency range,
sort of—if you have good enough equipment (which would make you a rare,
wealthy, and elite audiophile indeed), it will capture frequencies as high as 70 to
75 kHz, up there where the bats fly. More typically it falls into the 10 Hz to 25
kHz range.
Down here in the real world, most audio hardware is designed with upper limits
of 20 to 30 kHz in mind. The human ear can detect frequencies up to 25 kHz,
and the range of sensation is 50 kHz. If you have something blasting away at 115
dB sound pressure level at a frequency of 45 kHz, you’ll feel the pain but not
know why. Some folks believe that very high frequencies are still perceived in
some manner and add to the listener’s enjoyment. What they might be talking
about are the harmonics. If you have a sound at 100 Hz, there are harmonics of
that sound at 25 Hz, 50 Hz, 200 Hz, and so on. If you clip the harmonics, the
sound tends to sound a little dead on the high end.
I have compared some of my favorite music on both CD and LP, and it’s the
extra noise on LPs that sets them apart. I can really tell the difference in a
symphony—the quiet passages on a CD are unmarred by scratches, hiss, or
rumble, and the loud bits are loud and accurate, without distortion. If you want
to make your own comparisons, make sure you have LPs and CDs that have
been recorded with skill and care. An awful lot of them are junk, and the trend
with modern popular music is simply to crank all levels on a CD to the
maximum, with no regard for dynamic range, distortion, nuances, or balance.
Pianos and organs are great for testing the quality of your audio system because
their sounds are difficult to reproduce accurately, they have monster dynamic
and frequency ranges, and you can tell pretty easily if they sound right. Try
“Toccata and Fugue in D Minor” by Johann Sebastian Bach; this covers the full
range of the pipe organ, the big kind you see in cathedrals. At one point, a bass
pedal is held so long your speakers may visibly distort. Pink Floyd’s “Time”
from the Dark Side of the Moon exercises the sound separation among left, right,
and true center. Jimi Hendrix’s Electric Ladyland, if you can find the original
double LP and not some bad CD remaster, is an amazing piece of studio and
artistic wizardry that will exercise your audio system and reward careful
listening.
Wire Recordings
The original master “tapes” were made on wire recorders, which used spools of steel wire as the recording
medium. Wire recorders were in wide use until the 1960s, when they were supplanted by magnetic tape

recorders. Old music, like the original Carter Family recordings of the 1920s, were recorded on wire
recorders. Wire rusts, and the fidelity is nothing to get excited about, but it is very durable. Even so, most of
those old recordings are lost.
But not all! The Live Wire: Woody Guthrie in Performance 1949 won the 2008 Grammy for Best Historical
Album. It was restored from wire recordings and is believed to be his only recorded live performance. Like
a lot of wire recorders, these recordings were made on a home-built device, which complicates any
restoration process. But restored they were, and now you can enjoy Woody Guthrie live on CD.
CDs win hands down for convenience. They’re sturdy, they don’t get damaged
from being played, you don’t have to continually fuss with them, and they are
portable. Most CD players have remote controls, and you can play the tracks in
any order or shuffle. You can load multiple CDs in a CD changer without harm
and bliss out for hours.
Despite the efforts of the music industry to foil our fair use rights and desire to
enjoy music the way we want to, it’s as easy to create custom-mix CDs as it was
to create our own mix tapes. And for most of the same reasons: to package music
the way we want and to discover new artists. (Chapter 5 tells how to make
compilation CDs.) However, we now have two marvelous new options that we
didn’t have back in the olden days, and that is satellite radio and Internet radio.
Neither one is high on the audio quality scale, but you can’t beat them for variety
and discovering new artists. Commercial broadcast radio is worse than ever,
which I didn’t believe was possible.
CDs also win on cost. A hundred dollars buys a perfectly satisfactory CD player.
Even in the olden days, a good-quality turntable, cartridge, and stylus cost
several hundred dollars, and they haven’t gotten any cheaper. Oh, and don’t
forget the dust cover, which was always an overpriced add-on. And a stylus-
tracking force gauge, and cartridge alignment tool, and special cleaning
accessories, and so on.
CD Players
You can spend a little or a lot on a CD player.player Ideally, you’ll be able to test them with your own sound
system before making a purchase, especially if you’re going for a higher-end model. As with all digital
audio, the quality of the digital-to-analog converter determines how good it sounds, so spending more can
make a difference. If you are connecting your CD player to a receiver or amplifier that has its own DAC
(you’ll see optical or coaxial digital inputs), that gives you two DACs to try. Using the digital connector
means the CD player sends a digital signal to your receiver and does not use its own DAC. Instead, the
receiver performs the conversion to analog. Using your CD player’s RCA connectors means your CD player
will do the conversion and send an analog signal to your receiver. If you have a high-end CD player, you
probably don’t want your receiver mucking with its output, so use the analog RCA connectors. Of course,
it’s not always that simple, because in some modern A/V receivers, the integrated preamp converts all

incoming signals with no regard for whether they are analog or digital, which is dumb, but there it is. This is
not always documented, so you might have to pester your vendor to find out what you have.
So who wins, vinyl or CDs? Easy—whichever one you like better. Don’t get
hung up on specs; it’s the music and your enjoyment that matters.

Longevity
Longevity is still an open question. The current state of digital storage is not
encouraging for the long term, so you better plan to periodically transfer your
archives to fresh media. There are several problems with long-term digital
storage: One, the physical media may not last for more than a few years without
deteriorating. Two, think of all the closed, proprietary file formats that have
come and gone in the past 10 or 20 years and are no longer readable. Three, if
your media survive and the files are still readable, will you have a hardware
device that can read your media? If someone handed you a 5.25″ disk, a Zip
disk, a 3.5″ diskette, or a super floppy disk, would you have any idea what to do
with it? Currently we take CDs, DVDs, USB sticks, and 3.5″ hard drives for
granted, but they are all just a few years old, and we do not know what the future
holds.
Note
There might be a business opportunity in old drives and software. Alvin notes, “There’s a market for those
who can transfer from the ancient media to current. I have a Viper QIC tape drive for the DC300 tapes, a
Bernouli drive, a Questech 40MB drive (it was a favorite of Apple Macintosh’s), a TEAC digital audio
cassette drive (205MB storage), Zip and Jaz drives, 250MB Colorado QIC, and other floppy tape drives.”
Commercial CDs are pressed rather than burned like home-created CDs and will
outlive most home-burned CDs because they are built of sturdier materials and
have deeper grooves. CD-Rs will outlive CD-RWs; don’t use CD-RWs for
anything that you want to last more than a year or two.
There are significant differences in brands. Taiyo Yuden is the top-of-the-line
manufacturer of CD and DVD blanks. Taiyo Yuden blanks appear under their
own name and under different brand names, but the secondary vendors change
their suppliers often, so you can’t count on the names to tell you what you’re
getting. Genuine Taiyo Yuden blanks are made only in Japan. There are fakes, so
search online to learn how to identify the real deal.
Verbatim, TDK, and Sony are also considered to be good brands, though they
use multiple suppliers. You can read the disk ID after purchase with diskDVD
Identifier and DVDInfo for Windows, DVD Media Inspector for Mac, and
cdrecord and dvd+rw-mediainfo for Linux.

Chapter 4. Creating and Editing Live Tracks for CD
CDs are great for storing and distributing your own recordings, and you can use
Audacity to prepare your tracks for copying to a CD.
Suppose you have some long tracks recorded in the studio or from a live
performance. You might want to split them into individual songs or cut out
material between songs and knit them together to sound like one long, unbroken
live track. Maybe you’re cutting and pasting the best of several different
recording sessions. Perhaps you have multitrack recordings that need to be
downmixed to two-channel stereo for CD. You want to clean it all up and make
it sound as good as possible.
Recording live shows is challenging. I’ll talk about several different ways to do
this, from inexpensive and easy to more expensive with ultimate control over the
final mix. Then we’ll move on to using Audacity to prepare your recordings for
CD.
Note
Please review Chapter 1 if you need to review how to use Audacity.
The workflow goes like this:
1. Record stuff.
2. Apply cleanups and fixes in Audacity.
3. Create song titles and metadata for individual songs.
4. Export to two-channel 16/44.1 WAV.
5. Copy to CD and enjoy!

The most time-consuming part is fix-its and cleanups. If you don’t need to do a
lot of fixing, it goes fast.

Making Good Live Recordings
In Chapter 2, we learned about putting together a recording studio and how to
turn your computer into a digital audio workstation. Making good live
recordings is harder than making good studio recordings because so many things
are out of your control. However, that’s okay, because you’re not necessarily
after some sort of technical perfection but rather capturing the excitement and
energy.
Getting good two-channel stereo recordings is pretty easy, because nearly all
audio equipment supports two-channel stereo. If you want multichannel
recordings of live shows (for more control of the mix), then you’ll need more
expensive equipment.
One of the biggest potential hurdles relates to who controls the venue’s sound
system. If it is you, then you can do whatever you want. If the performers or
venue have their own system and technicians, then you’ll need their cooperation.
Remember to record some audience noise in case you need to add a bit more live
flavor. You should also record a few minutes’ worth of various background and
audience noises to use later for noise removal. You want good samples of noise
not mixed with music, or anything you want to keep, for best noise removal.

Portable Digital Recorder
Figure 4-1. The Zoom H2 on a microphone stand.
A little portable digital recorder just might surprise you with how well it can
capture a live performance. The Zoom H2, which is my favorite compact digital
recorder, has four built-in microphones. You can use either the front pair or rear
pair or all four at once to create a spatial, three-dimensional sound. The Zoom
comes with a little stand to put it on any flat surface and a handle that fits into a
mic stand so you can easily position it anywhere (Figure 4-1). It’s unobtrusive
and even looks like an old-fashioned microphone.
The Zoom has a 1/8″ stereo line input, which means you can connect it directly
to a mixer. Usually in live shows all instruments and vocalists are connected to a
single sound console, and even the most low-budget console should have a pair
of stereo RCA recording outputs. The Zoom uses a two-RCA-to-1/8″ stereo TRS
adapter, as shown in Figure 4-2.

Figure 4-2. Zoom H2 with a two-RCA-to-1/8″ stereo adapter for connecting to a
mixing console
Whatever you hear through headphones connected to a monitoring port on the
sound board is how your recording will sound, so ideally there will be a good
person at the sound board keeping all the channels balanced and sounding good.
Because everything is already mixed down to two channels, your editing options
are limited, so it needs to be right during recording.
The Zoom also has a USB 1.1 port to connect to your computer, so you can
record directly to your computer if you prefer, rather than recording to the
Zoom’s SD storage card.
You don’t have to use the Zoom H2 just because I like it—there are dozens of
different great portable digital recorders to choose from, with all kinds of feature
sets.

Laptop with Audacity
Fix up a laptop with Audacity and a decent recording interface, plug into the
sound console at the show, and you can edit and make CDs on the spot. Copy the
raw tracks to a USB stick for performers who want to do their own editing. If the
internal sound card in your laptop does not suit you, try a nice external USB
recording interface like the one in Figure 4-3, which shows a ThinkPad and M-
Audio MobilePre USB all ready to go to the show.
Another option is to use a higher-end PCMCIA sound card like the Digigram
VXpocket v2. The Digigram costs about $500. It works on Linux, Windows, and
Mac; provides two channels at full duplex; and supports S/PDIF and XLR
connectors.
Figure 4-3. ThinkPad and M-Audio MobilePre

Multitrack Recording of a Live Performance
Suppose you want more editing and mixing control, and you want to make a
multichannel live recording. How do you do this? With the right knowledge and
a big enough budget to support all the necessary equipment. Audacity records as
many tracks at one time as your recording interface supports, starting with
version 1.3.9. Older Audacity releases support a maximum of 16. (See Chapter 9
to learn more about making good multitrack recordings with Audacity.)
Don’t try this without really knowing what you are doing, because connecting
things the wrong way will result in bad sound or even damaged equipment. If
you do not have control of the PA system at the venue, then you will need the
cooperation and help of the resident sound engineer. Here are four different ways
to approach making live multitrack recordings.
One option is to supply your own microphones and mic every performer and
instrument separately from the venue’s sound system. Although this means a lot
of microphones and cables everywhere, this lets you use your own recording
equipment independently of the main sound board.
A more common option is to use microphone and instrument cable splitters to
make each mic and instrument cable do double duty. This is how many
professionals record live concerts; they share mics that are run through splitters,
and each team controls its own recording console. Sometimes these are tucked
away backstage, and sometimes they have long cable runs running outside to
mobile recording trucks. This setup has a lot of flexibility, and you can add your
own mics as you see fit. For example, it seems to be a rule that no two people
can agree on the correct way to mic drums, so they will set up their own drum
mics.
You’ll need splitters, transformers, maybe some resistors and patch panels, and
cables, and you’ll need to know how to connect everything. You’ll need to know
the ins and outs of dealing with phantom power and who supplies it, connecting
and disconnecting in the correct order, getting along with the other stage and
sound crews, and lots more.
One more option is to connect directly to a mixing console that supports
multichannel outputs. (A good word to know is busses—the more busses a mixer
has, the more flexible its signal routing options.) Then you don’t need redundant
mics or splitters and long cable runs. Look for direct outs, aux sends, or

subgroup outs. Some outputs send signals that are affected by the mixer controls,
so they’ll have fades and special effects as applied by the console technician. If
you want a straight unprocessed signal, that will depend on the features of the
sound console and what the sound tech can let you use.
If you are the sound engineer and get to use your own equipment, consider
getting a multichannel digital mixer, like the PreSonus StudioLive 16-Channel
FireWire Digital Mixer. Then you don’t need a separate ADC/DAC, and you
don’t have to puzzle out how to make analog consoles designed for live shows
also make good digital recordings. Sadly, the StudioLive is not supported on
Linux, but it has excellent software bundles for Mac and Windows. This is a
super nice, new generation mixer that is designed to support multichannel
recording, both in the studio and in the performance hall. It costs about $2,000,
plus you’ll also need an amplifier for powering live shows.

Be Nice to the Sound Crews
Be nice to the venue’s sound engineers and crew. They are skilled professionals
who have to combine both science and artistry, and they will make or break your
recordings. Don’t act like you know everything, because they won’t be fooled. In
my experience, sound crews at live shows are nice people who share their
expertise generously as long as you listen carefully, are helpful, and keep out of
their way.

Audacity Settings for Recording
Let’s run through the appropriate recording settings in Edit > Preferences.
(Please visit Chapter 13 and Chapter 14 to learn how to tune your PC for audio
recording and managing your sound devices.)
First, open a new Audacity project and use File > Save As to save and name
your new project. You can’t save changes while Audacity is recording, so you
might take advantage of short breaks to stop recording, press ctrl-S or use File >
Save Project, and then pick up where you left off with shift-Record.
Set your recording and playback devices on the Edit > Preferences > Devices
tab and set the number of channels you are recording. Audacity will show only
the number of channels that your recording interface supports. Windows users,
always select Windows DirectSound and never MME for the Host, because
MME is the antiquated generic Windows sound interface. You could select
Primary Sound Driver for your recording and playback devices if you have
only one sound card. If you have more than one, then select the specific
recording interface from the dropdown Recording Device menu (Figure 4-4).
(Your selections will be different, unless you have the same audio interfaces that
I have.)
Figure 4-4. Setting the correct recording and playback devices in the Edit >
Preferences > Devices dialog on Windows
Figure 4-5 shows how it looks on a Linux PC:

Figure 4-5. Setting the correct recording and playback devices in the Edit >
Preferences > Devices dialog on Linux
You’ll probably want to review your recordings during breaks in the show, so set
your playback device to something that outputs to headphones.
On the Recording tab, uncheck “Overdub,” “Software Playthrough,” and “Sound
Activated Recording.” Leave your Latency settings alone unless you experience
dropouts. Dropouts mean your CPU can’t keep up, so increase the Audio to
buffer value until the dropouts stop (Figure 4-6).
The settings on the Quality tab (Figure 4-7) depend on what your analog-to-
digital converter supports. Let’s say you have an analog mixer connected to a
high-end sound card that supports up to 24/96 (24-bit depth, 96 kHz sampling
rate); if you have enough hard drive space, you could record at 32-bit depth and
96,000 Hz sampling rate for ultimate high quality. (Bit depth is called Sample
Format in this menu. Bit depth is the correct term.)

Figure 4-6. Entering settings on the Recording tab
Figure 4-7. Settings in the Quality tab are determined by what your recording
interface supports and your preference.
My MobilePre maxes out at 16/48, so I set Audacity to 32-bit float/48 for
recording. It’s no good setting a higher sampling rate (upsampling) than your
recording interface supports because there is no magic quality infusion. It wastes
disk space and bogs down your CPU, and upsampling hurts audio quality. But
there are benefits to recording at 32-bit float even on 16-bit sound cards, which
is explained in Chapter 1. (See 16/44.1, 24/96, 32-Bit Float in 16/44.1, 24/96,
32-Bit Float to learn more about quality settings.)
If you are recording from a digital mixer or a mixer with its own digital output,
then that will determine your maximum bit depth/sampling rate. For example,

the Behringer Xenyx X2442USB 24-Channel Mixer is an analog mixer with a
built-in ADC that delivers a 16/48 digital signal via USB. It plugs right into your
computer, so you don’t need a sound card. So you could set Audacity to record
at 32-bit float/48 for maximum quality. If 16/48 isn’t good enough, you could
connect an outboard ADC that supports higher bit depths and sampling rates to
the Xenyx’s RCA analog recording outputs.
Don’t Switch Your Quality Settings Until You’ve Finished!
It is best to stick with the same quality settings throughout recording and editing, until your final exports.
Changing bit depths and resampling are not good for audio quality, so the fewer times a recording is
resampled or exported to a lower bit depth, the better. I record and edit at 32-bit float/48 and then export to
different quality levels as I need them, such as 24-bit WAV and FLAC for highest quality or the lower-
quality Ogg Theora or MP3 formats. If you prefer recording and editing at lower quality levels, such as
16/44.1 (which is CD quality), the same principle applies: Use 16/44.1 from recording to final edit, and then
if you want lower quality levels, select them as needed at export.
There isn’t much difference between a 44.1 kHz sampling rate and 48 kHz. The sampling rate determines
your frequency range, which is about half the sample rate. 44.1 kHz covers the range of human hearing.
Sometimes I can hear a small difference in recordings made at 48 kHz compared to 44.1 kHz recordings,
but I have to be listening for it on a good sound system. There is a more noticeable difference between 16-
and 24-bit recordings. Start with a high-quality recording, and then you can export to any number of lesser-
quality formats as you want.

Setting Recording Volume Levels
Set your recording levels before you start by clicking the Input Level Meter
(Figure 4-8). Because digital recording has such a high signal-to-noise ratio,
which is also called a low noise floor, you can set a conservative peak level to
allow for the unpredictability of a live performance. It’s not like recording on
tape where we had to push recording levels as high as possible to keep noise
levels at acceptable levels; you don’t want to go over zero in digital audio
because that causes distortion. I aim for a peak level of -24 dB for live shows.
The Meter toolbar has a little handle on the right to make it longer or shorter, and
the handle on the left is for dragging it anywhere you want, even outside of
Audacity.
Figure 4-8. Turn on the recording monitor to set your peak recording levels
before starting recording.

Starting, Stopping, and Pausing Recording
When you’re ready to start recording, just click the red Record button. Click
Pause to stop and then Record to continue on the same track. Clicking Stop and
then Record starts new tracks, so if you stop when you meant to pause, pick up
again on the same track by pressing shift-Record.

Monitoring Your Live Recording
The best way to monitor your recording is by plugging headphones into a
monitoring port. For example, the MobilePre has a zero-latency monitoring port,
and there are always monitoring ports on mixers. The better recording interfaces
have zero-latency monitoring ports, which is a good thing to look for when
you’re shopping.

Editing Live Recordings
Well, that was fun! You heard a great show, or had a wonderful studio session,
and recorded everything successfully. Now how do you get all that goodness
onto a CD?
If you used a digital recorder, you need to copy the files from the recorder into
your Audacity computer. I prefer to use a separate storage card reader rather than
connecting the recorder to the computer because it usually works better and
faster, especially on non-Windows PCs. Any SD or Compact Flash card should
be seen by your PC as a generic USB storage device, but manufacturers love to
infest devices that use them with weird Windows-only file transfer managers.
This does not make sense to me, since Windows has a perfectly good built-in
USB storage device manager. Many of them also have a fondness for using USB
1.1, and not the full-speed 12Mbps but the agonizingly slow 1.5Mbps version,
which is super fun when you fill a multigigabyte SD card.
However you do it, once your recording is transferred to your Audacity PC, open
Audacity and use File > Open to import your recording into Audacity. Then
save this new Audacity project with File > Save Project As and give it a
different name than your audio filename. Audacity will warn you that “Project
depends on other audio files” (Figure 4-9) and ask whether you want to copy all
audio into your project. Click Copy All Audio into Project (Safer). Now you
have your original and a copy, and whatever you do in your Audacity project
does not touch the original file. (See Saving Your Work in Saving Your Work to
learn more.)

Figure 4-9. Making a copy of your original recording to preserve it
If your recording has multiple files, create a separate Audacity project for each
one. I like to use related project names like Fiddle-Festival-1, Fiddle-Festival-2,
and so on.
If you made your original recording in Audacity, you can work from your
original project file, which will change it, or you can make a copy and work
from that. To make a copy, click File > Save Project As to save it with a
different name.

Editing and Downmixing Multitrack Recordings
you can skip this section if you are working from a two-channel stereo
recording.
This section is a short review of multichannel downmixing, so please visit
Chapter 9 to learn about multitrack recording and mixing in detail.
If you made a multitrack recording, which is three tracks or more, you have a lot
more great editing options than with a two-channel stereo mix. One track per
vocalist or instrument gives you ultimate control, and even if you had to settle
for subgroups because of limitations of the mixer, this is still a feast of
flexibility.
Starting in Audacity version 1.3.8, you can use the sleek new Mixer Board to
adjust the pan and gain on each track by selecting View > Mixer Board. The
playback in Audacity is exactly how your mix sounds, so you get an accurate
preview of your mix.
Of course, you can still use the Pan and Gain controls on the Track panels of
each track if you prefer.
Editing and fixing your tracks is the same whether you have a stereo mix or a
multitrack recording, which we’ll cover in the following sections. There are
some special hazards with multiple tracks. One is keeping them synchronized.
Be careful with deletions and additions, because this changes the length of the
tracks. Another is downmixing to two-channel stereo combines tracks so they
get louder and might create clipping. Third is the Link Tracks button, which first
appeared in Audacity 1.3.9. This keeps label tracks synchronized with the audio
tracks. Having a label track at the top of your project is useful for making notes,
and it does not link to the tracks below it. But a label track that lies underneath
your audio tracks, which is where new label tracks always appear when you
create new ones, creates a track group that includes all the audio tracks above it.
Link Tracks is enabled by default, so if it gets in your way, just click the Link
Tracks button to turn it off. Newer Audacity versions display chain links that
appear when you make any selection or Time Shift tracks to indicate that Link
Tracks is active (Figure 4-10).

Figure 4-10. Chain links appear when the Link Tracks button is active.
There are two ways to downmix. This first method is clicking Tracks > Mix and
Render, which creates a new stereo track in your Audacity project. You can then
make further adjustments before export, such as creating labels, fixes, and other
edits. It will sound just like the playback in Audacity sounds, so when it sounds
right in Audacity, it’s ready to go. First set your left, right, and mono channel
assignments in the Track menus. Left is channel 1, right is channel 2, and mono
tracks are mixed down to both.
When you click Tracks > Mix and Render, your tracks are replaced with a new
stereo track. If you would rather have Audacity create a new stereo track without
replacing your original tracks, use the keyboard combination ctrl-shift-M. I
prefer the second method because I want to save my original tracks. Then I copy
the new stereo track into a new project, finish editing, and then export.
Downmixing combines tracks, so they get louder. Make sure View > Clipping is
activated so you can quickly find clipped passages. You might reduce the
amplitude of all your tracks before downmixing with Effect > Amplify to -9 or
-12 and then apply Effect > Normalize after downmixing to bring the volume
back up where you want.
The second downmixing method opens a custom mixer, which is really a
channel mapper, at export. Open Edit > Preferences > Import/Export, and
select “Use custom mix.” Then select File > Export, and you’ll get a simple
mixer (Figure 4-11) that allows you to control your channel mapping. This is
how you control which tracks go to the right channel, left channel, or both.
Channel 1 is always the left channel.

Figure 4-11. Downmixing a multichannel recording into two stereo tracks
This does not work with File > Export Multiple, so if you want to divide your
downmixed track into individual songs, you’ll have to import it back into
Audacity.

Special CD Settings in Audacity
The next thing you need to do is go to the Selection toolbar and change the
timing to CD frames, which is 75 frames per second (fps). This ensures that any
cuts you make will start and end on a CD frame. Any audio that lands outside of
these frames will be lost and will possibly create clicking noises. Figure 4-12
shows what this looks like. You can choose either hh:mm:ss + CDDA frames (75
fps) or CDDA frames (75 fps). The former shows the time plus CD frames, and
the latter displays only CD frames. Check the “Snap To” box to ensure that stops
and starts are always on the CD frame boundaries.
Figure 4-12. Setting the correct frame rate for CD audio in the Selection toolbar
While you’re at the Selection toolbar, set the Project Rate value to 44,100 Hz.
Audio files for CD must be 16/44.1 WAV files. (The bit depth will be selected at
export.)

Trimming
Now it’s time to do some housecleaning on your recording. Remember that you
have a lot of different views to choose from, such as View > Fit in Window,
View > Fit Vertically, and the Zoom tool. Pressing ctrl-2 returns to Normal
view. View > Zoom to Selection is a great little time-saver that expands your
selection to the width of the window. Remember also that Audacity has nearly
unlimited undo, even past saves. You don’t lose your undo history until you
close your project.
A good starting point is to trim away any excess. When you select unwanted
segments for deletion, leave a little extra. You can always trim more, but it’s
harder to put it back. The shaded area in Figure 4-13 is a bunch of people
speechifying and is not something I want to save, so it’s gone all in one swoop.
There doesn’t appear to be anything at the beginning or in between the songs to
trim right now, so I’ll leave those alone until later.
Another way to trim a lot of excess is to select what you want to keep and then
click the Trim button. This keeps your selection and deletes the rest.

Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs
Sometimes there will be a defect on just one channel of a two-channel stereo
track. If you split this into two tracks, then you can apply repairs to just the one
channel and rejoin the tracks. There are a couple of advantages to this: The
second track helps to mask a less-than-perfect fix, and the fix that you apply to
the defective portion probably won’t help the other channel sound any better and
may even hurt the quality.
Figure 4-13. Using View > Fit in Window to do rough cuts with the entire track
displayed
To divide a stereo track, go to the Track menu and click Split Stereo Track. To
rejoin the tracks, use the Track menu in the track that is on top and click Make
Stereo Track. The two tracks must be adjacent to each other.

Fixing Clipping and Too-Loud Passages
Hunt down any clipping and too-loud passages and fix them. These throw off the
volume levels for the whole track and shock listeners, so it’s always a good idea
to fix them.
Find any clipping quickly by selecting View > Show Clipping. This marks any
clipped passages with red bars. Zoom in on the clipped segments until you can
precisely select the parts that are too loud and then use a negative value, such as
-3 dB, in Effect > Amplify to lower the volume. Rerecording clipped segments
is better, but since you probably won’t have that opportunity with a live show,
making them less noticeable is the next best thing. Click the Preview button to
see whether it sounds right, and if it doesn’t, change the Amplification value
until it does. Then click OK to make it permanent.
Note
Adjust the length of previews in Edit > Preferences > Playback. The default is three seconds.
Look for any extreme peaks that are not clipped, which could be a drum beat,
sudden audience noise, something dropped, a bump of the mic—whatever it is,
check it out and decide whether it needs to be toned down.
If any clipped or too-loud passage is so obnoxious you want to remove it
entirely, select it and select Edit > Silence (or ctrl-L) to make it totally silent.
You might not want to delete it because that shortens the track, which would be a
problem on a multitrack project. If it is so long that silencing it would be too
noticeable, try patching the annoying part with a clip from somewhere else. To
do this, first delete the offending bit with Edit > Split Cut. This leaves a gap in
place of the deleted portion. Then carefully paste into the gap a segment of the
same length copied from another part of the track, or even from a different track;
you can use anything as long as it sounds all right. This can be finicky work, so
remember to zoom in so you can see what you’re doing. The Envelope tool is
good for smoothing transitions with careful fades, or try the Draw tool to apply
some careful interpolation.

Noise Removal
Audacity’s Noise Removal tool is pretty good, though it can take a few tries to
get it right because noise removal is always a compromise with its side effects—
removing noise also affects the sounds you want to keep. If the sounds that you
want to keep have similar volume and frequencies as the noise, you might not
get very good results. Noise removal works best when the noise is distinctly
different from what you want to keep.
First you need to create a profile of the unwanted noise. This is why you
recorded various audience and background noise samples at the live show, so
you would have good samples to create a profile from. Create a noise profile by
selecting a 5-to 30-second segment of noise, then go to Effect > Noise Removal
and click Get Noise Profile. (If your samples are not long enough, double them
up by copying and pasting them into the same track.) Then select the part of the
track you want to remove the noise from, go back to Effect > Noise Removal,
and click the Preview button to hear how it sounds (Figure 4-14).
The Noise Removal effect has three adjustable settings: Noise reduction,
Frequency smoothing, and Attack/decay time. Noise reduction controls how
much the volume of the noise is reduced, so a value of -10 turns it down by 10
decibels, and -50 will nuke it into silence. For both Frequency smoothing and
Attack/decay time, moving the slider to the left is more aggressive, and moving
it to the right makes gentler changes. A larger value for Frequency smoothing
means it changes a wider range of frequencies. Remember: Attack refers to how
hard a note is hit, and decay is how long it takes to fade away. Smaller values are
more abrupt, and larger values are more gradual.
When the Preview sounds good, click OK. If you don’t like it after pressing OK,
press ctrl-Z to undo, or use Edit > Undo, to try again.

Figure 4-14. Using the Noise Removal effect to tone down unwanted
background noises
You can build your noise profile with noise samples from the Freesound Project
(http://www.freesound.org/). This is a collaborative database of Creative
Commons—licensed sounds. You can find just about anything here, including
samples of white, pink, and brown noise; buzz from a bad TRS plug connection;
pool hall noise; and lots more. You can contribute your own samples to the
project, too.

Compressing Dynamic Range
Using dynamic range compression wisely is an important skill in audio editing.
For example, in podcasts that have more than one person talking, it’s a kindness
to your listeners to make sure that the volume levels of the various people
speaking are all the same. Compression is also used to change the character of
sounds. For example, drums are mostly rapid peak sounds, so a bit of
compression is used to give them a fuller, richer sound. Compression can make a
vocalist or instrument “pop” out of the mix and make it sound more vivid.
Compression can also help level out an erratic performer, such as a singer with
bad mic technique or an instrumentalist who doesn’t have good volume control
but is loud and soft at the wrong times.
What you can accomplish with compression will be limited by your recordings.
If you have multitrack recordings with every performer and instrument on their
own tracks, or usefully subgrouped, then you have all kinds of editing flexibility.
If your recording is two-track stereo, then you can’t edit very surgically, but you
can apply compression to the whole recording to make it sound better in noisy
environments, such as vehicles and workplaces. Controlling it yourself means
you can measure out just the right amount.
There are several places in the audio chain where compression can be applied.
Was a compressor used during recording? If it was, be careful about applying
any more because that can make your track sound fake or weird.
I’m conservative when it comes to using compression. If something needs to be
louder or quieter, I prefer to adjust it with the Envelope tool or Amplify effect. In
the olden days of tape, compression techniques like Dolby noise reduction were
used to minimize tape hiss. Music was compressed in the recording and then
expanded on playback to lower the noise floor. Digital audio has such a high
signal-to-noise ratio, this isn’t necessary.
Now let’s learn how to use Audacity’s Compressor effect (Figure 4-15).

Figure 4-15. Audacity’s Compressor effect for applying dynamic range
compression
Select what you want to apply compression to, part of a track or a whole track,
and then click Effect > Compressor to open the Compressor effect. You can
make the Compressor window larger and expand the decibel scales by dragging
the corners.
The Threshold setting determines the starting point, in decibels, where the gain
of the audio signal is reduced. A threshold of -60 dB means everything with an
amplitude of -60 dB and above will have reduced gain, which in most cases is
too much, since that will be everything. A threshold of -10 dB means the loudest
10 dB of your track will have its gain reduced.
The Noise Floor setting prevents background noise from being amplified during
pauses by keeping the gain constant until the signal comes back up to the
Threshold level; it does not allow the gain to increase in quiet passages that are
below the Noise Floor decibel setting. If there are no quiet pauses in your audio,
then this setting won’t help much, and you should move the slider all the way to
the left, -80 dB, to make it have no effect.

The Ratio setting controls how much compression, or reduction in gain, will be
applied to sounds that are higher than your Threshold setting. A higher ratio,
such as 4:1, means more compression. An input signal of 4 dB higher than your
threshold will be reduced to 1 dB higher than the threshold, so it applies a 3 dB
reduction. Try gentler ratios first, starting at 2:1, and then listen to the preview. If
it’s not enough, try a higher ratio. Audacity’s compressor has a maximum ratio
of 10:1, which is a lot. Other compressors go as high as 60:1.
Attack Time determines how quickly compression is applied, and Decay Time
determines how long it takes to phase out the compression. A too-short Attack
Time might result in some audible distortion, and a too-long Decay Time might
miss some short peaks. The Preview button helps you try different settings
quickly.
Compression makes your audio quieter, so you may need to amplify or
normalize it after applying compression. The Compressor effect has a “Make-up
gain for 0 dB after compressing” checkbox, which is another way of saying
apply normalization to 0 dB. I don’t use it because I prefer to control
normalization separately, and I don’t always normalize to 0 dB, but it’s there if
you want to save a step.
There is also a “Compress based on Peaks” checkbox. When this box is
unchecked, which is the default, the compressor reduces the gain on sounds
above the Threshold level using RMS values. “Compress based on Peaks” raises
the gain on quieter sounds that are above the Threshold level.
Be careful with compression because it is easy to overdo it. In much of modern
popular music, there is virtually no dynamic range; it’s all rammed into the same
narrow 5 dB or even smaller range with no quiet passages, no contrast, and just
one big shouting blob all boosted to the maximum, sometimes even into
distortion. Any emotional impact and artistry are destroyed. You’re trying to
make it more comfortable for different listening environments or improve how a
vocalist or instrument sound, not kill the recording entirely.
Visit Compress Dynamic Range in Change Speed to learn more about dynamic
range compression and how to use the excellent Chris’s Dynamic Compressor.

Cutting a Single Long Track into Individual Song Tracks
Do this when you have a single stereo track in your Audacity project and have
already done all of your other cleanups and fixes. A single stereo track in an
Audacity project can contain a number of songs, but to Audacity it’s all one
long, unbroken track; it doesn’t know where the song breaks are, so you have to
make them yourself. There are two different approaches you can take. One is the
usual collection of separate songs with a few seconds of silence dividing them.
Another is marking the song breaks so you can skip around, but with no breaks
between them, like a live concert album.
Whichever you prefer, just do as shown in Figure 4-16: Figure out where you
want each song break; then press ctrl-B to mark the spot and create a label. This
is where you type in the name of the song. Labels go at the beginning of the
songs, so when you start, first press the Home key on your keyboard to make
sure you’re at the very beginning.
Figure 4-16. Creating song titles and breaking up a long track into individual
songs with a label track
If you need to move a label, grab it by its moving handle, which is the little
round dot (Figure 4-17).
The angle handles are for extending labels to mark sections of your track. These
are called region labels (Figure 4-18). Learn all about labels and label tracks in
Creating and Managing Labels in Creating and Managing Labels.
Figure 4-17. The little round dot in the label handle is for moving the label.

Figure 4-18. Drag the angle handles to use labels to mark out sections of track.
In Audacity versions 1.3.9 and newer, beware the Link Tracks button. This keeps
audio and label tracks synchronized and can get in the way by forcing tracks to
be aligned when you don’t want them to be. Turn off Link Tracks if it gets in
your way, though this is less likely to be a problem for a single stereo track. Link
Tracks probably won’t appear in the first 2.x Audacity release but may appear
later when the kinks are worked out. Learn more about Link Tracks in Link
Tracks and Track Groups in Link Tracks and Track Groups.

Creating Graceful Breaks Between Songs
Figure 4-19. Using the Envelope tool to create fade-ins and fade-outs
Creating silence between songs, with graceful fades in and out, is easy in
Audacity. There are several tools to choose from. First, let’s try the Envelope
tool. Figure 4-19 shows it in action, creating about a 2.5-second fade-out to
silence and then fading back in. The little, white squares are the node control
points. Create these by clicking the track, and then you can move them to make
adjustments. Each node has four control points—one inner pair and one outer
pair. Control points move both horizontally and vertically. To get rid of a node,
grab a control point and drag it outside the track’s boundary.
Envelope tools are standard in most audio-editing applications. It takes a bit of
practice to get the hang of them, but once you figure them out, you gain a high
degree of control over fades and amplitude.
You may also try selecting Effect > Fade Out and Effect > Fade In, which is
fast and easy. All you control is the length of the fade. First select the segment
that you want to fade and then apply the effect. Figure 4-20 shows how to create
a nice 10-second fade-out.

Figure 4-20. First make a selection 10 seconds long and then apply Effect > Fade
Out.
Suppose you want two seconds of silence between songs, but there isn’t that
much space between them—no problem, you can insert as much silence as you
want by selecting Generate > Silence. Use the Selection tool to mark where you
want the silence to begin, select Generate > Silence, set it to two seconds, and
click OK.
Note
Beware of CD-writing applications that automatically insert two-second breaks between songs. This should
be a configurable behavior.

Normalization
One of the last steps to perform is to apply normalization to raise the volume
level of your track. Select the whole track, and then select Effect > Normalize.
Check both “Remove any CD offset” and “Normalize maximum amplitude to.”
The highest value you can use for the maximum amplitude is zero, which is a
good value to use for a two-channel stereo track.

Optional Track Metadata
You have the option to write track metadata using the File > Open Metadata
Editor dialog. Before export, fill in information common to all the tracks: artist
name, album title, genre, date, and comments. Audacity will automatically fill in
the track names from the labels or track names and number each track
automatically. You can see a preview for each track at export if you open the
Edit > Preferences > Import/Export dialog and check “Show Metadata Editor
prior to export step.” Uncheck this to skip the per-track preview.
WAV format does not support CD text or metadata. (Other audio file formats do,
such as Ogg, FLAC, and MP3.) This is not the same as CD text. CD text is a
nonstandard extension to the Red Book CD Audio format that displays song
titles on CD players that support it. Most software CD players support CD text,
and so do newer home and car CD players. Most CD-writing software supports
CD text, so you can enter the individual song titles when you are authoring the
CD. Some CD-writing programs (such as Nero, which runs on both Linux and
Windows) extract song titles from the filenames, which is a lovely time-saver.
The metadata are always preserved in your Audacity projects.

Final Export
This has been a great journey, from recording to editing, and now you are two
steps away from creating CDs of your great recordings. The second-to-last step
is to export your recordings to the correct format for CDs, which is 16/44.1 two-
channel WAV. This is also the step where your tracks are broken up into
individual song files. (If your project has more than two tracks, please see
Editing and Downmixing Multitrack Recordings in Editing and Downmixing
Multitrack Recordings.)
If you have not already set the sampling rate for your project to 44.1, do so now.
Change the Project Rate setting to 44,100 Hz on the Selection toolbar. Then
select Tracks > Resample, set the rate to 44,100, and click OK. This will take a
few minutes on long tracks.
Now click File > Export Multiple. Enter the directory you want to save your
audio files in and select both “Split files based on: Labels” and “Name files:
Using Track/Label Name.”
Click the Options button to set the correct export format. Choose Header: WAV
(Microsoft) and Encoding: Signed 16 bit PCM (Figure 4-21).
Figure 4-21. The correct export format settings for CDs
Your track will be exported as a bunch of individual WAV files, one per label.

Writing Your Songs to CD
Now you have a batch of nice individual WAV files, one file per song. Use your
favorite CD-burning program to put your tunes on a CD. Be sure to create an
audio project and not a data project, because CDs must be in the Red Book
Audio format to play in all CD players. Set your burn speed to half the
maximum as coaster insurance. Some CD-writing programs, like Nero,
automatically grab the song titles from your WAV filenames, which is a nice
time-saver. Most CD-writing programs create a default two-second gap between
songs, so watch out for this. You can make a live album that sounds like one
long, unbroken track by eliminating these gaps and still have individual song
tracks so you can skip around.

Labeling Your CD
Don’t use sticky paper labels on your CDs, because these degrade the disc over
time. There are better ways to create nice-looking labels. You can get special CD
blanks that are made to be printed on by inkjet printers that support printing on
CDs. These are different from ordinary printers by having a special tray to hold
the disc.
Another type of printable CD requires a special thermal printer. These are not
expensive, usually around $100.
A third type is the LightScribe CD, which requires a special CD writer and CD
blanks. These cost about the same as ordinary CD/DVD writers, around $50.
There are many software programs for designing your CD labels and making
them look nice and professional.

Mass CD Duplication
You might want to make CDs to distribute, and you can do this without spending
huge amounts of money. There are many laser CD duplicators that are like your
computer’s CD burner, only faster and with multiple trays. These range from
about $400 for simple duplicators with manual feeds to several thousand dollars
for automatic feeds and local data storage.
There are also commercial duplication services with varying levels of service,
such as cover art and design. These can be cost-effective and save you time and
hassle. The best CDs are pressed rather than burned. A duplication service that
uses a press rather than a laser duplicator costs more and usually requires larger
runs. But your discs will last longer.
“Do I need to buy a special audio CD?” is a common question. No, you do not.
All CDs are exactly the same type, but it is worth sticking with good brands like
Taiyo Yuden (my favorite). Verbatim, Ridata, and MAM-A are also reliable
brands. Always get CD-R; don’t bother with CD-RW except for
experimentation. See There Is Not a Special Audio CD in Audio CDs for more
information.

Combining Songs from Different Recording Sessions,
Fix-its, and Special Effects
There are a few different ways to combine songs from different recording
sessions onto a CD. Please see Chapter 5 to learn how to do this.
Chapter 11 covers special effects, and Chapter 12 has more details on fix-its and
cleanups.

Chapter 5. Authoring a Compilation CD
You can make custom-mix CDs just like we used to make custom-mix tapes
back in the olden days. There are many reasons for making your own custom-
mix discs: to make your own song collections, to make your own greatest hits
samplers, to combine your best live performances, to make party discs, to make
a promotional CD of your own music, to weed out songs you don’t care for, to
condense several CDs or LPs into fewer discs . . . whatever your reasons, it’s
easy to do with Audacity.
This newfangled digital era is the best: You can make copies that are perfect
clones of the originals, and it’s faster and easier to edit files on a computer than
on tape. Creating your own custom CD goes like this: Collect the audio tracks
you want to use in Audacity, apply cleanups and edits, write your track metadata,
export to your desired format, write to a CD, and you’re done.

Audio CDs
There are two types of audio CDs that you can make, and which type you choose
is determined by your playback devices. The standard CD that plays on all CD
players is encoded according to the Red Book CD Audio standard. This is what
commercially recorded CDs use, and this is what you want to use to make a
universally playable disc. That is no big technical deal, because all you do is
choose “Create an audio CD” in your CD-writing program. You must always
create 16/44.1 WAV files for Red Book CDs.
The second type of CD you can make is written to the Orange Book standard to
play on a computer. Again, this is no big technological deal; it’s just an ordinary
data CD, and in your CD-writing program you’ll choose “Create a data CD.” On
this type of disc you may use any audio file format you want, such as FLAC or
24-bit WAV for higher quality or lossy, compressed formats like Ogg Vorbis or
MP3 to cram more songs onto a disc. You are limited only by your choice of
software media player, and these days it’s a rare software media player that
doesn’t support everything under the sun.
You should verify CD-R and CD-RW support in your CD player. CD-RWs are
great for creating temporary collections for parties and special events, but some
CD players don’t handle them very well. Some don’t even handle CD-Rs well,
but that is pretty rare anymore. Some newer CD/DVD players support non–Red
Book formats such as MP3, WAV, and WMA.
Note
Alvin, our excellent technical reviewer, explains why older CD players have problems reading newer discs.
“The older azide-based discs had a very large difference in reflectance, and the sensitivity of the player was
set to this large difference. With CD-RW and the pthalocyanine (silver)–based discs, the difference in
reflectivity of the 0 and 1 (burned vs. unburned) disc is much smaller.”

There Is Not a Special Audio CD
I’ve said it before, and I’ll say it again: All blank CDs are exactly the same type;
there is no such thing as a special audio CD, even though you see them in stores.
The only special things about them are a pressed data flag that is part of the
Serial Copy Management System (SCMS) to control copying protected material
and a copying tax that goes to the Recording Industry Association of America
(RIAA) or its equivalent in other countries. The SCMS encoding controls three
states: copy allowed (00), copy once (11), and copy prohibited (10). It might get
in the way if you try to use the kind of CD player that attaches to your stereo
system to copy a copy of a commercial CD. But you can copy the original all
you want, and computer hardware and media are exempt from being SCSM-
compliant.
There are quality differences among brands, and different materials are used to
make the discs. Taiyo Yuden makes its own discs; they are very good and
promise the most longevity. Mitsui, Phillips, Kodak, Verbatim, and TDK are all
reliable as well. The price difference between the good brands and the not-so-
good brands isn’t significant. There is no point in pinching pennies because
you’ll just create more coasters with the lesser-quality brands, so you won’t save
any money. See Andy McFadden’s CD-Recordable FAQ
(http://www.cdrfaq.org/faq.html) to learn all about CD media.

Convert MP3s to Red Book CD
A commonly asked question is “How do I copy my MP3s to a CD that will play
on every CD player?” They must be converted to 16/44.1 WAV files and then
Red Book–encoded. To do this, use Audacity to convert MP3s to 16/44.1 WAV
format, and then in your CD-writing program select “Create an audio CD.” It
won’t give you WAV quality; it will still be lo-fi, lossy MP3 quality. You won’t
get more than 80 minutes of music on your disc even with the smaller file sizes.
But you’ll have a standard CD that will play anywhere.

CD Writers and Software
These days, most consumer-level CD/DVD burners are pretty good and not very
expensive, about $40 to $90. External USB burners are portable, and some are
bus powered so you don’t need a power cord.
CD-writing software is everywhere. For basic CD writing, you shouldn’t have to
pay money because there are dozens of freebies. There is built-in CD/DVD-
writing software in Windows, though it’s pretty limited. Nero and Roxio are
decent and offer inexpensive editions. For more advanced tasks, Sony’s Creative
Software CD Architect (Windows only) is a decent value in a CD-mastering
program at less than $100, with professional features such as cross-fades, cue
sheets, indexing long live tracks, previews, dithering, resampling, karaoke, and
DJ mixes.
Linux users have three good graphical open source applications to choose from:
Brasero, Gnome CD Master, and K3b. All are graphical frontends to powerful
command-line apps such as wodim, cdrdao, and various encoders and
converters. They, of course, can be used on their own without the pretty
graphical interfaces.
Gapless burning is a common problem in do-it-yourself audio circles. This
means creating a CD that plays one long, unbroken track, like a live show, with
no breaks between songs. This can be put together from multiple audio files or
from a single long WAV file. You need a CD burner that supports gapless
burning, which now should be all CD/DVD burners. Look for session-at-once
(SAO) and disc-at-once (DAO) support. Track-at-once (TAO) means the laser
pauses at the end of each track. SAO burns your whole session in one pass with
no pauses and leaves the CD open so you can add more tracks, while DAO
closes the disc. Use SAO or DAO for gapless burning of audio CDs.
An extra challenge for CD-authoring software is creating a track index for a
long, unbroken performance. Create a long WAV track in Audacity, and then
create CD text and a track index in your CD-writing program so you can
navigate the disc just like on a CD with multiple song tracks. (You can’t create
this in Audacity.) You should end up with two files: a .bin file, which contains
your audio, and a .cue or .toc file, which contains the disc index. Some CD-
authoring applications use their own weird nonstandard cue sheet formats;
beware of these, because other CD-writing programs won’t be able to use them,

and they might confuse playback devices.
Roxio, CDRWin, Sony’s Creative Software CD Architect, and higher-end suites
by Steinberg and Minnetonka are some programs that can do this for Windows
users. Brasero and Gnome CD Master do the best job for Linux users. K3b can
index long tracks, but its interface for doing this is rather cumbersome.

Three Ways to Author a CD Compilation in Audacity
There are several ways to create a CD compilation in Audacity. One way is to
copy each song into a single Audacity project, each on its own separate track.
Edit and apply fixes to each track individually, and then normalization across all
tracks is a single step. Give each track its own name, and there are your song
titles. This is a good method for creating a typical audio CD with multiple song
tracks and a short, silent gap between each one.
Another way is to copy all of your songs into a single stereo Audacity track,
apply fixes and edits, and then create a label track to divide them into individual
songs. You can use this to create a CD that appears to be a single long, unbroken
track by creating nice smooth transitions between each song and then making
sure there are no gaps between the songs when you burn your CD.
With the first two methods, your final result is a batch of WAV files, one file per
song.
A third method is to copy all of your songs into a single stereo Audacity track
and apply edits and fixes. Export it as a single 16/44.1 WAV file, and then use
your CD-writing program to create song titles and divide it into individual song
tracks with two-second gaps, or index the track so that it remains unbroken but
still navigable.
Each method has its advantages, so let’s look at each one in detail.

One Track per Song Project
I like this method for creating CDs with multiple song tracks and a standard two-
second silent gap between each one. You can normalize all tracks at once and
edit each one individually without worrying about inadvertently changing
something else. When each song in your project is on its own track, it looks like
Figure 5-1.
Your first step is to create a new Audacity project by selecting File > Save
Project As. Next, configure Audacity with the following settings for creating
CD-ready WAV files.
Set the frame rate to CD audio in the Selection toolbar, as shown in Figure 5-2.
This ensures that any splits you make will start and end on a CD frame. Any
audio that lands outside of these frames will be lost and possibly create clicking
noises. You can choose either hh:mm:ss + CDDA frames (75 fps) or CDDA
frames (75 fps). The former shows the time plus CD frames, and the latter
displays only CD frames. Check the “Snap To” box to ensure that stops and
starts are always on the CD frame boundaries. Set the Project Rate value to
44,100 Hz.
Figure 5-1. Putting each song on its own track

Figure 5-2. Selecting the CD frame rate and project rate in the Selection toolbar
Now open the Edit > Preferences > Recording dialog and make sure that
“Overdub: Play other tracks while recording new one” and “Software
Playthrough: Listen while recording or monitoring new track” are not checked.
In the Edit > Preferences > Devices dialog, set Channels to 2 (Stereo).
Now add some audio files to your project. To add audio files in WAV, FLAC, or
some other format, select File > Import > Audio. If you want to copy tracks or
clips from another Audacity project, open the other project in a new window and
copy and paste.
Name each track with the song name in the Track menu. (At export, each track
will be exported into individual WAV files that use the track names as
filenames.)
Next, apply edits and repairs. (See Fixes and Cleanups in Fixes and Cleanups.) I
like to put one second of silence at the beginning and end of each track and
normalize all of them to 0 dB. Then as I build my CD-ready WAV collection,
they’re all ready to go and don’t need any more processing in Audacity.
Make sure that your Project Rate setting is still 44,100 Hz. If the first track you
opened or imported was at a different sampling rate, then that would have
become the project rate. It doesn’t matter if you have mixed sampling rates,
because everything will be resampled to the project rate at export.
An optional step at this point is to enter some metadata by opening File > Open
Metadata Editor. You can enter information such as the album title, year, genre,
and comments. This is saved only in your Audacity project because WAV files
do not support metadata. (Other audio file formats do, such as FLAC, MP3, and
Ogg Theora.) Audacity will automatically fill in each track title from your track
names, the track number, and everything you entered in the Metadata Editor.
If you want to review the metadata for each song as it is exported, open Edit >
Preferences > Import/Export and check “Show Metadata Editor prior to export
step.”
Now you are ready to export your tracks for CD recording. Flip back to Final
Export in Final Export if you need a refresher on exporting multiple tracks. Be
sure to click the Options button to set the correct export format.

Click OK and then Export. You will see a confirmation for each song and a
summary when it is finished as in Figure 5-3.
Figure 5-3. A successful multiple export
Now you have a batch of CD-ready WAV files. Use your favorite CD-writing
program to create an audio CD and be sure to create an audio project, not a data
project. Most CD software supports CD text and adjusting the gaps between the
songs. Beware of default two-second gap settings, which will add to any gaps
you created in Audacity.

Single Audacity Track Compilation Project
For this method, your Audacity screen will look something like Figure 5-4 when
you are finished editing and ready to export. Why do it this way? I think it’s
easier to control fades and transitions between songs, and I like having
everything in a single track. This is my favorite way to create live CDs with no
breaks between songs.
Figure 5-4. This compilation includes songs from various sources, all knit into a
single Audacity track.
Your first step, as always, is to create a new Audacity project with File > Save
Project As. Next, configure Audacity with the following settings for creating
CD-ready WAV files, just as you did in the previous section.
Set the frame rate to CD audio in the Selection toolbar, as shown in Figure 5-2.
This ensures that any splits you make will start and end on a CD frame. Any
audio that lands outside of these frames will be lost and possibly create clicking
noises. You can choose either hh:mm:ss + CDDA frames (75 fps) or CDDA
frames (75 fps). The former shows the time plus CD frames, and the latter
displays only CD frames. Check the “Snap To” box to ensure that stops and
starts are always on the CD frame boundaries. Set the project rate to 44,100 Hz.
Now open the Edit > Preferences > Recording dialog and make sure that
“Overdub: Play other tracks while recording new one” and “Software
Playthrough: Listen while recording or monitoring new track” are not checked.
In the Edit > Preferences > Devices dialog, set Channels to 2 (Stereo).

Now you can put some audio tracks in your project. If you want to copy some
tracks from another Audacity project, open this in a separate Audacity window
with File > Open or File > Recent Files, and copy and paste. To add audio files
such as WAV, FLAC, Ogg Theora, and so forth, select File > Import > Audio.
Each new import will open in its own track, so you will have to cut and paste it
into your compilation track and then delete the extra track.
When you have all the songs you want, apply edits and repairs (see Fixes and
Cleanups in Fixes and Cleanups). If your songs vary in volume and you want
them all the same, you’ll have to adjust each one individually using Effect >
Amplify. Select each song one at a time, and then bring them up to your desired
peak amplitude, no more than zero.
Now create a label track. This is how each song gets a title and how this one
long track will be split into a bunch of separate song files. Start by pressing the
home key to make sure you are at the very beginning, and then press ctrl-B to
create the label. Type in the song title and press the return key. Click at the
beginning of the second song, make another label, and keep going until you’re
finished labeling all the songs (Figure 5-5).
Figure 5-5. Creating a label track
Make sure your project rate in the Selection toolbar is still 44,100. Any clips that
have a different sample rate will be resampled to the project rate at export.
If you’d like, you can enter some metadata, but remember that the information is
saved only in your Audacity project—WAV files do not support metadata. To
export your project for CD recording, see Final Export in Final Export. When
you are finished, you will see a confirmation for each song and a summary as in
Figure 5-3.

Single Audacity Track + CD-Mastering Program
This third method requires a good CD-authoring program that supports CD text,
track splitting, and control of the spacing between tracks. The idea is to create a
single long Audacity track with all of your songs and do your cleanups and fixes
in Audacity. Then export it as a single 16/44.1 WAV file and use your CD-
writing program to create song titles, to divide the track into individual songs
and adjust the gaps between songs, or to create an index without breaking up the
track.
There are many CD-authoring applications that can do this, such as Roxio,
CDRWin, Sony’s Creative Software CD Architect, and higher-end suites by
Steinberg and Minnetonka for Windows users. Brasero and Gnome CD Master
are best for Linux users.
Let’s use Brasero to illustrate how to do this, because it has the simplest
interface. First, create your new audio project and load your audio file. Then
right-click your file and click Split File. This opens Brasero’s Split Track
window (Figure 5-6). Select Method: Split track manually, click the Play button
to hear your track, and click Slice to mark a song break.

Figure 5-6. Using Brasero to split a long track
Drag the Play slider back and forth to find split points quickly, or just kick back
and listen, clicking the Slice button as the appropriate breakpoints come along.
When you’re finished, click OK. This takes you to a window like Figure 5-7
where you can enter your track titles, and then you can either create a disc image
and cue sheet that you can use in any CD-writing application or go ahead and
burn to disc.

Figure 5-7. Entering song titles and getting ready to burn to disc, or creating a
.bin image and .cue file that can be used by any CD-writing program
This example creates a long track with no breaks between songs. What if you
want song breaks? No worries: Just right-click any track to insert a two-second
pause (Figure 5-8).
Figure 5-8. Using Brasero to insert breaks between songs
If your long track is a compilation of songs with the usual silent breaks between
each song, try selecting Method: Split track for each silence. Then it will split it
automatically.
Of course, the other CD-authoring applications do things their own way, but this
should give you an idea of the basic steps.

CD Cue Sheets and BIN Files
Cue sheets are used in conjunction with .bin image files, which contain your
audio, that any CD-writing software can use to burn a new CD. The cue sheet
contains the table of contents for the disc, like this one created by Brasero:
FILE "homealrac/winding-road-1.bin" MOTOROLA
TITLE "Audio disc (26 June 10)"
TRACK 01 AUDIO
     TITLE "Guitar Summit"
     PERFORMER "Winding Road"
     INDEX 01 00:00:00
TRACK 02 AUDIO
     TITLE "Gone Away Again"
     PERFORMER "Winding Road"
     INDEX 01 02:50:24
TRACK 03 AUDIO
     TITLE "Tennessee Waltz"
     PERFORMER "Winding Road"
     INDEX 01 06:45:63
TRACK 04 AUDIO
     TITLE "Montana Two-Step"
     PERFORMER "Winding Road"
     INDEX 01 14:30:72
Cue sheets are used on both CDs and DVDs. If you’re into ripping commercial
CDs and DVDs, you probably already know about cue sheets, because some
ripping software can create them from the table of contents (TOC) on the CD.
You can create and edit these yourself, though I’m lazy and prefer to have some
nice CD-authoring software do it for me. Here are the most commonly used
fields, including some not used in the Brasero example:
PERFORMER
The artist or group
FILE
The name of the corresponding disc image file, with the file type.
MOTOROLA is a type of binary file. Other options are BINARY, WAVE,
AIFF, and MP3.
TITLE
The disc title
TRACK
The track number and data mode, which is AUDIO
TITLE
The track title
INDEX
The number 01 marks the start of the track. The time values are minutes,
seconds, and CD frames. (Remember, in Audacity we always set the time

parameter to CDDA Frames in the Selection toolbar.) An INDEX value of
00 creates a hidden track, which is a gimmick you’ve probably experienced
on some of your own CDs.
PREGAP
How many seconds of silence to insert before a track starts; for example,
00:02:00 is two seconds.
POSTGAP
How many seconds of silence to insert after a track ends.
You don’t have to use cue sheets. You don’t even have to know anything about
them. They’re just another optional item in your CD-and DVD-authoring toolkit
to help you control what goes on your discs. There are all kinds of free how-tos
all over the Internet if you’re interested in learning more.

Fixes and Cleanups
Chapter 4 included a bunch of information on cleaning up live tracks, and a lot
of that applies to cleaning up compilation CDs too. We’ll review the basics here
along with explanations of a few other fixes that may come up when you make
your compilation discs. We’ll talk about splitting stereo tracks for more precise
editing, normalization, adjusting the gaps between songs, and graceful fades. See
Chapter 12 to learn more about fix-its and cleanups such as noise removal;
dynamic range compression; and fixing clicks, pops, clipping, and other defects.
Chapter 11 is all about applying special effects.

Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs
Sometimes there will be a defect on just one channel of a two-channel stereo
track. If you split this into two tracks, then you can apply repairs to just the one
channel and then join the tracks back together. There are a couple of advantages
to this: The second track helps to mask a less-than-perfect fix, and the fix that
you apply to the defective portion probably won’t help the other channel sound
any better and may even hurt the quality.
To divide a stereo track, go to the Track menu and click Split Stereo Track. To
rejoin the tracks, use the Track menu in the track that is on top and click Make
Stereo Track. The two tracks must be adjacent to each other.

Normalization
Normalization, or raising all your different songs to the same volume levels, is a
common audio-editing task that can be done in CD-writing software. But again,
in Audacity you have a lot more control.
Before normalizing, you should review your tracks for any unusual peaks that
could indicate some kind of defect, such as a bumped mic, a cough, something
dropped, or anything that is so loud it doesn’t sound right. Normalization doesn’t
change the dynamic range, so one too-loud peak means normalization won’t
have much effect, and you could end up with a track that is too quiet overall. To
lower the volume on any too-loud peak, zoom in until you can select it precisely,
and then open Effect > Amplify. Enter a negative value, like -3 dB, to lower the
volume. You can use the Preview button to help adjust it. When it sounds right,
click OK, and move on to the next one.
If you put your whole project into a single Audacity track, you’ll have to select
each song carefully and raise it to your desired maximum volume level. You
should do this before creating any fades. Another way to handle this is to use the
Envelope tool so you can fix it all with one tool.
When every song is on its own individual track, it’s easier—select all tracks
(ctrl-A or Edit > Select All), and then click Effect > Normalize. Check both
“Remove any CD offset” and “Normalize maximum amplitude to,” and enter
your maximum volume level up to 0 dB.

Making Graceful Fades and Song Breaks
Creating breaks between songs, with graceful fades in and out, is easy in
Audacity. Many CD-writing programs can do this too, but you have more control
in Audacity. There are three Audacity tools that I like to use: the Fade In/Fade
Out effects, the Envelope tool, and the Silence generator.
The Fade In/Fade Out effect is fast and simple; all you control is the length of
the fade. First, select the segment that you want to fade, and then select Effect >
Fade Out or Effect > Fade In.
If you need to insert an interval of pure silence, use the Selection tool to mark
where you want the silence to begin, click Generate > Silence, set it to whatever
duration you want, and click OK.
The Envelope tool gives you more control of both the duration and the degree of
fades. Figure 5-9 shows it in action, creating about a 2.5-second fade-out to
silence and then fading back in. The little squares are the node control points.
Create these by clicking the track, and then you can move them both horizontally
and vertically. To get rid of a node, grab a control point and drag it outside the
track’s boundary. Envelope tools are standard in most audio-editing applications.
It takes a bit of practice to get the hang of them, but once you figure out how to
make them go where you want, you gain a high degree of control over fades and
amplitude.
What about cross-fades, you ask? A cross-fade is when one track fades out and
another fades in at the same time, with some overlap and no break. Cross-fades
are used all the time in soundtracks and music. Some Audacity plugins for
creating cross-fades are included in the standard add-on plug-in packages, but
they’re pretty limited. I think it’s easier and better to use the Envelope tool.
Someday Audacity will have a good cross-fade tool. Meanwhile, Figure 5-10
shows my preferred method.

Figure 5-9. Using the Envelope tool and the Time Shift tool to create fade-ins
and fade-outs
Figure 5-10. Creating a cross-fade with the Envelope tool
This shows two Audacity stereo tracks. Let’s call the one on top Song1 and the
one on the bottom Song2. Use the Time Shift tool to position Song2 for the
desired length of overlap; then use the Envelope tool on each track to set the
length and degree of fade. When it’s just the way you want, you’ll have to mix

down the two tracks into a single stereo track. If you want to create a lot of
cross-fades in a project, use two separate Audacity tracks as in Figure 5-11. Then
you’ll have to mixdown only once.
Figure 5-11. Creating cross-fades between every song by using the Time Shift
tool and the Envelope tool
Click Tracks > Mix and Render to mix your tracks down to a single new stereo
track in your Audacity project, replacing your original tracks. You can then make
further adjustments before export such as creating labels, making fixes, and
performing other edits. It will sound just like the playback in Audacity sounds,
so when it sounds right in Audacity, it’s ready to go. Channel assignments are
controlled in the Track menus: Left, Right, and Mono. Left is channel 1, Right is
channel 2, and Mono tracks are mixed down to both. (Remember to use ctrl-
shift-M if you want Audacity to create a new stereo track without replacing your
original tracks.)
Keep in mind that combining tracks makes them louder, so click View > Show
Clipping to quickly find any clipped passages. If the mixdown creates clipping,
undo it, use the Normalize or Amplify effects (Effect menu) to reduce the
amplitudes of your tracks, and try it again. If you go too low, you can always
raise the volume on your final, mixed-down track using Effect > Normalize or
Amplify.
See Chapter 9 to learn more about multitrack editing and mixing.

Configuring Audacity for Orange Book CDs
Orange Book CDs are ordinary data CDs without any special audio encoding.
These will play on any computer but not in most standalone CD players like in
your car or stereo system. You can mix up audio file formats on these and get a
lot more minutes of music on a CD.
In the Edit > Preferences > Devices dialog, select 2 channels (stereo).
In the Edit > Preferences > Recording dialog, uncheck “Overdub: Play other
tracks while recording new one” and “Software Playthrough: Listen while
recording or monitoring new track.”
In the Selection toolbar, select CDDA Frames (75 fps) and check the “Snap To”
box (Figure 5-2).

Putting an Orange Book CD Collection Together
If you already have a batch of audio files all ready to copy to a CD, you don’t
need Audacity at all. Just open your CD writer and create a new data CD project.
Copy your files to the CD, enter CD text if you want, burn the disc, and you’re
done.
There are a couple of different ways to assemble an Orange Book CD project in
Audacity. Remember, your audio files are treated as ordinary data files, so you
can use any audio file format that is supported by your media player. If the CD
will contain all the same formats and quality settings, such as all FLAC or all
Ogg Vorbis or all MP3, you can follow the same steps as for a Red Book CD,
which is to create a single Audacity project containing all of your songs. Export
to your desired format and quality. Then in your CD-writing program, select
“Create a data CD” instead of creating an audio CD. If you created track
metadata, it will be displayed in CD players that support it (except for WAV
files, which do not support storing metadata).
The first audio file you open will set the project rate. You can resample audio
files to different sampling rates, but this can hurt audio quality. Upsampling
doesn’t add more quality, just more bits. Downsampling throws away bits. A
good tactic is not to mix up files in Audacity but rather to edit files that have the
same sampling rate in a single Audacity project. After export, you can mix and
match them all you like.
You won’t be able to apply normalization or adjust the breaks between the tracks
in your CD-writing program because it won’t see the files as audio files. Apply
normalization in Audacity and make sure every track is normalized to the same
level, like 0 dB or whatever you prefer. Adjust the gaps between songs in
Audacity in the usual way, with fades and silences.
Figure 5-12 shows what the metadata look like when you play a CD in Amarok,
which is an open source cross-platform media player. The compilation includes a
mix of FLAC, WAV, and MP3 files, which Amarok handles with ease. Pretty
much any computer media player should do the same thing. FLAC format gives
you WAV quality in one-third to one-half the file size, and it supports metadata.

Figure 5-12. A mixed FLAC, MP3, and WAV CD compilation in Amarok

File Formats and Quality Settings
There are many different audio file formats; WAV and FLAC are great choices
for highest quality, and Ogg Vorbis and MP3 are good lossy, compressed formats
when you need to save space.
An Orange Book CD supports all WAV files, so you can use 16-or 24-bit and
whatever sampling rate you prefer.
Online music services such as Magnatune, Pristine Classical, and Grooveshark
offer downloads in FLAC format because it is equal in quality to WAV in a
smaller file size.
FLAC supports both 16-and 24-bit depths and has nine compression levels, from
0 to 8 (Figure 5-13). The default is 5, and that is a good one to stick with, though
nobody will mind if you experiment with the others. The different settings are
different levels of compression, with 0 being the least compression and 8 the
most. FLAC is lossless, so there is no difference in quality, only in how much
the files are compressed. The value 8 takes several times longer to encode than 5
with not much additional benefit. Decoding FLAC files that have been
maximally compressed doesn’t take any longer than decoding ones that have
been lightly compressed, so the degree of compression won’t affect playback.
Ogg Vorbis is also an open and unencumbered format. It has 11 quality settings
in Audacity, from 0 to 10 (Figure 5-14). The value 3 is roughly equivalent to a
128Kbps MP3, which is pretty lo-fi. I think 6 is good for music. Ogg Vorbis uses
channel coupling for all levels up to 5, which means that redundancies between
two stereo channels are combined to save bandwidth, so you might notice a loss
of stereo imaging. Channel coupling is not used at levels 6 and up. I don’t
perceive any gain in going greater than 7, though your ears may tell you
differently.

Figure 5-13. FLACs are lossless and a great choice for Orange Book CDs.
Figure 5-14. Ogg Vorbis is a good-quality lossy, compressed audio format.
MP3 is a closed, proprietary format with patent encumbrances, though I have not
heard of small-time musicians getting sued for royalties. Nobody will know what
you use on your own personal music discs anyway.
MP3 supports both variable and constant bitrates. Constant bitrates are best for
Internet streaming. Variable bitrate MP3s are good for a Orange Book CD
because they often sound better than constant bitrate files. A constant bitrate
means the same fixed bitrate is used throughout the file, even if it needs more or
fewer bits in certain passages. Variable bitrate operates within a range that you
select, using more or fewer bits as needed. For my ears, a variable 170 to

210Kbps MP3 sounds as good as higher-bitrate MP3s, and it sounds better than
the lower bitrates (Figure 5-15). Naturally it is your ears that must be happy.

Computer Media Players
Software media players will play any audio file format you throw at them.
Windows users could try Windows Media Player, Winamp, or VLC. Linux users
could start with VLC, Rhythmbox, Mplayer, Songbird, Xmms, or Amarok.
There are dozens, maybe even hundreds, of software media players, so you
should be able to find one you like.
Figure 5-15. MP3s at 170 to 210Kbps sound okay to me, better than lower
bitrates and as good as higher bitrates.

Ripping CDs
It’s easy enough to copy and paste into an Audacity project from your own
digital audio file archives, but what about plucking songs off CDs? The audio
tracks on a CD are written using a special format, the Red Book CD Audio
standard, so you can’t just copy the songs off a CD but must use a special digital
audio extractor, or CD ripper. Some CD-writing programs include rippers, such
as Nero (Windows and Linux) and K3b (Linux). There are multitudes of
standalone CD rippers for all platforms. For example, Windows users can try
Windows Media Player, Audio Grabber, or the excellent Exact Audio Copy.
Exact Audio Copy has a bit of a learning curve, but once you get it set up for
your system, it is fast and accurate, and it handles damaged CDs better than any
of the others. Linux users have, among many others, the excellent Grip,
KAudiocreator, and VLC Media Player.
CD rippers extract tracks directly from the CD, so you don’t need a sound card.
This how you make a true, 100 percent faithful clone of the original. You could
also intercept the playback signal in various ways and record that, such as
connecting your CD player directly to a recording interface using its RCA
connectors, using the line or headphone port on your stereo amplifier, or even
holding a microphone in front of your speakers. But these techniques won’t
produce a perfect copy; they might introduce some flaws, lose a bit of fidelity, or
introduce some alterations such as a different treble/bass curve. This is called the
analog hole, which is yet another silly ogre invented by people in the
entertainment industry who seem to have no understanding of audio technology.
You don’t need to be an audio engineer to understand that the ultimate fate of the
digital bits on a CD is to be converted into an analog signal that we can listen to
and that anything that we hear can be recorded.
Different tactics have been tried in futile attempts to “close the analog hole,”
such as introducing deliberate distortions and signal degradations to foil
copying, getting laws passed to cripple the functionality of audio and video
players, keying playback to watermarks so that only signals bearing the correct,
approved watermarks will play back at all, and putting backdoors in devices that
allow vendors to shut them down remotely or control them in other ways. It’s a
losing arms race because anything that is invented can be circumvented, and
customers are unwilling to leap tall buildings just to hear their music.
Audio CDs are rarely copy-protected anyway, and the few attempts that have

been made were public failures. Sony BMG was rather severely embarrassed
when it was discovered that its copy protection secretly installed rootkits on
Windows PCs, which violated laws in various countries and opened security
holes. In the United States, Sony BMG admitted that it violated federal law and
had to deal with a number of civil lawsuits. This so-called copy protection did
not work on anything but Windows PCs, so Linux and Mac users and owners of
standalone CD players and mass CD duplicators were not affected.
Rippers are useful for recovering tracks from your own CDs and from
deteriorating out-of-print commercial CDs.
Note
In this era of “intellectual property” protection craziness (at least in the United States), the principle of fair
use has taken a beating. I’m not going to offer legal advice because I’m not qualified, and it would
deteriorate into a rant anyway. I do want to offer a gentle reminder that the other extreme of disregarding
copyrights is just as wrong, and no, we are not entitled to everything for free. And it doesn’t require legal
genius for a person to recognize when they’re taking unfair advantage.
Specialized CD rippers cater mainly to the MP3 crowd, so watch your file
formats. Most CD and DVD rippers support exporting to a number of different
audio file formats, such as Ogg, WAV, FLAC, AAC, WMA, and MP3. For best
quality, always rip the native format, which for Red Book CDs is always WAV.
Once you have ripped your tracks, you can then edit them in Audacity just like
any other digital audio file and export to any other formats you want.

Ripping DVDs
If you want to extract the audio tracks from DVDs, then you need a DVD ripper.
Some good DVD rippers for Linux are K9copy, K3b, dvd::rip, and VLC Media
Player. HandBrake and DVDFab are good Windows rippers, and VLC also runs
on Windows. Try VLC first; it is open source, is free of cost, and has the most
features. With VLC, you can extract and transcode your DVD audio tracks into
almost any format. Again, you’ll get best quality by ripping to the native format
and then can use Audacity to export to other formats if you need to do so.

Chapter 6. Authoring Super High-Fidelity Audio
DVDs
CD audio is a universal music medium just like vinyl LPs were. There are
multitudes of playback devices, and audio quality is excellent even on
inexpensive CD players. But when you want higher fidelity or larger storage
capacity than an audio CD (how about seven CDs’ worth on a single DVD?),
what do you do?
You may feel like you are being shunned because all the attention is being given
to newer and better video formats and the only audio lovers getting any attention
are MP3 consumers. Lossy formats and tiny portable devices with lo-fi earbuds
are getting all the glory, while audiophiles are stuck with aging formats and
technologies that haven’t advanced in years. Adding insult to injury is the never-
ending parade of ineffective, hostile DRM (which stands for digital rights
management or digital restrictions management—take your pick) follies that are
infesting new video and audio playback technologies, like termites in new
houses.
Fortunately, there are some options for the golden-eared digital audiophile. In
this chapter, we’re going to look at DVD-Audio. DVD-Audio is a special digital
audio format for DVD; it is not the same as the audio formats used in DVD
movies. You’ll sacrifice some portability because it is not as well supported as
CD audio, but a number of home and vehicle DVD players support it.
CD audio supports only two-channel 16/44.1 sound. DVD-Audio supports very
high-resolution audio, all the way up to 24/192 and up to six-channel surround
sound. Audacity, from version 1.3.3, also supports these features.
If you don’t want super-duper high fidelity, you can store a passel of music on a
DVD. You don’t need any special hardware to create DVD-Audio disks; you

need just an ordinary computer DVD writer and blank DVD media. You do need
special authoring software to create the correct type of DVD disk image, and you
have to use PCM-type audio file formats such as FLAC, WAV, and AIFF. I like
FLAC because it’s an open, high-quality lossless, compressed format that creates
files that are 30 percent to 50 percent smaller than WAV and AIFF.
Some examples of DVD-authoring software are DVD-AUDIO Solo Plus
(Windows), Minnetonka Audio Software discWelder (Mac and Windows),
Steinberg Wavelab (Windows), and DVD Audio Tools for Linux. See DVD-
Audio Authoring Software in Exporting to 16-Bit for more information.
Note
You may want to review Chapter 1 and Chapter 2 for refreshers on using Audacity and for recording studio
basics.

What Are WAV, AIFF, and FLAC?
Let the iPod and Zune set have their tiny, overpriced lo-fi devices, for there is a
whole world of high-fidelity digital audio to explore. As we discussed in
Chapter 3, digital audio has many advantages over analog audio. Audacity has
native support for three high-quality PCM audio formats: WAV, AIFF, and
FLAC. WAV and AIFF are pretty much the same thing.
Waveform Audio Format (WAV) was developed by IBM and Microsoft from the
Interchange File Format (IFF), which was developed by Electronic Arts (EA)
and Commodore-Amiga in the mid-1980s. IFF can carry text, image, or audio
data, and it was intended to be a generic wrapper for exchanging different types
of data across diverse platforms.
Audio Interchange File Format (AIFF) was developed by Apple, and it is also
based on IFF. There are small technical differences between WAV and AIFF
because they were developed to run on different operating systems, but these
days both are well supported by most software media players.
Free Lossless Audio Codec (FLAC) is a high-quality lossless compressed format.
It is an open and unencumbered standard. Online music services such as
Magnatune, the Philadelphia Orchestra online music store, and Linn Records
offer downloads in FLAC format because it is equal in quality to WAV in a
smaller file size. FLAC is well supported and growing in popularity.
FLAC, WAV, and AIFF are linear pulse-code modulation (LPCM). Linear means
integer, which we’ll discuss in detail in Creating High-Quality Recordings in
Audacity in Creating High-Quality Recordings in Audacity.
All three are excellent choices for both your studio masters and your final
exports. You can make perfect copies of them for archiving and backups, and
you can generate lower-resolution copies in lossy formats such as Ogg Vorbis
and MP3. Your workflow looks like this:
1. Source material, such as live recordings or copies of legacy media, is
converted to high-resolution masters in Audacity.
2. Generate files for playback in FLAC, WAV, or AIFF.
3. Use special authoring software to write tracks to DVD.

DVD-Audio Overview
DVD-Audio is a digital audio format for DVDs. It is not the same as the audio
formats used in DVD movies but is a different format just for audio. DVD
movies use various compressed, lossy audio formats to preserve disk space,
which even on a DVD is at a premium when you combine movie-length video
and multichannel surround sound. DVD-Audio supports professional studio
master audio quality, which is 24/192. If you’re content with CD audio (16/44.1
stereo), you can cram about seven hours’ worth onto a single standard 4.7GB
DVD. At 24/192, you’ll get about 75 minutes of music on a standard DVD.
Some DVD-authoring software supports writing to 8.5GB double-layer DVDs,
so you can really pile in the tunes. The DVD-Audio standard also supports still
pictures and video menus.
Note
Sometimes home-burned double-layer DVDs are not reliable on different playback devices. Stick with the
good-quality brands of DVD blanks and make sure that your DVD player supports both double-layer DVD-
R and DVD-Audio. Your particular DVD writer may work better with specific brands of blanks, so use
what your manufacturer recommends.
DVD-Audio is an LPCM format like WAV and AIFF. It supports bit depths of
16, 20, and 24 and sampling rates up to 192 kHz. Audacity supports 16-and 24-
bit depths and pretty much any sampling rate you want. If the rate you want isn’t
in the Edit > Preferences > Quality dialog, just enter your own in Edit >
Preferences > Quality > Default Sample Rate > Other.
DVD-Audio has a theoretical dynamic range of 144 dB, though the limitations
of audio hardware mean your maximum dynamic range is always about 120 dB.
Dynamic range in this context isn’t about cranking the volume or blasting your
listeners with sudden extreme peaks; the advantages of an extremely wide
dynamic range are loads of headroom for recording and processing and a very
low noise floor.
DVD-Audio supports a range of stereo and surround channel combinations at 24
bits: 1.0 mono and 2.0 stereo at sampling rates of 44.1 kHz, 48 kHz, 88.2 kHz,
96 kHz, 176.4 kHz, and 192 kHz.
These all support sampling rates of 44.1 kHz, 48 kHz, 88.2 kHz, and 96 kHz at

24 bits:
2.1 stereo (left, right, LFE)
3.0 (left, right, surround)
3.1 (left, right, surround, LFE)
4.0 (left, right, center, surround)
4.1 (left, right, center, surround, LFE)
5.0 (left, right, center, surround right, surround left)
5.1 (left, right, center, surround right, surround left, LFE)
The low-frequency effects (LFE) channel deserves a bit of explanation. It’s often
assumed to be the subwoofer channel, but this is not quite right. The LFE
channel is a special channel that carries sounds in the 3 Hz to 200 Hz frequency
range, and the LFE signal can be sent to any speaker capable of handling this
range.
Uncompressed DVD-Audio has a bitrate limit of 9.6Mbps, so you can have
glorious 24/192 two-channel stereo. But you’re not going to get uncompressed
5.1 surround at full 24/192 resolution because 9.6Mbps is not enough bandwidth
for full resolution on all of those channels. The best you’ll get is 24/96 in 5.1.
You can have different resolutions on different channels, such as 24/96 for the
two front channels and 16/48 on the surround channels. You need compression
to get higher resolution for 5.1, and the only compression supported by the
DVD-Audio standard is the proprietary Meridian Lossless Packing (MLP)
lossless compression. A license for MLP is expensive, usually more than $2,000,
and available only for Windows and Mac authoring software.

Creating High-Quality Recordings in Audacity
Your starting point is the highest-quality audio files you can create. This does not
necessarily mean recording at the highest possible sampling and bitrates, but
using good recording techniques to produce the best-sounding recordings. As we
discussed in Chapter 1 and Chapter 2, a lot of factors affect the quality of your
audio recordings: background noise, microphone placement, the quality of your
mics, preamp, analog-to-digital converter, and the power of your computer.
Audacity supports up to 32/192 recording, so let’s see what the pros and cons are
of using higher resolutions.

More Power
You need a stout CPU to handle high-resolution recording. I have one PC with
an Athlon LE-1620 2.4 GHz and 4GB of RAM. It is a single-core CPU, and it
bogs down at sampling rates higher than 48 kHz. Multicore CPUs are wonderful
for audio production. Audacity is not designed to take advantage of multiple
cores, but you’ll still see a significant performance improvement because your
operating system will use those extra cores for other tasks, which frees up CPU
cycles for Audacity. I also have a system with a three-core CPU (AMD Phenom
X3), and it handles eight channels at 24/96 with no trouble (using a Focusrite
Saffire Pro 26 I/O FireWire recording interface).
I haven’t noticed any advantage in having more than 4GB RAM, but memory is
so cheap it doesn’t hurt to load up. (See Chapter 13 and Chapter 14 to learn
about tuning your computer for best audio performance.)

What Bit Depth Is Best?
The Audacity documentation recommends recording at 32-bit float and then
downsampling to your desired bit depth for your final export. So even though
your final product is 24 or 16 bit, starting from 32-bit float results in higher
quality than recording in 24-or 16-bit integer. This is true even if your recording
interface supports only 16 bits. You will always downsample because there are
no 32-bit playback devices; you must always export to 24-bit or lower integer
(also called linear) formats. 32-bit float is always an intermediate step, not the
final result.
Let’s talk about what 32-bit float is, since it is rather misunderstood. Integers are
whole numbers, and float means floating decimal point. A 32-bit float number is
a 24-bit mantissa plus an 8-bit exponent. 32-bit float means great precision and
very high resolution. You get a smoother, more accurate response curve across
the whole range of your analog-to-digital conversion.
Bit depth controls dynamic range, and in audio production dynamic range is very
important. Each bit equals about 6 dB dynamic range. So, 16-bit has a dynamic
range of 96 dB, 24-bit is 144 dB, and 32-bit float is about 1,500 dB; 32-bit
integer is 196 dB. There are limitations in electronic hardware that limit actual
dynamic range to a maximum of about 120 dB, and most people don’t care to
listen to music with a dynamic range greater than 50 dB, which is quite a lot. So
what’s the point of having very wide dynamic range? The value of all that
dynamic range is abundant headroom for editing, lowest noise, less risk of
clipping, and lossless exports to lower bit depths.
Those extra eight bits make all the difference when you’re doing a lot of
manipulation and effects. You can mangle your 32-bit files to your heart’s
content and when you’re finished make a lossless 24-bit export. If you started
from a 24-bit file, applied a lot of processing, and finished with a 24-bit export,
you would likely introduce some noise and experience some loss of quality.
We dinosaurs from the analog era have a habit of pushing recording levels as
close to the red line as possible, because there were good reasons for doing so.
Even the best analog tapes and recorders created a bit of hiss and had a relatively
narrow dynamic range, so we had to push the limits of signal to noise to
minimize this. Going a bit over the red line didn’t matter very much with analog
audio because it was a gradual effect—at +2 or +3 the distortion was bothersome
only to the fussiest of listeners. At +4 or +5 you were a cool rock band. In digital

audio it’s all or nothing—when a signal passes 0 dB, everything over zero is
discarded, or clipped. You might hear an audible click or something similar to
the familiar analog distortion buzz. It’s easy to hear for yourself. Just plug in a
mic, crank up the gain, and talk loudly. Or use Generate > Tone to create a sine
wave, and then use Effect > Amplify to crank it way up over zero. You can find
clipped segments easily by selecting View > Show Clipping, which uses red
bars to mark clipped passages.
Some documentation says that recording at 32-bit float means virtually no
distortion, even if you go over 0 dB. But there are several variables that affect
any sounds that go over 0 dB, mainly the software processing your sounds.
Different Audacity plugins, or any other software that you might use, will
process sounds over 0 dB in different ways, so you could still get clipping and
create distortion. It’s not necessary to push your recording levels that high
anyway since you have dynamic range to burn.
The short story is that the 16-bit, 24-bit, and 32-bit depths all offer more
dynamic range than you’ll ever be able to use, so you’ll have plenty of headroom
with any of them. When you’re recording at 24-bit depth, you can handily afford
to throw away the top 12 dB. At 16 bits you can set your peaks to -6 or -9 dB
and have no worries. Audacity’s 32-bit float means you can record to a peak of
-24 dB, which is helpful at a live show to allow for unexpected peaks.
Of course, there are downsides to recording at high bit depths and sampling
rates. Higher resolutions eat up disk space and require more CPU power
(Table 6-1).
Table 6-1. How Much Disk Space per Stereo Minute Is Used by Different Bit
Depth/Sampling Rate Combinations
Bit Depth/Sampling Rate Disk Space per Stereo Minute
16/44.1
10MB
16/48
11MB
24/48
17MB
24/96
33 MB
24/192
66MB
If you overload your CPU, you’ll get dropouts, which sound terrible. If you like

skips, pops, and fuzz, it’s better to add them on purpose as special effects.
Consider the complexity of what you’re recording. Simple voice recordings,
such as an audio book or podcast, don’t benefit much from super-high
resolutions. A solo singer or instrumentalist or a small band can be captured
perfectly at 16/44.1, while a symphony orchestra will use everything you have.
So the answer to the question “Which one is best?” once again is “It depends.” If
you have enough computer power and storage, recording at 32-bit float with any
sampling rate gives you loads of elbow room for all kinds of editing and
exporting. You can always go downward, but you can’t go upward. On the other
hand, if you are careful and skilled, all the links in your audio chain are good
quality, and your own ears are pleased with the results, then lower resolutions are
plenty fine. The fun part is you can do this any way you want.

What Sampling Rate Is Best?
Now that we’ve thoroughly thrashed out bit depths, what about sampling rates?
As we learned in Chapter 1, sampling rates determine frequency range. The
frequency range is about half the sampling rate. The best human hearing has a
range of about 20 Hz to 22 kHz, so a sampling rate of 44.1 kHz should cover the
range of human hearing. The better audio hardware has an upper limit of 20 to
30 kHz.
But it’s not quite that simple. Some studies seem to indicate that very high
frequencies are still perceived in some manner and add to the listener’s
enjoyment. What they might be talking about are the harmonics. If you have a
sound at 100 Hz, there are harmonics of that sound at 25 Hz, 50 Hz, 200 Hz, and
so on. When you limit the frequency range, you also limit the harmonics.
If you have good hearing and are fussy about your music, I wager you’ll be
happier with 24 bits than 16. In my experience, bit depth makes a more obvious
difference than sampling rates. I record at 32-bit float/48 and export to 24/48
when I want best quality. Don’t upsample, because all that does is add bits
without adding quality, and most likely it will sound a little worse.

Saving Your Masters
Audacity project (.aup) files are not quite adequate for archiving, because every
time you edit a project they change. They are fast and efficient workspaces. But
project files have been known to be fragile; if a project becomes corrupted, you
have only Audacity’s automatic recovery mechanism to fix it. If that fails, game
over. A good way to archive your studio masters is to export them as WAVs or
FLACs. The highest quality is a 32-bit float WAV. (Select File > Export >
Options.) Then you won’t lose so much as a bit and will always have a high-
quality master. FLAC maxes out at 24-bit integer, which is still a lot of bits, and
FLAC files are smaller than WAV.
Multitrack recordings take a bit of care to preserve as WAVs or FLACs, because
the Audacity track names and channel mappings get lost at export and are
preserved only in your Audacity project files. If you export a big multitrack
project as a single file, you’ll get all your tracks back but without their track
names. Instead, they will all have the filename. If you select Export > Multiple,
which exports each track into an individual file, the track names will become the
filenames.
I save both Audacity project files and 32-bit float WAV masters. Saving Your
Work in Saving Your Work goes into more detail on making backups.

Creating 5.1 Surround
Audacity 1.3.8 and newer can record as many tracks at the same time as your
sound card supports and your computer can handle. Older Audacity versions
support a maximum of 16 tracks at once. Set the correct number of tracks in Edit
> Preferences > Devices. If your recording interface supports fewer channels
than you want to record, you’ll have to lay them down in multiple sessions (see
Chapter 9).
Audacity 1.3.3 and newer come with a simple multichannel mixer interface for
mapping your tracks to the correct surround channels, as Figure 6-1 shows.
Make sure the slider at the bottom is set to the correct number of output
channels.
Figure 6-1. Simple mixer and channel mapper
This mixer appears automatically when you export files if you open the Edit >
Preferences > Import/Export dialog and select “Use custom mix.”
Unfortunately, Audacity doesn’t tell you what track is going to which channel.
So use this guide, which details the DVD-Audio channel-numbering convention:

Channel 1 Front Left
Channel 2 Front Right
Channel 3 Center
Channel 4 Low Frequency Effects (LFE)
Channel 5 Surround Left
Channel 6 Surround Right
To keep from driving yourself crazy, name your tracks so you know what they
are (using the Track menu), as Figure 6-2 shows. You can name them whatever
you want.
Figure 6-2. Using the Track menu to give your tracks helpful names
Then you’ll see the track names in the mixer. However, in Figure 6-3 the two
front channels are in the wrong order. No problem—just click them to remap
them to the correct channels and make them look like Figure 6-4.

Figure 6-3. Your track names show up in the mixer.
Figure 6-4. Fixing out-of-order tracks

What if you want stereo from a multichannel project? No problem—just change
the mixer settings. Follow the example in Figure 6-5 to map six channels to two
stereo channels, first making sure the output slider is set to two channels. Tracks
can be mapped to more than one channel.
Figure 6-5. Mapping six-channel discrete surround to stereo

Exporting to 16-Bit
You might try applying some dithering when downsampling from 32 or 24 bits
to 16. This is set in the Edit > Preferences > Quality > High-quality
Conversion dropdown menus. Dither is deliberately adding noise to smooth the
rough edges for a cleaner sound. Shaped dither is considered to give the best
results, but it is also the most CPU-intensive. Triangular is a good compromise
between quality and CPU cost, and rectangular is lightweight and makes the
smallest alterations. Dithering isn’t needed on 24-bit files, though I won’t
complain if you want to experiment and hear for yourself.

DVD-Audio Authoring Software
Once you have your FLAC, WAV, or AIFF audio files all ready to copy to a
DVD, all you need are plain old normal DVD blanks, an ordinary computer
DVD writer, and special DVD-Audio authoring software. Here are some
examples:
DVD Audio Tools for Linux
Linux has only one DVD-Audio authoring application that I know of, and
that is DVD Audio Tools (http://www.dvd-audio.sourceforge.net/). It has
both a command-line interface and a nice graphical interface. It runs on
both Linux and Windows, and it is free software (licensed under the GPL)
and free of cost.
DVD Audio Tools is simple and streamlined—the first time you use it, you
should have a playable DVD in an hour. It accepts both FLAC and WAV
files. You can also use it to “rip” audio tracks from unencrypted DVDs.
DVD Audio Tools only creates a disk image, so you’ll need to burn the disk
with your usual favorite DVD-writing application.
DVD-AUDIO Solo Plus
Cirlinca’s DVD-AUDIO Solo Plus (http://www.cirlinca.com/products.htm)
is a nice Windows program that supports just about everything you would
want to do: It supports multichannel surround, 8.5GB dual-layer discs,
gapless playback, and unencrypted CD/DVD ripping. Currently, it retails
for about $45. Cirlinca does not offer Meridian Lossless Packing (MLP)
licenses. (MLP is a patented method of lossless compression for DVD-
Audio.)
Minnetonka Audio Software discWelder
discWelder for Windows (http://www.minnetonkaaudio.com/) comes in
three editions: Bronze, Chrome, and Steel. Bronze is priced at $99, Steel is
$595, and Chrome wants $2,995 to follow you home. Another $2,000 gets
you MLP. Bronze is comparable to DVD-AUDIO Solo Plus. Steel supports
8.5GB dual-layer disks and slide show graphics and gives you complete
control over mixing and mapping. For that price Chrome should cook your
breakfast and clean your house, but it doesn’t. Instead, it adds support for
animated graphics, lets you have both stereo and surround streams, and
exports to DLT tape. There are also Mac versions.
Steinberg Wavelab
Steinberg’s Wavelab 7 (http://www.steinberg.net/en/products/wavelab.html)

comes in two editions: Wavelab 7 for about $500 and Wavelab Elements 7
for about $100. These come with bales of features for audio editing,
mastering, special effects, multichannel surround, and, of course, DVD-
Audio.
After you spend all that money and go to all that trouble, you don’t want grotty
old hand-scrawled disk labels, do you? No, you don’t, and that is why you are
going to spend a few bucks on a new LightScribe DVD burner. These cost the
same as ordinary old-fashioned DVD burners, which is $50 or less, and you can
burn fancy disk labels right into the disk. You have to purchase LightScribe
DVD blanks, which currently cost a small bit more than the ordinary kind. Both
Linux and Windows have software for creating the labels.
Another option is to purchase inkjet-printable DVD blanks, and then you can
make color labels. You’ll need an inkjet printer with a special CD/DVD tray to
use these.
A plain old felt pen is also perfectly fine for writing your disk labels.
Remember, you don’t want to use sticky paper disk labels, because the glue
degrades the disk over time.

Transferring Legacy Media
In Chapter 3, we learned how to convert legacy analog media to digital formats.
Tapes and vinyl records require jumping through some extra hardware hoops to
get everything connected. CDs and DVDs are easier, because you can do
everything on your computer. First copy the CD, DVD, or legacy media to your
computer. The popular term for copying CDs and DVDs is ripping, and this is
done with special, easily obtained software. Some good DVD rippers for Linux
are K9copy, dvd::rip, and VLC. You need libdvdcss to rip encoded DVDs.
libdvdcss is available in many Linux distributions and should be easy to find.
HandBrake is one of the best Windows DVD rippers, and it even has a
command-line-only version for Linux. VLC also runs on Windows, and DVD
Fab Platinum is very good. All of these let you select just the audio tracks. Try
VLC first; it is open source and free of cost, and it has the most features. With
VLC you can extract and transcode your DVD-Audio tracks into almost any
format.
CD rippers are legion. Linux users can also try K3B, KAudioCreator, Brasero,
Asunder, SoundJuicer, and Grip. Windows users can also try Windows Media
Player, Audiograbber, and Winamp.
A good archive format for CDs ripped to a hard drive is 16-bit FLAC, and 24-bit
FLAC is appropriate for most DVD-Audio tracks. It makes a perfect copy and
saves disk space. If you think you’re going to edit your ripped tracks, consider
archiving them as 32-bit float WAV masters to give yourself some headroom for
future editing.
What About SACD?
Music lovers are always asking “What about Sony/Phillips’s Super Audio CD (SACD)?” SACD is not an
option for the home or small studio because the recorders are very expensive, plus you must pay format
license and patent fees, which is a shame, because it’s a real breakthrough. SACD takes one-bit samples at a
2.82 MHz sampling rate. That’s right, 2.82 million times per second. That is a tad more than the standard
Red Book CD sampling rate of 44.1 kHz. On paper, it’s closer to an analog waveform than any other digital
format. SACD does not use pulse code modulation (PCM) but a new method of recording and playback that
is called Direct Stream Digital (DSD). PCM requires interpolation and oversampling filters, while DSD
employs a more direct, less-complex signal path. SACD has a potential dynamic range of around 100 dB.
It seems that vendors of both SACD and DVD-Audio became bogged down in DRM nonsense, rather than
marketing these high-quality formats in a pleasing and attractive manner, so both have been slow to gain

traction in the marketplace. I think they are both going to fade away eventually.

Learn More
Please see Chapter 1 and Chapter 2 to learn the basics of using Audacity and
setting up a recording studio, Chapter 9 for multitrack recording, and Chapter 12
for fix-its and cleanups.

Chapter 7. Creating Podcasts
Thanks to the Internet, everyone who is anyone is making podcasts. Now anyone
with a little bit of recording gear and an Internet connection can create an audio
broadcast to share with the world. You can tell stories, report news, and share
how-tos. Your podcast can be just you talking, you interviewing another person,
you and a cohost, or you and a gaggle of cohosts and guests. You can add a
music track or special effects. Making podcasts with Audacity is easy and fun.
Once you have created your masterpiece, you need a website to host it and make
it available to your eager audience. The Internet is full of free and inexpensive
podcast hosts. If you have enough bandwidth and want to be your own server
admin, you can be your own host thanks to the multitudes of free and open
source streaming server software.
The term podcast used to refer to downloadable MP3-encoded recordings for
iPods. Apple made a brief, ferocious attempt to own the word pod and sicced
lawyers on a number of small businesses who dared to use the word, such as
TightPod (laptop-protecting covers), Profit Pod (data collector for vending
machines), Spodradio (a German online broadcaster), and Podcast Ready
(another online broadcaster). Fortunately, it seems that the attack lawyers have
moved on to something else, and it is safe to say “pod” again. So, that is what we
are going to do: pea pod, pod of whales, pod people. Open the pod bay door,
Hal.
Audacity is a dandy tool for making podcasts. You can use a digital recorder and
then dump the recording into Audacity for editing, or you can record directly
into a computer. A USB microphone or headset connected to a netbook makes a
great lightweight portable recording studio. Or, you may indulge in using an
entire studio full of fancy expensive gear; it’s entirely up to you.

Up until now in this book I’ve been nattering on about high-quality audio and
not using lossy, compressed audio file formats. With podcasts we’re going the
other way: smaller file sizes and lossy, compressed formats. You still want to
start with creating a high-quality master, but it’s not necessary to treat your
podcast the same way as an ultimate audiophile music recording, because it is
going to be trimmed down for Internet streaming and fast downloads.
You may want to review Chapter 1 and Chapter 2 first to learn the fundamentals
of using Audacity and how to set up your recording gear.

The Short Story
Making a simple podcast takes just a few steps:
1. Make your recording.
2. Edit it in Audacity: trim, repair, normalize—the usual cleanups and fixes.
3. Export to a playable compressed format such as Ogg Vorbis or MP3.
4. Upload to a site where your fans can download and enjoy your podcast.
Let’s take a look at the finer points of making a good podcast.
Note
Audio terminology is a bit confused when it comes to defining track. Track can be a single mono track, a
stereo track, and even a sound track. In Audacity, it is helpful to think of a track as any single editable unit,
which is any mono track or stereo track. Any edits that you make, such as deletions, additions, special
effects, and so on, will be applied equally to the left and right channels in an Audacity stereo track.

Making a Simple Voicecast
The simplest podcast is just you talking. As simple as this sounds, speaking into
a microphone takes a bit of practice. You might practice speaking into a
microphone without creating unwanted noises such as smacks, pops, loud
breathing, clicking dentures, or any other unpleasant sounds. Beware verbal ticks
like “uh, um, you know.” Practice gauging the optimal distance between your
mouth and the microphone, and set it up so that you can stand or sit comfortably.
Using a mic stand is better than hand-holding, and if you’re using a lavalier mic,
clip it where your clothing won’t rub on it. I prefer a good-quality USB headset.
Speak past the mic as though you have an audience in the room, rather than into
the mic; this will help you energize your voice and project it in a way that will
reduce unwanted side effects. A windscreen or a foam windsock is essential.
How fast should you speak? This depends on your personality and the type of
material. Usually 120 words per minute is cited as a good rate, though it will feel
slow to most English speakers. This doesn’t necessarily mean a speed limit of
two words per second, but it means relaxing and using carefully timed pauses to
allow listeners a chance to absorb what you’re saying.
I use a Plantronics stereo USB headset for voice recordings (Figure 7-1). It’s
comfortable and easy to use, and the sound quality is good. USB recording
interfaces have their own analog-to-digital converters, so you don’t need a sound
card. They also eliminate the risk of picking up internal computer noise, which is
sometimes a problem with internal sound cards.

Figure 7-1. A good USB headset is a great tool for making voice recordings.
It takes a lot of practice to speak well without a script or rehearsing, so don’t feel
bad if you need them. It’s better to make as clean a recording as possible than to
clean up a recording all full of bad stuff, and your listeners will appreciate a
crisp, focused presentation.

Audacity Settings
First create a new Audacity project with File > Save Project As.
Then set your recording and playback devices in the Edit > Preferences >
Devices dialog, and set your channels to however many you are recording at one
time. If it is just you with a mono microphone, set one channel. If you are using
a stereo mic or headset, that is two. Beware of cheapo onboard sound chips, like
the ones used in laptops—the microphone input is often mono even if they claim
it’s stereo.
In the Edit > Preferences > Quality dialog, set a default sample rate of 44,100
and a default sample format (which is really bit depth; Audacity has a few
terminology quirks) of 32-bit float. (See Chapter 1 for more information on bit
depths and sampling rates.) You can record at a higher audio resolution if you
prefer, but for a simple voicecast, those extra bits aren’t going to make any
difference. In fact, you could use 16/44.1. It saves disk space, sounds good, and
exports to lower-quality formats like MP3 and Ogg Vorbis just fine.
Now go to the Edit > Preferences > Recording dialog, make sure that
“Overdub: Play other tracks while recording new one” and “Software
Playthrough: Listen while recording or monitoring new track” are not checked.
Leave the Preferences menu and click the Input Level Meter to start monitoring
and to set your recording level (Figure 7-2). This might take a bit of trial and
error, depending on how much variation there is in your voice. Record to a peak
of -9 or -12 dB to give yourself a good safety margin, and you’ll still have a very
good signal-to-noise ratio. Never go over zero; that results in clipping, which
creates distortion. The blue lines mark the highest peak for the session, and the
red lines mark the highest peak in the last three seconds. The dark red bars
indicate peak levels, and the light red bars show the average amplitude.
Figure 7-2. Setting the recording level
Most USB headsets come with Windows software that lets you control both the
input and output volumes. Linux users may have to rely on ALSA (see
Chapter 13) to set the volume levels. The Audacity Mixer toolbar (Figure 7-3)
works with audio interfaces if their drivers support volume controls. Many don’t.

This is why I love recording interfaces with ordinary, old-fashioned knobs to
twiddle.
Figure 7-3. The Audacity Mixer toolbar
And now, the moment you’ve been waiting for—click the Record button and
start talking! Figure 7-4 shows a voice recording in progress.
Click Pause to stop recording, and Record to append to your existing track. If
you click Stop and then click Record, you will create a new track. If you click
Stop by mistake, pick up where you left off with shift-Record.

Cleaning Up Your Recording
Once you have recorded your deep thoughts, you can go back and clean up your
recording. First, delete anything you don’t want to keep; just do a rough cut on
your first pass and leave a bit extra. You can always delete more, but you can’t
put back very easily. If you have more than one track, be mindful of keeping
them synchronized (though if they do get out of sync, there are simple ways to
get them back together).
Then select View > Show Clipping to highlight in red any clipped segments. If
you find some, there are a number of ways to fix them.
If it is a very brief clip, less than a quarter second in duration, zoom in until you
can precisely select the clipped part and delete it. When it’s a fraction of a
second, no one will notice.
Figure 7-4. At last, we’re making our recording!
Another way is to rerecord the clipped segment at the correct recording level in a
second track or Audacity window and then copy that over the clipped segment.
It’s not easy to replace a short segment surgically, so you might select a longer
section to replace. Look for natural breaks so you can patch the new part in
gracefully, as in Figure 7-5. The selection in Figure 7-5 is about four seconds
long, even though the clipped portion (indicated by the three vertical peaks
between the six-second mark and the six-and-a-half–second marks) is less than a

half second in duration.
Figure 7-5. Making a smoother patch by selecting a segment to replace at natural
breaks
Now here is a cool trick that I like because it helps me keep track of where I am
editing. If you have used Audacity very much, you know that a slip of the mouse
or accidentally hitting a hotkey will lose your place, and if it’s a long track, it’s a
pain to get back to where you where. So, don’t delete your selection but instead
use Edit > Split Delete. This replaces the selection with an empty gap, as in
Figure 7-6. This also keeps your track at the same length, which you might want
if you have two or more tracks to keep synchronized.
Figure 7-6. Using Edit > Split Delete to leave a gap marking your deletion
Now you can go ahead and make your rerecording. Don’t worry about making

the recording levels exactly the same as in your original project because that is
easy to adjust with Effect > Amplify. When it is satisfactory, with nary a belch,
bump, or cough, copy it and paste it into the gap (Figure 7-7). The edges may
not exactly match, but we can fix that.
Figure 7-7. Paste the new segment into the gap you left when you deleted the
bad bit.
There are a number of ways to deal with the empty parts on either side of the
new segment. The simplest is to delete them. If you don’t want to shorten the
track, use Generate > Silence to fill the gaps.
Another way is to use the Time Shift tool to move everything together. The
edges will match exactly when you see the Snap Guide appear, which is a yellow
vertical line that appears when borders are perfectly lined up. Click to mark the
place where the borders join, and then zoom way in until you can use the Repair
effect to smooth over the edge of your patch. This operates on a maximum
sample size of 128 samples, so zoom way in until you can make a selection that
small. The Zoom tool centers on wherever you click. Then click Effect >
Repair, which uses interpolation to make a seamless join.
One more fun Audacity trick for stretching out a patch is to use Effect > Change
Tempo to slow down your patch without changing the pitch. You can measure
the exact length required by selecting the “Length” radio button in the Selection
toolbar and then make a selection from the beginning of your patch to the end of
the gap. The yellow Snap Guides will appear when you are exactly on your
borders. The example in Figure 7-8 needs to be 60 seconds long.

Then select just your patch, click Effect > Change Tempo, and enter the new
length, as shown in Figure 7-9. Click the Preview button, and if it doesn’t sound
too weird, click OK, and you’re done.
Figure 7-8. Figuring out how long your patch needs to be
Figure 7-9. Using Effect > Change Tempo to stretch out a patch

Reducing Too-Tall Peaks
You should also look for any disproportionately tall peaks in your waveform
(Figure 7-10, at 2.7 to 3 seconds), even if they aren’t clipped, and review them to
decide whether they need to be reduced. In this example, I was speaking too
loudly from the excitement of making a podcast, so I used Effect > Amplify to
reduce the amplitude. Yes, it says “amplify,” but if you give it a negative value
(such as -3 or -6 dB), it will attenuate.
You can use trial and error to figure out how much reduction in volume to apply,
or you can use the Waveform (db) view to get an idea of how much you need.
Change the waveform display to Waveform (db) in the Track menu (Figure 7-
11), and then expand the width of the track (grab the border with the mouse and
pull) until you see the decibel scale on the left (Figure 7-12). In this example, it
looks like the loud part could be as many as 12 decibels too loud, so that gives
me a starting point of -12 to try. Remember, Audacity gives you nearly unlimited
undos (Edit > Undo or ctrl-Z), so it’s safe to use trial and error.
Figure 7-10. The portion from 2.7 to 3 seconds is too loud.
The decibel scale in the Track panel is adjustable in the Edit > Preferences >
Interface dialog, from 0 to -36 to 0 to -145. This lets you adjust the display to

whatever is useful for you. I usually keep it at -60 because that gives me plenty
of detail without making the scale too large.
Figure 7-11. Changing the waveform display to Waveform (dB)
Figure 7-12. This selection could be as many as 12 decibels too loud.

Fades
There are two ways to control fading in and fading out. The easy way is to select
the track segment you want to fade in or out and then click Effect > Fade In or
Fade Out. All you do is control the length of the fade.
For finer-grained control, use the Envelope tool. Click the waveform to create
control nodes, and then drag these around to make different parts of your track
louder or quieter. Drag nodes past the track boundary to get rid of them.

Normalization
When you have your track all trimmed and cleaned up, the last step is to apply
Effect > Normalize. Make sure both boxes in the Normalize dialog are checked
(“Remove any DC offset” and “Normalize maximum amplitude”). DC offset
refers to the mean amplitude; if this is not zero, then normalization won’t be
applied correctly because the amplitude levels will be off balance, and it might
even create a bit of distortion. Figure 7-13 shows an example of DC offset,
before and after correction. In the top track, you can see how the whole
waveform is not quite centered on zero, and then in the bottom track it is.
Figure 7-13. The waveform before normalization (above) and after (below)

Export to MP3 or Ogg?
Now that your recording is all cleaned up, it is time to export it to a compressed
lossy format, either Ogg Vorbis or MP3 (MPEG-1 Audio Layer 3, not MPEG-3).
(Refer to Chapter 13 and Chapter 14 to learn how to enable MP3 support on
Linux and Windows.)
MP3 is the universal portable digital audio format: Everything supports MP3. As
we discussed in Chapter 1, there are differences between Ogg Vorbis and MP3.
Some listeners claim that Ogg Vorbis delivers higher quality than MP3. At low
bitrates, neither one sounds very good to me; rather, they sound flat and without
character or depth. At higher bitrates, both sound acceptable, though I think Ogg
delivers a more accurate, natural sound. MP3s sound a bit too-bright and
crunchy.
Ogg Vorbis supports multichannel surround, while MP3 supports one or two
channels. MP3 is encumbered by patents held by several different patent holders
in different countries, and the last one expires on 2017. Does this mean you’ll
get a visit from attack lawyers if you distribute your work in MP3 format? I
don’t know. It seems that a lot of artists distribute their work as MP3s without
paying license fees and don’t get in trouble. Ask a lawyer who specializes in
these issues.
Even if your listeners all have megamondo broadband, it’s a good practice to
maintain a frugal attitude. And they don’t all have fat pipes; estimates of US
dial-up users range from 25 to 45 percent. Don’t forget that the Internet is
international, so your potential audience includes countries that rely on dial-up
and low-speed wireless. Even for broadband users, network congestion and
queuing gum up streaming media, so the moral is that streaming audio is still
more reliable at lower bitrates.
As always, there are trade-offs. If your podcast host allows it, you can offer your
listeners a choice of listening options at different quality levels and both
streaming and downloadable files.

Ogg Vorbis Quality Settings
Ogg exports are easy in Audacity. You might have read how-tos that say to use a
variable bitrate (vbr) rather than a constant bitrate (cbr). Although this is good
advice, it is unnecessary because Ogg Vorbis does not support cbr. Select File >
Export > Save as type: Ogg Vorbis Files, and then click the Options button
(Figure 7-14). Exporting to Ogg Vorbis is simple: Pick a number. 0 is the lowest
quality and smallest file size, and 10 is the best quality and largest file size.
Figure 7-14. Setting Ogg Vorbis quality level
A variable bitrate means that simple passages will have a lower bitrate, and more
complex passages will have a higher bitrate. This delivers better quality than a
fixed bitrate. You won’t be able to calculate file sizes precisely, but the fine folks
who invented Ogg Vorbis don’t think much of measuring quality by bitrates
anyway. To give a basis for comparison, a quality setting of 3 results in an
average bitrate of around 112Kbps, and Ogg fans claim it sounds better than a
128Kbps MP3.
Ogg Vorbis uses lossy channel coupling up to level 5. Redundancies between the
left and right channels are combined to save space. This might affect the stereo
imaging, so if this bothers you, use a quality setting of 6 or higher because
channel coupling is turned off at this level. I use 6. My ears can’t tell the
difference between 7 and up. Your ears, of course, may tell you a different story.
For a simple voicecast, you can go all the way down to 0, and it still sounds
acceptable.

MP3 Quality Settings
On both Linux and Windows, you may have to install an MP3 encoder
separately. Use the LAME MP3 encoder because it is high quality, free of cost,
and open source. Linux users can install it from their usual package repositories,
and Windows users should follow the instructions at the Audacity downloads
page (http://audacity.sourceforge.net/help/faq?s=install&item=lame-mp3).
Note
Windows users should visit the OSSwin project (http://osswin.sourceforge.net/) to find links to hundreds of
excellent open source applications for Windows.
I don’t know if audio geeks love to argue for the sake of arguing or simply have
strong passions about everything, because MP3 quality settings are minefields of
controversy. Just follow this simple rule, and you’ll be fine: I, your author, am
right (except when your own ears tell you differently).
In Audacity you have four categories for setting the MP3 bitrate: Preset,
Variable, Average, and Constant.
Preset gives you four different prefab combinations that are recommended by the
LAME developers: Medium, Standard, Extreme, and Insane. Standard is fine for
music, but you can go lower for a simple voicecast. Medium, Standard, and
Extreme all use variable bitrates (vbr). Variable bitrate means the bitrate varies
according to the complexity of the sounds, which results in better audio quality.
In the olden days, variable bitrates gave MP3 players fits because they were
designed for constant bitrates (cbr). But that was a long time ago, and these days
variable bitrates shouldn’t present any problems. Variable bitrates are always
defined within a range, like the 170Kbps to 210Kbps of the Standard preset.
Insane uses the maximum constant bitrate, 320Kbps. In my experience, the
Standard setting (170Kbps to 210Kbps) is about as good as MP3 can deliver, and
anything over that doesn’t make a noticeable difference.
Variable has a range of 10 quality settings. Quality setting 5 is 110Kbps to
150Kbps, which is fine for simple voicecasts.
Average is, in my opinion, not worth bothering with. It is a compromise between
Variable and Constant bitrates. You set a constant bitrate, but since it’s an

average, a little bit of fluctuation is allowed. So the quality is not quite as good
as Variable, and it’s a little better than Constant bitrate.
Constant bitrates are supposed to work better for streaming audio over the
Internet, and you get a predictable file size. If you want to use constant bitrates,
Audacity gives you a full range to choose from.
Set Variable Speed: Standard. Standard gives better quality, and it takes a tiny bit
longer to encode.
Figure 7-15 and Figure 7-16 show the MP3 export menus and the various quality
settings.
Leave Channel Mode: Stereo, because you have to be desperate for storage
space to even think of using Joint Stereo. If you are desperate for storage space,
to the point that you’re thinking of encoding your MP3 files at a bitrate of
112Kbps or lower, then give it a try. The term joint stereo is a poor name that
does not describe what it does. A popular misconception is that it joins the two
stereo channels and destroys the stereo separation. As always with audio
engineering, it’s more complex than that. Here is a new audio term for you:
human psychoacoustics. Isn’t that a splendid phrase? No, it doesn’t mean psycho
like a crazy person with a big knife, sorry. It means engineering audio in a way
that takes into account how the human ear perceives sounds, instead of adhering
to a strictly mathematical model, which does not correspond to how human
hearing really works. It is quite sophisticated, and if you don’t like the way joint
stereo sounds, it’s easy enough to do over.

Figure 7-15. Audacity supports a wide range of MP3 bitrates.

Figure 7-16. Audacity offers a range of MP3 quality settings and presets.
What is joint stereo? In the MPEG-1 Audio Layer 3 standard, it means using any
of several techniques to reduce bitrate while preserving an acceptable level of
quality by merging redundancies in the left and right channels. These
“redundancies” are frequencies that the human perceives as less directional,
which are the upper frequencies. It should improve how recordings at low
bitrates sound because more audio data are preserved at the expense of stereo
imaging.
MP3s, Encoders, and Other Audio Formats
LAME stands for “LAME Ain’t an MP3 Encoder.” In its early days, it wasn’t an encoder; it was a set of
patches against the original ISO/IEC demonstration source code, so (very hair-splittingly) technically it was
not an encoder. Over time, the LAME developers wrote all new code until LAME no longer needed the ISO
sources, and now it is, quite blatantly, an encoder. Because of the confusing patent issues around the MP3
(MPEG-1 Audio Layer 3) format, several alternative formats have been developed: Vorbis (which is open
source), Advanced Audio Coding (AAC), and Windows Media Audio (WMA). AAC and WMA have their
own issues, which are discussed in a moment.
None of the MP3 patent holders has ever gone after the developers of open source encoders or individuals
using MP3 for their own private use.

Other Lossy Formats
There are other lossy, compressed audio formats that generate small file sizes,
such as AAC, WMA, and RealPlayer. Audacity supports these via the FFmpeg
library on Linux and Windows and has some nice export presets. You may also
use the external encoder of your choice, which you can access via the Save as
type dropdown menu in the Export dialog (Figure 7-17).
Figure 7-17. Using the “external program” option to export with any installed
audio encoder.
Note
See Chapter 13 and Chapter 14 to learn how to install FFmpeg and MP3.

AAC wasn’t very popular until Apple chose it as the default format for its iTunes
Store and all of its audio devices. WMA is the Windows Media Format, and
RealPlayer is . . . well, RealPlayer. AAC, WMA, and RealPlayer are all closed,
proprietary formats that are encumbered with various unpleasant features such as
digital rights management (DRM), tracking software, and patent guff.

Exporting Your Podcast
Once you have decided what format or formats to export your podcast to, select
File > Export to make your actual exports. You can make all kinds of exports
from the same Audacity project. Note that you can export part of a track by
selecting part of it and then selecting File > Export Selection.

Two-Person Podcasts
Say you don’t want to be a lone pontificating hermit but instead want a cohost or
want to interview another person. The easiest and best way is for each person to
have their own mono microphone going to a separate recording channel. This
makes it a lot easier to make edits and repairs. Be kind to your listeners and try
to make both voices as close to the same volume level as you can. Let your ears
be your guide more than the waveforms, because even when the waveform says
both voices have equal volume, some people sound louder. (There’s that
psychoacoustic thingie again.)
If you’re using a netbook or laptop with a real stereo microphone port, you can
use a splitter for plugging in two mono mics.

Editing a Two-Track Recording as a Single Stereo Track
When you record two channels, Audacity creates a single stereo track no matter
how you are set up. You can use two separate mono mics or a single stereo mic,
and the default is a single stereo track. Figure 7-18 shows how this looks.
(Notice how the waveform indicates that each person has politely taken turns to
speak.)
Figure 7-18. Recording with two mono microphones, one left and one right, in a
single Audacity stereo track
You can make adjustments in the relative volumes of the left and right channels
by using the cool new Mixer Board, which first appeared in Audacity 1.3.8
(Figure 7-19.) Use the Mixer Board to adjust the gain, or volume level, of the
track, and use the Pan slider to adjust the relative volume of the left and right
channels. These adjustments do not change the project file; you will hear the
changes in playback in Audacity and in your final export, but your Audacity
project files will not be altered. The Mixer Board controls are all or nothing;
they apply to the whole track and can’t be applied only to sections of the track.

Figure 7-19. The Mixer Board
This is pretty easy, and if you want more control, you can split your recording
into two mono tracks.

Editing a Two-Track Recording as Two Mono Tracks
Splitting your stereo track into two mono tracks gives you a lot more control.
Click the dropdown arrow in the Track menu, and select Split Stereo Track
(Figure 7-20). Now you have two separate tracks and can make whatever
changes and fixes you need to each one individually.
Figure 7-20. Split a stereo track into two mono tracks for easy editing.
You should name each track (also by using the Track menu) so you will always
know what they are.

Note
Here is a cool trick for the Mixer Board: If you use certain words in your track names such as guitar,
vocals, piano, and even some abbreviations, the icons will match the names. See Customizing the Mixer
Board in Customizing the Mixer Board to see a complete listing of keywords.
After splitting your stereo track into two mono tracks, edit each track separately,
making the usual fixes and matching the volume of your two speakers as well as
you can. By default, Audacity plays all tracks at the same time when you hit
Play. Look on the Mixer Board for the Mute and Solo buttons to control which
ones you want to hear. Solo automatically mutes all tracks except the one you
want to hear; Mute silences one track at a time.
If your two people talk at the same time, you can separate them by adding
silence. For example, if there is five seconds of overlap where they are both
yakking at once, add five seconds of silence to one track to push them apart.
Position the cursor where you want the silence to begin, click Generate >
Silence, and enter how many seconds of silence you want. You may have to do
this several times on both tracks to keep them lined up, especially after making
changes.
When you have everything cleaned up and ready to export, rejoin your tracks by
using the Track menu in the upper track and clicking Make Stereo Track.

Adding a Background Music Track
Now that you’re aces at producing multitrack podcasts, adding a music track is
as easy as falling over. Just like when you make a solo podcast, your soundtrack
should be in a two-channel stereo track even if it is a mono recording. Then your
listeners will hear music in both channels. You can create a two-channel track
from a mono track by copying the track, pasting the copy below the original, and
selecting Make Stereo Track from the upper track’s Track menu.
You can add a music file to your podcast project by opening the File > Import >
Audio dialog or by copying and pasting from another Audacity project.
You can adjust the music volume with the Gain slider. Remember, the Gain
slider does not alter your project file, so it’s a quick way to tune your mix
without making a lot of changes that might mess up your project for future
editing. Another option is to use the Envelope tool to vary it from pleasant
background to thrilling crescendo. The Envelope tool does change the project
file.
There is an even cooler way to manage the volume on your background music
track, and that is with Effect > Auto Duck. This is perfect for recordings with a
background music track because it automatically lowers the volume when the
foreground track cuts in and raises it when the foreground cuts out. In Figure 7-
21 we see the setup: A background music track is on top, and the bottom track is
the voice track. When the voices start, I want the music volume to decrease, and
when the voices stop, the music should get louder. The tracks have to be in this
order: the background track on top and the foreground, or control track,
underneath.

Figure 7-21. To use Auto Duck, your background track must be on top and the
foreground, or control track, underneath.
Select the background track and hit Effect > Auto Duck. You’ll see a control
panel like the one in Figure 7-22, which shows the settings I like to use. These
settings create a fast fade-out and a gradual fade-in. The background track ducks
out of the way fast and gracefully glides slowly back in with just a little bit of
overlap with the voice track.
Figure 7-22. My suggested Auto Duck settings for a fast fade-out and slow fade-
in
Figure 7-23 shows the result.

Figure 7-23. Auto Duck has been applied; compare these to the tracks in
Figure 7-21.
Duck Amount is how much volume reduction you want on the background track.
Maximum Pause determines how long the total fade-in and outs will take. The
values for Outer fade down length and Outer fade up length cannot total more
than the maximum pause.
The Outer fade down length setting determines how quickly the background
track will fade before the voice on the control track comes back. Anything
outside the two vertical lines happens when the control track is below your
threshold. The Inner fade down length setting determines how much overlap
there will be with the control track.
The Outer fade up length setting sets how fast the backing track fades back in
when the voice on the control track stops, and the Inner fade up length setting
controls the overlap. A half second of gently rising music over the voice isn’t a
lot; I think it makes a nice bit of a transition.
The Threshold setting controls the sound level for triggering the Auto Duck
effect.
When you are finished, you need to mix and render your tracks together into a
single stereo track. If you press ctrl-shift-M, this mixes your project down into a
new stereo track underneath your original tracks. This is how I prefer to
mixdown because it saves my original tracks, and then I copy the new stereo
track into a new Audacity project for final tweaks and exports. If you use Tracks
> Mix and Render instead, your original tracks are replaced by the new stereo
track.
Sometimes combining multiple tracks makes them too loud, so undo Mix and

Render (ctrl-Z or Edit > Undo) and use the Gain controls to turn them down a
bit. Then export again. (When you have odd problems with track volume, such
as unbalanced sound, check your Gain sliders.)
Now your podcast with its background music track is ready for export.
Visit Chapter 11 to learn more about Audacity’s special effects, Chapter 12 for
fix-its and cleanups, and Chapter 9 to learn more about multitrack recording and
mixing.

Chapter 8. Becoming an Online Star
So you want to distribute your own recordings and maybe even make some
money selling them. In this wonderful Internet era, online distribution is easy
and inexpensive. There are two distinct skill sets needed for succeeding at online
music distribution: being technically adept at creating good recordings in various
formats for downloading and streaming and understanding the business of being
a professional artist, which is complex and involves tasks like customer service,
contracts, and copyright issues. In the first section of this chapter, we’ll learn
about creating different audio file formats for various purposes, such as lower-
quality promotional MP3s, streaming audio, and high-quality downloads. In the
second part, we’ll take a look at the business of being a recording artist, which is
trickier than being a good musician and recording whiz.

File Formats and Audio Quality
With Audacity it is easy to export your audio files to whatever format you want.
Let’s take a look at your options. The common downloadable formats are AAC,
MP3, Ogg Vorbis, WAV, and FLAC.
Note
Please review Chapter 1 if you need a refresher on exporting to different audio file formats, and see
Chapter 13 and Chapter 14 to learn how to set up and tune your system for audio production.
AAC is becoming popular because that is the format used by Apple’s iTunes
Store. Version 1.3.6 of Audacity introduced support for importing, exporting,
and converting non-DRM AAC files via FFmpeg. These have the M4A (A for
audio) file extension. M4P files are DRM encumbered. (No, it’s not P for Pooey,
but Protected.)
Creating files in AAC format in Audacity is easy: Select File > Export > Save
as type: M4A (AAC) Files (FFmpeg) and click the Options button. In the
Options dialog, you have a range of quality settings from 10 to 500, with 500
being the highest quality. This range represents Fair, Okay, Good, Better, and
Best. The 256 setting is good for a more complex recording. A very simple
recording, such as one-voice spoken-word piece, sounds decent at 50 (Figure 8-
1).

Figure 8-1. Exporting to AAC format (the default iTunes format) creates a file
with an .m4a extension.
Audacity supports many different MP3 options, and you can read all about them
in Chapter 7. Let’s review the ones that are most practical to use. MP3 supports
both constant bitrates and variable bitrates. Variable bitrates deliver better
quality. Your online distribution sites will have specific requirements, and with
Audacity, you can easily tailor your tunes to meet them.
The 128Kbps constant bitrate MP3 is the lowest common denominator in the
United States. This will play on every digital audio player, and some distributors
require constant bitrate MP3s for streaming. In Audacity, click File > Export >
MP3 Files > Options > Constant > 128Kbits/sec. The Options dialog gives you
a wide range of constant bitrates, from 8Kbps to 320Kbps. Although 320Kbps is
often touted as CD-quality, it isn’t. Your own ears may tell you differently, but I
can’t hear any improvement over 192Kbps.
Note
Some low-bandwidth carriers may require bitrates as low as 32Kbps for streaming Internet audio. While
this may not sound wonderful, it expands your potential audience. Half of Internet users in the United States
are still on dial-up, and many other countries still rely on predominantly low-bandwidth Internet services.

Your best Audacity options for variable bitrate MP3s are in the File > Export >
MP3 Files > Options > Variable dialog. Choose your desired quality setting, set
Variable Speed: Standard and Channel Mode: Stereo (Figure 8-2). There are 10
bitrate options in this menu, from 45Kbps to 85Kbps to 220Kbps to 260Kbps. I
like 170Kbps to 210Kbps as a good level for music, and I like 110Kbps to
150Kbps for simple spoken-word pieces. The Variable Speed option limits the
variable bitrate to a set range so you can get both better quality and some
predictability.
Figure 8-2. Using variable bitrate settings for MP3s in Audacity
If your distributor supports it, you should also offer Ogg Vorbis files for users
who don’t care for MP3. They may prefer the higher quality of Ogg, or they may
using prefer open source, patent-unencumbered formats. Ogg Vorbis can be
streamed or downloaded just like MP3. It delivers high quality at low bitrates
and supports multichannel surround, while MP3 supports only one or two
channels. MP3 is a closed, proprietary standard chock-full of messy, confusing
patent conflicts. I haven’t heard of any of the patent holders coming after anyone
who uses an open source encoder like LAME, which is the preferred MP3
encoder to use with Audacity, and I haven’t heard of any small-time users
getting in trouble for distributing their work in MP3 format. Just be aware that it
is an issue for some of your fans, and there is a possibility it could turn into a
problem for you.
Audacity supports Ogg Vorbis, and it is easy to choose your quality level. Go to
File > Export > Ogg Vorbis Files > Options. You get a menu with a little slider
that lets you choose from 11 quality settings, from 0 to 10. A value of 3 is
roughly equivalent to a 128Kbps MP3. A value of 5 is pretty nice for music, with

one possible drawback: Ogg Vorbis uses channel coupling for all levels up to 5.
This means that redundancies between two stereo channels are combined to save
bandwidth, so you might notice a loss of stereo imaging. Channel coupling is not
used at levels 6 and up. I don’t perceive any gain in going above 7, though your
ears may tell you differently. Ogg Vorbis support is growing fast, and a lot of
playback devices support it (Figure 8-3).
Figure 8-3. Exporting ot Ogg Vorbis format
FLAC is a wonderful lossless, compressed format that gives WAV-quality audio
in a smaller file size. FLAC files are typically around a third smaller than WAVs.
FLACs are great for fans who play music from their computers or have
computer-based music servers, and an increasing number of music players, both
home and portable, support FLAC. FLAC cannot be streamed but must be
downloaded and then played.

Figure 8-4. FLAC supports both 16-and 24-bit.
FLAC supports both 16-and 24-bit depths and has nine compression levels, from
0 to 8 (Figure 8-4). The default is 5, and that is a good one to stick with, though
nobody will yell at you for experimenting with the others. The different settings
are different levels of compression, with 0 being the least compression and 8 the
most. FLAC is lossless, so there is no difference in quality, only in how small the
files are compressed. A value of 8 takes several times longer to encode than 5
with not much additional benefit. Decoding FLAC files that have been
maximally compressed doesn’t take any longer than ones that have been lightly
compressed, so the degree of compression won’t affect playback.
WAV is the standard for high-quality uncompressed audio. File sizes are large
and cannot be streamed, but they are wonderful for your fans who want a high-
quality file that can easily be converted to other formats, such as CD and lower-
quality portable formats. And, of course, to enjoy for itself. Go to File > Export
> Other uncompressed files > Options. In the Uncompressed Export Setup
dialog (Figure 8-5), select Header: WAV (Microsoft), and then choose your
encoding. Select either Signed 16 bit PCM or Signed 24 bit PCM. 16-bit is CD
quality, and 24-bit is DVD and studio master quality. Select 24-bit only if your
original recording is 24-bit or higher.

Figure 8-5. WAV settings should be either signed 16-bit or 24-bit.
Signed means positive integer, which we learned about in Chapter 1. You want
signed 16-or 24-bit integer because those are playable formats outside of
Audacity. 32-bit float is an intermediate editing format used internally by
Audacity and other audio editors.

The Business of a Recording Artist
You’re becoming serious about distributing your own recordings. You’ve heard
all the horror stories about how artists are ripped off by the entertainment
industry and have memorized Courtney Love’s wonderful speech to the Digital
Hollywood online entertainment conference on May 16, 2000, “Courtney Love
Does the Math” (http://salon.com/technology/feature/2000/06/14/love/):
Today I want to talk about piracy and music. What is piracy? Piracy is the act of stealing an artist’s
work without any intention of paying for it. I’m not talking about Napster-type software.
I’m talking about major label recording contracts.
Frank Zappa and Janis Ian have also written or given talks in this vein, which
you should be able to find online.
Or maybe you aren’t worried about possible unpleasant experiences from
signing with a major label, but you want to retain control of your own destiny
and your own work. You want to release recordings engineered to your
specifications and tailored for different uses, rather than dumbing everything
down for the lowest common denominator. You want to work when and where
you feel like it and not have other people telling you what to do. When someone
actually wants to buy your work, you want to make it as easy as possible and
then keep the money. So, what do you do?
I can’t help you with attaining fame, glory, and groupies. Getting noticed is still
the hardest part. But I can point you to resources for online distribution and tell
how to package your recordings for different uses such as high-quality
audiophile, lo-fi promotional MP3s, streaming audio, and CDs.

Establishing an Online Presence
Distribution and promotion and promotion used to be the big hurdles for
recording artists, and that was why they needed to make deals with record
companies. Now distribution is easy, thanks to the Internet. An Internet
distribution strategy has two parts: your own personal website and as many
music distribution and broadcast sites as you can manage. Always have your
own personal site with photos, contact information, and links to where fans can
hear and purchase your music. This increases your search engine presence, and it
makes it easy for fans to find you. Do please resist the urge to make this a typical
overproduced site full of special effects and animations and dark, barely readable
color schemes; this guarantees you will chase away your visitors. Make it clean,
simple, readable, and easy to navigate, because nobody cares how self-indulgent
your web designer is. They want to know about you and how to hear your music,
and they don’t want to jump through hoops to get there.
You should have a consistent online identity. The first step to building your
online identity is to register your own domain name. Don’t have an email
address or domain name that promotes someone else’s business, like
carlarockstar@gmail.com or guitarcarla@hotmail.com. Free email addresses are
seriously uncool anyway. Domain names are cheap, about $15 per year. If you
change web hosts and email service providers, your domain name will always
travel with you. Suppose you have a band—let’s say you’re The Bandits—and
your domain is http://thebandits.com/. Now you can do all kinds of creative
things with the domain name. Everyone in your band can have their own email
address, such as drummer@thebandits.com, diva@thebandits.com, or
rockgod@thebandits.com. No matter what music distributors, hosting services,
or social networking sites you try, http://thebandits.com/ will always be there for
your fans to find you.
There are all kinds of domain name registrars such as Dotster, GoDaddy,
Register.com, Tucows, and many more. Most web hosting services also include
domain name registration, but I would keep the two separate. Web hosting is a
brutal business full of fly-by-nights that come and go, and a bad registrar can
make it difficult to transfer to another registrar, or you can even lose your
domain name. The Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers
(ICANN) oversees domain names and maintains a list of accredited registrars
(http://www.icann.org/en/registrars/accredited-list.html). This doesn’t guarantee

that their customer service or prices are any good, just that they are legitimate
registrars. WebHostingTalk (http://www.webhostingtalk.com/) is a great source
of real-world information on hosting services and registrars.
Think carefully about what kind of contact information to put on your sites,
because thanks to the magic of the Internet, communications can turn into a deep
time sink. If you don’t want to spend a lot of time answering emails, Tweets,
forum posts, and so on, then limit how people can reach you. A web form
protected by a captcha is a good way to allow fans to talk to you without getting
buried by spam. Captchas that use simple arithmetic problems or multiple-choice
questions (“If you are a human, click the picture of the puppy.”) are easy and
effective. The kind that obscure text are annoying and hard for everyone but
spammers.
Who is a good web designer design? Someone who listens to you; who can
explain what they do in plain English (or language of your choice); and who
favors clean, fast, navigable site design over fancy show-off stuff that chases
your fans away. Always test your sites on a dial-up connection and on a
smartphone. Broadband is far from universal, and mobile Internet use is
exploding, so you need to be tuned in to how your site looks and performs on
slow connections and on tiny screens.
Note
Remember to also factor in accessibility for vision-impaired fans. The United States has an aging
population, so it’s good business to welcome all of your fans, and accessible design is good design for all
visitors. If your website designer doesn’t want to bother with making your site friendly to all visitors, look
for a different designer.
Consider having a rented snail mailbox. It’s reliable, it weeds out the casual
stream-of-consciousness Twitter/email communiques, and it ensures that anyone
who really wants to talk to you can do so.
What about MySpace and Facebook? Go for it; they’re free, and you’ll probably
be pleasantly surprised at who finds you there. Budget some time to keep them
current. You don’t have to log in every day to have deep, meaningful
conversations with fans, but definitely make sure that links and information
about all of your recordings and performances are current. It takes time to build
a following, so be patient and read all of the helpful information that tells you
how to get the most benefit out of MySpace and Facebook. There are no fast,
magic solutions, and you shouldn’t believe anyone who tries to sell you some.

Never ever spam. Do not believe “marketers” who claim they sell genuine
guaranteed opt-in mail lists full of people who are happy to hear from you. This
is a lie. You should carefully build your own mailing lists. The right way is to
have a confirmed opt-in, which means when someone signs up, they have to
respond to an email that is sent to confirm their registration. Make opting out
easier than signing up; the lesson that marketers and spammers refuse to learn is
you can’t force people to like you.
Do be careful—there is no such thing as privacy online. Everything you say is a
public performance and recorded forever.
You’ll have to measure your own tolerance for texting, Twitter, and whatever
other newfangled communication tools come along. They can be powerful and
effective, and they can drive you crazy.

Online Music Distributors
Hooking up with an independent online music store that handles sales, gives you
a fair cut, and doesn’t try to glom your copyrights is no longer a fantasy, and you
have many to choose from. Here is a sampling of sites with different approaches
to distributing music and compensating artists.
Magnatune’s (http://www.magnatune.com/) motto is “We are not evil.” They
have another motto that I like better: “You get great music, musicians get 50%.”
That’s 50 percent of sales, not profits. Magnatune distributes music in several
DRM-free formats: streaming only, which is like listening to the radio,
downloads in various formats, CD, and licenses for commercial use. All music is
try-before-you-buy, and customers can either select what songs and albums they
want to hear or listen to various streams. Magnatune customers can also get a
streaming membership for $15 per month, which purchases unlimited listening
and downloads with no commercials.
Magnatune supports MP3, WAV, FLAC, AAC, and Ogg Vorbis formats. WAV
and FLAC are the highest quality, and WAVs can be written to CDs. 128Kbps
MP3s are the lowest quality and are licensed under Creative Commons
“Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike” license. This grants liberal rights for
noncommercial uses: sharing, remixes, sampling, and covers. Any commercial
use is expected to pay money. There is a lot of information on the Magnatune
website, and they have live humans to talk to.
You retain all copyrights to your own work and can make deals with other
distributors. Magnatune pays artists every six months, provided they have earned
at least $100.
CD Baby (http://www.cdbaby.com/) sells both DRM-free CDs and MP3
downloads and partners with a number of online stories like iTunes and Amazon.
It also does bulk CD duplication and artwork. CD Baby charges a $35 setup fee
per album; this covers digitizing the CD, converting tracks into various formats,
scanning the cover art, and doing other housekeeping chores. You set your own
CD pricing. CD Baby keeps $4 per disc and 25 percent of download sales.
Artists are paid weekly. Your CDs will be available through a multitude of stores
such as Borders and Amazon.
CD Baby offers a nice service for live shows—its Credit Card Swiper Program.
This is a credit/debit card terminal that you can take to shows and set up on your

merchandise table. CD Baby takes a 12.8 percent cut. This sounds like a lot, but
having your own merchant credit card account is expensive. It will cost you a
monthly fee whether you sell anything or not, plus a percentage of every sale,
usually around 2.5 to 3 percent per swiped transaction. If you sell your CDs on
your merchandise tables, CD Baby takes 12.8 percent instead of the usual $4 cut.
CD Baby offers a number of other artist services such as Host Baby (web
hosting), stickers and cards, and a booking service.
eMusic (http://www.emusic.com/) is a well-regarded DRM-free MP3 online
music store that is a treasure trove of good indie bands and mainstream popular
music. However, they don’t accept just anyone; they work with established
music labels, so you need to already be signed on with someone. eMusic is all
corporate and lawyerly and full of bureaucracy. It’s probably a better deal for
music fans than for little-known musicians, though it never hurts to check it out.
TuneCore (http://www.tunecore.com/) has a flat-rate system. You pay $9.99 per
song plus a $9.99 annual maintenance fee, or $49.99 per album the first year and
$19.98 for each year thereafter, plus $19.98 annual maintenance. This gets you
into 19 online stores including Amazon MP3, eMusic, Rhapsody, and Spotify.
They also have an Amazon: Disc On Demand option for selling CDs. There is a
two-month lag on sales reporting from most stores, and TuneCore reports twice
per month. After that, you can withdraw your funds any time. (It requires a
PayPal account.)
iTunes (http://www.apple.com/itunes/content-providers/faq.html) is the big
show. There are significant hoops to jump through, but nothing ventured,
nothing gained. CD Baby, TuneCore, and SongCast all partner with iTunes,
which is easier than applying directly to iTunes.
The Independent Online Distribution Alliance (IODA)
(http://www.iodalliance.com/) acts as a collective agent and aggregator, using the
power of collective bargaining to give independents a stronger business voice. In
return for a percentage of artists’ royalties, it handles rate negotiations, reporting,
distribution of works, distribution of royalties, and other grotty but necessary
business chores.
Independent online distribution is a growing business, and you can find many
more distribution sites. Promotion is up to you, though every site provides useful
tools and advice to help you. Don’t be a typical clueless artist and sign your life
away or hook up with some rip-off artist. Researching distributors is as easy as
sitting down at your computer and doing some web searches. Don’t forget the

gnarly business of taxes and reading the fine print. When will you get paid? How
can you verify sales and payment records? Copyrights, DRM, closing your
account, making changes, getting help from real live humans, and dispute
resolution are all important things to look at.
Consider choosing distributors by genre, rather than popularity. Sure, iTunes and
Amazon are the big gorillas, but if your niche is sophisticated jazz, dance music,
world music, or some such, look for a distributor that specializes in your type of
music.
It is good to maintain a professional, businesslike approach and remember
mundane details such as keeping your word; contact information; correct
spelling, grammar and punctuation; readable fonts; and nice-looking artwork.
Nobody cares how much you artistically suffer.

Self-Hosting
Another option is to self-host, which means running your own servers. These
here modern times are not like the olden days of Bulletin Board Services (BBS)
when thousands of people ran their own BBS servers from PCs in their
bedrooms. Maintaining a website, hosting your own downloads, and offering
streams of your work are all feasible for the do-it-yourselfer but are not for the
faint of heart or the technophobe. Bandwidth is the biggest problem: If you want
to house your servers in your home, first find out whether you can get adequate
bandwidth for a reasonable price and whether your Internet service provider will
even allow you to run servers. Then you are responsible for your own security,
software, hardware, and system and network administration. It is satisfying to be
the boss of your own servers, but it does require a lot of skills.
A better option is to use a good hosting service that has all the tools you need
and gives you a good deal on bandwidth. It’s hard to beat a good hosting service
on bandwidth cost, since they buy in bulk and spread the cost over many
customers. Then the hosting service handles hardware problems, Internet
connectivity, security, and backup power. Plans range from free for a basic low-
traffic site to inexpensive shared hosting (which means one server with a limited
amount of Internet bandwidth serves many customers) to paying for your own
dedicated, unshared server. You can get started cheaply and upgrade as you
become more successful.
Note
Remember WebHosting Talk (http://www.webhostingtalk.com/) for learning which hosts are good and
which ones to avoid.
The free/open source software world has everything you need for running your
own websites. Use the Linux operating system because it is robust and secure.
Then there are bales of great servers to choose from:
Drupal, Joomla, Mambo, and Plone are all examples of excellent open
source content management systems (CMS). These are the frameworks for
the content that you want to put on your site so you can easily organize and
post articles, photos, calendars, news, forums, and links.

Icecast and Campcaster are excellent open source streaming Ogg Vorbis
and MP3 servers that you can embed on your website.
Shoutcast is a closed, proprietary streaming server, and Shoutcast Radio is a
fast and free Internet broadcast service for hosting your streams. You can
also embed Shoutcast streams in your other sites.
Many web hosting services offer Icecast and Shoutcast streaming and, of course,
many other streaming media servers. Any hosting service offers a big bundle of
server software and a nice graphical control panel for everything. If they don’t
have a particular piece of software, ask whether they will install it, and if the
software is free-of-cost open source, they probably will. Most hosting services
rely heavily on open source software because it is free or inexpensive and
because it is good.

Selling Stuff Online
Selling things online can be as simple as having a website and a PayPal account
for accepting payments or a mailing address for checks and money orders.
Check and money order fraud are rampant to the point that it may not be worth
accepting either one. PayPal is easy and popular; just be sure you understand its
fee structure so you don’t get surprised at the myriad ways it nibbles away
chunks of your money. Google Checkout has lower fees than PayPal and doesn’t
have PayPal’s reputation for inconsistent, unfair dispute resolution. You can use
both, which will capture more customers since many of them will not want to
sign up for one when they already have an account at the other.
Processing online credit card payments requires a sophisticated infrastructure.
You don’t want to be one of those shops that makes headlines when some
teenager hacks your customer database and steals all the information. Consider
using a prefab storefront that has all the payment processing already in place.
Start at Amazon.com (http://www.amazonservices.com/content/sell-on-
amazon.htm); it is reputable and reliable, and it posts all of its prices and
policies, so it’s a good starting point for research and comparisons. Amazon does
not directly sell independent music but partners with music distributors like CD
Baby and TuneCore. Having an Amazon storefront might be a good venue for
your band swag and getting more visibility and another way to generate CD
orders.
You can avoid payment hassles by hosting only free downloads and streaming on
your personal site and then linking to your wares on CD Baby, Songcast, or
whatever distributors you are hooked up with.
The one piece that almost everyone forgets is customer service. How are
customers going to contact you when they have questions or problems, phone?
Email? Who is going to respond, and can you count on them to respond quickly
and in a way that keeps customers happy? If you are selling physical items like
CDs, DVDs, T-shirts, and other branded merchandise, who is going to pack and
ship them and how fast? Customer service is everything. It costs at least ten
times more to acquire a new customer than to keep an existing customer happy,
no matter how great your artistic genius.

To DRM or Not to DRM?
Digital rights management (DRM), or as some prefer to call it, digital
restrictions management, means copy protection, and the various technologies
designed to prevent illegal copying. The concept might sound good, since the
idea of people copying your music for free sounds like a rip-off. But in practice
it’s a nightmare. It doesn’t even slow down big-time pirates who reproduce and
sell thousands of copies of movies and music CDs. It doesn’t stop the clever kids
who want something for nothing. It mainly gets in the way of legitimate paying
customers.
It adds an intolerable overhead burden to online distribution, because this
requires always-available authentication servers. Already this is falling apart
after just a few years. Wal-Mart announced in September 2008 that it was going
to shut down its DRM authentication servers, which meant that customers would
not be able to play their DRM-“protected” music that they had purchased if they
tried to move it to a different machine or restore from a system failure. Wal-
Mart’s remedy was for customers to copy their DRM-“protected” tracks to CDs,
which would then play anywhere. There was such an outcry that they changed
their plans and still maintain their DRM servers. Even though they have moved
to DRM-free distribution, that old DRM baggage is going to haunt them for a
long time.
Apple’s iTunes store went DRM-free in February 2008, and existing DRM-
protected files can be converted to DRM-free versions for 30 cents per song or
30 percent of the album price. (Thank you for the opportunity to pay twice.)
Yahoo! and Rhapsody have also moved away from DRM. Amazon and EMI
moved in and captured a dominant chunk of the music market by offering DRM-
free tracks from the beginning.
There are a sizable number of doofy DRM schemes that make me wonder why
some people get paychecks for coming up with these brainstorms, while we
sensible people have to scramble for our daily bread. Sony BMG got busted not
once but twice for sneakily installing cloaked rootkits on Windows computers
from “protected” music CDs. Not only was this a trespass that would have been
criminally prosecuted if it were some kid instead of a globalcorp, it opened big
security holes in these computers. Other brilliant DRM ideas that went over like
lead balloons were time-bombed music tracks that became unplayable after a
certain number of days, attempts to count and limit the numbers of copies that

could be made, and downloads that became unplayable when subscriptions
expired. All of these depend on some kind of central authorization and control,
which to my way of thinking requires unwarranted intrusions into our personal
business and a level of reliability that few service providers can sustain. I have
vinyl LPs that are older than me—how long do you think digital tracks will
survive even without DRM monkeyshines? I can’t fathom the mind-set that can
come up with these sort of hostile, self-defeating Big Brother tactics.
On the other hand, having your work poached is no good either. Recording
artists have a right to get paid for their recorded works; I don’t think much of the
folks who say, “Give your recordings away and earn money giving live
performances.” Apparently they have never performed or created a good
recording. I don’t have any wisdom to offer except to treat your paying
customers as well as you can. In real life, and not the bizarro world inhabited by
the entertainment industry barons, most people will treat you fairly if you treat
them fairly and do the right thing because it’s the right thing, not because they
are forced to.

Copyrights and Legal Issues
Copyright law is in a seriously weird place right now in the United States and
some other countries as well. The rights of copyright owners keep getting
extended, while fair use is taking a beating, and minor infringements are
escalated into major crimes. Creators are pushed out as the rights holders to their
own works, though that is an old, chronic problem. As Courtney Love said in
“Courtney Love Does the Math”:
. . . a congressional aide named Mitch Glazier, with the support of the RIAA, added a “technical
amendment” to a bill that defined recorded music as “works for hire” under the 1978 Copyright Act.
He did this after all the hearings on the bill were over. By the time artists found out about the change, it
was too late. The bill was on its way to the White House for the president’s signature.
That subtle change in copyright law will add billions of dollars to record company bank accounts over
the next few years—billions of dollars that rightfully should have been paid to artists. A “work for
hire” is now owned in perpetuity by the record company.
Under the 1978 Copyright Act, artists could reclaim the copyrights on their work after 35 years. If you
wrote and recorded “Everybody Hurts,” you at least got it back to as a family legacy after 35 years.
But now, because of this corrupt little pisher, “Everybody Hurts” never gets returned to your family,
and can now be sold to the highest bidder.
. . . By the way, which bill do you think the recording industry used for this amendment? . . . How
about the Satellite Home Viewing Act of 1999?
That charming little provision was overturned retroactively in The Work Made
for Hire and Copyright Corrections Act of 2000. But you see what you’re up
against. One way to take matters into your own hands is to release your works
under a Creative Commons license. There are several of them, and you can read
all about them at http://www.creativecommons.org/. These allow you to define
different degrees of permissions for reuse and distribution, from permissive to
restrictive. When you look for legal advice, be sure that you find an attorney
who is well versed in all aspects of copyright law, including Creative Commons.
Note that I said, “when you look for legal advice,” not “if.” The Internet is
already full of nonlawyers trading legal advice, so do yourself a favor and find a
real lawyer to advise you. You can find all kinds of information online and at the
library, and then when you meet with an attorney, you’ll be well prepared.
Unfortunately, this is a necessary part of being an artist in these modern times.
You can live on beans and rice, you can patch old clothes, and you can drive an
old car held together with wire and tape. But undoing legal messes is difficult,
expensive, and often not possible; prevention is much cheaper and considerably
less stressful.

Learn More
Please refer to Chapter 4 to learn more about putting live performances on CD.
Chapter 6 goes into detail on producing very high-fidelity audio files, and
Chapter 9 is all about multitrack recording and mixing in Audacity.

Chapter 9. Multitrack Recording
Editing and mixing multiple tracks is a whole lot easier in the digital realm than
it is in the analog world. No waiting for tapes to rewind, no physically cutting
and pasting tapes—it’s all just pointy-clicky bit shuffling. Although Audacity
isn’t the most sophisticated application for heavy-duty multitrack recording and
editing, you can make excellent mono and stereo recordings with it and even 5.1
and 7.1 surround sound. It’s the real deal, with discrete tracks.
Note
That’s as in separate, not as in able to keep a secret. Discrete is an important term in audio because it tells
you when you’re getting the real deal, and not something simulated. For example, a surround sound hi-fi
system will emulate 5.1 sound from a stereo recording, which has only two discrete channels. Real 5.1 has
six discrete channels.
What is Audacity missing? It doesn’t have per-track recording level meters, and
you can’t make edits while tracks are playing. When you’re using a multichannel
recording device, you can’t control which input goes to which track.
Multichannel surround mixing is still rather rudimentary: You can export to 5.1
and 7.1 surround, but Audacity gives you no help mapping the channels.
Audacity’s strengths lie in recording, editing, and mixing for mono and stereo
playback. Ardour might be a better choice for Linux and Mac users who want to
perform heavy-duty studio wizardry, perform multichannel surround, and have
maximum control, and of course Windows and Mac users have great thundering
herds of other high-end audio production suites to choose from.
So, what can Audacity do? It will record as many channels at one time as your
recording interface supports and your computer can handle. Some examples of
multichannel recording interfaces are the M-Audio Delta 1010 PCI sound card

(10 × 10), the Edirol FA-101 FireWire audio interface (10 × 10), the RME
Hammerfall sound cards, and the M-Audio NRV10, which is a useful
combination of an analog mixer and 10-channel FireWire DAC/ADC.
Audacity has no hard limit for the total number of tracks in a project; you can
keep adding tracks until your computer keels over. Audacity supports all of the
basic multitrack editing and mixing functions: mix and match clips, time-shift
and synchronize, layer multiple copies of the same track or clip, do fix-its and
special effects, and mixdown to any number of channels from 1 to 32 (WAV,
AIFF, and Ogg Vorbis; other file formats support fewer channels). In real life,
mono, stereo, and 5.1 surround (6 channel) are your likeliest options.

Tracks, Channels, and Clips
Let’s take a moment to be sure of our terminology. A single track in Audacity is
represented by a single waveform, as in Figure 9-1. I call this a mono track to
make it clear that it’s not a stereo track. However, the definition of track is a bit
fuzzy in audio and also in Audacity because it treats a stereo track the same way
it treats a mono track—even though there are two channels with two different
waveforms, Audacity sees a stereo track as one track, and everything you do to it
is applied equally to both channels. A track is also a single song in a track, CD,
LP, or tape that contains several songs.
Figure 9-1. This is what a single mono track looks like—one waveform, no
matter how many voices or instruments are recorded on the track.
Channel refers to audio inputs and outputs. When you record using a single
mono microphone, that is a single input channel even if you have an entire
orchestra playing and choir singing. Multichannel recording interfaces let you
use more microphones and instrument plugins, which creates more tracks.
Note
The number of input channels in Edit > Preferences > Devices must match the number of your physical
input channels.
You get the ultimate flexibility and control by giving every voice and instrument
its own mic. Studio recording is nothing like live recording—sometimes every
performer is in a separate soundproof cubicle, or recorded at different times and
different locations, so the various band members might never even be physically
present at the same time. It’s a common practice to use multiple mics on a single
performer and then manipulate the resulting multiple tracks to create absolute
perfect wonderfulness (or an overproduced glop, as the case may be).
Be careful with the physical recording inputs that you plug your mics and

instruments into—some are mono, some will be stereo, some will require
phantom power, and others will be for various other purposes. Be sure you’re
plugging things in correctly—just because it fits doesn’t mean it’s right.
Note
A good habit to develop is to never hotplug anything, unless you are certain it is safe to do so. Don’t turn on
phantom power until after your condenser mics are plugged in. Don’t plug anything into your amp, preamp,
mixer, and so on with the power on, or at least make sure all volume controls are at zero. Turn power off
before unplugging. Most audio equipment is tolerant of a certain amount of abuse. But pops from
hotplugging are annoying and may damage your equipment.
If you use a stereo mic on a mono recording input, only one channel will record,
and you’ll have a stereo track like the one in Figure 9-2 with one channel blank.
Figure 9-2. This is what happens when you plug a stereo microphone into a
single-channel recording input.
No worries if this happens to you; just use the Track menu to separate a stereo
track into two tracks, and then delete the empty one. There are two split track
options: Split Stereo Track creates a left and a right track, while Split Stereo to
Mono creates two mono tracks. (You can use this same menu to join two
individual tracks into a single stereo track.) Assigning a track left, right, or mono
is important when you mixdown to stereo: Left tracks go to the left channel,
right tracks go to the right channel, and mono goes to both. (See Mixdown to
Stereo in Mixdown to Stereo to learn more.)
Low-end onboard sound chips are notorious for claiming to have stereo
microphone inputs, but then only one channel works. If you try a mono
microphone on one of these, it may not work at all, so I can’t resist giving the
obvious warning: Test it before you need it.

Note
See Chapter 2 for a refresher on setting up audio hardware, and consult your product documentation.
Beware anyone who wants to “help” you! It’s your gear, and you don’t want the help of people who don’t
know what they’re doing, which is quite a large number of folks who think they’re experts (such as
professional musicians who have been on stage all their lives and rely on the old “whack it until something
happens” technique). Your peace of mind and equipment are more important than their egos.
Output channels are like input channels. If you create a 5.1 surround mix that is
six discrete channels—left, right, center, surround left, surround right, and low-
frequency effects (LFE)—you could take a single mono track and export it to 5.1
surround, as Figure 9-3 shows. I don’t know why you would want to, but it’s
there if you do. Audacity supports a maximum of 32 output channels. If you
have a playback device that supports 32 channels, you will have yourself one
heck of a fun time. A more realistic option for all those channels is to export
them to a single 32-bit WAV file, or 32 individual WAV files (using File >
Export Multiple), and then import them into a more sophisticated mixing
application for advanced mixing and studio wizardry. For example, some users
like to record and edit in Audacity and then do the final mix in a different
program that does things Audacity doesn’t do, such as support MIDI, or that has
more sophisticated multitrack mixing. Since Audacity is free, it doesn’t cost
anything but some time to try different workflows.

Figure 9-3. An amusing example of creating a 5.1 WAV file from a single track
using Audacity’s custom export mixer
Clips are segments of tracks. You can have a lot of fun with clips, such as
changing what a person says in an interview by moving the words around,
making loops, or grabbing clips from different recordings and blending them
together in new and different ways. You can have several clips in a single track
or put each one in its own track. You can even drag clips from one track to
another using the Time Shift tool (Figure 9-4).

Figure 9-4. Clips can be moved independently all over the place with the Time
Shift tool, even to different tracks.

How to Make Multitrack Recordings
There are several ways to make multitrack recordings. One way is to use a
multichannel recording interface and record all of your tracks at one time.
Another way is to record new tracks at different times into an existing project;
this is called overdubbing. Another way to manage a multitrack project is to run
multiple recording sessions, each in its own Audacity project, and then copy
tracks from these into a single Audacity project.
For recording larger numbers of tracks at once, I have a Focusrite Saffire Pro 26,
which is an excellent multichannel FireWire recording interface. It has eight
microphone preamps, phantom power, two ADAT banks (16 channels), S/PDIF,
24/192 digital I/O, and a lot of other goodies. Figure 9-5 shows a four-channel
recording session in Audacity using the Saffire. As you can see, it doesn’t look
special: It’s just four channels all recording at the same time. The Saffire can
theoretically handle 26 recording inputs at one time, which Audacity can handle
with no problem; the only limitation is what my computer can handle. (Audacity
versions before 1.3.8 are limited to 16 inputs at once.)
Figure 9-5. Recording four tracks at one time with the Focusrite Saffire Pro
My little M-Audio MobilePre USB can record four inputs at once. However, it is
really a stereo recording interface with only two discrete input and output
channels. So recording four inputs means that two are combined on each
channel, and instead of four tracks that can be manipulated individually, there
are only two. This once again illustrates that in the great wide world of audio,
there are many ways to do things.

Many higher-end sound cards and recording interfaces are designed to be
combined, and then they appear to Audacity as a single interface. Audacity does
not have the ability to combine multiple recording interfaces; it must see a single
device with multiple channels. Windows and Mac users get special drivers and
management software to do this. With luck you can combine lower-end sound
cards as well. However, in my experience, combining cheapo sound cards is
painful and unreliable on any platform, so I’m going to pretend that such an
option does not exist.
Note
Remember that Audacity supports almost unlimited undos and redos, so you can experiment safely. Undo
changes with ctrl-Z or Edit > Undo and redo with ctrl-shift-Z or Edit > Redo.
When you want to add audio files such as WAV or FLAC to your project, import
them into your Audacity project with File > Import > Audio. File > Open
launches a new Audacity session, and File > Import > Audio opens an audio
file into the current project. You can’t import an Audacity project into another
Audacity project, but you can open two or more projects and copy tracks
between them.

Figure 9-6. Track menu
Get well-acquainted with the Track menu (Figure 9-6) because you will use this
a lot.
There are a number of items to note here. You can split a stereo track using the
Track Menu; click Split Stereo Track/Split Stereo to Mono. Then, for your
own sanity, give each track a descriptive name.
You can join two mono tracks to make a stereo track. They have to be adjacent
to each other, and you have to select Make Stereo Track from the uppermost
track’s Track menu. Then Audacity will automatically join it to the next track
below. If the tracks are not together, select Move Track Up/Down from the
Track menu or drag one with the mouse by grabbing it on the track label. (See
Chapter 1 if you don’t remember what all the Audacity parts are called.)

Playback Tips and Tricks
As you recall from diligent study of Chapter 1, by default Audacity plays all
tracks at once when you press the playback button. Pressing the spacebar also
starts playback. To listen to one track, click Solo in the Track menu. To listen to
some tracks but not all, click the Mute button on the ones you don’t want to
hear. ctrl-U mutes all tracks, and shift-ctrl-U unmutes all tracks. Position the
cursor on the Time Scale at any starting point you want; when it changes to a
little hand, click to start playback at that point. You can skip all over your track
this way without using the Stop/Play buttons.
Figure 9-7. Play back a selection by creating a play region on the Time Scale.
You can quickly play a selected part of a track by creating a play region by
clicking and dragging in the Time Scale to mark the section you want to play
(Figure 9-7). This plays immediately, and then the play region disappears.
You can create a persistent selection by selecting part of the track in the usual
way, by clicking and dragging with the Selection tool. Then click the Play button
to play only that selection, or click shift-Play to loop-play the selection. Press
ctrl-B to create a region label for the selection (see Creating and Managing
Labels in Creating and Managing Labels to learn more about region labels).
Press C (for cut) to hear a preview of what the track will sound like with the
selected part cut out. The default length of the lead-in and lead-out to the cut is
one second; you can change this in Edit > Preferences > Playback.
A fast way to play part of a track is to click to mark a stopping point, position the
cursor to the left of the mark (don’t click, just hover) and press B. Playback will
start where the cursor is positioned and stop at your mark. You can go the other

way and place the cursor to the right of your mark, then press B, and it will play
from the selection to the cursor.

Label Tracks
Label tracks are useful for keeping track of what’s happening on your project
tracks. You might remember labels from Chapter 3, where they were used to
divide long tracks copied from vinyl LPs into individual song tracks. When
you’re editing multiple tracks, you can also use them for bookmarks and notes
and to create alignment markers. Each audio track can have its own label track
(Figure 9-8). New label tracks are created by selecting Tracks > Add New >
Label Track. Position label tracks by grabbing the track label with the cursor
and dragging them or by using the Track Menu’s Move Track Up/Down
selection.
Figure 9-8. You may use as many label tracks as you like.
If you depend on label tracks, then you need to take extra care with backing up
your Audacity projects, because they exist only inside Audacity. Label tracks can
be exported and imported just like audio tracks, but unfortunately (as of
Audacity 1.3.12), you cannot export multiple label tracks. If you try to export
multiple label tracks (File > Export Labels), they will be merged into a single
text file, and at import you’ll get a single label track containing all the labels
from all the tracks.
You can place a label track at the very top and use this like a conductor’s score,
with notes and timing marks for the whole project.

Creating and Managing Labels
Figure 9-9. Point labels mark a single point on a track, and region labels mark a
section.
There are two types of labels: point labels and region labels. In Chapter 3,
Chapter 4, and Chapter 5, we used point labels to divide long tracks into
individual songs. Region labels mark a selection, as Figure 9-9 shows.
Point labels are easy to create. Stop playback, click in your track with the
Selection tool wherever you want a new label, and then press ctrl-B. Type in
your label name or whatever text you want, and hit return. You can also select
Tracks > Add Label At Selection. To delete a label, backspace over the label
text until it disappears.
Press ctrl-M to add labels during playback; this is one of the few Audacity
functions that doesn’t require stopping everything first. When you have multiple
label tracks, remember to first select the one you want the new label in. (Click its
track label to select it.)
Take a look at the little handles on the labels, the angles, and the circle. Grab the
circle to move the label. Drag the angle handles to make or resize a region label.
Change a region label to a point label by dragging an angle handle until all the
handles merge.
You can create region labels in several ways. One way is to select part of your
audio track and then select Tracks > Add Label At Selection (or just press ctrl-
B). Another way is to stretch out a point label by dragging its angle handle. The
little angle and circle change how they behave when you have adjoining region
labels. The little circle handle creates and moves a common border, and common
borders are separated with the angle handles (Figure 9-10).

Figure 9-10. Circle handles move the whole label, and angle handles create and
resize region labels. You can join region label borders and then move the border
with the circle handle, and you can separate them with the angle handles.
Press the tab key to navigate forward through your bookmarks, and shift-tab to
go backward. Select Tracks > Edit Labels to edit and reorder them quickly.
Labels are numbered to show which label track they belong to (Figure 9-11).
Figure 9-11. Selecting Tracks > Edit Labels puts all your labels in one place for
easy editing and reordering. Note how the labels are numbered according to their
label tracks, 1, 2, and 3.

Using Labels to Edit Multiple Tracks
You can use labels to mark points or segments across multiple tracks. Suppose
you want to delete a 10-second chunk across two audio tracks. Mark this with a
region label, and then click inside the label text (Figure 9-12).
Figure 9-12. Using a region label to select track segments across multiple tracks
This turns the label text field white and selects a 10-second segment in all tracks
above the label track, including other label tracks. If this includes tracks you
don’t want affected, deselect the extra tracks shift-click the track labels). Press
ctrl-X or select Edit > Cut, and the selections will vanish. You can use this for
any editing function across multiple tracks. You can move the selection or
change its size simply by changing the region label.
It’s not required to use region labels for operations like these, because you can
use the Selection tool to make selections across multiple tracks. The keyboard
works too, using the up-and down-arrow keys to move the cursor and using the
shift and arrow keys to size selections.

Aligning and Moving Tracks
There are many ways to move tracks around, both in time and in track order.
Audacity has several good tools for moving and aligning your tracks.
One way to move tracks backward and forward in time is by using the Time
Shift tool (Figure 9-13). The Time Shift tool moves an entire track forward or
backward in time.
It couldn’t be easier: Just click, hold down the mouse button, and drag the
waveform left or right. You can even drag past the beginning of the track and
move forward in time, which is indicated by little arrows in the track as in
Figure 9-14. This is nondestructive, and you can drag it back out again.
Figure 9-13. Selecting the Time Shift tool
Figure 9-14. When you time-shift beyond the beginning of the track, two little
arrows appear.
When you are time-shifting tracks and they become perfectly aligned with other
tracks, or are exactly aligned with starting at zero, Audacity displays a vertical
yellow line. Audacity calls this a Snap Guide. If there are multiple boundaries
and they are too close together, the Snap Guide will get confused and not work.
Zoom in to give it some elbow room.
As long as a track is a single unbroken waveform, the Time Shift tool moves the
whole waveform. To divide a track into independent segments, click with the
Selection tool to mark where you want to split it, and then select Edit > Split (or
press ctrl-I). The selection line turns white, and now you have two segments that
you can time-shift independently.

Note
If Link Tracks is enabled, tracks with label tracks will not split. Disable Link Tracks to change this.
To rejoin split tracks, time-shift the segments back together. The yellow Snap
Guide line will appear when they are touching. Then change to the Selection
tool, make a selection spanning the join, and select Edit > Join or press ctrl-J. If
there is a gap, selecting Edit > Join will fill it with silence.
Take a look in the Tracks > Align Tracks menu for a treasure trove of useful
track alignment commands. Suppose you have been time-shifting multiple tracks
and they’re all over the place, so you want to reset everything and start over.
Select the tracks you want to line up, select Tracks > Align Tracks > Align
Tracks Together, and then select Tracks > Align Tracks > Align Tracks with
Zero. Poof! Everything is reset to start at zero.
Note
Don’t include label tracks because they always start at zero, so this will prevent audio tracks with any offset
from aligning to zero. Deselect label tracks by shift-clicking in their track labels.
Align with Cursor is a fast way to shift a track by a precise amount. Here’s how
it works: Let’s say you want to insert a time offset of 10 seconds at the beginning
of your track. Click at the 10-second point to mark it, and then select Tracks >
Align Tracks > Align with Cursor to move the start of the track to that point.
Align End with Cursor lines up the end of the track with the cursor.
Align with Selection Start and Align with Selection End are similar to Align
with Cursor, except the track is moved relative to a selection. For example, if
you have a selection spanning the 5-to 10-seconds segment, Align with Selection
End positions the track to begin at the 10-second mark. Align with Selection
Start moves it the other way so that it starts at the 5-second mark.
Align End with Selection Start/End work the same way, except they are relative
to the end of the track.
A slick trick with labels is to create an alignment point when you have to time-
shift multiple tracks. Use a point label for this: Create your point label, click the
label text, and a line will extend from the label into all tracks above it. Use the
Time Shift tool, and the yellow Snap Guide will appear when the beginning or
end of the track (or tracks) is perfectly aligned with your point label.

Figure 9-15. Tracks 1, 2, and 4 have been selected.
Track alignment can be also made without labels at any arbitrary point on the
Time Scale. Using the Selection tool, click anywhere in a single track to mark
your alignment point, and then extend the cursor up or down into the other tracks
by selecting them (shift-click in the track labels). shift-click also unselects. You
can select arbitrary tracks using this method, as Figure 9-15 shows. Then use the
Time Shift tool to line up against the cursor mark or select Tracks > Align
Tracks > Align with Cursor.

Link Tracks and Track Groups
A new (and sometimes confusing) feature that appeared in Audacity 1.3.9 is the
Link Tracks button (Edit toolbar). This should be activated (depressed) by
default; this keeps label tracks aligned with audio tracks through time shifts,
tempo changes, cuts, pastes, and other changes. You can turn off Link Tracks
when it gets in your way by clicking (raising) the Link Tracks button or
selecting Tracks > Link Audio and Label Tracks and unchecking the box.
Label tracks are linked to the audio track or tracks immediately above them,
until there is another label track; these are called track groups. Create a new
label track with Tracks > Add New > Label Track. It will appear at the bottom
of the existing tracks, and you can move it by grabbing the track label and
dragging it or by selecting Move Track Up/Down from the Track menu. You
can insert blank label tracks to separate track groups from other tracks.
When you use the Time Shift tool in a track group, every track in the group
moves as a unit. When you delete part of one track, a corresponding segment is
deleted from every track in the group. When you paste a segment of audio into
one track, the other tracks receive a corresponding length of silence. When you
use Effect > Change Speed and Change Tempo, the effects are applied to all
tracks in the group. Labels are kept in sync through all these changes.
Note
Link Tracks may not be enabled in the Audacity 2.0.x series. They first appeared in Audacity 1.3.9 and
should return in the Audacity 2.1.x beta series. Their behavior may change, so check your Audacity release
notes.

Time-Shifting Multiple Tracks at the Same Time
What if you want to time-shift multiple tracks the same amount, all at the same
time? shift-click the track labels to select the tracks you want to time-shift, or
press ctrl-A to select all of them and then use the Time Shift tool to move them
(Figure 9-16).
Figure 9-16. Time-shifting multiple selected tracks. Note that the selected tracks
(1 and 3) are darkened.
If your Audacity version includes the Link Tracks feature, disable it, or time-
shifting the tracks won’t work right.

Splitting Tracks
Splitting tracks is how you break a long track into independent clips that you can
move around as you need. Sometimes you need to move a section a second or
two to match it up to the other tracks or to separate two people talking at the
same time. Sometimes you want to split a track into a bunch of short clips. To
create clips, position the Selection tool where you want to make the split, and
then press Edit > Split. Now you have two clips and can use the Time Shift tool
to move them around.
Figure 9-17. Selecting Edit > Split New creates a new track with the cut
segment.
Select Edit > Split Cut to cut a selected portion of a track and leave a gap so the
track length is unchanged. The cut portion is placed on the clipboard and can be
pasted (ctrl-V or Edit > Paste) into another location.
Selecting Edit > Split Delete deletes the selected portion.
Selecting Edit > Split New creates a new track and moves the cut portion to it
(Figure 9-17).

Working with Clips
If you’re working with short clips, rather than the long tracks we’ve seen so far,
it looks like Figure 9-4. You can have multiple separate clips on the same track.
Each one can be time-shifted independently and even dragged to other tracks
with the Time Shift tool. You can perform edits on the individual clips, such as
changing the amplitude, applying effects, removing or pasting in additional
material, and fixing defects. The one thing you cannot do is control the channel
mapping when exporting individual clips that share the same track because this
is done per track, so any clips you want to control this way need to be on their
own tracks.
Figure 9-18. Audacity’s Snap Guide feature
Audacity’s Snap Guide feature is helpful when you want to select a clip
precisely, because you’ll see the yellow lines appear when you are exactly on its
borders (Figure 9-18).
Selecting multiple clips is a bit tricky. Press ctrl-A to select all tracks. To move a
selected batch of clips, first use the Selection tool to mark out a segment on the
time line that crosses all the clips you want to move. Then use shift-click in the
Track panels to select tracks, and then use the Time Shift tool to move them. It’s
rather clunky, and you can’t skip around and select an arbitrary batch of clips
(Figure 9-19).

Figure 9-19. You can only select clips in a common region on the timeline. In
this example, the clips with the darkened areas in the first three tracks will all
time-shift together.

Time-Shifting Inside Tracks
The Time Shift tool is good for moving an entire audio segment forward or
backward in time, but what if you want to insert a break in the middle of a track
or time-shift a portion of a track? Audacity has a number of different ways to do
this. My favorite method for creating a break or padding a track is to select
Generate > Silence. This avoids splitting the track or deleting anything; all it
does is insert a period of absolute silence of whatever duration you want.
Position the Selection tool where you want the silence to start, select Generate >
Silence, enter the duration of the silence, and click OK (Figure 9-20).
Figure 9-20. Generating silence

Figure 9-21. Audacity gives you a lot of different values to choose from for the
duration of your silences.
As Figure 9-21 shows, you have multiple options for timing the length of the
silence: hours, seconds, milliseconds, and various frame rates, which I’ll explain
in the next section.
Days, hours, seconds, and milliseconds are straightforward, and I admire anyone
who is working with audio files with durations measured in days. Samples
displays the number of audio samples according to your project’s sampling rate;
for example, when your project’s sampling rate is 44,100 Hz, one second’s worth
of audio is 44,100 samples.
Another way to do this is to split the track into two or more segments and then

move them apart to create a break of whatever duration you need. See Aligning
and Moving Tracks in Aligning and Moving Tracks to learn how to do this.

Metronome Track
The first and best cure for synchronization problems caused by slightly different
tempos is keeping everyone in time when you make your recordings. In other
words, the key is prevention. You know those big, expensive recording studios,
with all the soundproofing and expensive gear? They don’t rely on editing
wizardry to fix defects any more than they have to. That is why they are
soundproofed and do multiple takes. And that’s why they use metronomes to
keep all the players in time.
Metronomes don’t cost much, and every recording studio should have one. Like
so many other electronic widgets, they come in a monstrous array of styles,
features, and prices. Just get one has both a silent blinking and an audible click
beat. If it also includes a tuner, has a sine wave generator, receives weather
forecasts, and makes sandwiches, those are nice bonuses.
Audacity will make a metronome track for you. It is better to use a standalone
metronome because that doesn’t use any CPU cycles, but it’s there if you want it.
If you’ve installed the C* Audio Plugin Suite (http://www.de/dsp/caps.html),
look in the Generate menu for C* Click Metronome. You’ll see a menu like the
one in Figure 9-22, where you set the beats per second, volume, and duration.
Damping accepts values from 0.1 to 0.9. Damping makes the metronome sound
muted at higher damping values and more resonant at lower values.
Similar to a metronome track is a click track. Unlike a metronome track, it has
an accented beat at the beginning of every measure. The pitch of the accented
and nonaccented beats is controlled by MIDI note number values. MIDI note
numbering starts at 0 and ends at 127, spanning almost 11 octaves. Number 60 is
middle C, and there are 12 notes per octave (see Table 9-1 for a MIDI note
number cheat sheet).

Figure 9-22. Look in the Generate menu for the C* Click Metronome plug-in.
Table 9-1. Pitches and Their Corresponding MIDI Note Number Values
Pitch MIDI note number
C
60
C#
61
D
62
D#
63
E
64
F
65
F#
66
G
67
G#
68
A
69

A#
70
B
71
If you’re wondering why no flat symbols are used, it’s because there is no flat
symbol on a keyboard.
Figure 9-23 shows the configuration panel for Generate > Click Track. (On
Linux it’s deeper in the Generate submenus, depending on what plugins are
installed.) First create a new empty track by selecting Tracks > Add New >
Audio Track, and then open Click Track.
Figure 9-23. Configuring the Click Track effect
Most of the options should be self-explanatory. Number of measures determines
the length of the track. Noise click resonance and Individual click duration affect
the tone quality; higher values on both of these make the click tone more
musical.

Overdubbing
Overdubbing is recording a new track while listening to an existing track or
tracks. Overdubbing is one way to record an entire symphony by yourself, one
track at a time. It’s also for simpler projects, of course, such as recording
yourself playing a couple of different instruments and singing, doing pretty
harmony with yourself, or recording when everyone but the drummer showed up
and you’re going to record without her (she can record her parts later).
Figure 9-24. Enable Overdub so you can listen to an existing track while
recording a new track.
Let’s do a quick overdub. First open an existing audio track or record a new one.
Then in the Transport menu, enable Overdub (Figure 9-24). You can also enable
overdubbing by selecting Edit > Preferences > Recording. Use the Device
toolbar to route playback wherever you want it to go. Headphones are best in
most circumstances, because you probably don’t want microphones picking up

the playback. Then click the Record button to record a second track. You’ll hear
the first track in your headphones, and you can sing or play along.
Figure 9-25 shows a simple overdubbing session. Playback of the first track is
routed to a headset, and our invisible solo performer is singing along with it on
the second track.
Figure 9-25. Recording a new track while listening to the first track

Measuring and Fixing Latency
Latency is a common problem when you are overdubbing, because there is
always some latency in playback. Ordinarily some latency at playback doesn’t
matter because we’re just listening, and the sound doesn’t have to be
synchronized with anything else. But when you’re overdubbing, any latency
causes the new tracks to be unsynchronized with the old tracks. An easy way to
demonstrate this is to record yourself counting to 10. Then overdub a second
track and count to 10 again while trying to match the first track. Play them back,
and most likely the second track will not be in sync with the first track.
Note
Always have Edit > Preferences > Recording > Software Playthrough unchecked. Using Software
Playthrough lets you monitor what you are recording, but that’s the worst way to do it because it adds
latency and uses CPU cycles. It is better to use a monitoring port on your recording interface.
Audacity lets you compensate for this latency in Edit > Preferences >
Recording > Latency. The default latency correction value is 130 ms, which
probably is not correct for your system. You can see this correction in action
when you’re overdubbing a track, because when you stop recording, Audacity
will time-shift the new track by whatever the latency correction value is. This
time shift is indicated in the usual way with a pair of arrows on the left side of
the waveform (Figure 9-26).
Figure 9-26. Automatic application of latency correction by time-shifting is
indicated by the pair of arrows.
One way to get the correct latency correction value is to use trial and error. A
simple method is to record a click or metronome track and then overdub a vocal
track where you try to match the click track. Sure, you might feel silly saying
“tick tick tick” or “ONE two three four” into a microphone, but it works. Make
sure that the “Snap To” checkbox on the Selection toolbar is not checked and

keep adjusting the latency value until it sounds right.
A more precise method is to measure latency using a loopback cable. This might
sound exotic, but all you’re doing is connecting the playback output of your
recording interface back to the recording input. If it’s an internal sound card,
connect the line out to the line in. If it’s a USB or FireWire interface, it’s going
to depend on your device and what kind of connectors it has, but the task is still
the same—connect playback out to record in.
Then set Latency Correction to 0. Make sure that the “Snap To” checkbox on the
Selection toolbar is not checked. Select the “Length” radio button, and set the
time parameter to hh:mm:ss + milliseconds.
Next, generate a metronome or click track, 30 seconds long, 180 beats per
second. The number of beats per second can be anything; I prefer a faster beat
because it’s easier to measure.
Figure 9-27. The overdubbed track does not line up with the first track because
of latency.
Turn on overdubbing (Transport > Overdub (on/off)), select your recording
interface for both the playback and recording devices on the Device toolbar, and
press the Record button. You should see something like Figure 9-27.
When you’re finished recording, zoom in until you can select the gap between a
click on the top track and its corresponding click on the bottom track. If you’re
not comfortable using the mouse, use the shift and arrow keys to mark the
selection. (Use the arrow keys to move back and forth and up and down, and use
the shift and arrow keys to select.) You will see something like Figure 9-28.

Figure 9-28. Select the gap from the begining of the first beat on the first track to
the beginning of the first beat on the second track to measure latency
Now you have a Length value in the Selection toolbar. In my example, that is
177 ms, which is a lot. If you want, you can zoom way in to get the most precise
measurement. You’ll probably never get zero latency, but you can get close.
Latency correction for overdubbing always takes a negative value, because the
new track always lags behind the old track. If you change your recording
interface, you should repeat the loopback test, because different devices have
different latencies.
When you read up on latency, you will find many passionate discussions about it
and much boasting of heroic low-latency exploits such as “I got my latency
down to three milliseconds!” That is fine, if dubious, but it is good to keep a bit
of perspective. It’s no good going for super-low latency at the cost of stability or
creating skips and stutters because your CPU can’t keep up. Latency matters
during overdubbing, and Audacity helps you with its configurable latency
correction. It matters when you use software monitoring, which is why I prefer
using recording interfaces with zero-latency monitoring ports. It matters
anywhere you have additional stops in your audio chain such as outboard
special-effects processors. When you play a note, you want sound to come out,
not lag.

You can reduce latency in your audio production computer by using a high-speed
multicore processor and streamlining your computer and tuning it for audio
production. Chapter 13 and Chapter 14 tell you how to do this.

Changing Tempo
Despite your best efforts, sometimes the tempo of your tracks wanders out of
sync. If you’re in a punk band, it’s all right, but otherwise you’ll probably want
to correct this. Select Effect > Change Tempo, which changes tempo without
changing pitch. It’s easy, that is, if you know what values to use, and
unfortunately Audacity does not have a tempo detector. The person who writes a
tempo detection plug-in will be a big hero. I use a stopwatch and count out the
beats during playback. It might take a bit of trial and error, but it’s usually easier
than rerecording.

NTSC, PAL, and CDDA Frames
This is a simplified explanation of what frames are. If you want to make movie
soundtracks, then this is just an introduction to a key concept, and you will want
to learn more.
Frames values are for positioning splits exactly at video and audio frame
borders. Check the “Snap To” box in the Selection toolbar, set your time value to
the appropriate frame type, and then when you make splits or cuts, they will
exactly match the frames. Any audio outside of the frame borders will be lost
and possibly create a click.
National Television System Committee (NTSC) frames pertain to analog
broadcast television in North America, some South American countries, and a
few other countries. The NTSC drop frame rate is 29.97 frames per second (fps),
and the NTSC nondrop frame rate is 30 fps. Audacity supports both. Why two?
Why the odd 29.97 number? This is an old standard dating from the black-and-
white TV era. The black-and-white broadcast frame rate was true 30 fps, but
when color was added to the broadcast signal, the frame rate, for various
technical reasons, was slowed down to 29.97 fps. Now pay close attention,
because I am going to call on all of my mighty explaining powers to explain the
difference between drop and nondrop NTSC frame rates in a way that ordinary,
non-video-engineer mortals can understand. This has never been done in the
history of humanity; you’re seeing it here first.
NTSC drop and NTSC nondrop frame rates have only one difference: They use
different timecodes to control the playback speed. There is no difference in the
length of the program, but just a tiny difference in how fast it is played back. The
term drop is unfortunate because it is commonly believed that video frames are
dropped, but this is not true. Video time is measured by counting video frames.
When you shoot one hour’s worth of video at true nondrop 30 fps, your one-hour
project will contain exactly 108,000 frames. If it is broadcast without first being
converted to drop frame, it will run about 1 hour and 3.6 seconds, because at a
29.97 frame rate there are 107,892 frames per hour. So, at the end of an hour,
there are 108 frames left over.
If you care to do the math, you’ll see that there is a 1 percent difference between
the two. Naturally this adds up over time, which causes woe to broadcasters. It
also causes woe to film editors, who need to be able to measure cuts and scene

lengths accurately.
This discrepancy is cured by inserting a bit of on-purpose amnesia and self-
deceit into the drop frame timecode. With NTSC drop frame, your film is played
at 30 fps, but it pretends to be 29.97 fps because that is the requirement for
NTSC TV broadcast. Every video frame is counted until that 1 percent
difference adds up to a whole frame. Then the timecode pretends that frame does
not exist and does not count it, and continues counting on the next frame. So
even though your film still has its original 108,000 frames, the forgetful
timecode plays what it thinks are only 107,892 frames in one hour, but it’s really
108,000. Since it has fooled itself into not seeing those other 108 frames they get
played anyway, the film ends on time, and everyone is happy.
This all sounds complicated and bizarre, but in the video-engineering world, it
was an elegant solution that caused minimal disruption to legacy broadcast
infrastructure. The alternative, with the advent of color, was to overhaul the
entire TV broadcasting system for the new color standard.
All NTSC TV broadcasters require that master tapes submitted to them use
NTSC drop frame. If you’re editing a film soundtrack in Audacity, you can
exactly match the correct frame rate.
Phase Alternating Line (PAL) is the color TV broadcast standard for a good
portion of the planet: Australia, much of Asia, South America, Europe,
Greenland, and some African countries. It uses a 25 fps frame rate, which
Audacity supports.
Traditional film movies are at 24 fps.
If you’re making an audio track for DVD, you can use NTSC, PAL, or 24 fps.
For web streaming, you can use whatever frame rates you want.
The Compact Disk Digital Audio (CDDA) frame rate of 75 fps is for audio CDs.
We learned about this for converting legacy analog media to CD in Chapter 3.
For example, when you copy a vinyl LP into Audacity as one long track and then
split the track into individual songs, selecting the CDDA frame rate ensures that
all that splits will match the CDDA frames, and you won’t create clicks from the
audio being out of sync with the CDDA frame rate.

Creating Loops
Some folks are totally overboard into loops. Loops are clips played over and
over, such as when turning a few seconds of drumming into a long drum track,
creating a backing music track from a short clip, or being hypnotically
repetitious—whatever pleases you. You’ve probably seen low-budget
documentaries that used loops to stretch a few minutes of music into background
soundtracks.
A simple loop is easy. Start with a single short clip. Select Effect > Repeat.
Enter how many times you want it to repeat. Audacity even does the arithmetic
for you (Figure 9-29).
Figure 9-29. Creating a simple loop by using a short clip and selecting Effect >
Repeat
You can loop a clip, a whole track, or a selection in a track. The repeated parts
will be appended to the original selection, so if your selection is in the middle of
a track, then the repeats will also be in the middle, starting to the right of the
selection.

Mixdown to Stereo
When you have done all of your edits and cleanups and are getting ready to mix
your tracks down to stereo, go into the Track menus of the individual tracks and
assign them to the appropriate left, right, and mono channels. Left tracks go to
the left channel at mixdown, right tracks go to the right channel, and mono
tracks are mapped to both channels. In Audacity, the top channel of a stereo
track is the left channel, and the bottom one is the right channel.
Note
To learn more about cleaning up your tracks, fixing problems, and special effects, see Chapter 3, Chapter 4,
Chapter 12, and Chapter 11.
Figure 9-30. The Pan slider adjusts the left-right balance on mono and stereo
tracks.
You now have the option of adjusting the pan of each mono or stereo track,
which means adjusting their left-right balance to enhance stereo imaging. You

can do this either with the Pan slider on the Track panel or with the Pan slider on
the sleek new Mixer Board that first appeared in Audacity 1.3.8. The Pan slider
does not change your project file; it only affects playback in Audacity and how
your export will sound. Adjust this during playback in Audacity so you can hear
exactly how your export will sound. This does not work on left or right tracks
but only on mono and stereo tracks. Figure 9-30 shows how this looks.
Next to the Pan slider is the Gain slider for adjusting track volume. Just like pan,
gain does not change your project file but only controls how your export will
sound. This is also adjustable during playback.
Audacity has several ways to mix and render your tracks down to a stereo track.
First make sure that in the Edit > Preferences > Import/Export dialog you
have selected “Always mix all tracks down to Stereo or Mono channel(s).”
Now select Tracks > Mix and Render. This replaces your tracks with the new
stereo track. If you would rather not have your project tracks replaced by the
new stereo track, don’t select Tracks > Mix and Render but remember that nifty
keyboard shortcut ctrl-shift-M (Audacity 1.3.4 and newer). This mixes and
renders a new stereo track that will appear below your mono tracks (Figure 9-
31).
Now you have a nice stereo track all mixed and ready for more editing or to
export to any number of playable formats. If you elected to use the ctrl-shift-M
command to mix and render, you can export just your new stereo track by
selecting the track (click the track label) and then selecting File > Export
Selection.

Figure 9-31. Pressing ctrl-shift-M to mix and render preserves your original
tracks and creates a new stereo track.

Customizing the Mixer Board
Here is a cool trick for the Mixer Board: You can make the icons match your
track names by using certain keywords and abbreviations (Figure 9-32):
Figure 9-32. Mixer board icons match your track names.
I learned these names by browsing the source code online at
http://www.audacity.cvs.sourceforge.net/audacity/audacity-src/. These are not
documented anywhere else yet, as far as I know.
acoustic, guitar, gtr
acoustic, piano, pno
back, vocal, bg, vox
clap
drums, dr
electric, bass, guitar, bs, gtr
electric, guitar, gtr
electric, piano, pno, key
kick
loop
organ, org
perc
sax
snare
string, violin, cello
synth
tambo
trumpet, horn
turntable

vibraphone, vibes
vocal, vox

Too Loud! Clipping!
It is important at this stage to make sure that View > Show Clipping is checked.
This highlights any clipped passages in your new stereo track with red bars.
When multiple tracks are combined into a single track, they get louder, so
clipping is a common mixdown problem. If your new downmixed track has
clipping, you need to go back, lower some volumes, and mix and render again.
Figure 9-33. Doubleclick the Pan and Gain sliders to open a little window where
you can type in your values.
Before changing anything, first check your Pan and Gain sliders. It is easy for
these sliders to get moved even when you don’t intend to move them. Carefully
position the cursor on the slider button and click without moving it, and it will
pop up the exact value. If you have trouble moving the slider, double-click it to
open a little window where you can type in your pan or gain value (Figure 9-33).
There are several ways to adjust the amplitude of your tracks. One is to change
the amplitude of the tracks by selecting Effect > Amplify. Try a negative value
of -3, which will reduce the amplitude by 3 decibels. So if the maximum
amplitude is already at -3, this will make it -6. The value -3 is about a one-half
reduction in volume. That may sound like a lot, but as the human ear perceives
sound, that is about one step. About the minimum change we can detect is 1 dB.
This changes your track, so you may prefer to use the Gain slider instead. It also
changes the amplitude only for mixdown and does not alter the original track.
Whichever method you choose, you can preview it by clicking the Play button.
When you’re mixing multiple tracks, don’t be surprised if you spend some time
getting it right.

Control Your Channel Mapping
You can have more control over mixing and rendering by not using Tracks >
Mix and Render but rather going straight to the File > Export dialog. This
combines mixing, rendering, and exporting all into a single operation. Before
you do this, open the Edit > Preferences > Import/Export dialog and make
sure that “Use Custom Mix” is selected and that “Always mix all tracks down to
Stereo or Mono channel(s)” is not. This allows you to map your channels at
export, and this is when you will be grateful that you gave all of your tracks
useful names (Figure 9-34). You can map tracks to more than one channel.
Figure 9-34. Mapping your tracks to channels at export (note the channel slider
at the bottom)

Multichannel Surround
You may use Audacity to export to 3.1, 5.1, or 7.1 surround, or any multichannel
combination you want, using the Custom Mix option. How you do know which
channel is for what? This handy list shows you the channel mappings for WAV:
1. Front Left
2. Front Right
3. Front Center
4. Low Frequency
5. Back Left
6. Back Right
7. Front Left of Center
8. Front Right of Center
9. Back Center
10. Side Left
11. Side Right
12. Top Center
13. Top Front Left
14. Top Front Center
15. Top Front Right
16. Top Back Left
17. Top Back Center
18. Top Back Right
Just to keep life entertaining, other file formats support different channel
mappings. Table 9-2 shows some common audio file formats and their 5.1
channel mappings:
Table 9-2. Channel Mappings for Common Audio File Formats
File Format Channel Mappings
WAV
front left, front right, center, LFE, rear left, rear right
AC3
front left, center, front right, rear left, rear right, LFE
DTS
center, front left, front right, rear left, rear right, LFE
AAC
center, front left, front right, rear left, rear right, LFE

AIFF
front left, rear left, center, front right, rear right, LFE
FLAC
front left, front right, center, LFE, rear left, rear right
WMA
front left, front right, front center, LFE, rear left, rear right
The LFE channel is commonly thought of as the subwoofer channel. This is not
quite correct because it is not the same as the signal that is sent to the subwoofer
port. It’s a special channel for carrying sounds in the 3 to 200 Hz range, and the
LFE signal can be sent to any speaker capable of handling it.
For DVD-Audio, use the WAV mappings. (See Chapter 6 for more on DVD-
Audio.) Don’t bother with surround sound for CDs because they only support
two-channel stereo.
There are some special problems with creating multitrack surround audio in
Audacity. Audacity is very good at creating high-quality stereo and mono tracks,
but its abilities to manage multitrack surround are rather limited. You must know
the correct channel mappings yourself for different file formats because
Audacity does not tell you, and when you import a multichannel audio file into
Audacity, it loses the track names and channel mappings even if the file was
created in Audacity.
You can test your channel mappings after export by playing your new audio file
on your computer, if your computer has a multichannel surround sound card and
it is already set up and working correctly. See Chapter 13 to learn how to set up
and test surround sound playback on Linux computers. Windows users will find
configuration and testing tools in the Sound module of the Control Panel, and
Windows Media Player supports surround sound.
Another way to test your new surround sound file is to burn it to a DVD and
play it on a surround hi-fi system. Yet another way is to play the file on a digital
music server that serves a surround hi-fi system.

Chapter 10. Making Your Own Ringtones
I’m a cheapskate, and I think that paying money for ringtones is silly. Why
should I, when I already own mass quantities of CDs and my own recorded
music? I don’t even like cell phones. When I leave home, I don’t want an
electronic leash. If I crash into the ditch, someone will find me eventually, and
who’s to say if I could even reach a phone when I’m hanging upside down in a
mangled vehicle? It’s really okay to be unconnected once in a while.
But fortunately for you, excellent readers, this book isn’t about only what I like.
Mobile phone owners love to have customized ringtones and to use their mobile
devices as music players (that they can play loudly on their tinny lo-fi speakers
in public places and annoy grumps like me). Most mobile service providers
make it a matter of personal honor to charge customers for every last thing they
can do with their phones, including ringtones and file transfers. So, you might
say to yourself, fine, I’ll just search online for free ringtones. Be careful—most
of the “free” sites are come-ons for pay services and sometimes malware. There
are some legitimate online sources for free ringtones; some of them are mediocre
amateur efforts, and some are good. In this era of the Wild Wild Internet, shop
carefully and be on guard.
Since the point of this book is doing your own audio production, how hard can it
be to make your own ringtones and phone-friendly tunes? Not hard at all.
Making the actual audio files is easy. The hard part is figuring out what audio
file formats your phone supports and then how to transfer files into it. So let’s
use Audacity to create phone-friendly audio files and then look at different ways
of transferring files into your phone. You’re going to need your phone’s manual
or any relevant technical information you can dig up. If you don’t have a
manual, look on your phone manufacturer’s website.
Please refer to Chapter 1 if you need a refresher on the basics of using Audacity.

Customizing Audio for a Mobile Phone
First import the audio file into Audacity that you want to use: Either open an
existing Audacity project or click File > Import > Audio to start a new project
with a WAV, FLAC, MP3, Ogg, or other audio file. Save it as a new project
because you’re going to make a lot of changes.
If it is a stereo file, first convert it to mono with Tracks > Stereo to Mono.
Unless your phone supports stereo, of course. In Edit > Preferences >
Import/Export, make sure that “Always mix all tracks down to stereo or mono”
is checked.
If you need to create a ringtone of a specific length, such as 20 to 30 seconds,
select a 20-or 30-second portion of the track to use. Here is a slick trick for
precisely measuring your selection length: Position the Selection tool at the
beginning of your clip. Go to the Selection toolbar, select the “Length” radio
button, make sure “Snap To” is not checked, and enter how many seconds long
you want your clip to be. If you’re a bit shaky with the mouse, you can use the
arrow keys on your keyboard to move the cursor. Figure 10-1 shows how to use
this method to create an exactly 20-second clip.
Leaving your clip selected, select Edit > Trim (or press ctrl-T) to cut away the
excess. Do any other edits you want, such as fixing problems, boosting the
volume, applying special effects, or whatever you desire. A good trick is to fire
up Audacity’s equalizer to shorten the tone curve because your phone speaker
has a limited frequency range, which you can find in its specs. Equalizing your
audio file to match your phone speaker’s frequency range will make it sound
fuller and less tinny. This also makes it sound better in earbuds and Bluetooth
headsets.
For example, suppose your phone speaker has a range of 500 to 10,000 Hz. In
comparison, the full range of human hearing is about 20 to 22,000 Hz. Reduce
the frequencies outside this range by 24 dB using Effect > Equalization. The
equalizer has two sets of controls; you may use either the graphical curve or the
interface that looks like a hi-fi equalizer. Select “Graphic EQ” to display the
equalizer (Figure 10-2). The equalizer sliders max out at a 20 dB range, while
the curve has a range of 120 dB. A reduction of -60 dB is well beyond what we
can hear and is as good as absolute silence.

Figure 10-1. Using the Selection toolbar to create a clip of an exact duration (in
this example, 20 seconds)
Figure 10-2. The Graphic EQ view has sliders for controlling the frequencies.
In Figure 10-3, I manipulated the curve by clicking the line above 500 Hz to

create a control point, clicking at 20 Hz to create another control point, and then
dragging the 20 Hz control point down to -24. Then I did the same on the other
end starting at 10,000 Hz. To make changes, grab and move the control points,
which you can move in any direction. Gradual curves sound better than abrupt
transitions.
Figure 10-3. Here is the Draw curves view of the equalizer, showing a curve to
match the frequency response of a telephone speaker.
You can enlarge the equalizer window both vertically and horizontally; making it
wider exposes more of the frequency scale. The sliders on the left increase or
decrease the size of the decibel scales. The equalizer has no undo function, but if
you mess up incurably, you can hit the Flat button to reset to zero. Remove
control points by dragging them off the graph.
You can increase amplitude by going over zero, because this is not the same zero
as on the Zero Decibels Full Scale that we use when we’re recording or playing
back in Audacity. It does not mark the point at which clipping occurs. Rather,
anything over zero in the equalizer is simply an increase in amplitude, and
anything under zero is a decrease. You can still cause clipping or make it too
quiet, so the Preview button will help you with this. The Preview button will
preview the first three seconds of your clip by default. You can change this
duration in the Edit > Preferences > Playback dialog.
You might save your customized ringtone equalization curve with the Save As

button, and then you can apply it to all of your ringtones.
The “Linear frequency scale” checkbox, when you’re in Draw curves view,
changes the scale from the default logarithmic view to linear. Use the
logarithmic view when you want to see the lower frequencies in more detail.
The Length of filter setting controls how many samples Audacity processes at a
time. The default is 4,001 and should be fine most of the time. You can adjust
this either by moving the slider with the mouse or by using the arrow keys on
your keyboard. It is normal for Audacity to display a green line that follows the
blue line of your equalization curve. This shows the curve that Audacity will
actually use, which is affected by the limitations of the equalization algorithm. If
the green line and blue line diverge significantly, increase the Length of Filter
setting or smooth out your curve to make the transitions more gradual.
When you’re finished editing, your ringtone is ready to export, and you need to
know what file format and specification your phone requires. For example,
suppose your phone requires 192Kbps constant-bitrate MP3 at 8,000 Hz
sampling rate. No problem. If your project sampling rate is not already 8 kHz,
click Tracks > Resample to resample it to the correct rate. The Track panel will
then show the new sampling rate. Then open the File > Export > MP3 Files >
Options dialog. Select Bit Rate Mode: Constant and Quality: 192Kbps
(Figure 10-4).

Figure 10-4. Exporting to the MP3 format and quality level required by your
phone
With newer phones that support WAV files, requirements run the gamut from 8-
bit depth 8 kHz sampling rate to 16/44.1. If you need to change the sampling
rate, do that before export by using the Tracks > Resample dialog. Then export
using the File > Export > Other uncompressed files > WAV dialog and
selecting the appropriate bit depth. Figure 10-5 shows what exporting to an 8-bit
WAV looks like.
Remember, resample before export and set the bit depth at export. What if your
phone specs specify a bitrate, such as 64Kbps? The bitrate is always bit depth
times sampling rate times the number of channels, so 8-bit depth times 8 kHz
sampling rates times 1 channel equals a bitrate of 64Kbps. However, ideally your
phone documentation won’t make you do math and will spell it all out for you.

Figure 10-5. Exporting to 8-bit WAV
Keep in mind the storage available on your phone and how much hi-fi is it worth
trying to squeeze into a lo-fi playback device. If you have a choice of different
quality levels, it might pay to experiment with lower quality settings to find a
good balance between quality and storage capacity.

Applying Dynamic Range Compression
Little phone speakers can’t handle much dynamic range, so you should compress
the dynamic range of your audio files to level out variations in volume. I prefer
Effect > Leveller for this because it reduces the gain on the louder frequencies
and raises the gain on the quieter frequencies. The Leveller effect tends to be
harsh, but it sounds pretty good on little mobile device speakers. Figure 10-
6shows the settings I like to use: a Heavy level of compression and a low
Threshold for Noise. The Threshold for Noise determines what frequencies it
will change, so -80 db means virtually everything, while -20 dB affects
frequencies at -20 dB and up.
After applying the Leveller effect, you might need to normalize your track to
raise the volume as high as possible. Select Effect > Normalize, check “Remove
any DC Offset,” check “Normalize maximum amplitude to,” and set the decibel
value to zero, which is as high as you can go. Figure 10-7 shows a waveform
with the first half Levelled and Normalized and the second half untouched.
Strictly speaking, the Leveller effect doesn’t really behave like a compressor but
more like a limiter. A limiter is like a compressor set to a high ratio, like 20:1
and higher, so rather than smoothly reducing the gain above your threshold, it
squashes it most firmly.
Figure 10-6. Suggested settings for Effect > Leveller to compress the dynamic
range

Figure 10-7. The first half of the waveform has had both the Leveller effect and
Normalize effect applied. See how the highs and lows are more even than in the
second part of the waveform.

Phone Audio File Formats
Ordinary audio file formats aren’t weird enough; most mobile phones also
support a special ringtone format called Ring Tone Text Transfer Language
(RTTTL). Modern mobile phones also support MIDI, MP3, WAV, and a host of
other audio file formats. Audacity does not support RTTTL or MIDI, but you can
use it to prepare audio clips for RTTTL or MIDI conversion with other software.
Chapter 3, Chapter 7, Chapter 11, and Chapter 12 tell all about cleaning up your
audio files, using different audio formats and quality levels, and special effects.

RTTTL
RTTTL is a text language invented by Nokia that describes ringtones and is
designed to be the universal cell phone ringtone language for easy ringtone
transfers. This is what it looks like in written form:
AbbaDance:d=4,o=5,b=80:32p,2d,8c.,2d#,32d.,16c.,32a#.4,8c.,8d.,2d.
That is ABBA’s “Dancing Queen.” No, really, it is. You can download RTTTL
ringtones just like any other audio file, or you can type them in using your phone
keypad, if your phone includes a ringtone composer. It might be called melody
maker or something similar. Your phone manual will tell you which keypresses
to use for the RTTTL characters. The AbbaDance example shows the three
required elements: the name, the default value, and data.
The name field is the song name, and it can’t be more than 10 characters or
contain a colon, because the colon marks the end of the name string.
The default value field defines the default duration, octave, and tempo:
d Duration
o Octave
b Tempo
Any note not assigned its own duration will use the default. For example, d=4 in
AbbaQueen means the default duration is a quarter note. There is a four-octave
range numbered from 4 to 7. Tempo sets the beats per minute.
RTTTL describes the standard durations of musical notes:
1
Whole note
2
Half note
4
Quarter note
8
Eighth note
16 Sixteenth note
32 Thirty-second note
.
A dot equals a half-beat

You get whole notes and sharps but no flats, because there is no flat symbol on
the keypad. But that’s all right, because sharps and flats overlap—for example,
G-sharp and A-flat are the same thing.
P
pause
A
A
A# A-sharp and B-flat
B
B
C
C
C# C-sharp and D-flat
D
D
D# D-sharp and E-flat
E
E
F
F
F# F-sharp and G-flat
G
G
G# G-sharp and A-flat
If you really want to dig into RTTTL, you can find the spec online; just exercise
your mighty “RTTTL spec” web-searching powers. There are many sites with
downloadable RTTTL ringtones all ready to go.

Proprietary Audio File Formats
If your phone requires a proprietary or nonstandard audio file format not natively
supported by Audacity or you prefer to use AAC, WMA, or some other format,
you can use Audacity first to create and edit your audio clips, export them to
WAV format, and then use a file converter application to convert the WAV into
the correct format. Where do you find a converter? There are skillions of them,
which you can find with a bit of web searching.
Another option is to install the open source FFmpeg encoder. This is a high-
quality, open source multimedia encoder, and Audacity has FFmpeg integration
built in. FFmpeg is Free software and free of cost. Visit the FFmpeg
documentation page (http://www.ffmpeg.org/documentation.html) to learn how
to download and install it on Mac and Windows. Linux users can install it from
their distribution’s software repositories.
The Advanced Audio Coding (AAC) audio format is a lossy, compressed
encoding and compression technology that encompasses both digital audio and
video as part of the MPEG-2 and MPEG-4 specifications. AAC audio is
supposed to sound better than MP3, which is also a lossy, compressed format.
AAC is patented, and anyone who wants to distribute AAC-encoded content
may do so freely without restrictions or payment. But a patent license is required
to develop and distribute AAC codecs.
AAC is the default audio container format for iTunes, though iTunes also
supports WAV, MP3, AIFF, and Apple Lossless. AAC has some abilities that
MP3 does not, such as support for up to 48 channels, while MP3 supports only 2,
and a wider range of sampling frequencies, 8 kHz to 96 kHz, while MP3
supports only 16 kHz to 48 kHz. AAC is said to handle higher frequencies and
stereo imaging better. There are some other differences that are more interesting
to codec designers; the bottom line, as always, is how it sounds to you.
Note
Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft, one of the original developers of MP3 and one of its many patent holders, also has
a 5.1 surround-sound MP3 encoder and decoder. As most people say when they hear about this, “Why
bother with cruddy lo-fi six-channel surround sound? Two cruddy lo-fi channels are plenty.” But for those
who are interested, it is free to evaluate on Mac or Windows only. If you like it and want to use it for
anything other than personal evaluation, it will cost money.

AAC is represented by a host of file extensions—.m4a, .m4b, .m4p, .m4v, .m4r,
.3gp, .mp4, and .aac—which include both video and audio. Audacity uses the
.m4a extension, which Apple uses to indicate a non-copy-protected audio-only
file. .m4p is the extension used for encrypted, copy-protected iTunes audio files.
Saving your files in AAC format in Audacity is easy, once FFmpeg is installed:
Click Export > M4A (AAC) Files (FFmpeg) > Options. In the Options dialog
you have a range of quality settings from 10 to 500, with 500 being the highest
quality. This range represents Fair, Okay, Good, Better, and Best. The value 256
is a good setting for a more complex recording. A simple recording, such as a
spoken-word piece, sounds decent at 50, though 100 is noticeably better
(Figure 10-8).
Figure 10-8. Exporting to AAC format (the default iTunes format), which creates
a file with an .m4a extension
WMA is Windows Media Audio, a proprietary, lossless audio compression
technology invented by Microsoft. WMA refers to both the codec and the audio
file format. WMA supports a maximum 48 kHz sampling rate and two channels.
WMA audio is usually encapsulated in an Advanced Systems Format (ASF)
container, which contains metadata such as song name, artist name, and track
number. ASF also supports Windows Media DRM (digital rights management).
The file extension for DRM and non-DRM WMA files is the same, .wma; if you

try to play a DRM file on a player that doesn’t support Windows DRM, it will
label it as unplayable.
In Audacity, open the Export > WMA (version 2) Files (FFmpeg) > Options
dialog. Your only option is to select a bitrate (Figure 10-9).

How to Transfer Files to Your Phone
What most US providers want to you to do is sign up for their online services
and buy all your ringtones and music from them. What if you just want a phone
and not a web browser/email client with a tiny screen? Then you can order new
ringtones attached to text messages. What if you don’t want to pay for text
services or learn to type with your thumbs? Then you must be some kind of
weirdo. Wear the label with pride, and let’s explore other ways to move files in
and out of our phones. My preferred method is from a PC—my PC, that is, that I
control and don’t have to pay fees to access.
Many phones accept SD storage cards, usually miniSD or microSD cards. For
less than $20, you can get any of these with a USB SD card reader or an adapter
for a standard SD card reader so you can plug it into a standard USB port on a
computer. These cards have several gigabytes of storage capacity.
Figure 10-9. Encoding your ringtone in the WMA format
Note
The first time you install a new SD card in your phone, you should format it using the phone’s menu. This
creates the right type of filesystem for your phone. Your phone’s manual will tell you how. Formatting the

storage card erases everything on it.
After formatting a card, just plug it into the appropriate card reader, plug it into
your computer, copy over your new ringtones, and then stuff the card into your
phone and transfer the files to the correct directory. Your phone might even have
some helpful menu options to make this easy.
Bluetooth is another common option for connecting a mobile phone to a PC. It’s
an odd name for a useful function: very short-range wireless radio networking,
from 1 to 100 feet. If your computer does not have a Bluetooth adapter, you can
buy a USB Bluetooth adapter for less than $30. Get Bluetooth 2.0 because that is
the newest and fastest standard. To establish a Bluetooth networking connection,
follow the instructions in your camera’s manual. Typically, you’ll activate
Bluetooth on your PC, set it to discovery mode, and then set up pairing with
your phone from the phone’s menu. If it asks you for a personal identification
number (PIN), this is usually an arbitrary number that you invent at the time of
discovery and then duplicate on the computer to complete the connection.
Some cell phone service providers disable file transfer via Bluetooth because
they want to overcharge you for online services or charge you extra up front for
a data connection kit, which is a fancy way of saying they want to gouge you for
uncrippling some of the phone’s built-in functions. Figure 10-10 shows a
microSD card, a USB Bluetooth adapter, and accessories.
Of course, you can avoid all this business of paying to unlock phone functions
by purchasing an unlocked phone. You’ll have to figure out for yourself if it’s
better to go with a branded phone, which is subsidized by the service provider
and locks you in for a year or two, or to pay full price for the freedom of an
unlocked phone.

Figure 10-10. A microSD Flash storage card adapter, a wee Cirago USB
Bluetooth interface, another adapter, a cute red USB microSD reader, a tiny 2GB
microSD card, and a US quarter for scale
I think the easiest and best way to transfer files between a computer and a cell
phone is via an ordinary USB cable, and some phones support this.
Any of these methods can be used for any kind of file transfer, and not just your
ringtones. Photos, contacts, messages, any of the data stored in your phone can
be backed up to a PC or transferred from a PC to your phone. There are many
Windows and Apple software applications for managing your mobile phone
from your computer. These usually cost a few dollars. There is a good open
source, free-of-cost application worth trying that runs on Linux, Mac, and
Windows: BitPim. To quote the BitPim website (http://www.bitpim.org/):
BitPim is a program that allows you to view and manipulate data on many CDMA phones. . . . This
includes the PhoneBook, Calendar, WallPapers, RingTones (functionality varies by phone), and the
Filesystem.
Now you know how to create and optimize your own custom ringtones and
audio files for your mobile devices and how to add extra storage so you can
carry around your entire music collection with you. Don’t forget the earbuds. Or
even some fancy, high-end padded headphones, because your phone speaker
might be poo but its sound processor just might be pretty good, needing only

some good headphones to come to life.

Chapter 11. Audacity Plugins for Special Effects
Plugins are add-on software modules that give Audacity extra functionality:
filters, analysis, tone generators, and special effects of all kinds. Plugins are nice
because you don’t have to install a monolithic program with everything in the
world just to get the few extra features that you really want.
Some are bundled with your Audacity installation, and you can find many more
on the Internet. Or you can even write your own. Plugins do not run standalone;
they run on hosts, which are applications (such as Audacity and other audio
production software) that support the plugins. You will find Audacity’s plugins
in the Generate, Effect, and Analyze menus.
There are three types of plugins that work with Audacity: Linux Audio
Developer’s Simple Plugin API (LADSPA), Virtual Studio Technology (VST),
and Nyquist. LADSPA is mainly for Linux, though there are some LADSPA
plugins for Windows and Mac. VST is for Windows and Mac, and Nyquist
plugins work on all three.
Plugins are sorted alphabetically in the Audacity menus; there isn’t a way to sort
or organize plugins according to your own wishes, such as the ones you use the
most. Finding helpful information about them, such as what they do or what the
various settings mean, is often a bit of a challenge. There is some information on
the Audacity wiki, and the home sites of the various plug-in projects have
documentation of varying degrees of helpfulness. It’s easy enough to try them
and hear for yourself what they do. In this chapter, we’ll cover a batch of
commonly used plugins in detail and define some terminology. A brief audio
glossary at the end of this chapter explains some of the more common terms
you’ll encounter for plugins and special effects.
Manipulation and analysis of digital and audio signals are part of the discipline

of signal processing. We’re not going to dive into the math and theory of signal
processing in this book; to learn more, see the bibliography for some references.
Let’s dive right into exploring and playing with some of Audacity’s special
effects. Your own Audacity menus may be different from those in the examples,
depending on which Audacity version you are using and what plugins you have
installed. If you don’t know how to find and install plugins, skip ahead to the
sections in this chapter on finding and installing plugins on Linux and Windows.
Note
When you can’t find documentation, sometimes browsing the source code rewards you with useful
information. You can see all of Audacity’s source code online at
http://audacity.cvs.sourceforge.net/viewvc/audacity/audacity-src/. Use the Sticky Tag menu to select the
correct Audacity version, and then look in the nyquist, plugins, and src/effects directories to see the source
code for Audacity’s plugins.

Cross-Fades
Our first effect is not even a real Audacity special effect: cross-fading. A cross-
fade is when one track fades out and another track fades in with some overlap.
We hear this all the time on radio and TV. Audacity doesn’t have a cross-fade
function, but it’s easy enough to create one with the Time Shift tool.
You need two tracks to do this. Apply Effect > Fade Out to one, and apply
Effect > Fade In to the other. Then use the Time Shift tool to move the tracks to
create the degree of overlap you want (Figure 11-1).
Figure 11-1. A simple cross-fade created using the Fade In/Fade out effects and
the Time Shift tool
For finer control of the degree of fades and their duration, use the Envelope tool.

Generate Menu
The Generate menu contains plugins for creating new tones. Start with a new,
blank Audacity session. Select Generate and then whatever effect you want to
try. This will open a dialog with the available options for the particular tone. If
all the audio in an existing track is selected, generating a new tone will replace
the old one. If a portion of the existing audio is selected, the selection will be
replaced. If no existing tracks are selected, then creating a new tone also creates
a new track. You can also select Tracks > Add New > Audio Track to create
additional tracks.

Sine Wave Example
Let’s create a sine wave to get the hang of creating tones. Open the Generate >
Tone dialog. Select a sine waveform, set the frequency (Hz) to 3,999, set the
amplitude to 0.8, and set a duration of whatever you want. The default is 30
seconds (Figure 11-2).
You will see something like Figure 11-2. Zoom way in to see the classic sine
waveform (Figure 11-3).
Figure 11-2. What a 3,999 Hz sine wave may look like at first
Figure 11-3. What a 3,999 Hz sine wave looks like at extreme zoom
Click the Play button to enjoy your new sine wave tone.

Frequency Range of Generated Tones
The available frequency range of your newly generated tones is theoretically half
the project sampling rate. For example, if your project rate is 8,000 Hz, then the
available range for your tones should be 0 to 3,999 Hz. But your usable range is
a bit less. You will know you are at the extreme end of the range when you see
either silence or a pulsing waveform instead of a nice steady waveform.
Figure 11-4 shows a 3,999 Hz sine wave created with project sampling rates of
8,000, 16,000, and 32,000 Hz (from top to bottom). Figure 11-5 shows how they
look when you zoom way in and how they look smoother at higher sampling
rates.
Figure 11-4. How a 3,999 Hz sine wave looks at three different project sampling
rates

Figure 11-5. This shows how the waveforms smooth out at higher sampling
rates.

DTMF Tones
Using the Generate > DTMF tones effect is fun, because you can use it to play
any word or text string in DTMF tones. What, you ask, are DTMF tones? Those
are the tones emitted by an analog touch-tone telephone: dual-tone
multifrequency. It’s called dual-tone because each keypress sends a tone that is a
combination of two tones. The handy table in Figure 11-6, poached from
Wikipedia (with permission), shows the tone matrix for a touch-tone phone.
Figure 11-7 shows the DTMF tone generator dialog. The DTMF sequence is a
word, phrase, or any alphanumeric string. The tone/silence ratio controls the
duration of the spaces between each tone.
Figure 11-6. Analog telephone tones are combinations of two tones for each
keypress. (Image courtesy of Wikipedia under the Creative Commons
Attribution-ShareAlike license.)

Figure 11-7. The DTMF tone generator plays any word or phrase in touch-tones.
Figure 11-8 shows what “carla” looks like in DTMF.
Figure 11-8. A DTMF waveform spelling "carla"

Chirps
The Generate > Chirp effect is another fun tone generator. Use this to generate
tones that sound like slide whistles. Select a low frequency and a high frequency
and duration, and the tone will slide up or down according to frequency order.
You can try different waveform types to hear how they sound: sine, square (alias
or no alias), or sawtooth. The Interpolation setting offers either Linear or
Logarithmic. Linear gives equal time to all frequencies, while Logarithmic plays
the lower frequencies for a longer period of time (Figure 11-9).
Figure 11-9. Chirp tones sound like slide whistles.

Generating Noise
Figure 11-10. Generate > Noise takes three options: type of noise, amplitude,
and duration.
The Generate > Noise menu item is for generating white, pink, or brown noise.
Why, you may ask, would you want to do that? I’m nowhere near
knowledgeable enough to get into the mathematics, which is the foundation of
acoustics and which is fascinating if you care to learn. I can answer “what for”:
to test audio gear, to configure sound balance in music halls, to create
background noise to help sleep or concentration, and to cover up annoying
sounds. Figure 11-10 shows Audacity’s simple noise generator.
White noise is often used in electronic music production because it has the useful
property of cutting through other noises. It is called white noise because it is
analogous to white light, which is an equal combination of all light frequencies.
White noise is a combination of all audible audio frequencies, so one way to
think of it is 20,000 tones all playing at once at the same amplitude. However,
this isn’t strictly accurate, since it is usually generated by random noise
generators in which all frequencies are equally probable, rather than all played at
once. Human hearing is more sensitive to higher frequencies, so even though the
amplitude is the same at all frequencies, we notice the higher frequencies more.
White noise sounds like steam hissing.
Pink noise sounds similar to white noise, but instead of having the same
amplitude at different frequencies, it drops off by 3 dB per octave as frequencies
climb, with equal amplitude across each octave. So, lower frequencies have
more power than higher frequencies, and pink noise sounds more like a roar than
a hiss.

Brown noise is also known as red noise. It is called brown for Brownian motion,
not for color, and if you’re interested in why, I shall leave it as your homework
assignment to find out. (More math.) Brown noise decreases in amplitude by 6
dB per octave as frequencies increase, so it has even more bass emphasis than
pink noise. Pink and brown noise are closer to how human ears perceive
amplitude across the frequency range than white noise.
Figure 11-11 shows what white, pink, and brown noise look like in Audacity.
The bottom three tracks are in Spectrum view, which gives you a nice picture of
the relative energy (amplitude) at different frequencies. Red is “hotter,” or higher
amplitude, and blue is “cooler,” or lower amplitude. It’s just like the light
spectrum where the red end of the spectrum is hotter and blue is cooler. If the
image were in color, you would see that the white noise spectrum is uniform, the
pink noise spectrum ranges from red to red-with-blue, and the range from red to
blue is more pronounced in the brown noise spectrograph. Of course, you can
easily create these in Audacity and see the colors.

Figure 11-11. The first three tracks show white, pink, and brown noise in linear
waveforms. The second set of three tracks shows them in Spectrum view.
Several other types of noise “colors” are not supported in Audacity, unless you
find or write a plug-in. Purple noise is the opposite of brown noise because
amplitude increases 6 db per octave as frequency increases. Blue noise is the
opposite of pink noise: Amplitude increases 3 dB per octave.
We’ve used Generate > Silence several times in this book. It creates a
completely silent interval of whatever duration you want. This is handy for
aligning tracks that are off by a little bit, evening out the spacing in a podcast
with two speakers so they don’t talk at the same time, and making sure that the
intervals between songs are absolutely quiet. It’s also useful for testing how

silent your playback system really is.

Test Tones
Selecting Generate > Tones is a fun way to test the limits of your cheapo (or
nice) sound card and to give yourself an ad hoc hearing test. You can create
tones with sine, square, sawtooth, or square, no alias waveforms. Zoom way in
to see the waveforms like you see in books and articles about waveforms
(Figure 11-12).

Figure 11-12. Square, sawtooth, and sine waves
A sine wave can be thought of as a pure tone without harmonics, so when you
want a pure tone, you want a sine wave. A sine wave alternates smoothly from
positive (above the median, or zero line) to negative (below the median line) and
back again. More complex tones can be represented by combinations of sine
waves. Sine waves are all around us: Ocean waves, the Slinky, alternating
current, and light waves are a few examples. In audio, a sine wave represents
frequency, which is measured in hertz (cycles per second), amplitude (loudness
or volume), and phase. Figure 11-13 shows what these look like in Audacity.
You can think of phase in terms of Audacity’s Time Shift tool; when the phase is
nonzero, that means the waveform is moved forward or backward in time. A
negative value is backward, and a positive value is forward. This is called linear
phase because all frequencies are affected equally. Sometimes we don’t notice a
linear phase shift because there is nothing to compare it to. An example of this is
playing a CD—the music is delayed a little bit by passing through the digital-to-
audio converter, but we don’t care because we don’t notice it. On the other hand,
this is a real problem for overdubbing because new tracks will be out of sync
with old tracks, so we have to compensate for it. (See Chapter 9 to learn more
about overdubbing and synchronization.)
Two waveforms deliberately phase-shifted relative to each other will create new
sounds. A common effect is creating a pleasing echo by duplicating an audio
track and then mixing the two tracks with the second track a little bit out of
phase. Now you know the secret of overproduced commercial vocals: They use
way too many phase-shifted layers. (If you like echo, try selecting Effect >
Echo.)

Figure 11-13. The top track is a 100 Hz sine wave, and the second track is 1,000
Hz, showing what different frequencies look like. Both have the same amplitude.
The third track is half the amplitude of the top two, and the fourth track is a copy
of the third track, shifted slightly out of phase.
Phase shift also describes synchronization between two or more waveforms.
Two waveforms that are exactly in phase combine amplitudes and sound louder.
Two waveforms with varying degrees of being in or out of phase produce all
kinds of different sounds. Two identical waveforms that are inverted 180 degrees
relative to each other cancel each other out. Noise-cancellation devices do this,
with varying degrees of effectiveness.
A square waveform pertains to digital electronics. (The square wave is
sometimes also called the Rademacher function.) Rather than the nice smooth
curve of the analog sine wave, a square waveform represents the instant
transitions of digital circuits. Just like everything digital, it’s all binary—ones or
zeroes, on or off. Unlike a sine wave, which represents a pure tone with no

harmonics, square waveforms are chock-full of harmonics. You can hear a
distinct difference when you create a sine waveform and a square waveform in
Audacity and compare them. Square waveforms contain only odd-integer
harmonics, such as first, third, and fifth harmonics.
A square, no alias, waveform is a dandy demonstration of the distortion caused
by aliasing in digital audio. Create a square tone and a square (no alias) tone of
the same frequency and duration side by side and zoom in. You’ll see something
like Figure 11-14, and there should be an audible difference when you listen to
them, with the no-alias tone sounding smoother and purer. This is also a great
way to experience the effects of different sampling rates; you’ll notice that lower
sampling rates have higher distortion.
Figure 11-14. The top waveform is aliased, and the bottom waveform is not.
A sawtooth waveform has both even and odd harmonics, so it is used for
synthesizing complex musical sounds such as stringed instruments.

Click Track
The Click Track effect is a useful plug-in that may not come with your default
Audacity installation (see Linux Plugins and Windows Plugins near the end of
this chapter for information on finding and installing more plugins). It works on
Linux, Mac, and Windows. Click tracks are like metronome tracks, with one
difference: The first beat of each measure is accented (Figure 11-15).
Figure 11-15. The Click Track effect creates a beat track at configurable tempo,
duration, and tonal qualities.
The different click types are ping, noise, and tick. The Noise click resonance
setting makes them sound crisper or mushier, with higher values being crisper.
Click Track uses two different default tones: C above middle C for the first beat
of each measure, which is represented by MIDI number 72, and middle C for the
remaining beats in each measure, which is MIDI number 60. For example, if you
select a waltz beat, which is three beats per measure, you’ll hear “TICK tick tick
TICK tick tick.” There are 12 notes per octave, including flats and sharps.
Figure 11-16 is handy table listing all the MIDI note numbers.

Figure 11-16. Your handy MIDI note table for selecting MIDI pitches for a click
track
Note
Just for fun, sing the “Do Re Mi” song from The Sound of Music to refresh your memory of the seven
whole notes—do, re, mi, fa, so, la, ti, do. (If you’ve forgotten, that covers one octave plus one note: A, B, C,
D, E, F, G, A.)

Pluck
Another interesting add-on plug-in is Pluck. It’s pretty simple: Choose your
MIDI note, set the duration, and configure a gradual or abrupt fade-out. A higher
note like 96 sounds like the slide-advance tone in old-fashioned slide shows.
(Grade school in the 1960s, back in the last millennium . . .) A low-frequency
note sounds like a sci-fi sound effect (Figure 11-17).
Figure 11-17. The Pluck effect generates tones at different frequencies with short
or long fade-outs.

Risset Drum
The Risset Drum effect creates a nice tone that at lower frequencies sounds like
a deep bass drum, or any large resonant drum with a fat tone, and at higher
frequencies sounds metallic like a cowbell or a triangle (Figure 11-18).
Figure 11-18. The Risset Drum effect
The Risset Drum effect is named for the inventor Jean-Claude Risset, Jean-
Claude, who created a lot of amazing effects with electronic audio. A Risset
pattern creates the illusion of a rhythm in reverse: It sounds like the tempo is
increasing when it is really decreasing, and the other way around. A Risset
rhythm gives the illusion of a rhythm that is always accelerating even as it stays
the same.
This is a good effect to use for creating a 2/4 or 4/4 percussion beat. The settings
I used in Figure 11-18 create a deep, booming bass drumbeat at two beats per
second. The Decay value sets the length of the beat, so 0.5 makes two beats per
second. This creates only a single beat, so you can preview how a steady
repeated beat will sound by clicking shift-Play. Click the Stop button when
you’ve had enough. When you’re ready to create a drumbeat track, select the

beat and then click Effect > Repeat to create a loop. This opens a dialog with
one option: how many times you want it to repeat. It even does the arithmetic for
you and tells you how long it will run (Figure 11-19).
Figure 11-20 shows what your new drum track will look like.
Figure 11-19. Looping your Risset beat with the Repeat effect to create a drum
track
Figure 11-20. A drum track created with the Risset Drum and Repeat effects
What if the tempo you created isn’t quite right? That is easy to fix with the
Change Tempo effect, which changes the tempo without changing pitch. First
undo the Repeat effect so that you are back to your original, single drum beat.
Then click Effect > Change Tempo and enter your new Beats per Minute value.
In Figure 11-21, it changes from 120 beats per minute to 150. But of course it is
still just a single beat, so go back to Effect > Repeat and create a loop again,
and there is your new, faster drum track.

Figure 11-21. Use the Change Tempo effect to change tempo without changing
pitch.
It is best to change the tempo of your single, original beat because applying the
Change Tempo effect to your whole loop track will change where each beat
starts, and most of them will be off-tempo. Though this could be interesting
enough to use, it’s up to you.

Effect Menu
The effects in the Effect menu don’t create new tones but modify existing tones.
A good way to get the hang of the Effect menu plugins is to apply them to tones
created in the Generate menu. A sine wave is great for experimenting with
effects because it is a simple tone and you can hear exactly what the effect does.
Another good test tone is a simple recording of your own speaking or singing
voice.
Note
Note the Repeat Last Effect (ctrl-R) command at the top of the Effect menu. This is a fast way to reapply
the same effect with the same settings.

Reverberation
Probably the most popular effect in audio editing is reverberation. You have
probably listened to commercial music recordings where the reverb was laid on
too thick and it sounds like the singer is being crushed under layer upon layer of
reverb or like the recording was made in an empty swimming pool. A little
reverb goes a long way. The usual purpose of reverb is to better simulate a live
sound, but of course you can do whatever you like. Reverb can sound ethereal
and distant and be evocative of things half remembered.
Audacity’s Gverb plug-in is cross-platform and has a Preview button so you can
easily try different settings. You should preview reverb settings on monitor
speakers rather than headphones, because the channel separation in headphones
will lessen the reverb effect.
Note
The default preview in Audacity is three seconds; you can change this in the Edit > Preferences >
Playback dialog.
There are several ways to approach applying reverb to your audio tracks. A
common technique is to work from a duplicate wet track rather than your
original, unmodified dry track. When you have tweaked your reverb
satisfactorily, mix the wet track together with a copy of the dry track. Keeping an
original, 100 percent dry track means you can make several reverb tracks with
different settings and control the final results in the mix.
You can also edit just a duplicate track, keeping the original for insurance in case
the copy becomes a muddled mess. If you are daring, you can work without a net
and operate on your original. Audacity has nearly unlimited undo, so this isn’t all
that daring, but bad things can happen and then you have extra work.
First select a portion of audio or the whole track. To start from neutral with
Gverb, push all sliders all the way to the left (Figure 11-22), except the Dry
signal level, which should be at zero.

Figure 11-22. Gverb with all the settings at neutral, or no reverb
Now you can try the settings and hear what they do. The most noticeable
changes come from the Early reflection level and Dry signal level settings. Next
give Tail level a go, keeping it at an equal or lesser value than Early reflection
level, and then try changing Reverb time. This is what each setting does:
Roomsize
This is supposed to simulate different room sizes, in square meters, and it
operates mainly on the Early Reflection and Tail Levels. To my ears it
doesn’t seem to do much; your mileage may vary. Other reverb plugins and
gadgets seem to do this better.
Reverb time
This controls the duration of the reverb in seconds, with larger values
giving longer duration.
Damping
The higher the Damping value, the less intense the reverb. This simulates
different room sizes and surfaces, like a small room with hard surfaces
making a bright sound or a large room with absorbent surfaces creating a
softer, darker effect.
Input bandwidth
This is a tone control, with higher values emphasizing higher frequencies
and sounding brighter.

Dry signal level
This controls how much of the original signal is altered; 0 is none, and -70
is all of it. However, even at zero you will still hear some changes. The
overall volume is reduced along with lower dry signal levels, so you may
need to apply normalization after applying your reverb.
Early reflection level
This simulates how sound is reflected off the walls and furniture. Early
reflection is always delayed compared to a dry signal.
Tail level
This controls the intensity of the reverb. If you make this value larger than
the Early reflection level value, it gives an interesting distance affect, as
though you’re listening outside the concert hall.
The Audacity manual suggests a number of prefab settings to try
(http://wiki.audacityteam.org/index.php?title=GVerb), which I have copied here:
The Quick Fix
Roomsize: 40 m2
Reverb time: 4 s
Damping: 0.9
Input bandwidth: 0.75
Dry signal level: 0 dB
Early reflection level: -22 dB
Tail level: -28 dB
Bright, small hall
Roomsize: 50 m2
Reverb time: 1.5 s
Damping: 0.1
Input bandwidth: 0.75
Dry signal level: -1.5 dB
Early reflection level: -10 dB
Tail level: -20 dB
Nice hall effect
Roomsize: 40 m2
Reverb time: 20 s
Damping: 0.50
Input bandwidth: 0.75
Dry signal level: 0 dB
Early reflection level: -10 dB

Tail level: -30 dB
Singing in the Sewer
Roomsize: 6 2
Reverb time: 15 s
Damping: 0.9
Input bandwidth: 0.1
Dry signal level: -10 dB
Early reflection level: -10 dB
Tail level: -10 dB
Last row of the church
Roomsize: 200 m2
Reverb time: 9 s
Damping: 0.7
Input bandwidth: 0.8
Dry signal level: -20 dB
Early reflection level: -15 dB
Tail level: -8 dB
Freeverb is an older reverb plug-in that is a bit simpler to use, and to my ears it
sounds better (Figure 11-23). The Room Size slider has a wide and obvious
range, and there are both Wet and Dry sliders. Width mimics speaker spread.
Check the “Freeze Mode” checkbox to play the preview dry without changing
your Freeverb settings so you can quickly compare it to the modified signal.

Figure 11-23. Freeverb is an another reverb effect.
If Freeverb doesn’t come with your Audacity installation, visit the Freeverb3
home on SourceForge to get both source code and binary files
(http://freeverb3.sourceforge.net/).
Now let’s look at the built-in Audacity Effect plugins.

Amplify
I use the Effect > Amplify effect a lot for both reducing and increasing
amplitude. Don’t check “Allow clipping” or go over zero unless you know you
really want to, because anything greater will be clipped and distorted. An
increase of 3 dB is double, and 1 dB is about the smallest change we can
perceive. Enter a negative value, such as -3 dB, to reduce amplitude. Amplify
can be applied to a selection, a whole track, or a group of tracks.

Auto Duck
This is a great effect for recordings with a background music track, such as a
podcast, because it automatically lowers the volume when the foreground track
cuts in and raises it when the foreground cuts out. In Figure 11-24, we see the
setup: On top is a stereo background music track, and the bottom mono track is a
spoken-voice track. When the voice starts, I want the music volume to decrease,
and when the voice stops, the music should return to its former volume level.
They have to be in this order: the background track on top and the control track
underneath.
Figure 11-24. Using Auto Duck, with your background track on top and your
foreground, or ontrol track, underneath
Select the background track, and click Effect > Auto Duck. You’ll see a control
panel like the one in Figure 11-25, which shows the settings I like to use. These
settings create a fast fade-out and a gradual fade-in. The background track ducks
out of the way fast and gracefully glides slowly back in with just a little bit of
overlap with the voice track.
Duck amount is how much volume reduction you want on the background track.
Maximum pause determines how long the total fade-ins and fade-outs will take.
The Outer fade down length and Outer fade up length values cannot total more
than the Maximum pause value.
The Outer fade down length setting determines how quickly the background
track will fade before the voice on the control track comes back. Anything
outside the two vertical lines in the graph happens when the control track is

below your threshold. The Inner fade down length setting determines how much
overlap there will be with the control track.
The Outer fade up length setting controls how fast the backing track fades back
in when the voice on the control track stops, and the Inner fade up length setting
controls the overlap. A half second of gently rising music over the voice isn’t a
lot; I think it makes a nice bit of a transition. Figure 11-26 shows what these
tracks look like after the Auto Duck effect is applied.
Figure 11-25. Example Auto Duck settings for a fast fade-out and slower fade-in

Figure 11-26. Auto Duck has been applied; compare this to Figure 11-24.
The Threshold setting controls the sound level for triggering the Auto Duck
effect.

Change Pitch
Change Pitch changes the pitch without changing the tempo, so you can adjust
your audio higher or lower in pitch without speeding it up or slowing it down.
I’ve used this on tracks that were a little bit out of tune, and it does a nice job.
The Change Pitch effect will do its best to detect the current frequency and pitch
of your selection, and then you can go up or down from there (Figure 11-27).
There are all kinds of digital tuners for instruments and voice that do this and
even fancy rackmount units that automatically correct the pitch for you.
Figure 11-27. The Change Pitch effect serves up several ways to measure pitch
changes.

Phaser
Using Effect > Phaser splits the signal into two parts (one wet and one dry),
applies your settings to the wet track, and then combines them back into one. Its
primary purpose is to create an oscillating or vibrato effect, and thanks to the
wonder of modern electronics, you can apply a multitude of extra effects to it.
Try it on a recording of your own voice or a plain sine wave to get an idea of
what it can do. The phaser (phase shifter) is a popular effect used in all kinds of
music: to create a soaring effect on electric guitars, to sweeten keyboards, and to
make all kinds of spacey science-fiction noises (Figure 11-28). (A similar effect
is the flanger, which you get when you install the extra plugins from the
Audacity website.)
Figure 11-28. The Phaser effect creates a multitude of fascinating and eerie
sounds, from soaring vocals to space aliens.
The Stages setting determines the number of filters used at one time, from 2 to
24. Higher values create a more complex, layered tone, with multiple
oscillations.
The Dry/Wet balance accepts values from 0 to 255, with 0 being completely dry

and 255 completely wet.
An LFO frequency is a low-frequency oscillation that creates a pulsing rhythm or
vibrato-type effect. In the Phaser dialog, the available LFO Frequency range is
from 1 to 40 Hz, or 1 to 40 pulses per second. Increasing the value of this setting
can have a dramatic effect, depending on the other settings and how it interacts
with them. For example, try setting both LFO Frequency and Depth to their
maximums and see what happens. You know how ripples in a swimming pool
spread out, bounce off the sides, bounce back, and collide with each other?
Sound waves do the same thing, and you can’t always predict the results. It may
help to keep in mind that sound waves are three-dimensional, so they’re all over
the place and not just on a fairly flat plane like water ripples.
Figure 11-29. Phase shift is measured in degrees of a circle.
LFO Start Phase determines the phase shift of your signal, from 0 to 359
degrees. That’s right, just like a circle. The degree of phase shift is most easily
explained by looking at Figure 11-29. A sine wave alternates smoothly between
positive and negative voltage; positive voltage is above the center line, and
negative voltage is below. Where the waveform crosses the center line is the zero
crossing point, because that is the point of zero voltage. The starting point of the
sine wave is zero rising to positive; 180 degrees is at zero crossing into negative.
When it gets back to zero from negative, that is a full 360 degrees.
You might recall from earlier in this chapter how this affects your audio signal:
Two waveforms at a phase shift of 180 degrees from each other cancel each
other out, and varying degrees of phase shift combine to create different sounds,

from a simple echo to weird space alien noises.
You can also illustrate this three-dimensionally with a Slinky. That’s right,
Slinky is more than a toy—Slinky is a physics teaching tool. Slinky is a helix,
and Slinky represents audio phase in three dimensions. Slinky ripples in
longitudinal waves just like sound and in traverse waves that are like the
stretched strings of musical instruments. Slinky illustrates harmonics and
amplitude. Slinky is amazing, and researching “physics of Slinky” will lead you
to all sorts of fascinating knowledge (Figure 11-30).
Depth usually refers to how much the pitch is bent, from 0 to 255, with higher
values producing a more pronounced vibrato effect. However, Audacity’s phaser
seems to bend the amplitude rather than the pitch, which makes a signal that
fades in and out quickly. Crank this up along with the Stages value to get some
neat space alien sounds.
Finally, Feedback is the familiar distortion effect that adds crunch and texture. A
higher percentage equals more distortion. Set the Dry/Wet balance and Feedback
value to the maximum to generate some really weird sci-fi sounds like they used
in old movies.
Figure 11-30. Slinky illustrates many attributes of sound waves. (Image Credit:

Created by Wikipedia user Roger McLassus, released under the GFDL.)

Reverse
Reverse is a simple effect with no options—it turns your audio around backward.
Back in the 1970s when disapproving pruney-lipped people were playing LPs
backward to find the Satanic messages, this would have saved them a lot of
trouble. It was a waste of time anyway, since records with devil messages played
them frontward.

Sliding Time Scale/Pitch Shift
This is a fun new effect that changes tempo or pitch, or both. But that’s not all—
it also has a sliding effect so you can go from slow to fast, lower to higher pitch,
both at the same time, and the reverse. I know, all of these effects have been
done before in the wonderful Looney Tunes and Merrie Melodies cartoons. But
they had to do it the hard way with expensive equipment.
Checking the Dynamic Transient Sharpening checkbox seems to result in a
wider dynamic range with a bit less distortion. Overdoing Sliding Time
Scale/Pitch Shift will create distortion, and it’s a horsepower hog—on old, slow
PCs it will take a long time.

WahWah
Just like the name says, this makes your signal go “wah-wah.” Maybe I’m easily
amused, but exaggerated WahWah effects applied to nice, ordinary music tracks
crack me up every time. On a more serious note, the WahWah effect makes an
instrument sound like a voice. One of the most famous uses of this effect is on
Frampton Comes Alive for the song “Do You Feel Like We Do.” (Admit it, you
still own the vinyl double set and take it out and play it once in a while. Don’t be
embarrassed; it’s a great album, and Mr. Frampton is a fine guitarist.) Another
standout use of WahWah is in Steely Dan’s “Haitian Divorce” on the Royal Scam
album, which gives the lead guitar a sarcastic voice.
WahWah is similar to phase shifting. It uses LFO to set the oscillations per
second, from 0.1 to 4 Hz. That’s right, point one to four, a lot slower than the
Phaser effect.
LFO Start Phase and Depth are just like the settings in the Phaser effect.
Figure 11-31. The WahWah effect makes instruments "talk" and plays tricks with
left-right channel balance.
Resonance accentuates the higher frequencies; 1 is least effect, and 10 is the
most pronounced.

Wah Frequency Offset emphasizes the lower frequencies at lower percentage
settings and emphasizes the higher frequencies at the higher settings. It will
cause clipping if you go too high (Figure 11-31).
The WahWah effect adjusts the phase of the left and right channels on a stereo
track, making the track sound as though it travels back and forth between the
speakers.
Now let’s take a look at finding and managing Audacity plugins in Linux and
Windows.

Linux Plugins
There are two types of Audacity plugins that work in Linux: LADSPA and
Nyquist.

Linux LADSPA Plugins
There are several specialized Linux distributions for multimedia production,
such as 64 Studio, dyne:bolic, Planet CCRMA (which is a special set of
packages for Fedora and CentOS), and Ubuntu Studio. There are two ways to
install LADSPA plugins. One way is to use your Linux package manager. 64
Studio includes a bundle of more than 300 plugins. Debian and Ubuntu break
them out into separate packages. Here are some of the LADSPA plug-in
packages in Debian and Ubuntu:
blepvco (LADSPA anti-aliased, minBLEP-based, hard-sync-capable
oscillator plugins)
blop (Bandlimited wavetable-based oscillator plugins for LADSPA hosts)
caps (C* Audio Plugin Suite)
cmt (Computer Music Toolkit LADSPA plug-in collection)
ladspa-sdk (useful LADPSA tools for users and developers)
swh-plugins (Steve Harris’s LADSPA plugins)
tap-plugins (Tom’s Audio Processing LADSPA plugins)
vamp-examples (audio analysis plugins)
Look in the Sound section of the download repositories to find these. Install
them via your favorite graphical package manager, or use a command-line tool
like aptitude, for example aptitude install blepvco, or whatever package
name you want.
Here are some of the plug-in packages in Planet CCRMA:
ladspa-blop-plugins (Bandlimited wavetable-based oscillator plugins for
LADSPA hosts)
ladspa-swh-plugins (Steve Harris’s LADSPA plugins)
ladspa-cmt-plugins (Computer Music Toolkit LADSPA plug-in collection)
ladspa-mcp-plugins (by Fons Adriaensen; currently contains a phaser, a
chorus, and a moog vcf (voltage controlled filter))
ladspa-fil-plugins (four-band parametric equalizer)
ladspa-rev-plugins (reverb based on gverb, plus new features)
ladspa-tap-plugins (Tom’s Audio Processing LADSPA plug-in)
ladspa-vco-plugins (anti-aliased dirac pulse oscillator)
ladspa, ladspa-devel (useful LADPSA tools for users and developers)

Fedora has a graphical package manager, or you can run yum from the command
line, as in yum install ladspa-blop-plugins.
You can also install individual plugins by simply copying them either to
usrlib/ladspa/, which makes them accessible to all users on your system, or to
your personal home directory, such as homecarla/.ladspa, which means they will
be available only to you. All LADSPA plugins have an .so extension, for
example gong_1424.so.
LADSPA stands for Linux Audio Developer’s Simple Plugin API. This is a
framework for writing universal plugins that work in any Linux audio
application by giving application developers a common, simple, well-
documented application programming interface (API) to support. As a result, a
large number of Linux audio applications support LADSPA plugins: Audacity,
Ardour, ReZound, Rosegarden, GNU Sound, and many others.
There are several popular LADSPA plug-in projects:
Steve Harris’s plugins (http://www.plugin.org.uk/ladspa-swh/docs/ladspa-
swh.html)
Tom’s Audio Processing plugins (TAP) (http://www.tap-
plugins.sourceforge.net/)
CAPS, the C* Audio Plugin Suite (http://www.quitte.de/dsp/caps.html)
Computer Music Toolkit (CMT) (http://www.ladspa.org/cmt/)
Naturally this list shows just a few; there are many more.
LADSPA Version 2 (LV2) is the successor to LADSPA. It is more extensible and
more flexible. The Linux version of Audacity supports LV2 as of version 1.3.6.
Visit http://www.lv2plug.in/ to get current information on LV2 plugins, such as
Steve Harris’s LV2 plugins (http://www.plugin.org.uk/lv2/) and other active LV2
projects.
You can get detailed information on individual LADSPA plugins by installing
the ladspa-sdk package. This is the package you need to learn to write your own
LADSPA plugins, and it also includes some useful commands for getting
information about plugins. listplugins shows all your installed plugins, as this
snippet demonstrates:
$ listplugins
usrlib/ladspa/sine.so:
      Sine Oscillator (Freq:audio, Amp:audio) (1044/sine_faaa)
      Sine Oscillator (Freq:audio, Amp:control) (1045/sine_faac)
      Sine Oscillator (Freq:control, Amp:audio) (1046/sine_fcaa)

      Sine Oscillator (Freq:control, Amp:control) (1047/sine_fcac)
usrlib/ladspa/noise.so:
      White Noise Source (1050/noise_white)
usrlib/ladspa/triangle_1649.so:
      Bandlimited Variable Slope Triangle Oscillator (FASA) (1649/triangle_fasa_oa)
analyseplugin gives detailed information on individual plugins, as in this
abbreviated example:
$ analyseplugin gong_1424.so
Plugin Name: "Gong model"
Plugin Label: "gong"
Plugin Unique ID: 1424
Maker: "Steve Harris <steve@plugin.org.uk>"
Copyright: "GPL"
Must Run Real-Time: No
Has activate() Function: Yes
Has deativate() Function: No
Has run_adding() Function: Yes
Environment: Normal or Hard Real-Time

Linux Nyquist Plugins
Nyquist plugins also work on Linux and have an .ny extension. You can
download some from the Audacity site
(http://www.audacity.sourceforge.net/download/nyquistplugins), and a web
search will find hundreds more. Install these by copying them to
usrshare/audacity/plugins/ for systemwide usage or to $HOME/.audacity-
files/plugins to keep them all to yourself. The Nyquist programming language
(http://www.audacity.sourceforge.net/help/nyquist) is freely available and open
source, so you can write and distribute your own Nyquist plugins to your heart’s
content.

Windows Plugins
Three plug-in types run on Windows: VST, LADSPA, and Nyquist.
Steinberg’s Virtual Studio Technology (VST) is a plug-in standard invented by
Steinberg for its Cubase line of MIDI and audio recording and production
software. Steinberg licenses VST to third-party developers so they can create
VST plugins for any host; consequently, VST is the most widely used plug-in
standard. Audacity comes with a basic set such as Gverb, Tremolo, and Vocal
Remover.
VST plugins have a .dll extension. The Audacity download page
(http://www.audacity.sourceforge.net/download/plugins) has links to more, plus
a directory of VST plugins known to work well with Audacity. Installing these
means simply copying them to \Program Files\Audacity\Plugins.
You’ll also find LADSPA plugins that work in Windows on this page. Nyquist
plugins work in Windows as well; again, just copy them to \Program
Files\Audacity\Plugins.
The Internet is full of audio plugins, and you can use the plugins that come with
other audio production software.

Audio Effects Glossary
Audio effects have their own terminology, so let’s take a look at some of the
more common terms you’re going to encounter with audio plugins.
All-pass filter
A filter that passes all frequencies equally and applies phase shifting.
Reverberation effects use all-pass filters.
Decay
Decay controls how quickly or how slowly a sound fades away.
Delay
This controls the degree of reverberation and how it sounds, whether it’s
just a bright lively touch or an overdone muddy mess. In the olden days,
this was done with tape loops and changing the spacing between the
recording and playback heads on tape recorders. Now all you do is move a
slider or type a numeric value in seconds or fractions of seconds.
Four basic audio waveforms
A waveform is a visual representation of a sound, and the four basic
waveforms that are important to audio are sine, square, sawtooth, and
triangle. Figure 11-32 shows them side-by-side, thanks to Wikimedia. Their
shapes pertain to all sorts of advanced math, which is definitely beyond the
scope of this book and my own tiny math knowledge. These waveforms are
not unique to audio but are used in many disciplines such as math, physics,
electrical engineering, and all different kinds of signal processing.

Figure 11-32. The four basic waveforms
Harmonics
Harmonics can be thought of as overtones, though some textbooks say they
are not the same and then use a boatload of advanced math to show why.
We’ll keep it at the training wheels level: When you play a note on a
musical instrument, that is the fundamental frequency. This note may also
be accompanied by harmonics, which are other notes that are integer
multiples of the fundamental frequency. So, a fundamental frequency of
100Hz can have harmonics of 200 Hz, 300 Hz, 400 Hz, and so on. These
are numbered in order: fundamental frequency, 2, 3, 4, and so on. Square
waveforms contain only odd-numbered harmonics, while sawtooth
waveforms have both even and odd.
One reason to preserve a wide frequency range (which is controlled by the
sampling rate) is to preserve the harmonics, because even if you can’t hear
the full frequency range, you can hear the harmonics. Narrowing the
frequency range loses some harmonics in the range you can hear.
High-pass filter
This passes high frequencies unaltered, while attenuating lower frequencies
that are below the cutoff point. So, you could use this to tone down boomy
bass or unbalanced midrange frequencies.
Low-pass filter

This allows low frequencies to pass unaltered and attenuates higher
frequencies above the cutoff point, which you set. Use this to tone down
recordings where the higher frequencies sound too bright or where there is
noise such as tape or stylus hiss.
Low-pass filters are also used in hi-fi electronics to route low-frequency
sounds to subwoofers or to whatever speakers can handle them.
Reverberation
Reverberation is one of the most commonly applied effects; it tries to
simulate a live sound like we hear in a concert hall or stage show. Reverb is
echo, or sound reflections, that occur too quickly to be perceived
individually. This is what gives a piece of music a “live” sound: When we
attend a live performance, the music is reflected from innumerable surfaces
all around us. A recording studio is usually a deliberately “dead”
environment, so there is no natural reverb. So, reverb is applied to
recordings to enliven them and make them sound more realistic. It is used
in live shows to create a bigger, more spacious sound. You can’t control the
acoustics where you perform, but you can do a lot with your electronics to
overcome bad acoustics and to tailor your sound to simulate different
environments.
Stiffness
This tries to replicate the sound of physical objects at different levels of
stiffness, such as woodwind reeds, cymbals, and gongs.
Wet/dry balance
A dry signal has not yet had any special effects applied to it; an audio signal
becomes wet after effects are applied. Most plugins and hardware special
effects mixers allow only a proportional adjustment; if your wet balance is
45 percent, then your dry balance is 55 percent.

Chapter 12. Fix-its and Cleanups
Audacity has a number of tools for fixing defects and cleaning up recordings. As
I keep saying, your best approach is to make the cleanest recordings you can,
because that is a lot easier than fixing them. There is no TV crime-show magic;
there are limits to what you can do.
However, there is a lot you can do to fix problems, so we’re going to learn how
to do that in this chapter. (If you need a refresher, Chapter 1 covers the basics of
using Audacity, and Chapter 2 goes into building a simple recording studio.

Split Stereo Tracks
Oftentimes only half of a stereo track will have a defect. So, you should split the
track (Split Stereo Track in the Track menu), apply repairs to each track
independently, and then rejoin them with Make Stereo Track from the Track
menu. Then you’ll have the advantage of the good half helping to mask
imperfect repairs.

Repeat Last Effect
Note the Repeat Last Effect (ctrl-R) command at the top of the Effect menu. This
is a fast way to apply the same effect with the same settings over and over. The
Effects menu is a bit inconvenient because the effects go away when you click
OK, so when you need the same effect over and over, it gets a bit tedious to
wade through the whole menu again and again.

Noise Removal
There is no Hollywood magic wand like those used by the TV-crime lab techs
who take a damaged lo-fi recording, clean it up, separate all the different
elements, and magically isolate a voice print of the bad guy from way in the
background ... or match the exact waveform of the engine noise of the getaway
vehicle and identify the make and model, identify the rare custom shoes from the
sound of footsteps, or any of the other fanciful things TV writers come up with.
It just isn’t so. Trying to separate multiple sounds on a single track is like trying
to decompile a mixed drink; once everything is mixed together, there really isn’t
a practical way to separate it again. Noise removal is always a compromise with
its side effects, and that is why recording studios use multitrack recorders in
soundproofed rooms—because getting a clean recording is always better than
trying to clean up a mucky one.
However, sometimes unwanted noises sneak in, and you don’t have the luxury of
redoing the recording. Audacity’s Noise Reduction effect works pretty well
when the noise is distinctly different from what you want to keep and you have a
sample of pure noise to build a noise profile. A common example is the stylus
hiss or turntable rumble from a vinyl record album. These are easy to clean up:
First select a section of just the hiss or rumble, then click Effect > Noise
Removal > Get Profile to create a profile of the noise. Make sure nothing but
noise is selected and make it as long as possible, up to 30 seconds. Even 5-to 10-
second profiles will work, but longer ones are more accurate. When Audacity is
finished building the profile, the Noise Removal panel will disappear.
The next step is to select the track segment you want to fix, select Effect > Noise
Removal, and click OK. It is better to apply Noise Removal as surgically as you
can because it alters your recording. The difference might not be obvious unless
you’re listening for it, but it does make perceptible changes to the parts you want
to keep.
If you don’t like the results, press ctrl-Z to undo, change some settings, and try it
again. The default noise reduction level is -24 dB, which means frequencies
identified as noise are attenuated by -24 dB. If this removes too much of the
recording, set a higher decibel value, such as -20 dB, and try it again. A trick that
often works well to reduce bad side effects is to go back to your noise sample,
decrease its amplitude a few dB, create a new profile, and try again. Chances are
you won’t be able to erase the noise completely because doing so may erase

things you want to keep, but you can lower it to where it’s not so noticeable.
The Frequency Smoothing slider is more surgical at smaller values and affects a
wider range of frequencies as you move the slider right to set larger values. Try
smaller values first, because they’ll affect less of your recording.
The Attack/decay time slider determines how fast the Noise Removal effect
responds to change in the audio signal. For noise that is fairly steady, use a larger
value. If the noise fluctuates rapidly, then use a smaller value for a faster
response time (Figure 12-1).
Figure 12-1. This shows some gentle Noise Removal settings: Frequencies
identified as noise are reduced by 19 dB, frequency smoothing is narrow, and
attack and decay times are moderately slow.

Normalization
The Normalize effect (Effect > Normalize) is the workhorse of many a digital
recording studio, because it is common to record to a peak of -12 dB or lower,
sometimes all the way down to -24 dB. Normalization is usually the last step
before export to bring your recording up to a higher peak volume level. Digital
audio has such a wide dynamic range that you can record to conservative peak
levels to avoid distortion and then later normalize your tracks to bring the peak
levels up to a comfortable playback level.
Normalization is also used to bring multiple tracks up to the same peak volume
level. Do not use Normalize if you want to preserve the relative volume levels of
different tracks. For example, if you have one track that peaks at -6 dB and
another one that peaks at -12 dB and you want to keep the 6 dB spread, don’t use
Normalize; use Amplify. With Amplify you can raise or lower them a set
amount, for example +3 dB, which would raise them to -3 dB and -9 dB,
respectively. But if you want both tracks raised to a peak of -3 dB, then
Normalize is the tool for the job.
Always leave “Remove any DC offset” checked, because DC offset is not
something you want to keep. If there is any DC offset, this indicates that your
mean amplitude is not zero. A little bit of offset is no big deal, but if the offset is
big enough, it will mess up your dynamic range, and it could even cause some
distortion (Figure 12-2).
DC offset is short for DC offset from zero. DC originally meant direct current,
but now it applies to any waveform representing any type of signal. Figure 12-3
shows the before and after: The track on top is the original, unnormalized track
with a bit of DC offset, and the bottom track is normalized and has no DC offset.

Figure 12-2. Always check “Remove any DC offset” and “Normalize maximum
amplitude to” and set a maximum decibel value of zero or less.
Figure 12-3. Before and after: a bit of DC offset on an unnormalized track on
top; corrected DC offset and normalized on the bottom

Remove Clicks and Scratches
Audacity offers a couple of fast ways to clean up a scratchy recording of a vinyl
LP. Digital recordings can also pick up clicks from various sources. The first of
these is Click Removal: It’s not as reliable as manually correcting scratches, but
it’s fast and pretty good.

Click Removal
The Click Removal effect (Figure 12-4) looks for spikes in the waveform that
are typical of pops caused by scratches, deletes the scratch, and then does a bit of
interpolation to reconstruct the waveform. The Select Threshold setting
determines the sensitivity for deciding when a spike is a scratch; it uses an
algorithm that compares the audio on both sides of the spike to figure out what
part is the scratch and what part is the good audio. Its value is the square of the
required ratio between the amplitudes inside and outside the loud section. In
other words, smaller Select Threshold values are more sensitive, and larger
values are less sensitive. Higher sensitivity means it may alter peaks that are not
clicks, and a too-low Select Threshold will miss some clicks. The Max spike
width determines the maximum length of a segment, in milliseconds, that the
Click Removal tool will operate on.
Figure 12-4. The Click Removal effect takes only two settings.

Figure 12-5. Here is a click that is less than 3 ms long.
To get an idea of the Max spike width value to use, first set the Selection Start
value on the Selection toolbar to Length, and set the time parameter to hh:mm:ss
+ milliseconds. Then zoom in on a click in the waveform and select it, and you’ll
have its length in milliseconds. The Max spike width should be large enough to
include some good audio samples on both sides of the click so that it will have
enough good audio to compare to. Figure 12-5 shows a spike that is less than 3
ms long. I usually stick with the default of 20 ms, which gives good results most
of the time.
Loud, obvious scratches are the easiest. The Click Removal effect doesn’t handle
sections of light, crackly static very well; the Noise Removal effect is better for
this. Click Removal is fast and pretty good, but it’s not 100 percent, and it may
mistake percussion effects for scratches.

Repair
Figure 12-6. A brief clipped segment smoothed over with the Repair effect
The Repair effect is my preferred tool for fixing scratches. It has to be applied
manually, one scratch at a time, but it does a great job. Zoom in until you can
precisely select a region no more than 128 samples long, and then select Effect >
Repair. It will delete the selection and then use interpolation to smoothly fill the
gap. It’s a great tool for all kinds of surgical fixes: clicks, scratches, pops, and
short clipped segments. Figure 12-6 shows a before and after repair of a clipped
segment.

Draw Tool
Figure 12-7. Smoothing out a click with the Draw tool
The Draw tool (Tools toolbar) gives you ultimate control of repairs at the sample
level. First zoom in far enough to see the individual audio samples. The cursor
changes to a little pencil, and then you can use it to smooth out the contours of
the defect to make it less noticeable. The sound itself doesn’t change because
you’re just making it quieter, as Figure 12-7 shows.

Truncate Silence
What if you have a long recording that you want to trim by a few minutes,
without losing any audio? Perhaps you have a recording with a lot of silences
you would like to trim. The pauses between songs are too long, your deep
thoughts are interspersed with long pauses, or you have a sound-activated
recording with a lot of dead air. The Truncate Silence effect will automatically
find and shorten those silent intervals.
Don’t use the Truncate Silence effect after you have created fade-ins and fade-
outs, because it will wreck them.
Figure 12-8. These settings for Truncate Silence look for silent passages longer
than 800 ms and then shorten any silence of -40 dB or quieter to 800 ms.
Effect > Truncate Silence has four settings: Min silence duration, Max silence
duration, Silence compression, and Threshold for silence. The simplest way to
use this effect is to set the min and max duration to the same values and adjust
your threshold so that it catches only silent passages. In Figure 12-8, any silent
passages (-40 dB or quieter) greater than 800 ms long will be shortened to 800
ms. (1,000 ms is 1 second.)
Don’t set Max silence duration to zero because it might crash or do some other
unpredictable behavior. The minimum I have found to be reliable is 5 ms, though

some folks push it down to 1. If you want no silences at all, you’ll have to delete
them manually, though to my ears 1 ms is as good as zero.
Threshold for silence tells it what threshold to use to mark where the silent
passages begin. A value of -35 or -40 dB works well when the silent passages are
really silent; when they’re noisy like on an LP, with stylus noise between songs
or turntable hum, you might have to kick it up to -25 dB.
The Silence compression setting configures a ratio, rather than a fixed length of
silence duration, so that your silences will vary in length. You might want to use
this to preserve the natural cadence of a speaking voice or to make a live
performance sound more realistic. Suppose your min duration is 100 ms and
your max duration is 5,000 ms. If you set the silence compression to 4:1, a 10-
second silence will then be reduced to 2 seconds. The results will vary according
to the difference between your max duration and your longest silences. To get a
predictable result, you can use Truncate Silence to shorten the longest silences to
whatever maximum you want and then apply it again using silence compression.

Change Tempo
The Change Tempo effect is a great little fix-it when you’re mixing multiple
tracks and the tempo is off by a small bit on any of them. It changes tempo
without changing the pitch. You can apply it to selections, whole tracks, or
multiple tracks. There are a couple of ways to approach this. One is by trial and
error; just fiddle with the Percent Change setting until it sounds right. Some
folks have great ears and can do this quickly. You can also set the Beats per
Minute (BPM). If your other tracks follow a known BPM, then use this. If you
don’t know the correct BPM, play a minute of a track with the correct tempo and
count the beats. I do this with a stopwatch, and it works great when no one else
is around to bother me and interrupt my counting.
Figure 12-9. Change Tempo gives you three ways to correct the tempo, as well
as a Preview button.
Finally, there is a setting for Length in seconds. If you know exactly how long

your track or selection is supposed to be, this is a fast and easy way to set it right
(Figure 12-9).

Change Pitch
Figure 12-10. Change Pitch alters the pitch without changing tempo.
This changes the pitch without changing the tempo, so it’s a great little fix-it
when a performer is off-key. You can apply it to selections, whole tracks, or
multiple tracks. As you can see in Figure 12-10, it offers several different
settings: You can change keys, for example from A to C, or by semitones (half
steps), exact frequency, or a percent. If you have a good ear, the Percent Change
slider and Preview button are probably fastest.

How do you precisely measure pitch? The Change Pitch effect comes as close as
it can, though you get more accuracy with an electronic tuner.

Change Speed
I’m sure the Change Speed effect has many practical applications, but I always
seem to end up using it for amusement because it changes both tempo and pitch,
just like messing around with turntable speeds. So, you can speed up your audio
to play fast and high, like an over-caffeinated Alvin and the Chipmunks, or low
and slow like Samuel Ramey, the famous bass-baritone opera singer, on
tranquilizers. It supports the standard turntable speeds of 33 1/3, 45, and 78 RPM
and a range of arbitrary speeds controlled by a slider or by typing in a percentage
value (Figure 12-11).
Figure 12-11. Change Speed changes both pitch and tempo.

Compress Dynamic Range
This is a dynamic range compressor, not to be confused with file compression.
Dynamic range compression is commonly thought of as “make the loud bits
quieter and the quiet bits louder.” Most compressors only reduce gain; they
narrow the dynamic range by attenuating the louder parts so that the range
between the soft and loud parts is reduced. It is overused and abused in
commercial recordings, which is a shame because it is a useful effect when it is
used carefully and with good purpose. My preference is to use compression as
little as possible, because I think many “fixes” done with compression are better
worked out during recording, with the Amplify or Normalize effects, or with the
Envelope tool.
You can use compression to improve the balance of recordings by reducing the
dynamic range of tracks that are supposed to be more in the background and not
drawing attention to themselves. Apply some compression to level out changes
in volume and maybe lower their overall volume, and they become good little
supporting players. You can tailor recordings for different playback devices and
environments. You can apply compression to an entire recording or to individual
tracks or parts of tracks.
For example, if you want background music for playing in a noisy environment,
compressing its dynamic range will make it easier to listen to because you’ll
have a more consistent volume level, rather than having unexpected peaks
interspersed with inaudible passages. A podcast with several different people
speaking will benefit from careful volume control and compression, especially
when you’re recording people who are not experienced with talking into
microphones and who don’t speak at a consistent level. For this kind of
recording, you’ll get best results by manually adjusting the amplitude until it’s as
consistent as you can get it (the Envelope tool is great for this) and then applying
some careful compression to the final mix for a last bit of polish. Adjusting
voice tracks can take a fair bit of finessing, because some voices sound louder
even when they’re not. You should also keep in mind how your audience is
likely to listen to your recording—if they’re at work or listening on earbuds or
listening to something designed to soothe them to sleep, be kind and don’t
surprise them with sudden spikes in volume.
Compression can smooth out uneven volume levels caused by an inexperienced
performer or one who is having a bit of an off day. For example, your bass guitar

player is tired and hits some notes too hard and some not hard enough. Or your
singer has bad mic technique and moves around too much, so she fades in and
out. Maybe you have a vocalist or other soloist who needs to stand out from the
mix, so applying a bit of careful compression to their track and then increasing
the amplitude will push them to the front.
Most compressors make your selection quieter, so you may have to use the
Amplify or Normalize effect after applying compression.
Note
Apply dynamic range compression conservatively, because when it is overdone, it can create a bellows
effect, with the volume rising and lowering on a regular beat. Another side effect is raising your noise floor,
because noise becomes relatively louder along with the quieter passages. Yet one more side effect is giving
greater emphasis to background sounds, such as audience noise. Too much compression can introduce
distortion.

How Much Dynamic Range?
So, what is a good dynamic range to aim for when you’re applying dynamic
range compression to a recording? The definitive answer is “It depends.” First
let’s talk about what is possible and what we hear, and then we’ll look at some
examples for various situations.
Human hearing can perceive a range of roughly 120 dB. The maximum real-life
dynamic range in digital audio is about 115 dB. The dynamic range of a CD is
about 96 dB. Vinyl LPs can deliver as much as 60 dB. A live symphony might
encompass 80 dB. A comfortable listening range for most folks is going to be
narrower than that, more like 20 to 30 dB, which is still a nice wide range. What
works for you might take some trial and error. My own rule of thumb is under
ideal listening conditions, at home using my good stereo hi-fi, without
distractions or people talking to me, I’m comfortable with a dynamic range of no
more than 50 dB. And that’s when I’m in the mood for a dramatic opera or
symphony or a raucous live rock show. Most of the time I prefer something a
little quieter.
Sometimes you hear new things in familiar recordings when you narrow the
dynamic range, because this “raises” the quiet parts. (It’s all relative; reducing
the gain on the louder frequencies makes the quieter ones sound louder.) You
might hear feet hitting piano or drum pedals, performers muttering asides, more
nuances in quiet parts—you just don’t know until you try.
You can easily experiment in Audacity to get a feel for different dynamic ranges
by recording a simple test file and then using Effect > Amplify to set different
parts of it at different dB levels. Figure 12-12 shows a simple recording where,
starting at -50 dB, each 10-second segment is 10 dB louder until it reaches the
maximum of 0.
Figure 12-12. A simple dynamic range test: Starting at -50 dB, each 10-second
segment is 10 dB louder.
Modern popular music is typically mashed into a 5 dB or even smaller range, at

peak amplitude or over, which is a horrible thing to do to good music. In many
modern recordings and remastered old recordings, the dynamic range is so
narrow that it’s like pushing everything to the redline. There are no quiet
passages, no nuance, and no contrast; it’s just one loud schmear. It destroys
nuance and flavor. The reasons for doing this are a splendid combination of
simplicity and stupidity—when we hear two recordings at different volume
levels, our initial impression favors the louder one as sounding better. It’s also
used to make a track stand out from the pack when it’s played on radio or TV or
in a public place. But that hardly works anymore since they all do it.
The end result is compressing the life out of a recording. It’s aural junk food—
sure, that first hit of a candy bar or potato chip, or whatever your particular
favorite goody is, is mighty nice. But you can’t live on junk food, and it soon
becomes unsatisfying. It’s the same way with overdone compression; that first
impression might be “the louder one is better!” But after a few minutes of
listening, most folks change their minds and prefer a better-engineered
recording. Even if you’re not consciously aware that a recording has been
butchered beyond hope with compression, you’ll likely experience fatigue and
get tired of listening. A web search on loudness wars will return a lot of
interesting information.
You can see this as well as hear it by ripping a song from a music CD, importing
it into Audacity, and viewing the waveform. Figure 12-13 shows a selection
from Rickie Lee Jones’s “The Magazine”; compare this to any Top 40
contemporary CD. “The Magazine” is a wonderful work that rewards attentive
listening on a good sound system, and you can see in the waveform that it has
not been compressed into a useless tiny dynamic range, nor have all the levels
been maxed out. In fact, it doesn’t come anywhere near the red line. I prefer
recordings made with the assumption that I know what to do with a volume
knob.
Figure 12-13. "The Magazine," by Rickie Lee Jones, was engineered with some
actual dynamic range. Note how the peaks are nowhere near zero, and there is a
fair spread between the quietest and loudest parts of the waveforms.
I won’t give any horrid examples because I’m too chicken to point fingers, but

you can find plenty with a quick web search and probably in your own music
collection. It’s that same old race to the bottom, the familiar battle of quality and
artistry against pandering to the lowest common denominator. In this modern
era, that is lo-fi MP3s played on tiny, lo-fi portable devices and computer
speakers, and loud systems with horrid powered subwoofers that are to music
what hot sauce is to food—a little bit adds punctuation and contrast; a big
whacking overdose kills off all the flavor and enjoyment and turns it into an act
of aggression.
One more horrid example of dynamic range compression abuse is television
commercials. They are supposedly not allowed to be louder than the
programming, but they get around this by having no dynamic range at all but
with everything pushed to the maximum. (I think they are louder, too.)

Compressor Settings
Figure 12-14. Audacity’s Compressor effect is simple, with just a few settings.
That’s enough complaining about the state of the world. Let’s fire up Effect >
Compressor and learn what the different settings do (Figure 12-14). Most times,
using compression is two steps: Apply the Compressor, and then raise the
volume level of the compressed segment back up to where you want it.
This is a simple compressor with only four settings. The pros use expensive
hardware compressors, and Audacity’s Compressor does not quite match these in
ability. But it’s good enough for performing basic compression chores.
The Threshold setting determines the starting point, in decibels, where the audio

signal is attenuated. A threshold of -50 dB means all parts of the signal with an
amplitude of -50 dB and above will be attenuated. This on most recordings will
be everything. Usually you don’t want to compress everything; you get better
results with a light touch and tailoring it for a specific purpose.
The Noise Floor setting holds the gain at a constant level on audio below the
Noise Floor setting. If your track has a lot of quiet sections, this keeps them from
being amplified.
The Ratio setting determines how much compression will be applied. A 4:1 ratio
means an input signal of 4 dB higher than your threshold will be reduced to 1 dB
higher than the threshold. A ratio of infinity brings everything down to the
threshold level. In Audacity’s Compressor effect, the maximum is 10:1. Other
compressors go up to 60:1, which in practice is the same as infinite. The graph in
the Compressor gives you a nice visual of this, showing that low ratios are more
gentle and higher ratios result in greater gain reduction.
Again, my approach is “Less is better.” It’s easy to experiment with this in
Audacity and listen to how your audio quality is affected by different settings. I
use compression sparingly, rarely going over a -20 dB threshold or a 4:1 ratio. If
I’m thinking a recording needs more than that, I stop and think about what it
really needs—some careful adjustments with the Envelope tool? Rerecording?
Attack Time determines how quickly the compressor reaches its maximum
effect, and Decay Time determines how long it takes to phase out the
compression. A too-short Attack Time setting could result in some audible
distortion, and a too-long Decay Time might miss some short peaks. You can get
some different effects with different attack times. For example, a longer Attack
Time setting such as 0.5 seconds will not catch and attenuate a sharp drumbeat,
so this adds some punch. A fast Attack Time dampens percussion and other
sharp peaks. You probably want the fastest Attack Time for vocalists, which is
0.1 seconds, unless you’re trying for some unusual effects.
A slower Decay Time can create a long, almost soaring fade-out. This is a
common technique used to extend a guitar note. Audacity’s Compressor is
medium good at this, and it goes up to 10 seconds. If you’re going for a natural
sound, a fast Decay Time is better. Play around with it to see what it does to
different instruments and vocals. For example, a drum track with a fast Attack
Time setting and a slow Decay Time setting will sound interesting, almost
backward or echoey, because the beats are not allowed to decay naturally but are
held longer at a louder level.

A common side effect of compression is pumping and breathing. This happens
when you select a high Threshold setting and there is a lot of variation in the
track. The fluctuation of the compressor causes the attack/decay to become
audible. Sometimes this is fun to do on purpose.
Sometimes some odd-sounding artifacts will be appended by the Compressor to
the end of your recording. This is a normal by-product of compression, so deal
with it by padding the end of your recording with something you can delete after
applying compression.
“Make-up gain for 0dB after compressing” saves a step if you were going to
normalize to zero anyway.
There is a checkbox for “Compress based on Peaks.” When this box is
unchecked, which is the default, the compressor reduces the gain on sounds
above the threshold level. “Compress based on Peaks” raises the gain on quieter
sounds that are above the threshold level. I don’t think that it sounds very good;
to me, it’s harsh, and the pumping effect is hard to avoid. But then it’s your ears
that have to be pleased, not mine.

Chris's Dynamic Compressor
There is another compressor, Chris’s dynamic compressor
(http://pdf23ds.net/software/dynamic-compressor/), that is tailor-made for
compressing classical music in a pleasing way. I think it works great for all kinds
of audio and better than the stock Audacity Compressor effect.
The author, Chris Capel, was inspired to write this compressor because he often
listened to classical music in noisy environments. After spending a lot of time
fiddling with the volume controls, which wasn’t very rewarding, he decided that
applying some dynamic range compression to his recordings was the solution.
But the compressors he tried didn’t sound good enough, so he wrote his own
Nyquist compressor plug-in for Audacity. Since it is a Nyquist plug-in, it will
work on Linux, Mac, and Windows; just download and copy it to your plugins
directory. It will appear in the Effect menu as “Compress dynamics.” It has good
instructions right on the plug-in itself, as Figure 12-15 shows.
Mr. Capel is continually changing and improving his plug-in, so you can keep up
by visiting his website. Figure 12-15 shows the simple view. There is also an
advanced view that displays all the options, shown in Figure 12-16. To get the
advanced view, open the plug-in file compress.ny and follow the instructions.
This exposes the advanced parameters Attack and Release speed and Attack and
Release exponent. It’s super easy, because all you do is move a few semicolons.

Figure 12-15. The default simple view of Chris’s compressor

Figure 12-16. The advanced view of Chris’s compressor, showing all options
What sets Chris’s compressor apart is that it looks ahead and adjusts the gain in
anticipation of what is coming next. Most compressors do not do this but rather
react to changes in volume, so there is always a bit of lag. Sometimes this results
in a loud peak abruptly reduced or, worse, some distortion. Chris’s compressor
operates more smoothly and handles percussion and other loud transient events
gracefully. It is worth reading the comments on his web page, and he includes
some audio samples. The source file, compress.ny, is a plaintext file and contains
useful information.
Chris’s compressor is a nice piece of work, so let’s review its options.

Compress ratio operates differently from compression ratio settings on most
other compressors. It works two ways: dynamic compression and dynamic
expansion. Values range from -0.50 to +1.25. Negative values make the quiet
frequencies quieter, which is called dynamic expansion. Positive values reduce
the gain on the louder frequencies, which is called dynamic compression.
The default of 0.5 is pretty nice. It preserves a lot of the original dynamic range
and sounds natural. According to some posts in the Audacity forums, 0.77
matches the NPR radio station KPCC Pasadena. So if you want to be like KPCC
Pasadena, now you know how.
Release speed is like the Decay Time setting in the Audacity compressor,
controlling how quickly the compression is phased out. Values are in
milliseconds, so fewer milliseconds equal a faster release speed.
Attack speed is similar to the Attack Time setting in the Audacity compressor,
controlling how quickly the compression is applied, until it reaches its peak
ratio. If your recording has a lot of rapid peaks, you probably want a faster attack
speed to catch them. However, you can add some punch to drumbeats, for one
example, with a slower attack time so that they are not compressed as much.
Generally, music has faster increases in volume than decreases, so to keep pace
with the music, attack times should be faster, and release times should be slower.
The effects of the release and attack speeds are more subtle than their
counterparts in the Audacity compressor and less prone to introducing typical
compression artifacts.
Compression hardness controls how quickly compression is applied and
released. A higher hardness value equals slower attack and release speeds, and a
lower value is a faster, more aggressive attack and release. This appears only in
the simplified view and is like a shortcut for setting the release and attack
speeds, except you can’t adjust them individually.
Floor sets a floor, or noise gate; the default is -32 dB, which means nothing
below -32 dB is changed. Use this setting to define a range of the quieter
frequencies that won’t be changed. You might want to do this if you have a some
low-level background noise you don’t want amplified or you just don’t want the
quieter frequencies altered.
Noise gate falloff takes values from -2 to 10. Positive values reduce the gain on
everything below your Floor setting, and higher values reduce the gain to a
greater degree. Negative values do the opposite and boost frequencies that are
below your Floor setting. I usually leave this at zero so it does nothing, though

occasionally I will use it to boost the lower frequencies a little bit.
Maximum amplitude raises the amplitude after compressing, so you can save a
normalization step. It is not a decibel scale, so it may take a bit of trial and error
to get it right. (I think it’s easier to just apply normalization.)
Attack and Release Exponents take values from 1 to 6, with 1 meaning do
nothing and 6 meaning do the most. What do these do to your recording? They
work in concert with your Attack speed and Release speed settings to control the
responsiveness of the compressor. Mr. Capel advises that the default values of
2.00 and 4.00 should give pleasing results most of the time.
Chris’s Compressor doesn’t remember your last settings after you close Audacity
but instead reverts to the defaults in compress.ny. If you figure out some
different settings that you like better, you can make those the defaults by editing
compress.ny. Here are some settings as they appear in the file:
;control compress-ratio "Compress ratio" real "" .5 -.5 1.25
;control floor "Floor" real "dB" -32 -96 0
The first numbers are the defaults, and the second set of numbers are the
minimum and maximum values. So if you prefer 0.6 as the default for the
Compress ratio and -25 for the Floor setting, change them like this:
;control compress-ratio "Compress ratio" real "" .6 -.5 1.25
;control floor "Floor" real "dB" -25 -96 0

Leveller
Figure 12-17. Here is the Leveller effect at moderate settings: a Moderate
Degree of Leveling, which reduces loud parts and amplifies quiet parts, and a
Threshold for Noise of -20 dB, which is very conservative.
The Leveller effect is a sort of dynamic range compressor that reduces loud
frequencies and amplifies quiet frequencies (Figure 12-17). Careful manual
adjustment of amplitude, compression, and normalization gives better results
than using the Leveller effect. Leveller is simple and fast, but it also introduces
noticeable distortion as you apply higher degrees of leveling. Why use it? It’s
fast and easy. It sounds decent on spoken-word recordings and works best on
ringtones. For ringtones, try a Moderate degree of leveling and a Threshold for
Noise setting of -40 dB. This will flatten the whole waveform nicely, so it will
sound richer and fuller on tiny phone speakers.

Equalization
An equalizer gives you control over amplitude according to the frequency.
Instead of the usual bass-midrange-treble controls we’re all used to, the
Equalization effect is like having nearly infinite tone controls.
Note
The modern trend in tone controls on less-expensive playback devices is to do away with bass-midrange-
treble knobs and replace them with presets like Rock, Classical, Jazz, and Live. I hate these. I want knobs to
twiddle, by dang, not cheapo microchips with a limited set of somebody else’s notions of what sounds good.
The Equalization effect has useful prefab options and many custom tweak
options. It has preset equalization correction curves for old vinyl and acetate
records, such as RCA 1938 and 1947, Columbia LP and 78, Decca, and several
others. Recordings made before 1955 didn’t follow any industry standards; only
then did the RIAA equalization curve become widely used and eventually the
industry standard.
Equalization curves were invented to overcome the physical limitations of vinyl
and acetate recordings, because the lower frequencies occupy more physical
space on the records. Without applying an equalization curve, the recordings
would be very short, and the record would be mostly bass grooves with barely
perceptible treble. To compensate, the lower frequencies are attenuated, and the
higher frequencies are amplified so much that the uncorrected signal sounds
tinny, with hardly any midrange or bass.
Note
When you play a record, you can hear the uncorrected signal by putting your ear close to the stylus.
Your phono gear compensates for this by applying equalization correction,
which is exactly the reverse of the original equalization curve: Lower
frequencies are amplified, and higher frequences are attenuated. This is why
turntables require a special phono preamp. Adopting the RIAA curve
industrywide meant that all phono gear could then apply the same equalization
correction.

For contemporary LPs and 45s, all you need is a standard phono preamp. This is
the phono plug-in on your hi-fi amplifier or computer recording interface. For
older records or for custom tweaks on modern vinyl, you can use a standard
nonphono preamp to get the uncorrected signal and then apply the appropriate
equalization curve using the Equalization effect. Or customize it to suit your own
tastes. Once you have a custom curve tweaked to your satisfaction, use the Save
As button to preserve it.
Try some of the equalization presets to get different effects. For example, some
folks love that old AM radio sound, and now you have an easy way to replicate
it with the amradio curve. Figure 12-18 shows what it looks like, and as you can
see, it must be nostalgia driving the fondness for that old AM radio sound,
because it discards everything outside the 100 Hz to 6,800 Hz range.
Figure 12-18. The AM radio sound, still beloved by many, is a very squished
equalization curve.
The Equalization window opens small, so you might want to lengthen and widen
it to expand the scales and give yourself some working room. The sliders on the
left let you zoom in on the decibel range you want to work in. Figure 12-19
shows the Draw curves view, and Figure 12-20 shows the Graphic EQ view.
Draw curves gives you a dynamic range of 120 dB to play with, while Graphic
EQ is limited to 20 dB. If you mess up and want to start over, click the Flat
button.

Figure 12-19. The Draw curves view of the Equalization effect, with decibel
scale on the left side and frequency scale across the bottom
Figure 12-20. The Graphic EQ view, with sliders like a hardware equalizer
Using Draw curves is similar to using the Envelope tool. Click the blue line to
create a control point, and then drag the control point. Drag it outside the frame
to get rid of it. Control points can move in any direction.

Figure 12-21. You can move the sliders in precise increments with the keyboard,
and hovering the cursor displays the exact values.
The Graphic EQ sliders can be moved in several different ways. You can grab
them with the mouse. You can click above or below the slider knob, and this
moves it first 8 dB and then in 4 dB increments. Using the arrow keys moves it 1
dB at a time, and shift-click moves it 0.1 dB. Hovering the cursor over the knob
shows your precise frequency and dB values (Figure 12-21).
The Linear frequency scale setting, when you’re in the Draw curves view,
changes the scale from the default logarithmic view to linear. Use the
logarithmic view when you want to see the lower frequencies in more detail and
the linear view when you want to see all frequencies represented equally. The
logarithmic view is closer to how we actually perceive sounds.
There are two colored lines in the graph: a thick blue line and a thin green line.
The blue line is the one that you manipulate, and the green line shows the actual
equalization curve. If they diverge, that is because you are trying to make your
curve too steep. Either adjust your curve or try a larger length of filter. This
controls the number of samples that Audacity operates on at a time. The default
value of 4,001 should work fine most of the time. A smaller value produces a

smoother curve and might sound better, though you’ll need good ears and good
gear to hear the difference.
You can go over 0 well into the +dB range, and this is okay because it’s not the
same scale as in the track waveforms. It shows how many decibels of gain
you’re applying (or attenuation). The RIAA curve applies nearly 19 dB of gain
to the 20 to 40 Hz range, for example, with no ill effects. But you must still be
careful to not create distortion by going too high, and only trial and error will
show you where this is on a particular recording. Click View > Show Clipping
in the track you’re working on to quickly see whether you overdid it, because
this will mark any clipping with red bars.

Fix Timing and Latency Errors
When you use the Time Shift tool, it’s easy for tracks to become
unsynchronized. Suppose your tracks are all over the place and you want to reset
all them to start at zero. Select all the tracks, and then select Tracks > Align
Tracks > Align Tracks Together. Then select Tracks > Align Tracks > Align
With Zero. You could also select Tracks > Align Tracks > Align With Cursor
to line them up at any arbitrary point.
This won’t work if you have Link Tracks activated, which is indicated by a
depressed Link Tracks button. Link Tracks may not be present in your version of
Audacity; see the table of toolbuttons in Chapter 1 to learn more.
The Time Shift tool is a fast and easy way to move a track or a clip forward or
backward in time. Simply click the Time Shift button in the Tools toolbar, and
the cursor changes to a double horizontal arrow; drag your tracks or clips right or
left. You can also drag clips to other tracks.
Another way to move a track or clip a precise amount is to prepend it with
silence. Click at the point you want the silence to start, select Generate >
Silence; enter the duration in seconds, milliseconds, samples, or frames; and
then click OK. This will push the track to the right, which is like moving it
backward in time.
When you are overdubbing, latency is always a problem. Audacity automatically
time-shifts overdubbed tracks to compensate for latency. The default latency
correction value is -130 ms, which probably is not correct for your system. You
can adjust the latency correction value in the Edit > Preferences > Recording >
Latency correction dialog.
How do you know the right latency correction value to use? One way is trial and
error. A more precise method is to use a loopback cable. You need a cable to
connect your playback output to your recording input. On an internal sound card,
this is easy—line out to record in. For other recording interfaces, such as USB or
FireWire, you’ll have to find the correct type of cable and sort out your outputs
and inputs.
Then set Latency Correction to 0. Make sure that the “Snap To” checkbox on the
Selection toolbar is not checked. Select the Length radio button on the Selection
toolbar and set the time parameter to hh:mm:ss + milliseconds.

Next, generate a metronome track 60 seconds long, 180 beats per second.
Then in the Transport menu, check the “Overdub” checkbox, select your
recording interface for both the playback and recording devices on the Device
toolbar, and press the Record button. You should see something like Figure 12-
22.
When you’re finished recording, zoom in until you can select the gap between a
click on the top track and the its corresponding delayed click on the bottom
track. If you’re not comfortable using the mouse, use the shift and arrow keys to
mark the selection. (Use the arrow keys to move back and forth and up and
down, and use shift and the arrow keys to select.) You will see something like
Figure 12-23. This shows a latency of 177 ms, which is a lot.
Figure 12-22. Generating a loopback overdub to make a good latency correction
measurement

Figure 12-23. Measuring the latency between the two clicks on the click tracks
If you change your recording interface, you should repeat the latency tests,
because different devices have different latencies.

Analyze Menu
The Analyze menu contains tools for analyzing your audio. I’ll go over two of
them that I think are fairly useful, Plot Spectrum and Silence Finder.
Plot Spectrum makes a nice colored graph showing the amplitudes of different
frequencies. It has all kinds of different algorithms and functions to choose from.
I ignore most of these and use a Hanning window, Spectrum algorithm, and 512
or 1024 Size. A smaller Size value shows more details. The option that is
meaningful to me is Axis. Axis offers the standard choices of Logarithmic or
Linear view. When I use Plot Spectrum, I’m looking for obvious indicators, not
molecule-sized differences.
One handy use of Plot Spectrum is to measure your ambient noise. You can get
an idea of your ambient noise level with the Input Level Meter in the main
Audacity window, but Plot Spectrum gives you a lot more information. Set up
your mics as usual, and then select Transport > Timer Record to record a 20-
second sample. Plot Spectrum analyzes only 23.8 seconds at a time, so you could
even set the timer to record 23.8 seconds. Figure 12-24 shows a graph of an
ambient noise recording; hovering the cursor over any point shows the exact
frequency, the note, and the decibels both at the cursor and at the nearest peak,
which are displayed under the frequency scale.
Figure 12-24. This Plot Spectrum of ambient noise shows the background noise
covers a wide frequency range from 43 Hz to 22,000 Hz, from -32 dB to -82 dB,
with the lowest frequencies being the loudest.

The peaks in Figure 12-24 indicate some kind of regular noise, and note how the
loudest parts are in the lowest frequencies. Remember, this measures amplitude
per frequency, not time, so don’t read this like a waveform. It’s showing you
which frequencies are the loudest. Since the lowest frequencies are the loudest, I
can switch to Logarithmic view to get a more detailed look at the lower
frequencies (Figure 12-25).
Figure 12-25. Logarithmic view shows the lower frequencies in more detail.
Anything over -40 dB is probably going to be noticeable in a recording, and now
I know to look for the source of low-frequency noises. That turned out to be the
subwoofer of the living room hi-fi. A pretty good level to aim for is -50 dB, and
-60 dB guarantees that no background noises will be audible on your recordings.
Another good use for Plot Spectrum is to get a more precise idea of the dynamic
range of a recording that you are going to apply compression to. Take readings
of several of your highest peaks and lowest lows, and then you’ll have some
actual numbers to help you figure out what threshold to use. A good starting
point is to split the difference: If your highest peak is -5 dB and your lowest is
-35 dB, try a Threshold setting of -20 dB. Your own ears will tell you what
works; this just gives you a reasonable place to start.
It can be helpful to generate sine waves at different frequencies just to get the
hang of reading the Plot Spectrum graphs and to try the different algorithms and
windows. Figure 12-26 shows what a 8,000 Hz sine wave at 0.8 amplitude looks
like.

Figure 12-26. This “pure” 8,000 Hz sine tone actually includes frequencies from
6,000 to 10,000 Hz, and the frequency range narrows as amplitude increases.
As you can see, our “pure” tone isn’t all that pure, with frequencies ranging from
6,000 Hz to 10,000 Hz. The frequency range narrows as amplitude increases,
from 7,500 to 8,500 at -48 dB to 7,800 to 8,100 Hz at 0 db.
Silence Finder might be useful when you have a lot of songs on a single track
and want to find the song breaks and create labels at the breaks automatically.
Then you can select Export > Multiple to break up the track into individual
songs. If you want to use the song names for labels, you will still have to type
them yourself. It doesn’t work very well if the silences are not clean and well
defined. For example, Silence Finder would be a handy time-saver when you are
converting vinyl LPs to CDs, but vinyl records often have enough noise in the
song breaks to confuse it.
You can use Plot Spectrum to get an idea of the volume level in the song breaks
and then set the Treat audio below this level as silence value with less trial and
error. There is a funny little gotcha with this: Don’t enter a minus sign, because
that seems to be applied automatically (Figure 12-27).

Figure 12-27. Some example settings for the Silence Finder

Chapter 13. Configuring Linux for Best Audio
Quality
Linux audio is rather messy yet powerful. This chapter is a guide to getting
everything working correctly for high-end audio production. Linux is a
wonderful multimedia platform: It is stable, it is flexible, and if you use a
lightweight graphical environment, you’ll get better performance out of modest
hardware. Although Linux audio has some rough edges, it is advancing rapidly,
and it has its own universe of sophisticated audio software.
You can use whatever Linux distribution you want, because you can customize
any Linux distribution to serve as your recording studio, depending on what
hoops you’re willing to jump through. The most important things you need,
aside from Audacity and other audio software applications, are a real-time
preemptible kernel for lowest latency and a few system configuration tweaks.
You can configure and tune your favorite Linux distribution, or you can use one
of specialized Linux distributions for multimedia production that takes care of
the details for you.
I used Ubuntu while writing this book because it was the first distribution to
bundle the FFADO drivers for FireWire recording interfaces. (I have the
excellent Focusrite Saffire Pro 26 I/O for multichannel recording.) FireWire
recording interfaces are great performers, but they present some special driver
problems, so if you don’t have one, don’t worry about finding a distribution that
includes FFADO. You can always add it later anyway.
Note
The most important step is careful selection of your audio interface. Choose one that is well-supported on
Linux. Life is too short to waste on something that doesn’t want to work right. Visit the ALSA Sound Card

Matrix (http://www.alsa-project.org/main/index.php/Matrix:Main) to find supported sound cards. Also
check out Appendix A for hardware information.

Using Distributions with Real-Time Kernels
If your particular Linux distribution packages a real-time kernel, that takes care
of the biggest hurdle. What is a real-time kernel? This is a kernel where real-
time scheduling and real-time preemption are configured to favor audio
recording for the lowest possible latency. Latency is inherent in computers
because modern CPUs use preemptive multitasking; they perform one task at a
time but switch back and forth between tasks so rapidly that they appear to be
performing multiple tasks at once. Multicore CPUs smooth out this switching,
but they still need help from the Linux kernel.
Because the Linux kernel continues to develop at warp speed, some folks are
saying that a special real-time kernel really isn’t necessary anymore because
real-time features are integrated into the mainline kernel. You can get by without
one if you strip your Linux system down to the essentials needed for audio
production and use a modern multicore PC, gigabytes of RAM, and fast hard
drives. I’ll stick with real-time kernels for now, because they behave a little
differently from general-purpose kernels.
Realtime preemption controls how tasks interrupt each other to get the CPU time
they need. It’s like a classroom of kids trying to get the teacher’s attention, and
the teacher can deal with only one at a time. A multicore CPU is like having
more teachers. Interrupts are typically milliseconds in duration, which doesn’t
matter when we’re typing a letter or editing a photograph but is enough to
introduce defects into a recording. So, we can configure Linux to give the
highest scheduling priority to audio functions.
There are latencies inherent in the inner workings of the kernel itself, which in
modern kernels have become very small. So, it is possible to tune a Linux kernel
for very low-latency audio recording, down to less than 10 milliseconds.
Anything less than 20 is excellent.
Fedora and CentOS users should use Planet CCRMA packages
(http://ccrma.stanford.edu/planetccrma/software/planetccrma.html). Planet
CCRMA (pronounced “karma”) is a special collection of RPMs for Fedora and
CentOS that includes a real-time kernel, all kinds of audio software, and up-to-
date audio drivers. Just add the Planet CCRMA repositories to your system and
then use Yum to install, update, and remove packages the usual way.
Arch Linux is a superior audio production platform, and it has its own special

audio repository, ArchAudio. Red Hat, Mandriva, and openSUSE all package
real-time kernels.
Ubuntu (and Kubuntu, Xubuntu, and all the rest of the family) provides a real-
time kernel and related kernel modules; the bare minimum you need to get
started with Audacity are these packages:
audacity
linux-rt
Once you have an rt kernel installed, add all human users who are going to be
using Audacity to the audio group (in the etcgroup file). Then add these lines to
etcsecurity/limits.conf:
@audio - rtprio 99
@audio - memlock 3000000
The first line gives all members of the audio group the highest scheduling
priority. The second value controls how memory is used.
rtprio (real-time priority) values range from 0 to 99, with 99 being the
most favorable priority. This is the very front of the line.
memlock determines how much RAM the audio group locks up for itself, in
kilobytes, and prevents it from writing to the much slower swap file. My
system has 4GB RAM, so I set a limit of 3GB, or 3,000,000KB. Some how-
tos say to set this to unlimited. This is a bit controversial, because it seems
like common sense to leave some for system processes and nonaudio
applications. A value of unlimited could also result in out-of-memory errors
and interrupt your audio session. Some users report that setting any
memlock value makes no difference.
Many how-tos also say to add one more line: @audio - nice -19. This isn’t
necessary because the rtprio function takes care of scheduling priority. It doesn’t
hurt anything to try it for yourself.
Then reboot to your new kernel. Note that if you are already running your rt
kernel, all you need to do to activate your new group membership and changes
to limits.conf is to log out and then log back in. Then verify your audio group
membership:
$ groups
carla adm disk dialout cdrom audio plugdev lpadmin admin

Verify that your rt kernel is running:
$ uname -r
2.6.32-24-rt
The rt tells you this is a real-time kernel; this example is from Ubuntu 10.04.
You should also keep a stock kernel installed. Using a different kernel is as easy
as rebooting and choosing it from your boot menu. It will also help with
troubleshooting, because you can try tasks that are giving you problems with
different kernels to see whether they behave differently.

Specialized Multimedia Linux Distributions
There are several complete Linux distributions that are customized for audio and
multimedia production. Some of them run from a CD, DVD, or USB stick, with
a hard drive installation option. You should still verify audio group membership,
etcsecurity/limits.conf settings, and a real-time kernel like we talked about in the
previous section.
Here is a sampling of specialized multimedia Linux distributions:
64 Studio (http://www.64studio.com/)
Ubuntu Studio (http://www.ubuntustudio.org/)
dyne:bolic (http://www.dynebolic.org/)
pure:dyne (http://www.puredyne.org/)
Musix (http://www.musix.org.ar/en/)
64 Studio
64 Studio is a Debian-based distribution for all digital content creation, and it
includes a huge assortment of audio, video, graphics, and publishing software. It
supports both 32-and 64-bit architectures and runs on a wide range of PC
hardware. The maintainers aim for stability rather than bleeding edge, so they
issue updates conservatively. 64 Studio also builds and supports products such as
the Trinity Indamixx digital audio workstation and the Lionstracs Mediastation.
Ubuntu Studio
Ubuntu Studio is akin to 64 Studio in having nearly every Linux multimedia
application there is, except that it is based on Ubuntu, which in turn is derived
from Debian. Ubuntu is more than warmed-over Debian; the Ubuntu
development teams maintain its own patches and customizations. Ubuntu Studio
uses more up-to-date packages than 64 Studio, so you get newer software
releases and perhaps newer bugs. As with all things Ubuntu, there is a large and
enthusiastic user base and good community support.
You can also add Ubuntu Studio packages to a regular Ubuntu system. Run $
apt-cache search ubuntustudio to see your options. The ubuntustudio-audio
and ubuntustudio-audio-plugins metapackages should give you everything you

need for audio production, with one important exception: The linux-rt kernel is
not included, so you will have to install it separately.
dyne:bolic
dyne:bolic is a unique software project. dyne:bolic is not based on any other
Linux distribution but is built from scratch from source code. That’s just the
beginning—dyne:bolic operates in its own creative ways. It uses only Free
software as defined by the Free Software Foundation. This is good news for
users who want a system unencumbered by proprietary software. It runs from a
CD and is optimized both for speed and low hardware requirements, requiring at
a minimum a Pentium II 400 MHz computer or an Xbox game console. You can
use it with either a Linux or Windows PC, you can save your data to a USB stick
or local hard drive, and it has a hard drive installation option. Customization is
not as simple as using Yum or Apt to install new software packages because you
have to build a new CD image. It comes with good documentation and a friendly
user community.
dyne:bolic is Rasta (http://www.rastasoft.org/) software. Jaromil, the main
dyne:bolic developer, says this:
But remember there is no Peace without Justice. This software is about Resistance in a babylon world
which tries to control more and more the way we communicate and we share informations and
knowledge. This software is for all those who cannot afford to have the latest expensive hardware to
speak out their words of consciousness and good will. This software has a full range of applications for
the production and not only the fruition of information, it’s a full multimedia studio and has nothing to
envy to other proprietary systems, because freedom and share of knowledge are solid principles for
evolution and that’s where this software comes from.
pure:dyne
pure:dyne was initially based on dyne:bolic but has evolved into a blend of
Ubuntu and Debian. It runs from CD, DVD, USB stick, or a hard drive
installation. It is more up-to-date than dyne:bolic and is optimized for modern
i686 processors, though it will also run on older hardware. It is designed to be
user-customizable and comes with tools to create customized images.
Musix
Musix is Debian based, for 32-bit systems. It comes on a live CD or live DVD,
and it also has a hard drive installation option. Musix is also a 100 percent free
operating system. It provides a lightweight desktop environment based on

IceWM and the wonderful Rox filer, so it is suitable for modest hardware.

Building a Real-Time Kernel
If you don’t want to use a multimedia Linux distribution and your favorite distro
does not package a real-time kernel, you can build your own. A complete kernel-
building how-to would be a whole chapter by itself, so I’m not going to try to
stuff one into this chapter. You can easily find good how-tos; look for
instructions specific to your distribution.
You’ll need a proper build environment installed, kernel sources, and a copy of
the configuration file for your current kernel. Once those are in place, you need
the rt patch, which you can get from the mothership of the Linux kernel,
http://www.kernel.org/. Go to the rt wiki at
(http://rt.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Main_Page), and look for the
“CONFIG_PREEMPT_RT Patch” download. It must have the same version
number as your kernel sources. Once you have that, apply it to your kernel
sources.
In your kernel makefile, set EXTRAVERSION equal to a value that tells you this is a
real-time kernel, such as EXTRAVERSION = -rt. Then if your kernel version is
2.6.33.1, for example, your new kernel name will be linux-2.6.33.1-rt.
Now you are ready to configure your new kernel. Start with your existing kernel
configuration and run the make oldconfig command; you don’t need to start
from scratch just to enable real-time preemption. Review your kernel
configuration and enable Processor type and features > Preemption Mode
(Complete Preemption (Real-Time)), and Processor type and features > Timer
frequency (1000 Hz).
Then finish configuration, and compile and install your new kernel. That should
be all there is to it, but review the rt wiki to make sure, because Linux kernel
development is a fast-moving target. Keep your old stock kernel installed as
well. You can have as many kernels as you want on your system, and if anything
goes wrong, you’ll have a good kernel to boot to.

Latency Is Not That Scary
Latency is not the great bugaboo that it is sometimes made out to be. One way to
handle latency is to throw horsepower at it. A modern multicore CPU, gigabytes
of RAM, and fast hard drives can make latency almost disappear.
If that is not an option, it helps to understand when latency really is a problem
and when it isn’t. It matters when you are overdubbing. And even here Audacity
helps with that, because it has a configurable latency correction in the Edit >
Preferences > Recording dialog. (See Chapter 12 to learn how to measure and
correct for latency.) It matters when you are playing a software synthesizer or
playing any instrument through special effects plugins on your computer: When
you press a key or strum a string, you want music to come out, not lag. It matters
when you are monitoring a recording session, because you don’t want what you
hear to be out of sync.
In the Edit > Preferences > Recording dialog, there is a setting that affects
latency called “Audio to buffer.” Smaller buffers equal lower latency, but if they
are too small for your CPU to handle, you’ll get dropouts.
Latency doesn’t matter so much during mixing or during multichannel recording
where everything is plugged into a good recording interface that has a direct path
to Audacity with no detours. It is more important to have a stable setup that
doesn’t crash in the middle of a recording session. If you can live with higher
latencies in exchange for stability, that is a good trade. It’s no good pushing
latency levels down to the point of instability.
Interrupts are less of a problem when you run a clean system with everything
turned off except what you need for audio production. (See Linux System
Tweaks in Linux System Tweaks.)
JACK, the Jack Audio Connection Kit, has its own configuration options for
latency and buffer size, which you can read all about in Using JACK with
Audacity in Using JACK with Audacity.

Sorting Out Linux Audio
In this book we use Audacity with ALSA and JACK. No PulseAudio, OSS, aRts,
ESD, or whatever else might be lurking in the weeds.
The Linux audio landscape has been complicated for some years, with multiple
subsystems and overlapping functionality, and now it is going through some
significant changes. There is not a single Linux audio API that developers can
target, but rather they must deal with a herd of audio servers and subsystems: the
Open Sound System (OSS), the Advanced Linux Sound Architecture (ALSA),
the Enlightened Sound Daemon (ESD) on Gnome, the analog Real time
synthesizer (aRts) for KDE2/3, Phonon for KDE4, PulseAudio, and the JACK
Audio Connection Kit.
ESD and aRts are entering retirement, so that thins the herd a bit, leaving
PulseAudio (which runs on any Unix-type operating system), Phonon (KDE4)
for controlling playback, and JACK for professional audio production. ALSA
provides a common driver base for all of these that interacts directly with audio
hardware, and it also provides a useful set of user tools, such as a mixer, device
discovery, a simple player and recorder, and a speaker tester. PulseAudio is
finding its way into many Linux distributions, such as Ubuntu and Fedora, and it
looks like it will become the dominant desktop audio server.
PulseAudio is a sound daemon, while Phonon is a multimedia API supporting
multiple audio frameworks, including PulseAudio. PulseAudio and Phonon
provide playback mixers and routers and networked sound. Many Linux
applications do not have audio device choosers. For example, the Firefox web
browser only uses the default audio device. PulseAudio and Phonon let you
control which audio device Firefox uses. I prefer to turn PulseAudio off when
I’m using Audacity; Turning PulseAudio and Phonon Off in Turning PulseAudio
and Phonon Off tells you how to do this.
What about OSS? Some folks prefer it, and you’re welcome to give it a try.
ALSA is better supported in Linux, and it includes OSS emulation for
applications that want OSS.
Note
The Adobe Flash Player music player is buggy and unreliable. For example, Pandora Radio, the wonderful

online music broadcaster, relies entirely on Flash. It is a great service, and I am happy to be a paid
subscriber. But Flash Player is an ongoing source of trouble. It loses its connection to the audio system
periodically, and it doesn’t like changes in device routing, such as when changing from computer speakers
to an external sound system. When it flakes out, it takes a either a browser refresh or a restart to get it going
again. If you need an audio source for testing, you should look for something else.
JACK is a professional-quality, low-latency (meaning it adds no latency to your
sound chain) sound server for connecting audio hardware to audio production
software. JACK does not run standalone but requires alsa-base. JACK supports
multiple audio backends: OSS; FFADO (formerly Freebob) for using FireWire
recording interfaces on Linux; PortAudio, which is a simple cross-platform
audio API; and CoreAudio, the Mac OS X audio API. Audacity uses PortAudio.
Let’s clear up some common confusions regarding PulseAudio and JACK. They
address two different types of usage: PulseAudio is a device chooser and audio
stream router for playback and recording, while JACK is an audio router for
high-end audio production. JACK lets you route the output of multiple audio
applications pretty much any way you want, so you can combine different synths
and capture audio streams in various ways for recording. Pulse is CPU-intensive
and creates too much latency for overdubbing and other latency-sensitive tasks,
though both issues are improving as Pulse matures. It works fine for making
simple recordings, and Audacity and JACK both support Pulse. You need the
pulseaudio-module-jack plug-in for JACK support, which should be in your
distro repositories.
When do you use JACK? You don’t need it when your recording interface
handles all the connections you need for your recording session. If everything
plugs into a single recording interface, just point Audacity to it, and you’re good
to go. Though even here JACK can help by giving you flexible routing options,
letting you mix the audio streams in different ways and making performance
adjustments.
You need JACK when you are using a FireWire recording interface. You need it
when you want to incorporate software audio applications into your Audacity
recording session. (JACK has great MIDI support, though Audacity does not
support MIDI.) A simple example that we’ll go into in detail (in Using JACK
with Audacity in Using JACK with Audacity) is adding the excellent Hydrogen
software drum machine to an Audacity recording session. If you want to use
Hydrogen to create a drum track in Audacity, you need JACK to connect the
two.

Using ALSA
ALSA has two parts: the low-level base that supplies sound card drivers and
interacts directly with audio hardware and a higher-level interface that contains
the userland tools. alsa-base and its dependencies should already be present, but
you may need to install alsa-utils to get the userland tools. alsa-utils gives you
alsamixer, aplay, speaker-test, arecord, and number of sound files for
testing your speakers.
Open a terminal and type in alsamixer to open the mixer console, shown in
Figure 13-1. ALSA runs in the console via an ncurses interface, which means it
is completely keyboard controlled and does not require an X server. The top-left
caption tells you a lot of useful information: your sound card and chipset, which
set of functions you’re viewing, and the values for the highlighted setting. Use
the arrow keys to navigate back and forth. There are three views: Playback,
Capture, and All. Press the tab key to toggle between them. Pressing the esc key
closes alsamixer.
Figure 13-1. Using alsamixer to configure onboard surround sound. On my
system, all of the modules must be active—Surround, Center, LFE, and Side—
for stereo sound to work, even though their volume controls have no effect.
Press the F2 key to see detailed information on all your detected audio devices,
as in Figure 13-2. Note that they are numbered from zero. Use the arrow keys to
scroll up and down, and press the return key to close the information window.

Figure 13-2. alsamixer queries the /proc filesystem to show detailed
information on your audio devices.
Figure 13-3 shows the Playback configuration screen.
Figure 13-3. The alsamixer playback screen controls muting and volume on
playback devices.

Setting Recording and Playback Levels in alsamixer
alsamixer only displays functions that your sound card is capable of
performing. Here are the basic alsamixer commands:
The little boxes with MM in the playback menu mean those functions are
muted, or disabled. Toggle the M key to mute/unmute, and the MM turns to
00.
00 means zero volume, so use the up-and down-arrow keys to adjust it.
page up increases volume by 5, page down decreases volume by 5, and end
sets the volume to 0.
When there are two channels on one slider, you can adjust each one
independently. Q increases the left channel, and Z decreases it. E increases
the right channel, and C decreases it.
In the Capture screen, press the spacebar to select the active recording
(Capture) device. There may be more than two options, so press it several
times to see what your choices are.
Press the F1 key to see a Help menu. F2 displays your /proc information,
which shows you what is actually detected and working, as well as device
addresses.
Sometimes you will experience static or too-low volume that is caused by having
unnecessary functions enabled. For example, the Playback screen for my ATI
onboard sound shows a front mic volume control. When this is enabled, it causes
static. When I’m using headphones, the Headphone control needs to be turned
on, but changing the volume level has little effect, and I need to use both the
Master and PCM volume controls. The Master volume control is not needed for
the speakers, but the Headphone control is. Trial and error is about the only way
to figure these things out, and lower-end sound cards are more troublesome and
quirky than the better-quality ones.

Master vs. PCM
There is often confusion over Master and PCM playback settings. You usually
need both Master and PCM to enable playback, though sometimes only the PCM
slider has any effect. If the Master slider has no effect, this means either there is
no hardware volume control built into your sound card or your sound card driver
is lacking this functionality. Master is the master volume control, and PCM
stands for pulse code modulation. Remember Audio File Formats and Quality
Settings in Final Mixdown, where we learned about converting analog signals to
digital representations? ALSA’s definition of PCM sorts it out for us:
Although abbreviation PCM stands for “pulse code modulation,” we are understanding it as general
digital audio processing with volume samples generated in continuous time periods.
So think of ALSA’s PCM channel as a virtual sound card.

Multiple Sound Cards
If you have more than one audio interface, alsamixer numbers them from zero.
For example, I have both onboard sound and the M-Audio MobilePre connected
to a USB port. The MobilePre is #1, so to control it, I need to open alsamixer
with this command:
$ alsamixer -c1
-c1 means “card number 1.” How do you know what your card numbers are?
One way is to query /proc:
$ cat procasound/cards
0 SB             : HDA-Intel - HDA ATI SB
                     HDA ATI SB at 0xf9ff4000 irq 16
1 MobilePre      : USB-Audio - MobilePre
                     M Audio MobilePre at usb-0000:00:12.1-1, full speed
Another way is to press F2 in alsamixer (Figure 13-2).

Adjusting Volume Levels
When you’re adjusting recording and playback settings in Audacity, you can
have alsamixer open at the same time, as Figure 13-4 shows. It’s a fast way to
tweak volume settings and to find out what the alsamixer settings actually
control. In this example, a bit of trial and error showed me that the Mic Boost
and the first Capture slider controlled the microphone recording volume and that
this sound card has a real stereo microphone input with two channels.
(Remember, the Q and Z keys raise and lower the volume on the left channel,
and E and C control the right channel.)
Figure 13-4. The alsamixer Capture window controls device selection and
volume on recording devices. Here it is tiled with Audacity for controlling the
recording volume level.
Even in a simple setup like this, there are multiple recording level controls, both
in ALSA and Audacity. Keep alsamixer open for adjustments during recording.

Note
If you need a good excuse to splurge on a dual-monitor setup, audio production is a great reason. You can
have Audacity, JACK, and alsamixer on one screen and your other audio applications (like Hydrogen, other
synths, special effects) on the second screen. Nice and tidy, and you don’t have to keep moving things out
of the way.

Hardware Testing with alsa-utils
alsa-utils includes some good commands to help you troubleshoot and test your
hardware. Keep alsamixer open to the sound card you are testing so you can
quickly try different settings. The most common cause of no sound is because it
is muted in alsamixer.
Note
If you are running the JACK audio server, turn it off for these tests because these commands may not work
when JACK is running. It is best to keep tests as simple as possible in any case.
This is a quick and annoying way to verify that your default sound card and
speakers work. It should generate some white noise:
$ cat devurandom > devdsp
ctrl-C stops it. A nicer way is to use aplay to play a WAV file of your choosing,
like this:
$ aplay -t wav violin-summit.wav
-t means “file type,” and your choices are voc, wav, raw, and au. wav is the
default.
To see the PCM structure and a nice ASCII VU (volume units) meter, try this:
$ aplay -vv -t wav -V stereo violin-summit.wav
Playing WAVE 'violin-summit.wav' : Signed 16 bit Little Endian, Rate 44100 Hz, Stereo
Plug PCM: Soft volume PCM
Control: PCM Playback Volume
min_dB: -51
max_dB: 0
resolution: 256
Its setup is:
 stream : PLAYBACK
 access : RW_INTERLEAVED
 format : S16_LE
 subformat : STD
 channels : 2
 rate : 44100
 exact rate : 44100 (44100/1)
 msbits : 16
 buffer_size : 16384
 period_size : 4096
 period_time : 92879
 tstamp_mode : NONE
 period_step : 1
 avail_min : 4096
 period_event : 0
 start_threshold : 16384
 stop_threshold : 16384

 silence_threshold: 0
 silence_size : 0
 boundary : 4611686018427387904
       +############### 46%|48%################+
-V stereo means “display stereo VU meter,” which is represented by the hash
marks. These represent the RMS volume levels (root mean square, or average
volume over time), and the percentage values are the peaks. You can see that this
is a stereo CD-quality file, or 2-channel 16 bits at 44.1 kHz.
What if you have more than one sound card? Use aplay -l to display the raw
ALSA device information for all of your audio interfaces:
$ aplay -l
**** List of PLAYBACK Hardware Devices ****
card 0: SB [HDA ATI SB], device 0: VT1708S Analog VT1708S Analog
 Subdevices: 2/2
 Subdevice #0: subdevice #0
 Subdevice #1: subdevice #1
card 0: SB HDA ATI SB, device 1: VT1708S Digital VT1708S Digital
 Subdevices: 1/1
 Subdevice #0: subdevice #0
card 1: MobilePre MobilePre, device 0: USB Audio USB Audio
 Subdevices: 0/1
 Subdevice #0: subdevice #0
ALSA devices are named in the format interface:card,device. Sound cards are
numbered from zero. An ALSA interface is a PCM playback or recording
device, a MIDI device, or a control device such as a mixer. The hw interface talks
directly to the kernel, so this is the most direct way to test your audio hardware.
This example sends a WAV file to the first ALSA interface, the ATI SB onboard
sound chipset at hw:0,0:
$ aplay -vv -t wav -D hw:0,0 angeline-the-baker.wav
Sometimes you’ll see an error message like this: Warning: rate is not
accurate (requested = 44100Hz, got = 48000Hz) please, try the plug
plugin. This means use plughw in place of hw:
$ aplay -vv -t wav -D plughw:0,0 angeline-the-baker.wav
hw makes no conversions of any kind—think of it as your literal playback device.
It can do only what the hardware supports, so some audio files might sound
weird or not play at all. plughw is a special ALSA plug-in that is like hw with
extra powers; it can perform whatever conversions are necessary to play your
files. aplay supports only voc, wav, raw, or au, so you might as well stick with
WAVs.
This example plays a file on the second ALSA device, which in the example is
the MobilePre:
$ aplay -vv -t wav -D hw:1,0 angeline-the-baker.wav
If there were a third audio interface, it would be hw:2,0.

Testing Speakers
The speaker-test command helps you determine whether your speakers are
connected in the correct order. This example tests two-channel stereo:
$ speaker-test -t wav -D hw:0,0 -c2 -l1
speaker-test 1.0.20
Playback device is hw:0,0
Stream parameters are 48000Hz, S16_LE, 2 channels
WAV file(s)
Rate set to 48000Hz (requested 48000Hz)
Buffer size range from 64 to 16384
Period size range from 32 to 8192
Using max buffer size 16384
Periods = 4
was set period_size = 4096
was set buffer_size = 16384
0 - Front Left
1 - Front Right
Time per period = 2.732753
You should hear a pleasant woman’s voice say, “Front left, front right.” -c2
means two channels, and -l1 means run the test once.
This chipset supports 5:1 surround sound, so you can test this too:
$ speaker-test -t wav -D hw:0,0 -c6 -l1
speaker-test 1.0.20
Playback device is hw:0,0
Stream parameters are 48000Hz, S16_LE, 6 channels
Rate set to 48000Hz (requested 48000Hz)
Buffer size range from 6 to 5461
Period size range from 3 to 2730
Using max buffer size 5460
Periods = 4
was set period_size = 1365
was set buffer_size = 5460
0 - Front Left
4 - Center
1 - Front Right
3 - Rear Right
2 - Rear Left
5 - LFE
Time per period = 17.801733
You can test a single speaker with the -s option, like this example that tests the
center speaker channel:
$ speaker-test -t wav -D hw:0,0 -c6 -s5 -l1
speaker-test 1.0.20
Playback device is hw:0,0
Stream parameters are 48000Hz, S16_LE, 6 channels
WAV file(s)

Rate set to 48000Hz (requested 48000Hz)
Buffer size range from 6 to 5461
Period size range from 3 to 2730
Using max buffer size 5460
Periods = 4
was set period_size = 1365
was set buffer_size = 5460
 - Center
Notice the clever gotcha: The speaker-test output numbers the speakers from
zero, but for the -s option, you have to start from 1.
-t wav uses the included default WAV testing file; you might also try pink,
which generates pink noise, and sine, which sounds like the sine wave tones
from way back in the olden days of TV test screens. (Now they use infomercials.
I miss the test screens.) You may specify different frequencies (in Hz) to use
with the sine option, like this example that tests the subwoofer with a nice low
45 Hz tone:
$ speaker-test -t sine -f 45 -D hw:0,0 -c6 -s6
LFE means low frequency effects channel or low frequency emitter. This is the
channel that handles low-pitched sounds ranging from 3 to 200 Hz. This is not
the same as the physical port that you plug a subwoofer into, because the LFE
signal can be routed to any speaker or speakers that support it.

Testing Recording
aplay has a companion command, arecord. Remember to check alsamixer for
the correct settings, such as capture device and volume controls. If your
computer has both front and rear microphone ports, alsamixer should have an
option to select the correct one. In this example, two audio devices are detected:
$ arecord -l
**** List of CAPTURE Hardware Devices ****
card 0: SB HDA ATI SB, device 0: VT1708S Analog VT1708S Analog
 Subdevices: 2/2
 Subdevice #0: subdevice #0
 Subdevice #1: subdevice #1
card 1: MobilePre MobilePre, device 0: USB Audio USB Audio
 Subdevices: 1/1
 Subdevice #0: subdevice #0
This example makes a test recording with the MobilePre:
$ arecord -vv -fcd -V stereo -D hw:1,0 test.wav
Recording WAVE 'test.wav' : Signed 16 bit Little Endian, Rate 44100 Hz, Stereo
Hardware PCM card 1 'MobilePre' device 0 subdevice 0
Its setup is:
 stream       : CAPTURE
 access       : RW_INTERLEAVED
 format       : S16_LE
 subformat    : STD
 channels     : 2
 rate         : 44100
 exact rate   : 44100 (44100/1)
 msbits       : 16
 buffer_size  : 22050
 period_size  : 5513
 period_time  : 125011
 tstamp_mode  : NONE
 period_step  : 1
 avail_min    : 5513
 period_event : 0
 start_threshold  : 1
 stop_threshold   : 22050
 silence_threshold: 0
 silence_size : 0
 boundary     : 6206523236469964800
 appl_ptr     : 0
 hw_ptr       : 0
                  +############## 43%|34%###########+
ctrl-C stops recording. -fcd means CD-quality, which is 2-channel 16-bit at 44.1
kHz. aplay plays back the test recording:
$ aplay -vv -t wav -V stereo -D hw:1,0 test.wav

ALSA Applications
ALSA creates a number of virtual interfaces for your sound card called
applications. You can view these with aplay:
$ aplay -L
default:CARD=SB
   HDA ATI SB, VT1708S Analog
   Default Audio Device
front:CARD=SB,DEV=0
   HDA ATI SB, VT1708S Analog
   Front speakers
surround40:CARD=SB,DEV=0
   HDA ATI SB, VT1708S Analog
   4.0 Surround output to Front and Rear speakers
surround41:CARD=SB,DEV=0
   HDA ATI SB, VT1708S Analog
   4.1 Surround output to Front, Rear and Subwoofer speakers
surround50:CARD=SB,DEV=0
   HDA ATI SB, VT1708S Analog
   5.0 Surround output to Front, Center and Rear speakers
surround51:CARD=SB,DEV=0
   HDA ATI SB, VT1708S Analog
   5.1 Surround output to Front, Center, Rear and Subwoofer speakers
surround71:CARD=SB,DEV=0
   HDA ATI SB, VT1708S Analog
   7.1 Surround output to Front, Center, Side, Rear and Woofer speakers
iec958:CARD=SB,DEV=0
   HDA ATI SB, VT1708S Digital
   IEC958 (S/PDIF) Digital Audio Output
null
   Discard all samples (playback) or generate zero samples (capture)
That’s a lot of applications! In ordinary use, these don’t matter to the user, or to
applications that send sound streams to ALSA, because everything is handled
behind the scenes. You can test these the same way you tested the hw interfaces:
$ speaker-test -t wav -D default:CARD=SB -c2 -l1
$ speaker-test -t wav -D surround71:CARD=SB,DEV=0 -c8 -l1
$ aplay -vv -D surround51:CARD=SB,DEV=0 madbanjos.wav
On my system, aplay returned an identical set of applications for the MobilePre
even though it doesn’t support surround sound but only two-channel stereo. So,
this works:
$ speaker-test -t wav -D front:CARD=MobilePre,DEV=0 -c2 -l1
But this doesn’t:
$ speaker-test -t wav -D surround51:CARD=MobilePre,DEV=0 -c6 -l1
Stream parameters are 48000Hz, S16_LE, 6 channels
WAV file(s)
Broken configuration for playback: no configurations available: Invalid argument
Setting of hwparams failed: Invalid argument

Querying Your Sound Card
How do you know what abilities your sound card has, what bit depths and
sample rates it supports, and how many channels? If you have no manual, you
can query the /proc filesystem to find out. Audio devices are in procasound. You
can browse this directory in any file manager or from the command line. For
example, on my system procasound/card0 is the onboard ATI chipset. Reading
procasound/card0/codec#0 spits out a lot of information, and this snippet shows
that this chipset supports high sampling rates and bit depths:
$ less procasound/card0/codec#0
   rates [0x5e0]: 44100 48000 88200 96000 192000
   bits [0xe]: 16 20 24
The MobilePre looks like this:
$ less procasound/card1/stream0
M Audio MobilePre at usb-0000:00:12.1-1, full speed : USB Audio
Playback:
 Status: Stop
 Interface 1
   Altset 1
   Format: 0x2 (16 bits)
   Channels: 2
   Endpoint: 3 OUT (ADAPTIVE)
   Rates: 8000, 9600, 11025, 12000, 16000, 22050, 24000, 32000, 44100, 48000
Capture:
 Status: Stop
 Interface 2
   Altset 1
   Format: 0x2 (16 bits)
   Channels: 2
   Endpoint: 5 IN (SYNC)
   Rates: 8000, 9600, 11025, 12000, 16000, 22050, 24000, 32000, 44100, 48000
How did I know which /proc files to read? I tried ’em all. Do not try to edit /proc
files. /proc is a pseudo-filesystem that exists only in memory, showing the
current state of the kernel and operating system.

Using JACK with Audacity
The JACK Audio Connection Kit is a marvelous creation. Its original creator
was Paul Davis, and now Mr. Davis and a team of developers support JACK. It
is a professional-quality, low-latency sound server for Linux and any POSIX-
compliant operating system such as Mac OS X, Solaris, AIX, HP-UX, and IRIX.
Currently it runs well on Linux, Mac OS X, and FreeBSD.
Note
Phonon (in KDE4) doesn’t get in the way when you’re using Audacity, but PulseAudio often does, so see
Turning PulseAudio and Phonon Off in Turning PulseAudio and Phonon Off to learn how to disable it.
JACK acts like a switchboard to route audio signals between your audio
hardware and software without adding latency. JACK can interface with only
one sound card at a time, but it can interface with any number of software audio
production applications, as long as they are JACK-aware. If you have a hardware
device that controls all of your audio sources, then you don’t need JACK. For
example, in my little studio, my MobilePre can handle up to 4 inputs, and the
Saffire Pro can handle as many as 26. If everything I want to record plugs into
one of those, I don’t need JACK. But suppose I want to use Hydrogen, the
software drum kit for Linux? This is an excellent, fun drum synthesizer that is in
most distro repositories, and it comes with a batch of demos so I can
immediately start playing with it. How do I connect Hydrogen to Audacity? This
is where JACK comes in.
The order in which you start your various applications is important. First get
everything running and connected with JACK, and then Audacity always starts
last. It seems we should be able to open Audacity after JACK is running, connect
it to JACK, and then run whatever else we want. Sometimes this works because
JACK updates new connections dynamically. But Audacity can be finicky, so I
get everything else going first. Usually everything works fine on the first try, but
sometimes Audacity throws out an error message about having the wrong sound
device or some other unhappiness. Closing and reopening it usually takes care of
this.
Let’s use the MobilePre, since it is easy and simple. It has two microphones
connected for vocal and a guitar, and then we’ll add a nice drum track. First

close all other audio applications, and then start JACK. JACK can run from the
command line or the Qjackctl graphical interface. We’ll use Qjackctl, which
should appear in your system menu as JACK Control (Figure 13-5).
Figure 13-5. Qjackctl, the graphical JACK controller
If JACK starts up when you open Qjackctl, stop it, and then click the Setup
button. You’ll see a configuration dialog like Figure 13-6.
Figure 13-6. Selecting your audio devices and configuring JACK in the Qjackctl
Setup dialog
1. Check Realtime in the Parameters column if you are using a real-time
kernel. Otherwise, don’t check it.

2. If there is a monitoring port on your recording interface, check H/W
Monitor to enable it. Leave everything else in the first column unchecked.
3. In the next column, leave Priority at (default).
4. Leave Frames/Period at the default of 1024.
5. Set your sample rate and make sure it agrees with Audacity, Hydrogen, and
any other audio software you are running. It must be a rate that your
recording interface supports.
6. Periods/Buffer defaults to 2; leave it there for now.
7. Leave Port Maximum and Timeout at their defaults of 256 and 500,
respectively.
8. In the third column, choose “alsa” as the driver.
9. Choose your input and output devices; click the little arrows to the right to
display all of your sound devices.
10. Set the numbers of input and output channels, which are whatever your
audio interface supports. The MobilePre has two channels for both input
and output.
11. Click OK, and then click the Start button. It is normal to see a few xruns at
startup. Click the Messages and Status buttons to display everything you
need to know about your JACK session, both good and bad.
Now start up Hydrogen. Figure 13-7 shows what Hydrogen looks like.

Figure 13-7. The excellent Hydrogen drum synthesizer
Hydrogen, like so many good Linux synths, lets you select which audio interface
to use and which audio backend. Go into Tools > Preferences > Audio System
and select JACK. Make sure that the Connect to Default Output Pair option is
not checked (Figure 13-8).
Now go to Project > Open Demo and select a demo to play. Click the Loop
Song button (to the right of the Fast Forward button) to keep it going while
you’re testing.
Next, click the Connect button in Qjackctl. Figure 13-9 is the result. The System
clients are the MobilePre channels; System clients always represent your audio
interface, and of course Hydrogen is labeled as Hydrogen. You should hear a
drum track on the playback device selected in JACK. If you don’t, connect the
two Hydrogen out ports to two System playback ports. You will see lines
connecting them.
Configure your playback device in JACK’s Setup dialog, whether it’s
headphones, external speakers, or something else.

Figure 13-8. Configuring Hydrogen to use JACK

Figure 13-9. JACK and Hydrogen are running, and the Connections window
shows that Hydrogen is connected to your audio interface’s playback ports.
Now open Audacity. Configure Audacity to use JACK Audio Connection Kit:
Hydrogen as the recording device and press the Record button. You should see
something like Figure 13-10.
Figure 13-10. Audacity is recording the Hydrogen drum track, thanks to JACK.
Voilà! Audacity is recording Hydrogen! The JACK Connections window now
displays two new PortAudio clients, which are the Audacity recording inputs
(Figure 13-11).

Figure 13-11. JACK connects Hydrogen and the MobilePre to Audacity.
Audacity is represented by the two PortAudio clients. In this example, Hydrogen
is being recorded through the two PortAudio clients and simultaneously playing
back through the two system playback ports.
Usually the Connections window opens with the necessary connections in place
and dynamically creates new ones on demand. If it doesn’t or you want to
change them, just click a Readable Client, then click a Writable Client, and then
click the Connect button (or Disconnect). You can create multiple connections to
each client.
The MobilePre is a two-channel recording interface that supports up to four
inputs, so when I record something through the microphones, it goes into the
same two-channel stereo track as the Hydrogen drum track.
In some of the older versions of Audacity and JACK, the recording device
selection was not consistent. Sometimes selecting JACK Audio Connection Kit:
System worked, and sometimes I had to use JACK Audio Connection Kit:
<something else>, depending on what else I was using. So, you may have to try
a bit of trial and error.

Connecting a FireWire Recording Interface
Figure 13-12 shows a simple example of using the Saffire Pro with JACK and
Audacity. You need the ffado driver for Linux (http://www.ffado.org/) to use a
FireWire recording interface, a FireWire adapter on your computer, and the
correct cable to connect your FireWire device. There are two different FireWire
plugs, 4-pin and 6-pin, and you must have the one that matches your device.
Figure 13-12. The ffado-mixer for the Focusrite Saffire Pro I/O 26
This is how I got the Saffire Pro working for this example. First I opened ffado-
mixer, which comes with the ffado driver (Figure 13-12).

Then I started Qjackctl, opened the Setup dialog, changed the driver to
“firewire,” and changed the Interface to hw:0. Then I opened Hydrogen, set it to
use JACK as the audio backend, and then started a demo loop playing. The
Saffire has headphone-monitoring ports, so I plugged headphones into the
appropriate port and created connections in the JACK connector to route
Hydrogen’s playback to the first two Saffire input ports, System playback_1 and
playback_2.
Then I opened Audacity last of all. I made sure the sample rate was the same in
ffado-mixer, JACK, and Audacity, and I configured Audacity to record four
tracks, using the recording device JACK Audio Connection Kit: System.
Figure 13-13 shows what this all looks like: There are four PortAudio clients,
which means that four recording channels are open in Audacity. Hydrogen is
using two of them, and I have two mics plugged into the Saffire Pro for
recording on the other two.
Figure 13-13. Everything is working: Hydrogen is both recording and playing
back. Two mics are plugged into the Saffire Pro and are recording from Capture
3 and 4 to PortAudio 16 and 17.
Figure 13-14 shows how the recording session looks in Audacity.

Figure 13-14. How it looks in Audacity: two Hydrogen tracks recording and two
mic tracks

Creating Persistent Configurations
In the JACK Setup dialog, you can create and save multiple profiles. Make a
configuration; then on the first tab enter a name for it in the Preset Name box,
and then click Save. To open a profile, click the dropdown arrow in the Preset
Name box.
The Connections window only displays your current setup and does not save it,
so you must use the Patchbay to create saved connections. Get everything
hooked up the way you like in Connections, open the Patchbay, and then click
the New button. A little message will pop up and ask you if you want to save
your current Connections configuration (Figure 13-15).
Figure 13-15. The Patchbay asks if you want to save your current Connections
configuration.
Click Yes, and this will automatically duplicate the current settings in the
Connections window. You can modify this or accept it as is and save it with the
Save button, giving it a unique name (Figure 13-16).

Figure 13-16. You can edit what the Patchbay captured for you or save it as is.

JACK Settings
Let’s take a look at the settings in the Qjackctl Setup window in more detail.
“Realtime” should be checked when you have a real-time kernel and
unchecked when you do not.
Leave “No Memory Lock” unchecked when you have abundant RAM, but
if you’re making do with a lower-end computer, try checking it if you get
out-of-memory errors. This will prevent JACK from locking up memory for
its exclusive use and freeing it for all processes that need it.
Checking “Unlock Memory” helps lower-end computers by reclaiming
memory slurped up by graphics toolkits like Qt and GTK, especially if you
are running VST plugins under WINE. Leave it unchecked if you are not
experiencing problems.
Checking “Soft Mode” tells JACK to ignore xrun errors and keep running.
Use this when you want JACK to keep running no matter what, for example
during a live show. It’s better to track down and fix the problem, but it’s not
always possible, and xruns don’t always translate into big defects in your
recording.
You can check “Force 16-bit” when your audio interface supports only 16-
bit recording. It’s not required because JACK uses 32-bit internally, and it
tests 32-, 24-, and 16-bit settings for your input and output devices. If your
interface supports only 16 bits or you want to record at 16 bits, this will
shush the routine error messages in the Messages window.
“H/W Monitor” and “H/W Meter” enable hardware monitoring and
metering for devices with support for these functions. For example, the
MobilePre has a zero-latency monitoring port, so this activates it. H/W
Meter is for ALSA devices only, and few recording interfaces support this
feature.
The default Priority is 10, and this maxes out at 89. Usually the default is
fine. If you are running a real-time kernel, try setting it to 70 or greater to
see whether it makes any difference.
Frames/Period controls your balance between lower latency and fewer
errors. The default is a buffer of 1,024 frames per second sent from JACK
to your sound card, and the lowest possible value that is supported by PC
hardware is 64. For lower latency, you want a lower value. If you see a lot
of xruns in the Messages window, then increase this to a higher number
until you have no xruns. An xrun is either a buffer overrun or an underrun,

and xruns are audible as crackles and pops. On my system, JACK performs
well at 128 frames, which results in very low latency. One audio frame is
one sample times the number of channels, so a two-channel recording has
two samples per frame. A period is a CPU processing cycle, so a
Frames/Period rate of 128 results in a buffer size of 128 samples per
channel, for a total of 256 samples per period for two channels. To get the
buffer size in bytes, multiply Frames/Period by Periods/Buffers by 4.
The Sample Rate setting must equal your Audacity sample rate and be
supported by your recording interface. Higher sample rates put a heavier
load on your CPU and may require higher values in Frames/Period and
Periods/Buffers.
Periods/Buffers is an interesting bit of memory management. JACK divides
the memory buffer into periods and transfers data in units of periods. The
default is two periods per buffer. More periods equals higher latency and
greater stability. Try different values in combination with Frames/Period to
get latency down. For example, if it takes a high Frames/Period value to get
xruns down, like 2,048, try increasing Periods/Buffers to 3 or 4, and try
lowering Frames/Period.
Every input or output connection is a port. The default is 256 ports, which
is more than enough for most mortals, and you can have as many as 1,024.
Timeout controls how long JACK waits to kill an application during periods
of heavy congestion. The default is 500 milliseconds.
The driver is set to whatever driver your recording interface uses. Freebob
is the old version of the FFADO driver for FireWire interfaces, so select
“firewire” since Freebob is obsolete (unless you are running an old system
with actual old Freebob drivers). “dummy” is a fake driver for testing
JACK.
The Interface dropdown is active only when you select (default), meaning
the ALSA default, for your Input and Output devices. Then you have a few
extra choices such as devdsp and devoss. These are really not relevant in
modern Linux systems, but JACK supports them if your system supports
them.
Dither can make 16-bit recordings sound better; it is analogous to anti-
aliasing fonts or dithering in graphical images. Don’t use dither for higher-
bit depths because it is unnecessary, and they will sound worse. Think of it
as blending the rough edges for a cleaner sound. Shaped dither is
considered to be the best, but it is also the most CPU-intensive. Triangular
is a good compromise between quality and CPU cost, and rectangular is
lightweight and makes the smallest alterations. You don’t have to use

dithering, but it doesn’t hurt to try it. Audacity also has dither, so be sure to
use only one or the other.
On the Audio menu, you can choose Duplex, Capture Only, and Playback
only. Usually Duplex works fine, but you can try the other settings to see
whether there are any performance improvements.
Pick your Input and Output Devices from the dropdown menus (the little
arrows on the right).
Input Latency and Output Latency are for increasing latency. You might
want to fiddle with these to bring your Input and Output streams into
synchronization, especially when overdubbing or applying special effects.

Turning PulseAudio and Phonon Off
PulseAudio can be a stubborn little daemon. The man page says you can turn it
off with the command pulseaudio --kill. But depending on your particular
Linux distribution, it won’t stay killed; instead, it respawns itself. This is how it
works on Ubuntu 10.04: It has a normal init script to start it at boot,
etcrc2.d/S03pulseaudio. But when you try controlling this the normal way, it
doesn’t work, because running etcinit.d/pulseaudio stop doesn’t stop it.
Removing etcrc2.d/S03pulseaudio doesn’t prevent it from starting at boot.
Fortunately, I am even more stubborn and have figured out how to control
stopping and starting Pulse. I don’t want to remove it; I want it to run when I
want it to run. (If you want to remove Pulse, it shouldn’t hurt anything to do so.)
First look for a graphical control panel for Pulse with an option to disable it. This
is missing from my Ubuntu 10.04 installation but present on Fedora and other
distros. If your system has this, it might be all you need.
If there is no graphical control panel with an option to disable pulse, open
etcpulse/client.conf, change autospawn = yes to autospawn = no, and set
daemon-binary to bintrue. Make sure they are uncommented, like this:
autospawn = no
daemon-binary = bintrue
Next, to stop it from starting at boot requires several steps. First remove the
relevant etcrc*.d/S*pulseaudio link for your usual runlevel or rename it to a
“kill” link. This prevents init from starting Pulse. On my system, that looks like
this:
# mv etcrc2.d/S03pulseaudio etcrc2.d/K03pulseaudio
How do you know your runlevel? Use the runlevel command:
$ runlevel
N 2
That means runlevel 2, which is controlled by the links (which must be links to
files in etcinit.d, not the files themselves!) in etcrc2.d/. Your distro may have a
nice graphical services manager, which is a good thing to use.
On Ubuntu 10.04, there is one more startup file to dispense with:
etcX11/Xsession.d/70pulseaudio. This starts Pulse when a Gnome session starts.
Move this file to a different directory, like your home directory. Don’t delete it
because you might want it again someday.
Other distros customize Pulse in different ways, so if these instructions don’t

work, then look for help specific to your distro. There is no shortage of it
because a lot of users are struggling with this. Another little trick, when you find
scripts that start PulseAudio, is to change the binary that they call from
usrbin/pulseaudio to bintrue. This is a nice little executable whose only job is to
“do nothing, successfully.” It keeps the scripts happy, and it’s a convenient
placeholder if you ever want to change it back.
Now that you have purged all the startup scripts, how do you stop and start
PulseAudio? It’s as easy as pie:
$ pulseaudio --kill
$ pulseaudio --start
Phonon is a different kettle of clams. Phonon exists only on KDE4, and it is
impossible to remove because virtually all of KDE4 depends on it. It is not
necessary to stop or remove Phonon in any case, because it uses only a tiny bit
of system resources and adds no latency to your audio chain. It does have one
annoying habit—when a sound daemon like Pulse or JACK takes control of a
sound card, Phonon freaks out and emits an error message about how that sound
card is missing, and it wants to remove the sound card from its menus. Just click
Cancel to shush it.

Linux System Tweaks
Linux is a pretty efficient operating system, so you don’t need to go to heroic
lengths to make it get out of its own way. However, there are a few things you
can do to ensure the best possible performance.
High-powered PC hardware is always good and is cheaper than high-end audio
devices. My audio workstation has an AMD Phenom X3 2.4 GHz CPU, 4GB of
RAM, and a terabyte’s worth of SATA II hard drives. Those extra cores make a
nice difference, because even though Audacity is not optimized for multicore
processors, those extra cores mean faster, smoother multitasking. I also have an
old laptop with a 1.4 GHz CPU, 1GB of RAM, and a slower hard drive. This
handles up to four-channel 16/44.1 recording capably, but at higher bit depths or
sampling rates it tends to stall. I consider a 1 GHz CPU and 512MB of RAM to
be the bare minimum for music recording and editing. For podcasts and spoken-
word recordings, you can go as low as 128MB RAM and a 500 MHz CPU.
Turn off your screensaver and all fancy video effects. All that CompizFusion
bling is pretty, but it gets in the way of good audio. In fact, you should turn off
everything that is not absolutely needed: Don’t run other applications, and turn
off unnecessary services. There usually isn’t too much cruft; Bluetooth, wireless
daemons on systems without wireless devices, and Wacom tablet daemons are
the most common on-by-default services that most users don’t need.
Both KDE and GNOME are heavy-duty desktops that feast on CPU and
memory, so you can slim your system down by using a lighter-weight graphical
environment such as Xfce, IceWM, LXDE, Fluxbox, or any of the many other
lightweight Linux graphical environments.
Video is the single most demanding system on your PC, so you might want to
upgrade to a better video card. Many lower-end systems use shared system
memory instead of a dedicated graphics processing unit (GPU). In other words,
they use some of your system RAM to process video, and this is quite a bit
slower because it places an extra load on your system RAM and CPU, both of
which are considerably slower than a GPU. GPUs are so much faster that they
are used to build clusters for very fast, very powerful, high-end scientific
calculations.
Depending on your distribution, you should have a good graphical system
resources monitor so you can see where your system resources are being used.

The good old-fashioned top command is still a useful tool for viewing active
processes and how much system resources they are using. After starting top,
press 1 to see all the cores in a multicore CPU:
$ top
Tasks: 232 total,   1 running, 231 sleeping,   0 stopped,   0 zombie
Cpu0  :  3.7%us,  0.7%sy,  0.0%ni, 95.7%id,  0.0%wa,  0.0%hi,  0.0%si,  0.0%st
Cpu1  :  7.6%us,  0.7%sy,  0.0%ni, 90.1%id,  1.7%wa,  0.0%hi,  0.0%si,  0.0%st
Cpu2  :  0.0%us,  0.7%sy,  0.0%ni, 99.3%id,  0.0%wa,  0.0%hi,  0.0%si,  0.0%st
Mem:   4056672k total,  1602700k used,  2453972k free,   171880k buffers
Swap:  7092636k total,        0k used,  7092636k free,   655412k cached
 PID USER      PR  NI  VIRT  RES  SHR S %CPU %MEM    TIME+  COMMAND
17132 alrac     20   0  663m  35m  22m S    8  0.9   0:27.99 audacity
2208 root      20   0  181m  83m  14m S    3  2.1  32:02.89 Xorg
10683 alrac     20   0  620m 147m  28m S    1  3.7   4:37.10 firefox
2763 alrac     20   0  212m  10m 8276 S    1  0.3   3:00.33 multiload-apple
This shows that all is well. The summary at the top tells us many things: One
process is running, and the rest, all 231 of ’em, are sleeping. Three CPU cores
are chugging away.
All of these fields are explained in the nice man page, man top. Your version of
top may display different fields, but it is still the same top command. The top
section is the summary, and the bottom section is the task area.
CPU states (in the summary) are fun to examine in detail, but the main fields to
keep an eye on are the us, or user field, which shows the load per CPU, and the
sy, or system field, which shows the load from kernel processes. If you are
seeing sy values greater than 10 percent consistently, you should track down the
cause, because ordinarily it should be in the single digits.
The Mem and Swap fields tell you whether your physical RAM is sufficient. As
long as Swap usage is zero and your Mem is not maxed out, that is ideal for audio
processing, since RAM is many times faster than a swap file, which is on your
hard disk.
Down in the task area, you see information on every process on your system.
Again, don’t go crazy on the minute details, but look at the biggest users at the
top. This quickly reveals who the CPU and memory hogs are. Web browsers can
be awful hogs in this era of lardy, script-and Flash-heavy websites, so shut ’em
down. Audio processing chews up a lot of CPU cycles, so that’s the main thing
to keep an eye on. If you’re hitting greater than 75 percent consistently, think
about upgrading your CPU. The Linux kernel and most CPUs don’t mind
working that hard, but at that level you’re probably noticing slower performance.
You can tune your swap file size a bit for better performance. If you have

512MB of RAM or less, make your swap file size at least equal to your RAM
size. If you have 1GB of RAM or more, make your swap file no larger than half
your RAM. But don’t remove your swap file entirely—laptops need them for
suspend and hibernate, and if you ever use up all of your physical memory, that
swap file might save your recording session.
If you are using a PCI sound card, check your motherboard manual to find a slot
that does not use shared interrupts. PCI-Express sound cards are great because
PCI-E uses dedicated buses, rather than shared buses like the old PCI 2.0
standard. There are not a lot of PCI-E sound cards yet; the RME HDSPe MADI
series, for one example, is first-rate and works in Linux.
Don’t use networked file shares, except for storing backups of your audio files,
because they’re too slow.

The Tangled History of Linux Audio
The original Linux audio subsystem was Sound Blaster 16, which “just
happened” because SB16 sound cards had the best support and a nice API.
Those of us who are old enough to remember i386 PCs might also remember
that competing brands used SB16 emulation because it was the path of least
resistance. This evolved into the Open Sound System (OSS), which is portable
across all Unix and Unix-type operating systems. It still exists and is maintained,
and it is often confused with the OSS-compatible module in ALSA.
OSS fell out of favor as sound cards got cheaper and depended more on software
to handle mixing, instead of doing the mixing in hardware. And so ESD
(Gnome) and aRts (KDE) were born; these took care of mixing before sending
audio streams to OSS. However, this complicated matters because Linux
developers now had three different sound systems to deal with. The Simple
DirectMedia Layer (SDL) was then invented as a portability layer that could use
any audio backend, but it has some limitations that prevent it from ascending the
throne as the Great Linux Audio Uniter. Like everything else in life, it hasn’t
gone away but is still used in some applications. You probably have it on your
own systems.
Then OSS went closed source, and users had to pay money for it. That was the
last straw for hardy Linux developers, who retaliated by inventing ALSA. So,
that is how ALSA became the standard Linux audio subsystem. A good way to
start a flame war is to ignite an OSS versus ALSA debate—a lot of folks still
have strong passions on the subject.
OSS 4.x became Free software again when it was released under the GPL for
Linux in 2007, and now there are two versions: the GPL version and a
commercial version that includes some nonFree drivers. Some users claim that
their music sounds better with OSS and that it is simpler and better and easier to
use. I think a lot of that is wishful thinking, but if you like OSS, I won’t think
less of you.
I prefer plain old ALSA. It is the default in virtually all Linux systems, and it
works. As always with Linux, do your homework before you buy to make sure
you purchase well-supported hardware. The ALSA project has a supported
sound cards matrix at http://www.alsa-project.org/main/index.php/Matrix:Main.
ESD is the old Gnome and Enlightenment sound server, and it runs on top of

ALSA. It can manage multiple sound streams and networked playback.
PulseAudio has replaced ESD in GNOME.
aRts also manages multiple streams and networked playback. Don’t use aRts
because it increases latency beyond acceptable levels and because it is doomed
—it has been unmaintained for some time now and is outdated. Phonon replaces
aRts in KDE4. Phonon is not a sound server or an API but is intended to be a
universal interface for all audio and video playback servers and subsystems.
Phonon doesn’t get in the way, so you can leave it alone.
The future of desktop playback audio for Linux is cloudy. PulseAudio is poised
to become the standard sound manager for desktop Linux, but some say there are
still some deeper problems to resolve that Pulse can’t fix. So, don’t be surprised
by anything.

Sound Cards
Please visit Appendix A to learn about sound cards that are well supported on
Linux, from low-budget to high-end. Remember, it is very important to shop
carefully and purchase hardware that is well supported in Linux. There is a lot of
great quality audio hardware that works in Linux—life is too short to waste on
low-quality or poorly supported audio gear.

Chapter 14. Configuring Windows for Best Audio
Quality
Microsoft Windows users are in an interesting position right now. Windows XP
is still the most popular Windows version, despite being a Methuselah in
computer years as it was first released in 2001. Microsoft has tried several times
to retire it, but it won’t go away. In July 2010, Microsoft announced an extension
of support for XP SP3 through April 2014. XP will continue to be a downgrade
option for Windows 7 buyers for the length of Windows 7’s original equipment
manufacturer (OEM) life span, which ends two years after the next Windows
version ships. So, XP is going to be with us for a long time yet.
There are compelling reasons to stick with XP on your audio production
computer. It is frugal of system requirements, needing less than 5GB for the
operating system and service packs, and it runs acceptably with a 1 GHz CPU
and 512MB RAM. Put it on a dual-core laptop with a gigabyte of RAM, and you
have a capable portable recording studio.
Windows Vista didn’t get much traction in the marketplace. At the time this was
written, audio hardware manufacturers were finally catching up and releasing
Vista drivers for their products. Audacity 1.3.x runs fine on Vista. But Vista is a
system resources hog, eating up a good 12+GB of hard drive space just for itself.
Officially, it needs a minimum of a 1 GHz CPU and 512GB RAM for Vista
Home Basic or 1GB RAM for other editions, but if that is all you have, it will
feel like slogging through deep sand. It needs a 2 GHz CPU and 2GB RAM just
for basic chores such as email and web surfing. I recommend a minimum 2 GHz
dual-core CPU and 4GB RAM for running Audacity on Vista.
Vista system requirements also apply to Windows 7. It’s not very different from
Vista; it’s more polished, memory management is a little better, User Account

Control is less annoying, and it boots up a little faster. The Sound control panel
has a nice extra feature, a Communications tab with simple auto-duck settings
for your playback device. You can configure it for tasks such as automatically
muting all other sounds when you receive a Skype call.

Enabling MP3 Support
Because of patent encumbrances on the MP3 audio format (or more precisely,
MPEG-1 Audio Layer 3), an MP3 encoder is not included with Audacity.
However, you can easily get the LAME MP3 encoder, which is a high-quality,
cross-platform free software MP3 encoder and decoder. One way to get it is to
follow the instructions on the Audacity download page. Another way is from
inside Audacity, by exporting a file as MP3. If LAME is not present on your
system, you’ll see a dialog like the one in Figure 14-1.
Click the Download button to go directly to the LAME download page. You can
download either a zipped archive or an uncompressed archive. The installer is a
standard Windows .exe file; just download it, double-click the downloaded file,
and go through the installation steps. It will put LAME into \Program
Files\Lame For Audacity. You can verify that it installed successfully by looking
at the Edit > Preferences > Libraries dialog. Click MP3 Library: Locate, and it
will display the full file path (Figure 14-2).
Figure 14-1. To install LAME from inside Audacity, click the Download button
in the MP3 Export dialog.

Figure 14-2. After you install LAME, the Libraries dialog shows the full file
path.

Enabling WMA, M4A/M4P Support
Audacity offers native support for open, unencumbered audio codecs and
formats such as WAV, AIFF, Ogg Theora, and FLAC. But just like with MP3s,
Audacity cannot ship with support for closed, proprietary, or patent-encumbered
formats such as Windows Media Audio (WMA), M4A (lossy, compressed
format), or M4P (M4A with DRM added). M4A and M4P are the default formats
for Apple’s iTunes store. They use the Advanced Audio Coding (AAC) codecs.
No licenses or payments are required to distribute recordings in any form that
use AAC, but anyone who makes an AAC encoder is required to purchase a
patent license. Open source encoders get around this by releasing source code
rather than a ready-to-use binary application and by hosting their download
servers in friendly countries. Many countries do not enforce U.S. software patent
laws, or even recognize the validity of software patents, and expressly allow
reverse-engineering. So when it comes to figuring all this out, the Magic 8 Ball
has the definitive answer: “Reply hazy, try again.”
The short story is you can add support for a large number of nonfree and
encumbered audio (and video) file formats by installing FFmpeg. Audacity has
FFmpeg support built in, and you install it the same way as LAME. Just like
LAME, it will be placed into \Program Files\FFmpeg for Audacity.
Both LAME and FFmpeg can be installed, and their locations on your system
can be verified from Edit > Preferences > Libraries (Figure 14-3).

Figure 14-3. FFmpeg and LAME can also be installed from Edit > Preferences >
Libraries.

Low-Latency Recording and Audio Driver Fun
Making recordings on computers means you have to care about drivers. A lot.
The standard Windows MultiMedia Extensions (MME) sound system supports
two-channel 16-bit 44.1Hz recording. This is an old system that has been around
since Windows 3.1. Then Microsoft developed the Windows Driver Model
Kernel Streaming (WDM/KS) and Enhanced Windows Driver Model (EWDM)
drivers for Windows 2000 and newer. Audacity supports all of these. For
recording more than two channels simultaneously, you want sound cards with
full EWDM support. Most audio devices claim WDM support, but that doesn’t
always mean EWDM or WDM/KS, so they may not support recording from
more than two inputs at the same time.
The Audio Streaming Input/Output (ASIO) driver is a high-quality, low-latency
audio interface for Windows. Unfortunately, Audacity cannot ship with support
for it because it is a closed, proprietary driver. So, you have two options: Stick
with devices that support EWDM or WDM/KS, or compile Audacity with ASIO
support yourself. To do this, you need the ASIO software developer’s kit (SDK)
from Steinberg, the company that owns the ASIO driver, and the latest Audacity
source code from its CVS repository on SourceForge. You’ll also need Microsoft
Visual C++ 8, which is part of Visual Studio, to compile Audacity on Windows.
You’ll have to register for a developer account on Steinberg.net before you can
download the ASIO SDK. This is free and easy. Follow the instructions on the
Audacity download page to get the latest Audacity source code. Then find the
win\compile.txt file in the Audacity source tree, because it gives detailed
instructions for building Audacity with ASIO support.
Note
There are some licensing issues you must be aware of. You can build your own copies of Audacity with
ASIO support for personal use only: You cannot distribute them. This would violate both Audacity’s license
(the GPL) and Steinberg’s license for ASIO. The Audacity maintainers encourage users to email Steinberg
and politely request that it open source the ASIO driver.
The cheap and easy way is to ask a friend who already has Microsoft’s Visual
Studio to help you. It may sound like a lot of trouble to compile Audacity to
include ASIO support, but for someone who already knows their way around

Visual Studio, it’s pretty simple. Do you need ASIO support in Audacity? No, if
you shop carefully, you can find recording interfaces with good-quality EWDM
or WDM/KS drivers. Just having an ASIO driver doesn’t guarantee that a device
will perform well, because there are bad ASIO drivers. There are also bad
EWDM and WDM/KS drivers, so do your homework before purchasing
anything.
If you can find a way to enable ASIO support in Audacity, you’ll have a lot more
hardware and configuration options. A lot of higher-end sound cards support
multiple drivers, including ASIO and the WDM family, so you can try different
ones to see which ones perform the best.

Tuning Windows for Best Performance
Good audio recording requires a clean, well-performing computer that is not
bogged down with unnecessary applications and services. Poor Windows is
famous for getting loaded down with useless cruft, so we’re going to review how
to give it a good housecleaning.
A common cause of slow performance is video controllers that use shared
system memory. These suck up both CPU cycles and RAM. If you have one of
these, it will be worth the money to get a discrete graphics controller; the
difference in performance will be large and noticeable, because the processing
load will be handled by the video card. If you have cheapo shared-memory
video, you should be able to upgrade, whether it’s on a laptop or desktop PC.
Your laptop will have very specific requirements, which you should be able to
find out from your manual or the manufacturer’s website. A desktop PC should
offer more flexibility.
You have to match your video card to your motherboard, because there are
several different types of PCI slots for desktop PC video cards: PCI, AGP, and
PCI-e. You have to match both the slot and the correct voltage. Also make sure
there is enough room for your new video card, because some of them are
monsters with giant cooling fans. These giant beasts are for gamers, not audio
production rigs. Cheap and small will work fine. You may need to go into your
system BIOS to disable onboard video, if you are already using that. If all of this
sounds like a foreign language to you, you might look for a knowledgeable
friend to assist or even pay a professional.
Always have the latest Windows updates installed, especially service packs.
Make sure you have the latest drivers for your audio devices. Run Defrag and
Disk Cleanup periodically.
Turn off everything that is not essential for recording: other applications,
screensaver, antimalware, system maintenance applications, firewall, web
browser, email, “entertainment” crapware, adware, fancy special effects—
everything. Virus checkers and Windows firewalls are notorious system resource
hogs, but disabling them obviously leaves your system unprotected so you’ll
want to disconnect from any networks. Don’t forget to turn off wi-fi and
Bluetooth. Some laptops have nice physical switches to turn these off; otherwise,
go into the Network Connections control panel to disable them. If you need to

stay connected, you’re stuck with keeping your protections turned on.
Figure 14-4. Raising Audacity’s priority in the Task Manager
Raise Audacity’s priority in the Task Manager. To bring up the Task Manager,
press ctrl-alt-delete. Press this combination only once, or Windows will reboot.
Go to the Processes tab in the Task Manager and right-click the entry for
Audacity (Figure 14-4). The default priority is normal, and you should be able to
raise it to High without making other processes unhappy. Raising it to Realtime
seems like the obvious choice, but it makes my system unstable. You may have
better results.
You can safely disable a number of Windows services that consume memory and
CPU cycles with little benefit to you, and some are even security risks. Third-
party software vendors love to choke Windows with all kinds of junk. You can
look at the Processes tab in the Task Manager to see what is using up the most
CPU and memory, and then a quick web search should tell what the service is for
and whether it’s something you need to keep or can evict. We’ll look at some
common offenders in detail in the next two sections.

Tuning Windows XP
Figure 14-5. Fine-tuning Windows XP by turning off unnecessary and dangerous
services
First we’ll start with some easy stuff: In Windows XP, right-click My Computer
and select Properties. Click the Advanced tab, and then click the Performance
Settings button (Figure 14-5). On the Visual Effects tab, select “Adjust for best
performance.” This turns off the basic Windows XP eye candy.
While you’re still in Performance Options, go to the Advanced tab. By default

the Windows paging file is dynamic and changes its size according to demand.
Change it to a fixed size in the Virtual memory menu; this gives you a little
faster performance. If you have 512MB RAM or less, set your swap file size to
1.5 times your RAM. For 1GB to 4GB, make it half your RAM. For more than
4GB, try a minimal size like 512MB. You want Audacity using your nice fast
RAM, not slow paging files.
Note
The paging file is virtual memory. If Windows runs out of RAM, it uses the paging file that is on your hard
drive. Reading and writing to a hard drive are many times slower than using RAM, so it is always better to
have more RAM than to have a bigger paging file.
Now leave Performance Options and go to the System Restore tab. I recommend
disabling System Restore by checking the “Turn Off System Restore on all
drives” checkbox, though if you want to leave it on, that’s okay. In my
experience, it takes up disk space and slows down your system a little bit
without being all that useful, because it seems that failures and problems are
faithfully preserved in System Restore. Your best protection, as always, is
keeping regular data backups on external media.
Next, go to the Automatic Updates tab and turn them off. This means you have
to remember to run updates manually—don’t forget! You don’t want the updater
to kick in during a recording or editing session because it will bog down your
system, pop up messages at you, and then nag you about restarting.
On the Remote tab, disable “Allow Remote Assistance invitations to be sent
from this computer” and “Allow users to connect remotely to this computer.”
Hello, big fat security holes anyone? And they use some system resources. You
can always turn them on when you know you need them; the rest of the time
they should be disabled.
We’re finished with System Properties and ready to move on. Now you want to
look at any services that are set to start at boot and set the ones that don’t need to
be running all the time to Manual or Disabled. Do this in the Control Panel >
Administrative Tools > Services dialog. A lot of third-party software lards
down your system with all kinds of unnecessary baggage. One example is the
USB Audio interfaces software CD that came with my M-Audio MobilePre.
Windows XP already has a perfectly good USB audio interface built in, so you
don’t need to install anything extra—the MobilePre works just fine without the

extra guff, which is a driver installer and a rudimentary volume control panel.
There’s nothing to get excited about, and there’s nothing particularly useful. A
lot of USB audio devices do this, so try them first without installing anything
extra.
Here is a short checklist of services that should be disabled because they are
unnecessary or security risks, or both. It’s not necessary to track down and nuke
every last not-absolutely-essential service, though you’re welcome to do so.
TweakHound (http://www.tweakhound.com/) is a thorough and reliable guide to
Windows system tuning, including both good tweaks and bad tweaks. It is also
helpful to do web searches on specific services. Don’t change anything without
knowing what it does; you don’t want to nuke essential Windows services. When
you change a running service to Manual or Disable, you will also have to stop it.
Doubleclick the service to open a configuration dialog.
These are some of the more common offenders:
Alerter
Sends administrative alerts. This is useless and should be disabled by
default in Service Packs 2 and 3.
ClipBook
Another winner in the “Who the heck thought this was a good idea”
category—ClipBook shares the contents of your clipboard with remote
users. It should be disabled by default in XP Service Packs 2 and 3.
Network DDE, Network DDE DSDM
This manages Dynamic Data Exchange (DDE) network shares, which are
nasty things like ClipBook. It should be disabled by default in XP Service
Packs 2 and 3.
Routing and Remote Access
Turn your computer into a router and share an Internet connection. No, not
while you’re recording and editing. It should be disabled by default in
Service Packs 2 and 3.
Error Reporting Service
Phones home to Microsoft reporting gosh-knows-what information. Disable
it.
Indexing Service
Although building a database of files on your system for faster searches
sounds good in theory, the indexer is a major hog, and I guarantee it will
run exactly when you don’t want it to. I’ve tried searches both with and
without the indexer service, and I don’t see much difference either way.
Disable it.

Messenger
Related to the Alerter service and a famous security hole. Always disable it.
Infrared Monitor
Does anyone use infrared devices? If you have an infrared wireless
keyboard or mouse or any other device that connects via infrared, leave this
on. Otherwise, disable it.
Smart Card
Is anyone using any kind of smart cards for Windows PCs? I’ll eat my hat if
they are. Turn this off.
Telnet
Why is this even still hanging around? Telnet is completely insecure—you
never ever want to enable telnet access to your PC, except under completely
safe and controlled conditions when you know you really, really want to
and you can be counted on to turn it off when you’re finished. Disable it.
Themes
“Provides user experience theme management.” Whatever. This sucks up as
much as 15MB of RAM. Disable it.
Terminal services
This allows remote desktop sharing and administration. Disable it, and then
turn it on only when you want to use it.
WebClient
“The Web Client service allows . . . standard Win32 applications to create,
read, and write files on Internet file servers by using the WebDAV
protocol.” Disable it; it’s a notorious security hole that does nothing useful.
Figure 14-6 shows what the Services control panel looks like.

Figure 14-6. Managing services in the XP Services control panel
You may have FTP and World Wide Web Publisher services installed and
enabled; disable them during recording and editing sessions. If you’re not using
your system as an FTP or web server, disable them permanently.
Depending on what’s installed on your system, you’ll find all kinds of third-
party services running and bogging down your Windows PC: Norton, McAfee,
TrendMicro, QuickTime, Adobe, Java, Macromedia, weird little screensaver
things, newsfeeds, daily cute puppy pics, bogus system tune-up and registry
cleaners, and so on; it’s quite amazing what goes on behind your back. Ideally
your computer will be a lean, mean, dedicated audio production machine with as
little fat as possible.

Tuning Windows Vista and 7
Figure 14-7. Turning off resource-hungry special effects

Vista and 7 have rearranged the furniture a bit. To control display and special
effects settings, first open the Control Panel and set it to the Classic View. Then
open System > Advanced System Settings. This opens the System Properties
dialog, which has several tabs. Click the Advanced tab, click the Performance
Settings button, and turn off all the bling by checking “Adjust for best
performance.” This turns off all special effects (Figure 14-7).
Adjust your paging file size on the Advanced tab, which is next to the Visual
Effects tab. By default, the Windows paging file is dynamic and changes its size
according to demand. Change it to a fixed size for faster performance; click the
Change button under Virtual Memory. If you have 1GB RAM or less, set your
swap file size to 1.5 times your RAM. For 1GB to 4GB, make it half your RAM.
For more than 4GB, try a minimal size like 512MB. You want Audacity using
your nice fast RAM, not slow paging files.
Close Performance Options and go to the System Protection tab. I recommend
turning off System Restore here, though I won’t complain if you want to leave it
on. To disable it, uncheck all the boxes in the Automatic Restore Points box. In
my experience, it eats up a lot of disk space without providing much benefit. I
prefer to rely on good regular data backups, rather than hoping Windows can
cure itself when there are problems.
Now go to the Remote tab and uncheck “Allow Remote Assistance connections
to this computer.” This is a potential security hole, and you should turn it on only
when you know you’re going to use it. You’re done here now, so click OK to
close System Properties.
Windows Update, Windows Firewall, and Windows Defender are all configured
in Control Panel > Security Center. To squeeze maximum performance out of
Windows Vista/7, turn off everything. Of course, when you do this, your system
is vulnerable, so don’t connect to any networks while you are doing audio work.
Automatic Updating is especially troublesome because it will interrupt whatever
you are doing whenever it runs, bother you with nag messages, and then in most
cases want to reboot. Then the restart can take a long time as it applies and
configures the updates. You can run the updater manually when it’s convenient
for you.
Vista and 7 are better than previous Windows versions at not running bales of
useless and dangerous services. But you should still go through and do a bit of
weeding. Don’t change anything without knowing what it does; you don’t want
to nuke essential Windows services. A quick web search on specific services

should tell you what you need to know about them, especially if they are
Windows services. TweakHound (http://www.tweakhound.com/) is a thorough
and reliable guide to Windows systems tuning.
Services are controlled in the Control Panel > Programs and Features > Turn
Windows features on or off dialog. Your system may or may not have the
following services, depending on which flavor of Windows you are running and
what extras are installed.
Indexing Service
Indexes your files for supposedly faster searches. It will run when you don’t
want it to and gum up a great recording session. Turn it off. You won’t see
it on Windows 7, which replaces it with Windows Search. These should be
off by default.
Internet Information Services
Are you running an SMTP or FTP server? No? Then turn this off. It should
be off by default.
Microsoft.NET Framework
Microsoft keeps stuffing .NET components into every available Windows
computer, whether it makes sense to or not. You may have some
applications that depend on it, so leave it alone.
Tablet PC Optional components
Are you using a tablet PC? No? Then turn this off.
Telnet Client/Telnet Server
Always turn these off, except when you really want to use them. Telnet is
completely insecure and should never be on by default.
Windows Meeting Space
This is touted as a collaboration tool, an update of NetMeeting. It doesn’t
work any better than NetMeeting. Don’t turn it on except when you want to
use it.

Configuring Windows Audio Devices
Figure 14-8. Recording device picker on Windows XP—don’t choose Microsoft
Sound Mapper
The ancestral Windows MME sound system, which as we already discussed is
old, slow, and limited, appears in Audacity as MME: Microsoft Sound Mapper
(see Figure 14-8). If you select this as your recording device, you’ll get whatever
is set as the default recording device in the Sound control panel. Don’t choose
this for your recording device—select the exact driver for your device. The
correct choices for my system are the MobilePre and the onboard SoundMAX
audio chipset.
The Control Panel > Sound control panel includes mixer panels for adjusting
both recording and playback volume. You can use this to adjust recording levels
while recording or playing back in Audacity. On the Playback tab, select your
playback device and click Configure to get a simple speaker tester. This is a fast
and easy way to verify that your speakers are connected correctly and working
(Figure 14-9).
Note the simple little VU meter on the Recording tab, showing the recording
level (Figure 14-10).

Figure 14-9. Test your speakers in the Playback > Configure dialog. If this were
a sleek 5.1 surround system, you would be able to test that each channel was
routed to the correct speaker and that all speakers were working.

Figure 14-10. Adjusting the recording volume using the Windows Control Panel
Figure 14-11 shows the Properties dialog for my M-Audio MobilePre in Vista.
Vista calls it “Analog Connector”; fortunately, this can be changed if you want to
give it a more informative name. Use this to enable a sound device, control the
recording levels and balance, and set the recording quality level. Make sure the
quality level in Windows agrees with your Audacity settings. I’m puzzled as to
why the Balance setting requires an extra click and needs its own special dialog
when the Levels tab has acres of empty space. But what do I know; I am not an
elite software designer engineer.

Figure 14-11. Windows offers some simple playback and recording controls.
Visit Appendix A for information on sound cards and other audio hardware.

Chapter 15. Customizing Audacity
Audacity has a number of configurable options in the Edit > Preferences dialog.
You can improve your efficiency by setting Audacity’s default options to suit
your own workflow, so in this chapter we’re going to learn all about them.
Audacity underwent major changes in the 1.3 series, which is the beta for the
final 2.x release. The Audacity developers are on fire and making a large number
of excellent improvements and additions. What you see in this chapter should be
very close to what the final release looks like, but don’t be surprised if there are
some differences.

Customizing Audacity's Default Options
Audacity’s default options are set in Edit > Preferences, which you can also
open by pressing ctrl-P. Many of these settings can be overridden in the menus
and toolbars, which is faster than opening the Preferences dialog every time you
want to temporarily change a setting. Figure 15-1 shows what the main
Preferences menu looks like in Windows.
Remember to have any USB or FireWire devices plugged in and switched on
before starting Audacity, or Audacity will not detect them.
Let’s start from the top and work our way down.

Devices
In the Devices dialog, the Host is the base sound system of your operating
system. For Windows this should not be MME but Windows DirectSound. The
Playback and Recording devices should be your specific devices. In Figure 15-1,
I have selected the SoundMAX onboard chipset on my ThinkPad. Your sound
card will probably be something else. You could also select Primary Sound
Driver, which means the default recording and playback devices are selected in
the Sound module in the Windows Control Panel.
Figure 15-1. Selecting the default recording and playback devices in Windows
For Linux users, the host will be ALSA, the JACK Audio Connection Kit, or the
Open Sound System (OSS). The Playback and Recording device choosers can
use the ALSA defaults or select specific devices (Figure 15-2). I think it’s better
to always choose the specific audio interfaces you want Audacity to use, rather
than messing around with your system defaults.

Figure 15-2. This is how it looks for Linux users: On my system, the default
recording device chooser shows an onboard ATI chipset, the MobilePre USB,
and the ALSA default.
The number of recording channels depends on what your recording interface
supports. If you have a multichannel interface with 10 channels, for example,
you could select 10 even if you weren’t using that many. Audacity will then open
10 tracks, so if you record on 6 of them, you will have 4 empty tracks.

Playback
The Playback dialog (Figure 15-3) controls some special playback features that
are helpful when you’re editing your tracks.
Figure 15-3. The Playback dialog
Many of Audacity’s special effects (in the Generate and Effect menus) have
Preview buttons so you can hear your changes before actually applying them to
your tracks. Length of preview controls the duration of that preview.
Cut Preview is a slick tool for previewing what your track will sound like when
you cut out a section of the track. The default is one second, but you can set it to
whatever you like. Select a portion of a track that you think you want to cut, but
don’t cut it; just select it. Then press the C key on the keyboard, and you’ll hear
a preview of the audio before and after your selection, just as though you had
already made the cut. To play the selection, press the spacebar.
Remember how to change the size of a selected area? Make sure you have the
Selection tool active. Position the cursor near the edge of your selection; it
should change to a little I-beam. Hold down the shift key, and then click and
drag. shift-right arrow or shift-left arrow expands the selection, and shift-ctrl-
right arrow or shift-ctrl-left arrow shrinks it.
Seek Time when playing controls the length of Audacity’s jump ahead feature.
When you’re playing a track, press the left-or right-arrow key to jump backward

or forward by the number of seconds in the Short period setting. Press the shift
key plus the left-or right-arrow key to jump the length of the Long period
setting.

Recording
The Recording dialog (Figure 15-4) controls some key recording features.
Figure 15-4. The Recording window
Check “Overdub: Play other tracks while recording new one” to record a new
track while listening to an existing track or tracks. For example, you could first
record a nice fiddle track. Then with overdubbing enabled, the fiddle track will
play while you record a vocal track, a second fiddle, or whatever you want.
“Software Playthrough: Listen while recording or monitoring new track” enables
monitoring of your recording session through your playback device. Software
Playthrough works only when the recording input and playback are on the same
sound card. (Linux users: If they are separate devices, you can create a
connection with JACK.) This isn’t the best way to monitor a recording session,
because there will likely be noticeable lag and it may add enough CPU load to
cause skips. A dedicated monitoring port on your recording interface is better. If
you don’t have one, give Software Playthrough a try. (Note that it says to
“uncheck when recording stereo mix.” In other words, it works only with mono
tracks.) You can also enable and disable Overdub and Software Playthrough
from the Transport menu.
You may find yourself spending some time in the Latency section, trying to find
the best balance between performance and reducing latency. Audio to buffer
controls how much audio is buffered in memory. When this buffer is larger,

performance is smoother, but latency increases. When it is smaller, latency
decreases, but if the audio buffer is too small, your CPU won’t be able to keep
up and there will be skips and stutters. Higher latency is noticeable when you are
overdubbing or using Software Playthrough.
Latency correction compensates for the inevitable latency present in
overdubbing. There is always some latency present in playback, so when you
overdub, the new track always lags behind the playback track. (See Overdubbing
in Overdubbing to learn more.)
Sound Activated Recording can be enabled here, and you can set the decibel
level for triggering recording. You can also do this from the Transport menu.

Quality
The Quality dialog (Figure 15-5) sets the default audio quality values for both
playback and recording.
Figure 15-5. The Quality dialog
The Sampling section sets the default sampling rate and bit depth, which in this
menu are called Sample Rate and Sample Format, respectively. These settings
can be overridden on the individual Track menus and with the Selection toolbar.
Mind the terminology confusion here—sample format and bit depth are the same
thing, but bit depth is the correct term. Only in Audacity is bit depth called
sample format.
The Realtime Conversion settings choose the types of sampling rate and bit
depth conversions that are applied to audio files for playback in Audacity.
Resampling happens when your audio files have a different sampling rate than
your project rate. If the bit depth of an audio file is different from the project bit
depth, it will be converted to the project value. This doesn’t change the files
because the conversion is done on the fly for playback only. Best Sinc
Interpolater performs the highest-quality conversion. But it is CPU-intensive, so
if playback bogs down, try Medium Sinc Interpolater. Fast Interpolator, Zero
order hold (ZOH) interpolator, and Linear interpolation are very fast but not very
good, and they introduce audible distortion.
Dither is deliberately adding a bit of noise to smooth out the waveform when a

32-or 24-bit audio file is converted to 16 bits. Shaped dither is supposed to give
the best results, and it is the most CPU-intensive. Triangular is a compromise
between quality and CPU cycles, and rectangular is lightweight and makes the
smallest alterations. You don’t have to apply dithering; your own ears will tell
you if it makes any improvements or not.
The High-quality Conversion settings are just like the Realtime Conversion
settings, except they are applied to tracks during mixing and export, so unlike
the Realtime Conversion settings, your project files are changed.

Interface
The Interface dialog (Figure 15-6) controls some of the elements of the Audacity
interface:
Figure 15-6. The Interface dialog
Ergonomic order of audio I/O buttons
Check this to put the buttons in the Control toolbar in this order: Pause,
Play, Stop, Skip to Start, Skip to End, and Record. Unchecked, they go Skip
to Start, Play, Record, Pause, Stop, and Skip to End.
Show ‘How to get Help’ message at program start up
Check this to see a message box full of links to Audacity help resources,
such as the manual and wiki. You may need to install the Audacity manual
separately if you want a local copy. The most current version will be online.
Meter/Waveform dB range
This is where you adjust the display scale in the Meter toolbar and
Waveform dB view (Track menu), from -36 dB to -145 dB.
Language
This is a nice convenience if you want your Audacity session to be in a
different language than your operating system default. You also need the
language fonts installed on your system.
Location of Manual
Use this to program Help > Manual to either look for a local copy of the
Audacity manual, or to go directly to the online version.

Closing last window quits Audacity
If you uncheck this box, closing the last open project will leave Audacity
open, and you’ll have to select File > Exit (or press ctrl-Q) to close
completely. This is useful when you’re doing a lot of projects, such as
transferring a batch of vinyl records to CD, because you can close each
project as you finish without closing Audacity.
Beep on completion of longer activities
Check this to make Audacity beep when tasks that take longer than a
minute are finished.
CleanSpeech Mode
CleanSpeech Mode creates a customized, simplified Audacity interface for
quick cleanups and quick MP3 exports. One extra button is added to the
Control toolbar, and the menus are simplified (Figure 15-7). The Generate
and Analyze menus are removed, and some of the remaining menus have
simplified sets of commands and options. When you click the pretty orange
CleanSpeech button, you see something like Figure 15-8. There are two
prefab batches, or chain operations as they are called in Audacity: a fast
MP3 converter and the CleanSpeech batch job for cleaning up plain-speech
recordings such as podcasts.
Figure 15-7. CleanSpeech Mode button
Figure 15-8. CleanSpeech Mode has two prefab operations: CleanSpeech and

MP3 Conversion.
The MP3 conversion contains only two operations: normalization and export to
128Kbps MP3. If you apply CleanSpeech or MP3 conversion to an open project
by clicking the Apply to Current Project button, the exported files go into a
directory named cleaned in the project directory. You may also start with an
empty project, click Apply to Files, and select files to convert from a file picker.
The converted files will be exported into the same directories as the source audio
files. With the second method, no new Audacity project is created.
The default CleanSpeech settings are rather harsh because they apply Noise
Removal and the Leveller Effect. Noise Removal needs a custom noise profile to
be effective, and there is no way to build a custom profile here. The Leveller
Effect introduces a significant amount of distortion. It applies the Normalize
effect twice, which can increase noise. You can modify either of these two chains
or create new ones, though at the time this was written, the Audacity chains
feature was still rather immature and not very well documented.
Select File > Edit Chains to see exactly what the prefab CleanSpeech and MP3
conversions do (Figure 15-9).
Figure 15-9. MP3 conversion and CleanSpeech options
But even in its current unfinished state, the Audacity developers have the right
idea by making these custom batch jobs customizable through a graphical
interface. To create a new chain, open the File > Edit Chains dialog (Figure 15-
10) and click the Add button in the left pane. A little message window pops up
and asks you to name your new chain. In this example, I created the new “test”
chain.

Figure 15-10. Creating a new custom chain
Now I can add a command to the test chain by clicking the Insert button
(Figure 15-11). This opens the Select Command dialog. This has more
commands in normal mode than in CleanSpeech mode.
To find out whether you can customize command parameters, first select a
command, and then click the Edit Parameters button. In Figure 15-12, we do
this with the Amplify effect. This opens its normal dialog, so we can set the
Amplify parameters in the usual way.
This doesn’t work for all the commands, but you may find you can create some
useful chains to automate routine tasks.

Figure 15-11. The Select Command dialog
Figure 15-12. Setting the Amplify effect parameters

Tracks
The Track dialog (Figure 15-13) controls how your Audacity tracks behave
during recording, editing, and playback:
Figure 15-13. Setting the defaults for your track behaviors
Update display while playing
This autoscrolls during playback. If it bogs down your computer too much,
you can disable it. Though if it does, you really need to think about
upgrading your computer.
Automatically fit tracks vertically zoomed
This could be a convenient option: Your tracks are resized vertically to fit
the screen. But if your project has too many tracks, they will get squished
very small. Too few tracks and they will be expanded very large to fill the
screen.
Default View Mode
Choose your default waveform display, which has the same selections as in
the Track menu: Waveform, which is Audacity’s default; Waveform dB;
Spectrum; Spectrum log(f); or Pitch EAC. (See Track Panel in Track Panel
to learn more about these.)
Select all audio in project, if none selected
If this is not checked, all menu items requiring a selection will be grayed
out until you select something. When it is checked, all of your tracks are
selected by default when you make no selection.
Enable cut lines

This is a nice little feature that helps you keep track of recent cuts. When
you make a cut, a light blue line marks the location. When you move the
cursor elsewhere, the blue line turns red.
Enable dragging of left and right selection edges
This allows you to expand or reduce selections using the mouse. When this
is not checked, you must use the keyboard or the selection bar.
“Move track focus” cycles repeatedly through tracks
When you have multiple tracks, you can change focus with the up-and
down-arrow keys, and when the cursor comes to the top or bottom track, it
automatically continues to cycle through the tracks as long as you hold the
key down.
Editing a clip can move other clips
When this is checked, you can paste between clips, and Audacity will
automatically create space for the new paste. When it is not checked, if
there is not enough room, you will not be able to paste there.
Solo Button
This has a dropdown menu with three options that controls the behavior of
the Solo buttons on the Track panels and Mixer Board: Standard, Simple,
None. In Standard mode, clicking the Solo button on multiple tracks is
equivalent to selecting them, and you can select multiple tracks this way. In
Simple mode, clicking the Solo button on one track mutes all the others.
None removes all the Solo buttons, leaving only Mute buttons.

Import/Export
Here you can set some useful defaults for importing and exporting audio files
(Figure 15-14):
Figure 15-14. Setting default importing and exporting behaviors: Import/Export
When importing audio files
You must choose one of the first two options: “Make a copy of
uncompressed audio files before editing (safer)” or “Read uncompressed
audio files directly from the original (faster).”
The first option adds redundancy, and it allows you to manipulate or delete
your source audio files without damaging your Audacity project. The
second is faster and more frugal of disk space. If you aren’t going to change
the source files, then use this option. For example, suppose you have a long
live recording of your band, and you’re going to edit it and make some CDs
and downloads from it. If you’re like me, you preserve your originals intact,
warts and all, and make backup copies, so you don’t need Audacity to make
additional copies of the originals.
Normalize all tracks in a project
This setting will normalize all audio files on import into your project
according to the current settings of Effect > Normalize. I prefer to apply
normalization as one of the final steps on most projects, especially when
I’m mixing multiple tracks down to stereo, because mixing tracks together
makes them louder. But this could be a useful option when you are doing a
project that doesn’t require a lot of editing, such as assembling a

compilation from audio files that are already edited and mixed.
When exporting tracks to an audio file
“Always mix all tracks down to Stereo or Mono channel(s)” is the logical
choice when you mainly create stereo or mono mixes. “Use custom mix”
opens a channel mapper at export (Audacity calls it a mixer), which you
need for multichannel surround exports and when you want a little more
control of stereo exports.
Show Metadata Editor prior to export step
Checking this means the metadata editor will open for every individual
song track or file at export so you can verify or edit the metadata for each
one individually. This can be a big job if you are exporting a lot of
individual songs or tracks. You should first enter information common to all
tracks in File > Open Metadata Editor, and then Audacity will
automatically enter this for every song and automatically enter each track
number.

Projects
The Projects dialog controls autosave intervals and how to manage projects that
are spun off from other projects (Figure 15-15):
When saving a project that depends on other audio files
I don’t believe it is a good idea for Audacity projects to depend on other
Audacity projects. They should be self-contained. If you need to be frugal
of disk space, then you might want your Audacity projects to share
dependencies, but I think this is asking for trouble, because if anything
changes, it will affect multiple projects. The safe choice is “Always copy all
audio into project (safest).” “Ask user” is all right if you want to decide for
each project individually. You can check whether any project has
dependencies by clicking File > Check Dependencies.
Auto save
Click this if you want Audacity to automatically save a copy of your project
at whatever interval you select. The copy goes into a separate directory,
which Audacity uses for autorecovery of damaged projects. It doesn’t save
the data files, which are the ones with the .au extension, but rather the
project metadata, which is kept in an XML file. Linux users can see these
autosave files in .audacity-dataAutoSave/; they’re just like the project .aup
files. On Windows XP and Vista, look in Documents and Settings\<user
name>\Application Data\Audacity, and on Windows 7, refer to Users\
<user name>\AppData\Roaming\Audacity.
Figure 15-15. Setting default importing and exporting behaviors: Projects

You can’t save your project while Audacity is running, so it is a good idea to
take advantage of every opportunity to stop recording and save your project by
pressing ctrl-C or clicking File > Save Project as often as you can.

Libraries
The Libraries dialog confirms if you have LAME and FFMpeg installed, gives
their locations, and gives their versions (Figure 15-16).
Figure 15-16. The Libraries dialog shows the version number, 3.98.2, and the
full file path. If LAME were not installed, it would not show these.
If any of these is missing, just click the Download button to find and install
them.

Spectrograms
This dialog controls the level of detail in the track display when you select the
Spectrum or Pitch EAC views of your tracks. These are useful for in-depth
frequency analysis. (Chapter 11 has a nice introduction to frequency analysis.)
There is whole lot of math going on here that I do not understand, but I am
grateful to the brainiacs who do understand the math and refine the algorithms
that make digital audio engineering possible. The first setting, FFT (Fast Fourier
Transform) Window, controls how much frequency detail is shown. Larger FFT
sizes show more bass frequencies and less detailed time resolution.
Window type lists things like Rectangular, Hanning, Bartlett, Hamming, Welch,
and Gaussian. In the plainest terms I can think of, without digging into the math,
these are graphical views of digital signals intended to aid detailed analysis.
According to the Wikipedia article “Window Function”
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Window_function/), Blackman-Harris is a lower-
resolution, high-dynamic range window, while all the others are high-and
moderate-resolution windows.
The Minimum/Maximum Frequency settings are useful for trimming the display
when you’re working in limited frequency range, such as with a voice or a single
instrument.

Directories
Tell Audacity what temporary directory you want it to use in the Directories
dialog (Figure 15-17). The normal operating system temp file is best and should
be already selected by Audacity.
Figure 15-17. Temporary file location
The Audio Cache setting is a rather desperate option if you are stuck with a very
slow computer. Checking this option keeps all recording in memory until you
stop recording, and then it is written to disk. It will certainly speed up
performance on a computer with a very slow hard drive. But one little power
blip or running out of RAM means your recording session is lost. There isn’t as
much risk on a laptop since it has a battery, and you can set a minimum memory
threshold to trigger writing to disk. Audacity has a hard-coded minimum of
16MB RAM, so you can’t use a lower setting than that.

Warnings
This one is so easy you can do it in your sleep—decide which warnings you
want Audacity to display for different operations (Figure 15-18).
Figure 15-18. Turning warnings on or off

Effects
This dialog gives you the option to enable or disable Nyquist, VAMP, LADSPA,
or VST effects. (Linux users will not see VST effects because they do not work
on Linux.) I don’t know why you would want to disable any of these, but you
can if you want.

Keyboard and Mouse
In these two dialogs, you can set custom key bindings and see what the mouse
shortcuts are. You can’t change the mouse shortcuts, but you can customize
keyboard shortcuts all you want. Click the function you want to create a
keyboard shortcut for; let’s say it’s Open Metadata Editor. Click the box next to
the Set button and press the keys you want for your shortcut. In Figure 15-19, I
entered ctrl-S and clicked the Set button. Then Audacity kindly informed me that
ctrl-S was already in use. Because Audacity finds any conflicts for you, it goes
fast.
Figure 15-19. Changing keyboard shortcuts

Appendix A. Audio Hardware
The world of audio recording and processing hardware is large and bewildering,
and it uncomfortably straddles both the analog and digital worlds. It’s not always
clear if a particular device will work with a computer, or what devices are
necessary for digital audio recording.
This appendix contains a sampling of sound cards, mixers, analog-to-
digital/digital-to-analog converters, microphones, and portable digital recorders
in various price ranges to give you an idea of what is available. This is far from a
comprehensive catalog, but hopefully it will give you a good start in
understanding audio gear.
The simplest Audacity recording setup needs three things: a computer running
Audacity, an analog-to-digital/digital-to-analog converter, and some kind of
interface to connect microphones or musical instruments to your ADC/DAC.
This could be as simple as a laptop and a microphone. You can start out cheap
and simple and build up over time as you want.
Prices, models, features, and operating system support are all moving targets.
My favorite online shopping site is zZounds (http://www.zzounds.com/). They
carry a huge inventory, have great prices, and provide the best customer service.
B&H Photo Video are also first-rate (http://www.bhphotovideo.com/). Both sites
are great for learning about products and pricing, and they generate a lot of
useful customer reviews.

PCI, PCI-e, PCMCIA Sound Cards
I like PCI and PCI-e for very fast, trouble-free multichannel recording. PCI-e is
faster than PCI, because each PCI-e slot has its down dedicated bus while PCI
devices share bandwidth. Both are excellent and least-hassle.
PCMCIA interfaces are for laptops. PCI, PCI-e, and PCMCIA often require
separate breakout boxes for connecting mics, mixers, preamps, and other
devices. Some of them, in place of breakout boxes, use breakout cable bundles.

PCI
Digigram VX222HR
24-bit/192 kHz ADC/DAC, 2/2 stereo balanced analog and digital I/O,
includes breakout cables. $550. Windows and Linux.
M-Audio Delta 44
24-bit/96 kHz ADC/DAC, 4-in/4-out balanced and unbalanced 1/4″ TRS,
includes breakout box. $149. Windows, Linux, and Mac.
M-Audio Delta 1010LT
8 × 8 analog I/O, S/PDIF, 24/96 kHz ADC/DAC, word clock for accurate
device synchronization, 2 mic/line preamps. Includes breakout cable
bundle. If you want to connect more than two mics you’ll need an external
preamp. $199. Windows, Linux, and Mac.
M-Audio Delta 1010
24/96 ADC/DAC, 10-in/10-out rackmount breakout box, 7.1 surround
playback, S/PDIF in and out, word clock for accurate device
synchronization. Includes breakout box and cables. $799. Windows, Linux,
and Mac.

PCI-e
AudioScience ASI5641
Professional digital-only sound card with four stereo/eight mono AES/EBU
inputs and outputs, 24/96 kHz ADC/DAC. Requires a breakout box. Price is
about $1,295, plus $295 for a breakout box. Windows and Linux.
RME Hammerfall Multiface II
The RME Hammerfall Multiface II audio interface is a high-end
multichannel recording interface with multiple computer interface options:
their own HDSP PCI, PCI-e, and PCMCIA cards. See the PCMCIA section
for more information on the Multiface II. The HDSP PCI/PCI-e cards cost
around $300.

PCMCIA
Digigram VXPocket 440
PCMCIA, S/PDIF stereo input and output, 24/48 kHz ADC/DAC, two
balanced mic/line inputs, includes breakout cables. $650. Windows and
Linux.
RME Hammerfall DSP Cardbus + Multiface II
The RME HDSP PCMCIA Cardbus Type II is the laptop interface card for
the Multiface II audio interface. It delivers extremely low latency, high
bandwidth, and low CPU load. $400. Windows, Linux, and Mac.
The Multiface II has 24/96 kHz ADC/DAC, 8 analog I/O, 1 ADAT, 1
S/PDIF, word clock, 1 stereo analog output for headphones or stereo mix
out, 16-channel MIDI. It goes for around $800, and you can often find it
bundled with the RME HDSP for around $1100. You’ll need a separate
preamp to connect microphones.
There are also PCI and PCI-e interfaces for the Multiface II.

USB Recording Interfaces
USB interfaces are portable and easy to connect. Class-compliant USB
interfaces don’t need any special drivers, but a lot of USB interfaces do. Many
come with a driver CD even when they don’t need them.
Behringer UCA222
This little portable 16/48 USB ADC/DAC is yours for $35. Carry it in your
laptop bag; connects a pair of RCA inputs or a pair of RCA outputs. Use it
to connect a turntable, tape deck, instrument, or analog mixer.
Behringer Xenyx X1204 USB Mixer
The Xenyx line of USB mixers comes in various sizes and gives you a nice
combination analog mixer; 24-bit ADC/DACs; mic preamps; and extra
goodies such as special effects, equalizer, compressors, monitoring ports,
faders, and auxilary sends. Plug in all of your performers, adjust the mix,
and these little mixers will output a ready-for-CD stereo recording. The
Xenyx line ranges from $270 for the X1204 to $500 for the X1832.
Windows, Linux, and Mac.
M-Audio Fast Track Ultra 8R
Rackmount USB 2.0 24-bit/96 kHz, 8 preamps, 8 XLR/TRS combo jacks, 2
headphone outputs. $499. Includes drivers for Windows and Mac, reported
to work on Linux with stock ALSA drivers.
M-Audio MobilePre
My own little two-channel workhorse. Accepts up to four devices, such as
two mics and two instruments. 16/48 ADC/DAC, nice knobs for gain
control, headphone monitoring port, two mic preamps, phantom power,
bus-powered, stereo input and output, line ins and outs. $179. Windows,
Linux, and Mac.
PreSonus AudioBox 2×2
PreSonus makes nice audio hardware, and this little box is a nice value. You
get a two-channel bus-powered preamp ADC/DAC with phantom power; it
is very portable because it is small and doesn’t need an external power
supply. It has two combination TRS/TLR plugins for dynamic mics,
condenser mics, or instruments; nice knobs for controlling gain; two MIDI
ports; and a headphone monitoring port. $149. Windows, Linux, and Mac.
ProJect Phono Box II USB Phono Preamp
16/48 kHz ADC for connecting a standard turntable to your computer, for
both recording and playback. $199. Windows, Linux, and Mac.

Shure X2U XLR-to-USB Signal Adapter
Slick little XLR-to-USB microphone adapter with phantom power, 16/48
ADC, and mic preamp for both dynamic and condenser mics. Plug your
favorite mic directly into your computer. $150. Windows, Linux, and Mac.

FireWire Recording Interfaces
FireWire is wonderful for high-end multichannel recording, though getting
FireWire devices to work correctly can be a bit finicky. The new FireWire 800
standard creates the widest possible data path, which is a great boon for
multichannel recording, allowing you to record more channels at full 24/192
resolution than with any other type of computer interface.
Echo AudioFire 2
Bus-powered portable 4 × 6, 24/96 ADC/DAC, S/PDIF in and out, MIDI,
headphone port, 2 × 1/4″ TRS in, 2 × 1/4″ TRS out. You’ll need a mic
preamp to connect microphones. Windows, Linux, and Mac.
Edirol FA-101
Bus-powered, two XLR/TRS combo jacks, S/PDIF, 24/192 ADC/DAC, 2
phantom-powered mic preamps, 8 × 8 balanced analog I/O, MIDI. Nice
little high-end portable for around $400. Windows, Linux, and Mac.
Focusrite Saffire Pro 26 I/O
8 XLR mic preamps, 8 TRS line/instrument inputs, 8 TRS outputs, 2 ×
ADAT, 24/192 ADC/DAC, 1 S/PDIF in and out, word clock, two
headphone ports, and 10 gain control knobs. Plug in your mics and
instruments and start recording. Around $500. Windows, Linux, and Mac.
RME Fireface 800
24/192 ADC/DAC, 8 1/4″ TRS analog inputs, 8 1/4″ TRS digital outputs, 2
× ADAT, 2 × S/PDIF, phantom power, mic preamps . . . up to 35 signal
sources can be connected to the Fireface 800 and recorded onto 28 separate
tracks. This is a serious device for heavy-duty recording. FireWire 800 is
the latest FireWire spec. It delivers double the throughput of the old
FireWire 400 spec at 800Mbps. It is backwards-compatible to FireWire
400. You won’t see lower latency but double the bandwidth for
multichannel recording. This fine piece of gear sells for about $1,700.
Windows and Mac, someday Linux support.

Stand Alone ADC/DACs
A key component in digital audio recording is a good ADC/DAC. As with all
electronics, they come in many forms, from nice combination devices to as many
separate specialized components as you can cram into your studio.
Behringer ADA8000
When you have a lot of mics to connect, you need something like this.
Rackmount 8-channel 24/48 ADC/DAC, 8 microphone preamps, phantom
power. All eight channels can be routed to the ADAT output for connecting
to mixers or other devices, and each channel has individual line outs. $299.
To connect this to your computer, you need an audio interface with ADAT
ports like the Multiface II or the Focusrite Saffire Pro or an ADAT interface
card in your computer. These come in all the usual interfaces: PCI, PCI-e,
and FireWire. These range from a couple of hundred of dollars to several
hundred dollars. Windows, Linux, and Mac.
Apogee DA16X
There are many stand alone ADC/DACs for the professional recording
studio that do nothing but analog/digital conversion, like this one. 16
Channel 24/192 ADC/DAC, 2 × D-sub 25 pin analog outputs, 1 × D-sub 25
pin inputs, ADAT and word clock for synchronizing multiple devices. One
way you might use this converter is to connect your performers to an analog
mixer with mic preamps or perhaps a separate mic preamp, connect the
mixer to the Apogee, and then connect the Apogee to your computer with a
FireWire or PCI interface card. This unit will set you back about $3,000.
Windows and Mac.

Appendix B. Glossary
A–E
ADC/DAC
Analog-to-digital converter, digital-to-analog converter. Analog sounds
such as a singer or an instrument are converted to digital form for recording
and editing, then converted back to analog for playback. A CD player is a
DAC. Your computer sound card is an ADC/DAC. An ADC is a crucial
piece of equipment. A good one performs a good clean accurate conversion
without introducing noise. Bad ones sound strange and add noise. Some are
designed to add some color, for example to sound like a certain classic tube
amp or recording style from the old days.
Amplitude
Amplitude, as it relates to sounds, can be thought of as pressure; the greater
the pressure, the louder the sound. It is also described as intensity or energy.
You can see amplitude in a waveform, as in Figure B-1. Higher peaks mean
greater amplitude. Both tracks are 1,000 Hz sine waves created with the
Generate > Tone dialog. The top track has an amplitude of 1.0, and the
bottom track has an amplitude of 0.2. These two tones are identical except
for their amplitudes.
Figure B-1. Two identical sine waves with different amplitudes
This is physical pressure, which you can experience under certain
conditions. For example, you can see the cone of a subwoofer pulsate when
it is cranked up loud enough and feel the air movement when you place
your hand in front of it. (And people miles away can “enjoy” listening to it.)
Bill Nye the Science Guy has a cool stunt where he extinguishes a candle

with a homemade sonic cannon. A loud blast of sound will ripple water.
Sonic cannons have been tested in a number of creative ways, such as being
used as nonlethal police weapons for dispersing crowds. Theoretically, a
powerful enough sound blast at the right frequency will burst eardrums. At
less powerful levels, and at the right frequencies, it will create nausea and
feelings of discomfort and nervousness.
Ambience, Ambient Sounds
Any sounds from your surrounding environment. Ambient sounds add color
and energy, such as crowd noises, the sounds of birds and wind in the trees,
or the special sound qualities from recording in a special location such as an
open ampitheater or an old cathedral. Ambient sounds can also be
unpleasant, like traffic noise and barking dogs.
Analog Hole
A scary bogeyman invented by the entertainment industry that demonstrates
a fundamental misunderstanding of both technology and customer service.
Digital media players must convert audio and video to an analog form so
we can hear and see it; this is what comes out of your speakers and is what
you see on your television. If we can see it, it can be photographed, and if
we can hear it, so can a microphone. Of course, making copies in these
ways results in lower-quality copies, but it shows there is no way to prevent
copying by technological means. The industry’s efforts to “close the analog
hole” have resulted in crippled home entertainment receivers that send a
purposely degraded signal to the analog outputs or that have disabled the
analog outputs. This sort of crippling does not differentiate between media
that you have the right use however you want, such as your home movies
on DVD and homemade music CDs, and the mass-produced gluck they are
trying to “protect.”
It’s all futile anyway, since all forms of copy protection are cracked sooner
or later, and then you can easily make perfect digital copies.
Bit Depth
Controls dynamic range, signal-to-noise ratio, and overall fidelity and
accuracy. A wider dynamic range results in a higher signal-to-noise ratio,
which is also called a lower noise floor. In other words, you get more of the
sound you want and less noise introduced by your equipment. In the olden
days of recording on tape, there was always tape hiss and a certain amount
of noise from the tape machines. On vinyl LPs, there is noise from defects
in the vinyl and turntable hum. In digital audio, noise comes from your
electronics; good electronics are described as delivering a clean sound
without any introduced noise.

The common bit depths for audio production are 16 bits, 24 bits, 32 bits,
and 32-bit floating point. A larger bit depth results in a more accurate, more
faithful conversion from analog.
Bit depth goes hand in hand with sampling rate. Your analog-to-digital
converter “samples” the audio signal so many times per second. For
example, CD-quality is 16 bits at a sampling rate of 44,100 times per
second. Each individual sample is given a binary 16-bit value. Converted to
decimal, each sample is equal to or less than 65,535 (0–65,535).
24-bit depth has a range of 0–16,777,216 possible values, and 32-bit has 0–
4,294,967,295. Note that these are unsigned integer values. For example,
32-bit floating point is a 24-bit mantissa plus an 8-bit exponent. Audacity
and many other audio recording applications and DAWs use 32-bit float
internally because the floating decimal point allows for a very high level of
precision and creates all kinds of extra headroom so you can manipulate
your audio files in all kinds of ways without degrading them.
A bit depth of 16 has a potential dynamic range of 96 dB; 24 bits, 144 dB;
and 32 bits, 192 dB. Audio hardware has a hard limit of about 115 dB. The
potential dynamic range of 32-bit float is about 1,500 dB, which means a
super low noise floor and far less potential for clipping.
In some of Audacity’s configuration dialogs bit depth is called sample
format. Bit depth is the correct term.
Channel
A single path for any signal. For example, a mono microphone plugged into
a mono input is one input channel. A stereo signal routed to two speakers
has two playback channels. A music system with discrete 5.1 surround
sound has six playback channels. If you plug 10 performers into a mixer
and then plug that mixer into a single mono channel, that is still one input
channel even though your entire band is recording into it.
Many surround-sound receivers can emulate multichannel surround from a
stereo recording. This is not discrete multichannel surround but plain old
two-channel stereo.
Clipping
When a digital audio signal goes over zero dBFS, it is truncated to the
maximum value of the bit depth you are recording in. This can sound pretty
awful, so avoiding clipping is very important in digital audio.
Cross-fade
This is a nice and common effect: A fade-out overlaps a fade-in. Audacity
does not have a cross-fade effect, but it is easy to create a cross-fade using
the Envelope and Time Shift tools. You need two tracks: Manually create a

fade-out on one, a fade-in on the other, and then adjust the degree of
overlap with the Time Shift tool.
DAW
Digital audio workstation, which is a combination recorder-mixer. This can
be a stand alone hardware device or a software application or suite on a
computer.
dBFS
Decibels relative to full scale; see Decibel.
Decibel
Decibels measure amplitude, or how loud sounds are. One decibel is one
tenth of a bel, which was named for Alexander Graham Bell. Decibels are
also used to measure voltage and signal strength.
In audio, a decibel is not an absolute measurement but a ratio between the
sound we are measuring and an arbitrary reference level. About the smallest
change we can perceive is 1 dB. A gain of 3 dB is about twice as loud, and
a reduction of 3 dB is about half as loud. The intensity, or amplitude, of a
sound is not proportional to how we perceive its loudness. Loudness is a
psychoacoustic response, and it takes about a 10 times increase in the
intensity of a sound to make it sound twice as loud.
In digital audio, we use the decibels relative to full scale, abbreviated as
dBFS. Zero is the loudest we can go without clipping, and digital audio dB
values are expressed as negative numbers.
You might see tables that show the decibel levels of various sounds from
the quietest whisper a person can hear, which is zero, to the threshold of
pain, which is usually stated as 120 dB. These are not like the dBFS scale
we use in digital audio but the dBA scale, which is commonly used to
measure environmental and industrial noise.
Discrete
This is discrete as in separate, not discreet as in able to keep one’s mouth
shut. Most stereo systems have two discrete playback channels, and discrete
5.1 surround sound means six separate playback channels. Sometimes 5.1
surround is emulated from a stereo track, so this is not discrete 5.1
surround.
Downmix
Combine multiple audio tracks into fewer tracks, as in downmixing six
tracks to two-channel stereo.
Downsample
Convert to a lower sampling rate. For example, CD audio must be 16 bits/
44,100 Hz sample rate, so a 48 kHz audio file must be downsampled to

44.1 kHz. Resampling can harm audio quality, so the less often you
resample an audio file the better. Resampling once from a master file for
export to different audio file formats is all right; if you resample the
resampled file, chances are you will hear the difference.
DRM
Digital rights management, or digital restrictions management, depending
on your point of view. DRM is various copy-protection technologies
designed to prevent illegal copying of copyrighted media.

F–J
Frequency
Sound frequencies are measured in hertz, which are cycles per second, or
how long it takes one complete sound wave to pass by a given point in one
second. Higher frequencies create higher-pitched tones. Hertz is
abbreviated as Hz. Kilohertz is kHz, megahertz is MHz, and gigahertz is
GHz. The highest note on an 88-key piano is C8 at 4,186 Hz, or 4.186 kHz.
The Guinness World Records holder for the lowest note produced by a
human voice, Roger Menees, sang an F-sharp at 0.393 Hz. That’s right, less
than 1 hertz and far beyond the lowest key on an 88-key piano keyboard,
which is A0 at 27.5 Hz.
Figure B-2 shows two sine waves of the same amplitude but different
frequencies. The top waveform is 100 Hz, and the bottom is 1,000 Hz.
Figure B-2. Two sine waves of the same amplitude and different
frequencies.
Note
The official recording that Mr. Menees made to win his Guinness World Record is the “property” of the
Guinness company, so he cannot use this recording of his own voice.
Fundamental Frequency
Nearly all sounds are complex and have multiple frequencies. When you
play a trombone or strum a guitar, every note has multiple harmonic
frequencies, so which one is the note? It is the lowest frequency; that is
what we call the pitch, and that is what we tune our instruments to. Pitch is

subjective rather than objective; pitch is what we perceive the note to be.
Usually it’s pretty easy to say, “That note is middle C,” or A below C or F-
sharp or what-have-you.
But with some instruments it is not so easy to detect the pitch. For example,
when you beat a gong or a cymbal, can you pick out a distinct note? With
most gongs and cymbals, the overtones and harmonics are so complex you
can’t.
Harmonic Frequencies
A harmonic frequency is a multiple of the fundamental frequency. For
example, when the fundamental frequency is 100 Hz, the first harmonic
frequency is 200 Hz, the second is 300 Hz, and so on.
Hertz
See Frequency.
High-Z, Low-Z
See Impedance.
Hotplug
Plug or unplug an electronic device while the power is on. Usually this is a
bad idea because it can make a loud popping noise or even cause damage,
so a good habit to form is to always power your equipment off before
connecting or disconnecting anything.
Impedance
Impedance is electrical resistance. The short story is to always match your
impedances for whatever audio hardware you are connecting.
You’ll want to pay some extra attention to microphone impedance. Lower
impedance is better: 600 ohms or less. Medium impedance is 600 to 10,000
ohms, and high impedance is more than 10,000. Some higher-end mics
support multiple impedance ratings and have switches to select the one you
want to use. When you see High-Z and Low-Z, that is shorthand for high
impedance and low impedance. But these are imprecise, so it’s better to
know your exact ratings.
High-impedance mics are usually lower-quality mics, and they lose signal
strength over longer cable runs. If you can’t match impedances exactly,
connect your mic to an input with the same or higher impedance. If you go
the other way, you’ll lose signal strength. Nothing seriously bad will
happen with mismatched mic and input impedances, though you might
experience loss of signal strength and lesser audio quality.
A line matching transformer is a useful gadget for connecting devices with
mismatched impendances and converting them to match.
Intellectual Property

An imprecise, misused, meaningless propaganda term. The relevant legal
terms are trademark, copyright, and patent.

K–O
Latency
Lag, delay. Low latency is important for overdubbing and for monitoring a
recording session. Many things affect latency: the speed of your computer’s
CPU, how lean and clean your operating system is, sound card drivers,
computer busses (USB, PCI, FireWire), special effects processors, and
other outboard audio devices.
Metadata
Data about data; a means of storing information about a computer file
inside the file headers. Audacity has a metadata editor for recording session
information such as artist, title, date, and genre.
Mixdown
Same as downmix.
Overdubbing
Making a multitrack recording a few tracks at a time. It’s how one person
can record an entire symphony by themselves, one track at a time. Many
commercial recordings are recorded in bits and pieces, and the performers
may never be present at the same recording session or even use the same
studio. In Audacity, you can record an instrument track and then play it
back while you record a second track. There is always a bit of latency in
overdubbing this way, so Audacity has a customizable latency correction.

P–T
Peak Level
Highest volume level in your recording. Usually peaks are transient events
and are higher and more abrupt than your RMS levels. Peak and RMS
levels are represented by two different shades of blue in Audacity
waveforms.
Phase
Phase is about timing, the location in time of a waveform relative to its
beginning. When the phase of a waveform is nonzero, it has been moved
forward or backward in time. We do this in Audacity with the Time Shift
tool. Sound waves interact with each other in all kinds of complex and
interesting ways, and phase shifting is often used to create audio special
effects. For example, you can create a pleasing echo by copying an audio
track, shifting the phase of the copy a little bit, and mixing the copy and
original back together.
Two waveforms that are exactly in phase combine their amplitudes and
sound louder. Sounds that mix randomly may create totally new sounds.
Two waveforms that are phase-shifted 180 degrees relative to each other
cancel each other out. Noise-cancellation devices do this, though with
varying degrees of effectiveness because sounds are complex and don’t
match up exactly. When loudspeakers are not placed correctly, you might
hear part of the song disappear, like the lead singer sounds muted, because
of phase shifting.
When you are placing microphones, you must take phase into account,
especially if you are using multiple mics. For example, it is a common
practice to use multiple mics on a drum kit, with some on the floor and
some overhead. If they are not spaced correctly, they will be out of sync and
create some lag or phase shift to cause some partial cancellation so the
drums sound thin and weak.
Pitch
Pitch and frequency are often thought of as being the same thing, but
they’re not. Frequencies can be measured objectively, while pitch is usually
subjective. The ear can be fooled, as demonstrated by the French composer
Jean Claude Risset. Mr. Risset is known for creating auditory illusions such
as the Risset rhythm, which sounds as though it is forever increasing in
tempo when in fact it is maintaining the same tempo. The human ear

perceives that a high pitch gets higher as it grows louder, while a low tone
sounds as though its pitch is dropping as it gets louder. You can easily try
this yourself by generating some sine tones at different frequencies in
Audacity and gradually increasing and decreasing the volume.
In music, we think of pitch as being the musical notes, so we tune our
instruments to a pitch of middle C, or G below C, or whatever the
notes/pitches are.
Psychoacoustics
The study of how humans perceive sounds. Much of our perception is
relative; for example, going out into traffic noise isn’t as dramatic an event
after a day of working in a noisy store as when leaving a quiet library. Some
sounds mask other sounds, and so we might use white noise to mask other
noise.
Audio is very subjective, and recordings can be tailored to take advantage
of psychoacoustics. Modern high-tech hearing aids use psychoacoustic
models to make noises sound more natural. Psychoacoustic models are used
to make lossy audio formats such as MP3 and Ogg Vorbis sound better.
RMS
Root mean square, or the average volume of your recording over time.
Contrast with the Peak Level, which is the highest volume level. Audacity
represents RMS and peak levels with two different shades of blue in
waveforms.
Sample Format
See Bit Depth.
Sampling Rate
The number of times per second the analog-to-digital converter “samples”
the analog signal. The sampling rate determines the frequency range of your
recording. Theoretically, a perfect digital representation of an analog audio
signal is possible when the sampling rate is at least twice as high as the
highest frequency in the signal. The best human hearing can hear up to 20–
24 kHz, so a sampling rate of 40–48 kHz can (theoretically) reproduce the
entire range of human hearing.
Tempo
The speed of the music in beats per minute. You might have noticed that
tempo and energy don’t always correlate with each other—that some songs
with slow tempos have great energy, while some faster songs feel draggy.
Try listening more closely when you notice this—is it some quality
projected by the performers? The rhythm section? Is it because the song is
in a minor key, or a major key?

Threshold of Pain
The sound pressure level (amplitude) at which we feel pain. This varies a
little among individual people, and it varies only slightly at different
frequencies.
Timbre
Timbre, pronounced TAM-ber, is a catch-all term for describing the quality
of a sound, such as warm, cold, soft, brittle, reedy, full, rich, thin, breathy,
stout, and so on. Timbre describes the qualities that differentiate different
instruments even when they play the same notes, like cellos, violas, and
violins; bassoons and bass clarinets; or very similar instruments such as two
acoustic guitars.
Try listening to any older Allman Brothers Band recording and see if you
can tell the difference between the two lead guitar players, Duane Allman
and Dickey Betts. The Tiptons Sax Quartet is four saxophone players and a
drummer, so their recordings are splendid for honing your listening skills.
When you listen to the B-52s, can you tell Cindy Wilson and Kate Pierson
apart?
Track
A track, like a channel, is any single audio path or unit. A mono track in
Audacity is a single track. A stereo track in Audacity is also a single track,
even though it has two discrete channels, because Audacity sees it as a
single unit and anything you do to it is applied equally to both channels.
When you burn an audio CD, you can choose TAO (track at once), which
means the laser burns your entire track without pauses. This single CD
track can have multiple songs, and a single song is also a track.
Transient Response
An abrupt high-energy peak in a waveform caused by a sudden event like a
drumbeat, a hard-strummed string, or a bumped microphone.

U–Z
Upsample
Convert to a higher sampling rate; for example, resampling a 44.1 kHz
audio file to 48 kHz. Upsampling is pointless because it does not improve
audio quality and, in fact, may introduce some defects. You should
upsample only when you have to meet specific requirements for certain
tasks, such as upsampling a 22,050 Hz file for CD audio, which must be
44.1 kHz.
VU Meter
VU stands for volume unit. You might recall VU meters from the olden
days of analog tape recording, which we used to monitor recording volume
levels. VU meters typically had a scale of 20 to +3, a moving needle, and a
little red clipping or peak light. VU meters had a rather slow response time,
though avoiding clipping was not as crucial for analog recording as it is for
digital recording.

Appendix C. Seven Myths of Digital Audio
There are a number of persistent, silly audio myths that refuse to die. The funny
part is that a few blind listening tests would disprove them, or as the old geek
saying goes, “One experiment is worth a thousand arguments.” Here are my
favorites.

The Myth of the Golden Ear
Some audiophiles love to obsess over specs and are convinced that, yes, they too
can hear super-high frequencies just like bats, and the super-low frequencies just
like whatever animal hears super-low frequencies, and they need every last
possible hertz, and it must be filtered through special organic electricity or their
listening experience is ruined. Their equipment must be elite and overpriced, and
the Sacred Listening Room must be specially engineered. They are more
sensitive than ordinary mortals, and we just don’t appreciate what they go
through.
Salespeople and equipment reviewers exploit this attitude mercilessly. It’s a
proven way to sell overpriced gear. These salespeople and reviewers don’t have
any special hearing abilities, just acute sensitivities to the smell of money.
Of course, it is true that hearing acuity and perception vary among individual
people, but in any random assortment of humans with good, undamaged hearing,
the differentiator is how educated their ears are. This is true of all of our senses
—when you know what to look for, you become an ace birdwatcher. When you
learn to differentiate different flavors, aromas, and characteristics in wine, it
becomes a multifaceted pleasure instead of just an easy, pleasant buzz.
Experienced riders learn how to interpret all the signals a horse gives—mood,
intent, what’s ahead—and how to communicate back to the horse. Just like
everything else we do, listening is a learning process. You might start out unable
to tell the difference between a viola and a violin, but with experience you learn
to identify the individual musicians in a band or orchestra. Even when it’s the
Billy Tipton Memorial Saxophone Quartet. That’s right, four saxophone players
and nothing else; two alto, one tenor, and one baritone sax. To the inexperienced
ear, it’s just a blur of saxophones, but with a bit of listening, you can tell right
away who is playing what.
Back in the olden analog days, they didn’t have super-duper hi-fi recording
studios, and they sure as heck didn’t have super-duper hi-fi playback devices.
The best recordings from the olden days feature talented, skilled musicians and
talented, skilled engineers who knew how to get the most out of their equipment.
If specs are all that matter, we might as listen to pure sine waves. There are no
shortcuts to spending time listening, comparing, experimenting, and learning to
listen.

The Myth of Burn-In
This is another one that deserves a wooden stake through its vitals. Audio
electronics and speakers sound the same when they’re brand-new as they do
after decades of use, barring damage and component failure. Giving them a
period of “burn-in,” which is simply switching them on and then leaving them
on for whatever magic burn-in interval is required, is silly and does nothing to
change how they sound.
Tube amp-o-philes are particularly prone to burn-in fits and will insist that a new
amp sounds “cold” and, after 24 hours or whatever, sounds “warm.” ’Taint so;
it’s all the same. There are many things that affect how we perceive sounds:
temperature, humidity, mood, whether we are rested or tired, whether we have
been in a quiet or noisy environment all day. Audio electronics are pretty much
always the same.

The Myth of Tube Superiority
Tube amps are obsolete. Solid-state does everything they can do, cheaper and
better and with less distortion. Tube amps need more service over their lifetimes
because tubes burn out and lose power, and you might even need to retension
their sockets. You’ve probably heard lyrical odes to the “tube sound.” Tube amps
are perfectly good for those who prefer them. If there is a “tube sound” that you
like, it is most likely distortion created by the amp. If you want your amps to be
neutral and reproduce your audio as accurately as possible, you want solid-state.

The Myth of Uber Cables
You’re welcome to spend significant wads of money on cables if you really want
to. You’ll probably get more enjoyment out of papering your walls with dollar
bills, lighting cigars with twenties, or making stylish garments out of Ben
Franklins, because spending gobs of money on audio cables does not make them
better than sensibly priced cables. You’ll want to avoid weird, cruddy, no-name
brands, but otherwise any cable that is manufactured to the appropriate
specifications is equal to any other. Look for good construction, strong
connectors, good insulation, and specs and identifying information printed on the
sheaths. Sometimes there are useful options like right-angle plugs or swivel
plugs. If you want to waste your money, do please pick something more worthy
than overpriced audio cables.
Gold-plated connectors add shininess, higher price tags, and some corrosion
resistance. They don’t make the sound better.

The Myth of Analog Superiority
Analog audio cannot compete with digital audio for fidelity; signal-to-noise
ratio; lack of distortion; and ease of editing, manipulation, and reproduction.
Some folks like analog artifacts such as the “fat” sound of pushing analog
circuits to their limits, distortion, feedback, and so on. No worries, everyone is
entitled to their preferences. Though it’s worth noting these can be reproduced in
digital audio.

The Myth That You Don’t Need Tone Controls
This one really gets my goat. You enter the high-end snooty audio store to try out
some high-quality equipment. Hey, why not, you won’t know until you listen to
it, right? You are escorted to The Room of Acoustic Perfection. There you are
seated in the precisely positioned Listening Chair, in front of banks of speakers,
amps, preamps, no receivers because those are not snooty enough, and high-end
CD players. These are all connected to a switching system so that you can easily
try out different combinations. Very nice so far. Your salesperson will be into
something above the common herd; perhaps jazz, maybe some classical, maybe
some off-the-wall independent labels. Certainly no Top 40 or teenybop pop.
So on goes the music, and you sink back into pleasant bliss. But as you listen,
you notice it’s not quite right. You want a little less treble, perhaps, and a little
more bass. Maybe the midrange is a touch wimpy and you want to kick it up a
tick or two. Tough luck, buster, because those fine amps only control volume and
balance. You don’t get tone controls. Why? Because, as the salesperson explains,
real audiophiles listen to the music as it is “meant to be listened to.” So no tone
controls for you, and if you want any, then you are defective. Though not too
defective to drop a few thousand dollars on a hi-fi system with no tone controls;
fortunately, the salesperson is magnanimous and will permit you to do that.
Unfortunately, this is a complete myth. Most recordings are not “perfectly
engineered”; all of them are compromises. Because even the best-engineered
recordings are not proof against the environments they are played in or the
individual characteristics of your hi-fi components. They will sound different
depending what they are played on, the rooms they are played in, temperature
and humidity, your moods—every day it’s a little different, and God gave us tone
controls so we could hear recordings the way we want to. Maybe you have some
big bad feelings to work off and need some aggressive subwoofering. Maybe
you want it light and soothing. Maybe you just like to twiddle knobs. That is
your right, and you must not allow pretentious salespersons to take it away from
you.

The Myth That Someone Else Knows Better Than You
For the most part, fussy audiophiles are fussy about all the wrong things. There
are two categories of people who can teach you actual useful knowledge, and
those are musicians and recording engineers. I mean real musicians and real
recording engineers, not wannabes who think that when the knob goes to 11 it
means the amp is louder than amps that go to 10. Recording engineers are just as
much artists as engineers, and even mediocre ones can teach you a lot about the
nuts and bolts of making recordings.
It takes practice, experimentation, and a lot of listening, and the ultimate
decision about what is good is entirely yours. You have to learn to train your
own ear and taste and not depend on what other people tell you because they
don’t experience audio the same way you do. Especially if they’re trying to sell
you something.

Appendix D. References and Resources
Books
Aldrich, Nika. Digital Audio Explained: For the Audio Engineer. 2nd ed. Fort
Wayne, IN: Sweetwater Sound, 2004.
Everest, F.Alton and Ken C.Pohlmann. Master Handbook of Acoustics. 5th ed.
New York: McGraw-Hill, 2009.
Grant, Rickford (with Phil Bull). Ubuntu for Non-Geeks: A Pain-Free, Get-
Things-Done Guide. 4th ed. San Francisco: No Starch Press, 2010.
Pohlmann, Ken C. Principles of Digital Audio. 5th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill,
2005.

Online Resources
“Audacity Forum.” http://forum.audacityteam.org/
“Audacity User’s Manual.” http://manual.audacityteam.org/
Linuxaudio.org http://www.linuxaudio.org/

Image Credits
A very big and grateful thank-you to Wikimedia Commons
(http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Main_Page/) and its contributors for freely
sharing thousands of beautiful and useful photos and drawings and for allowing
me to use some of them in this book.
The following images are released under the GNU Free Documentation License:
Chapter 2, Figure 2-11
Chapter 11, Figure 11-30
The following image is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution
ShareAlike 3.0, Attribution ShareAlike 2.5, Attribution ShareAlike 2.0 and
Attribution ShareAlike 1.0 License:
Chapter 11, Figure 11-6
Chapter 11, Figure 11-11

GNU Free Documentation License
Version 1.3, 3 November 2008
Copyright (C) 2000, 2001, 2002, 2007, 2008 Free Software Foundation, Inc. http://fsf.org/
Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this license document, but changing it
is not allowed.

0. PREAMBLE
The purpose of this License is to make a manual, textbook, or other functional
and useful document "free" in the sense of freedom: to assure everyone the
effective freedom to copy and redistribute it, with or without modifying it, either
commercially or noncommercially. Secondarily, this License preserves for the
author and publisher a way to get credit for their work, while not being
considered responsible for modifications made by others.
This License is a kind of "copyleft", which means that derivative works of the
document must themselves be free in the same sense. It complements the GNU
General Public License, which is a copyleft license designed for free software.
We have designed this License in order to use it for manuals for free software,
because free software needs free documentation: a free program should come
with manuals providing the same freedoms that the software does. But this
License is not limited to software manuals; it can be used for any textual work,
regardless of subject matter or whether it is published as a printed book. We
recommend this License principally for works whose purpose is instruction or
reference.

1. APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS
This License applies to any manual or other work, in any medium, that contains
a notice placed by the copyright holder saying it can be distributed under the
terms of this License. Such a notice grants a world-wide, royalty-free license,
unlimited in duration, to use that work under the conditions stated herein. The
"Document", below, refers to any such manual or work. Any member of the
public is a licensee, and is addressed as "you". You accept the license if you
copy, modify or distribute the work in a way requiring permission under
copyright law.
A "Modified Version" of the Document means any work containing the
Document or a portion of it, either copied verbatim, or with modifications and/or
translated into another language.
A "Secondary Section" is a named appendix or a front-matter section of the
Document that deals exclusively with the relationship of the publishers or
authors of the Document to the Document's overall subject (or to related matters)
and contains nothing that could fall directly within that overall subject. (Thus, if
the Document is in part a textbook of mathematics, a Secondary Section may not
explain any mathematics.) The relationship could be a matter of historical
connection with the subject or with related matters, or of legal, commercial,
philosophical, ethical or political position regarding them.
The "Invariant Sections" are certain Secondary Sections whose titles are
designated, as being those of Invariant Sections, in the notice that says that the
Document is released under this License. If a section does not fit the above
definition of Secondary then it is not allowed to be designated as Invariant. The
Document may contain zero Invariant Sections. If the Document does not
identify any Invariant Sections then there are none.
The "Cover Texts" are certain short passages of text that are listed, as Front-
Cover Texts or Back-Cover Texts, in the notice that says that the Document is
released under this License. A Front-Cover Text may be at most 5 words, and a
Back-Cover Text may be at most 25 words.
A "Transparent" copy of the Document means a machine-readable copy,
represented in a format whose specification is available to the general public,
that is suitable for revising the document straightforwardly with generic text
editors or (for images composed of pixels) generic paint programs or (for

drawings) some widely available drawing editor, and that is suitable for input to
text formatters or for automatic translation to a variety of formats suitable for
input to text formatters. A copy made in an otherwise Transparent file format
whose markup, or absence of markup, has been arranged to thwart or discourage
subsequent modification by readers is not Transparent. An image format is not
Transparent if used for any substantial amount of text. A copy that is not
"Transparent" is called "Opaque".
Examples of suitable formats for Transparent copies include plain ASCII without
markup, Texinfo input format, LaTeX input format, SGML or XML using a
publicly available DTD, and standard-conforming simple HTML, PostScript or
PDF designed for human modification. Examples of transparent image formats
include PNG, XCF and JPG. Opaque formats include proprietary formats that
can be read and edited only by proprietary word processors, SGML or XML for
which the DTD and/or processing tools are not generally available, and the
machine-generated HTML, PostScript or PDF produced by some word
processors for output purposes only.
The "Title Page" means, for a printed book, the title page itself, plus such
following pages as are needed to hold, legibly, the material this License requires
to appear in the title page. For works in formats which do not have any title page
as such, "Title Page" means the text near the most prominent appearance of the
work's title, preceding the beginning of the body of the text.
The "publisher" means any person or entity that distributes copies of the
Document to the public.
A section "Entitled XYZ" means a named subunit of the Document whose title
either is precisely XYZ or contains XYZ in parentheses following text that
translates XYZ in another language. (Here XYZ stands for a specific section
name mentioned below, such as "Acknowledgements", "Dedications",
"Endorsements", or "History".) To "Preserve the Title" of such a section when
you modify the Document means that it remains a section "Entitled XYZ"
according to this definition.
The Document may include Warranty Disclaimers next to the notice which states
that this License applies to the Document. These Warranty Disclaimers are
considered to be included by reference in this License, but only as regards
disclaiming warranties: any other implication that these Warranty Disclaimers
may have is void and has no effect on the meaning of this License.

2. VERBATIM COPYING
You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either commercially
or noncommercially, provided that this License, the copyright notices, and the
license notice saying this License applies to the Document are reproduced in all
copies, and that you add no other conditions whatsoever to those of this License.
You may not use technical measures to obstruct or control the reading or further
copying of the copies you make or distribute. However, you may accept
compensation in exchange for copies. If you distribute a large enough number of
copies you must also follow the conditions in section 3.
You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above, and you may
publicly display copies.

3. COPYING IN QUANTITY
If you publish printed copies (or copies in media that commonly have printed
covers) of the Document, numbering more than 100, and the Document's license
notice requires Cover Texts, you must enclose the copies in covers that carry,
clearly and legibly, all these Cover Texts: Front-Cover Texts on the front cover,
and Back-Cover Texts on the back cover. Both covers must also clearly and
legibly identify you as the publisher of these copies. The front cover must
present the full title with all words of the title equally prominent and visible. You
may add other material on the covers in addition. Copying with changes limited
to the covers, as long as they preserve the title of the Document and satisfy these
conditions, can be treated as verbatim copying in other respects.
If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit legibly, you should
put the first ones listed (as many as fit reasonably) on the actual cover, and
continue the rest onto adjacent pages.
If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document numbering more
than 100, you must either include a machine-readable Transparent copy along
with each Opaque copy, or state in or with each Opaque copy a computer-
network location from which the general network-using public has access to
download using public-standard network protocols a complete Transparent copy
of the Document, free of added material. If you use the latter option, you must
take reasonably prudent steps, when you begin distribution of Opaque copies in
quantity, to ensure that this Transparent copy will remain thus accessible at the
stated location until at least one year after the last time you distribute an Opaque
copy (directly or through your agents or retailers) of that edition to the public.
It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of the Document
well before redistributing any large number of copies, to give them a chance to
provide you with an updated version of the Document.

4. MODIFICATIONS
You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of the Document under the
conditions of sections 2 and 3 above, provided that you release the Modified
Version under precisely this License, with the Modified Version filling the role
of the Document, thus licensing distribution and modification of the Modified
Version to whoever possesses a copy of it. In addition, you must do these things
in the Modified Version:
A. Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title distinct from that
of the Document, and from those of previous versions (which should, if
there were any, be listed in the History section of the Document). You may
use the same title as a previous version if the original publisher of that
version gives permission.
B. List on the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons or entities
responsible for authorship of the modifications in the Modified Version,
together with at least five of the principal authors of the Document (all of
its principal authors, if it has fewer than five), unless they release you from
this requirement.
C. State on the Title page the name of the publisher of the Modified
Version, as the publisher.
D. Preserve all the copyright notices of the Document.
E. Add an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications adjacent to
the other copyright notices.
F. Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a license notice giving
the public permission to use the Modified Version under the terms of this
License, in the form shown in the Addendum below.
G. Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant Sections and
required Cover Texts given in the Document's license notice.
H. Include an unaltered copy of this License.
I. Preserve the section Entitled "History", Preserve its Title, and add to it an
item stating at least the title, year, new authors, and publisher of the
Modified Version as given on the Title Page. If there is no section Entitled
"History" in the Document, create one stating the title, year, authors, and
publisher of the Document as given on its Title Page, then add an item
describing the Modified Version as stated in the previous sentence.
J. Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Document for public
access to a Transparent copy of the Document, and likewise the network

locations given in the Document for previous versions it was based on.
These may be placed in the "History" section. You may omit a network
location for a work that was published at least four years before the
Document itself, or if the original publisher of the version it refers to gives
permission.
K. For any section Entitled "Acknowledgements" or "Dedications",
Preserve the Title of the section, and preserve in the section all the
substance and tone of each of the contributor acknowledgements and/or
dedications given therein.
L. Preserve all the Invariant Sections of the Document, unaltered in their
text and in their titles. Section numbers or the equivalent are not considered
part of the section titles.
M. Delete any section Entitled "Endorsements". Such a section may not be
included in the Modified version.
N. Do not retitle any existing section to be Entitled "Endorsements" or to
conflict in title with any Invariant Section.
O. Preserve any Warranty Disclaimers.
If the Modified Version includes new front-matter sections or appendices that
qualify as Secondary Sections and contain no material copied from the
Document, you may at your option designate some or all of these sections as
invariant. To do this, add their titles to the list of Invariant Sections in the
Modified Version's license notice. These titles must be distinct from any other
section titles.
You may add a section Entitled "Endorsements", provided it contains nothing but
endorsements of your Modified Version by various parties—for example,
statements of peer review or that the text has been approved by an organization
as the authoritative definition of a standard.
You may add a passage of up to five words as a Front-Cover Text, and a passage
of up to 25 words as a Back-Cover Text, to the end of the list of Cover Texts in
the Modified Version. Only one passage of Front-Cover Text and one of Back-
Cover Text may be added by (or through arrangements made by) any one entity.
If the Document already includes a cover text for the same cover, previously
added by you or by arrangement made by the same entity you are acting on
behalf of, you may not add another; but you may replace the old one, on explicit
permission from the previous publisher that added the old one.
The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this License give

permission to use their names for publicity for or to assert or imply endorsement
of any Modified Version.

5. COMBINING DOCUMENTS
You may combine the Document with other documents released under this
License, under the terms defined in section 4 above for modified versions,
provided that you include in the combination all of the Invariant Sections of all
of the original documents, unmodified, and list them all as Invariant Sections of
your combined work in its license notice, and that you preserve all their
Warranty Disclaimers.
The combined work need only contain one copy of this License, and multiple
identical Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single copy. If there are
multiple Invariant Sections with the same name but different contents, make the
title of each such section unique by adding at the end of it, in parentheses, the
name of the original author or publisher of that section if known, or else a unique
number. Make the same adjustment to the section titles in the list of Invariant
Sections in the license notice of the combined work.
In the combination, you must combine any sections Entitled "History" in the
various original documents, forming one section Entitled "History"; likewise
combine any sections Entitled "Acknowledgements", and any sections Entitled
"Dedications". You must delete all sections Entitled "Endorsements".

6. COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS
You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other documents
released under this License, and replace the individual copies of this License in
the various documents with a single copy that is included in the collection,
provided that you follow the rules of this License for verbatim copying of each
of the documents in all other respects.
You may extract a single document from such a collection, and distribute it
individually under this License, provided you insert a copy of this License into
the extracted document, and follow this License in all other respects regarding
verbatim copying of that document.

7. AGGREGATION WITH INDEPENDENT WORKS
A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other separate and
independent documents or works, in or on a volume of a storage or distribution
medium, is called an "aggregate" if the copyright resulting from the compilation
is not used to limit the legal rights of the compilation's users beyond what the
individual works permit. When the Document is included in an aggregate, this
License does not apply to the other works in the aggregate which are not
themselves derivative works of the Document.
If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these copies of the
Document, then if the Document is less than one half of the entire aggregate, the
Document's Cover Texts may be placed on covers that bracket the Document
within the aggregate, or the electronic equivalent of covers if the Document is in
electronic form. Otherwise they must appear on printed covers that bracket the
whole aggregate.

8. TRANSLATION
Translation is considered a kind of modification, so you may distribute
translations of the Document under the terms of section 4. Replacing Invariant
Sections with translations requires special permission from their copyright
holders, but you may include translations of some or all Invariant Sections in
addition to the original versions of these Invariant Sections. You may include a
translation of this License, and all the license notices in the Document, and any
Warranty Disclaimers, provided that you also include the original English
version of this License and the original versions of those notices and disclaimers.
In case of a disagreement between the translation and the original version of this
License or a notice or disclaimer, the original version will prevail.
If a section in the Document is Entitled "Acknowledgements", "Dedications", or
"History", the requirement (section 4) to Preserve its Title (section 1) will
typically require changing the actual title.

9. TERMINATION
You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Document except as
expressly provided under this License. Any attempt otherwise to copy, modify,
sublicense, or distribute it is void, and will automatically terminate your rights
under this License.
However, if you cease all violation of this License, then your license from a
particular copyright holder is reinstated (a) provisionally, unless and until the
copyright holder explicitly and finally terminates your license, and (b)
permanently, if the copyright holder fails to notify you of the violation by some
reasonable means prior to 60 days after the cessation.
Moreover, your license from a particular copyright holder is reinstated
permanently if the copyright holder notifies you of the violation by some
reasonable means, this is the first time you have received notice of violation of
this License (for any work) from that copyright holder, and you cure the
violation prior to 30 days after your receipt of the notice.
Termination of your rights under this section does not terminate the licenses of
parties who have received copies or rights from you under this License. If your
rights have been terminated and not permanently reinstated, receipt of a copy of
some or all of the same material does not give you any rights to use it.

10. FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE
The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions of the GNU
Free Documentation License from time to time. Such new versions will be
similar in spirit to the present version, but may differ in detail to address new
problems or concerns. See http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/.
Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version number. If the
Document specifies that a particular numbered version of this License "or any
later version" applies to it, you have the option of following the terms and
conditions either of that specified version or of any later version that has been
published (not as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation. If the Document
does not specify a version number of this License, you may choose any version
ever published (not as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation. If the Document
specifies that a proxy can decide which future versions of this License can be
used, that proxy's public statement of acceptance of a version permanently
authorizes you to choose that version for the Document.

11. RELICENSING
"Massive Multiauthor Collaboration Site" (or "MMC Site") means any World
Wide Web server that publishes copyrightable works and also provides
prominent facilities for anybody to edit those works. A public wiki that anybody
can edit is an example of such a server. A "Massive Multiauthor Collaboration"
(or "MMC") contained in the site means any set of copyrightable works thus
published on the MMC site.
"CC-BY-SA" means the Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 license
published by Creative Commons Corporation, a not-for-profit corporation with a
principal place of business in San Francisco, California, as well as future
copyleft versions of that license published by that same organization.
"Incorporate" means to publish or republish a Document, in whole or in part, as
part of another Document.
An MMC is "eligible for relicensing" if it is licensed under this License, and if
all works that were first published under this License somewhere other than this
MMC, and subsequently incorporated in whole or in part into the MMC, (1) had
no cover texts or invariant sections, and (2) were thus incorporated prior to
November 1, 2008.
The operator of an MMC Site may republish an MMC contained in the site
under CC-BY-SA on the same site at any time before August 1, 2009, provided
the MMC is eligible for relicensing.
How to use this License for your documents
To use this License in a document you have written, include a copy of the
License in the document and put the following copyright and license notices just
after the title page:
Copyright (c) YEAR YOUR NAME.
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled "GNU
Free Documentation License".
If you have Invariant Sections, Front-Cover Texts and Back-Cover Texts, replace
the "with...Texts." line with this:
with the Invariant Sections being LIST THEIR TITLES, with the
Front-Cover Texts being LIST, and with the Back-Cover Texts being LIST.

If you have Invariant Sections without Cover Texts, or some other combination
of the three, merge those two alternatives to suit the situation.
If your document contains nontrivial examples of program code, we recommend
releasing these examples in parallel under your choice of free software license,
such as the GNU General Public License, to permit their use in free software.

Appendix E. Updates
Visit http://nostarch.com/audacity.htm for errata, updates, and other information.

Index
A note on the digital index
A link in an index entry is displayed as the section title in which that entry appears. Because some sections
have multiple index markers, it is not unusual for an entry to have several links to the same section.
Clicking on any link will take you directly to the place in the text in which the marker appears.
Symbols
.3gp files, Proprietary Audio File Formats
.au files, Audacity Quick-Start, Audacity in Detail
.aup files, Audacity Quick-Start, Audacity in Detail, What Bit Depth Is Best?
.bin files, There Is Not a Special Audio CD, Single Audacity Track + CD-
Mastering Program
.cue file, There Is Not a Special Audio CD
.dll file extension, Linux Nyquist Plugins
.m4a files, File Formats and Audio Quality, Proprietary Audio File Formats,
Enabling WMA, M4A/M4P Support
.m4b files, Proprietary Audio File Formats
.m4p files, File Formats and Audio Quality, Proprietary Audio File Formats,
Enabling WMA, M4A/M4P Support
.m4r files, Proprietary Audio File Formats
.m4v files, Proprietary Audio File Formats
.mp4 files, Proprietary Audio File Formats
.ny files, Linux Nyquist Plugins
.toc file, There Is Not a Special Audio CD
16-bit depth, exporting recording to, Exporting to 16-Bit
16/44.1, 16/44.1, 24/96, 32-Bit Float, Final Export
24-bit depth, A–E
24/192, for DVD-Audio, What Are WAV, AIFF, and FLAC?
24/96, 16/44.1, 24/96, 32-Bit Float
3-to-1 rule, for microphone placement, Microphone Cables
32-bit float, Saving Your Work, 16/44.1, 24/96, 32-Bit Float, Audacity Settings,
What Bit Depth Is Best?
5.1 surround, creating, Creating 5.1 Surround

64 Studio, Linux LADSPA Plugins, Specialized Multimedia Linux Distributions
A
AAC (Advanced Audio Coding) files, MP3 Quality Settings, Other Lossy
Formats, File Formats and Audio Quality, Multichannel Surround, Proprietary
Audio File Formats, Enabling WMA, M4A/M4P Support
ABBA, “Dancing Queen”, Applying Dynamic Range Compression
AC3 files, channel mapping for, Multichannel Surround
active processes, top command for viewing, Linux System Tweaks
ADC/DAC (analog-to-digital/digital-to-analog converter), Understanding File
Formats, Building a Good Digital Sound Studio on the Cheap, Connecting
Legacy Devices to Your Computer, Stand Alone ADC/DACs, A–E
Adobe Flash Player music player, Sorting Out Linux Audio
Advanced Audio Coding (AAC) files, MP3 Quality Settings, Other Lossy
Formats, File Formats and Audio Quality, Multichannel Surround, Proprietary
Audio File Formats, Enabling WMA, M4A/M4P Support
Advanced Linux Sound Architecture (ALSA). See ALSA (Advanced Linux
Sound Architecture), Proprietary Audio File Formats
Advanced Systems Format (ASF) container, Proprietary Audio File Formats
AEA R84 ribbon mic, Microphones
AIFF (Audio Interchange File Format) files, Authoring Super High-Fidelity
Audio DVDs, Multichannel Surround
alcohol, risk as cleaner for records, Preparing Vinyl LPs for Copying
Alerter, Tuning Windows XP
aligning tracks, Aligning and Moving Tracks
all-pass filter, Audio Effects Glossary
ALSA (Advanced Linux Sound Architecture), Latency Is Not That Scary,
Sorting Out Linux Audio, Hardware Testing with alsa-utils, ALSA Applications,
The Tangled History of Linux Audio
applications, ALSA Applications
format for naming devices, Hardware Testing with alsa-utils
alsa-utils, for hardware testing, Hardware Testing with alsa-utils
alsamixer (Linux), Audacity Quick-Start, Sorting Out Linux Audio, Using
ALSA, Setting Recording and Playback Levels in alsamixer, Setting Recording
and Playback Levels in alsamixer, Adjusting Volume Levels
master vs. PCM, Setting Recording and Playback Levels in alsamixer
multiple sound cards and, Setting Recording and Playback Levels in
alsamixer

recording and playback settings, Using ALSA
volume level adjustments, Adjusting Volume Levels
Amarok, Audacity Quick-Start, Putting an Orange Book CD Collection
Together, Computer Media Players
metadata display in, Putting an Orange Book CD Collection Together
Amazon.com, Selling Stuff Online
ambience, A–E
ambient sounds, Fix Timing and Latency Errors, A–E
ambisonic microphone, Polar Patterns
AMD, vs. Intel, Speakers and Headphones
amplifiers, Which Microphones for Which Occasions?, Connecting a Turntable
to Your Computer
tube vs. solid-state, Which Microphones for Which Occasions?
Amplify effect, Making Quiet Recordings Louder, Finding and Repairing
Clipping, Editing and Downmixing Multitrack Recordings, Splitting Stereo
Tracks for Surgical Repairs, Compressing Dynamic Range, Single Audacity
Track Compilation Project, Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs, Making
Graceful Fades and Song Breaks, Cleaning Up Your Recording, Cleaning Up
Your Recording, Customizing the Mixer Board, Reverberation, Noise Removal,
Compress Dynamic Range
amplitude, Audacity Quick-Start, Track Panel, Cutting Out Unwanted Chunks,
Customizing the Mixer Board, A–E
adjusting, Customizing the Mixer Board
fine-tuning levels, Cutting Out Unwanted Chunks
maximum, Audacity Quick-Start
amps, An Example Studio
amradio curve, Equalization
analog hole, Ripping CDs, A–E
analog media, converting to digital, Transferring Vinyl LPs (and Other Legacy
Media) to CD
analog Real time synthesizer (aRts), Sorting Out Linux Audio
analog superiority, myths about, The Myth of Tube Superiority
analog-to-digital/digital-to-analog converter (ADC/DAC), Understanding File
Formats, Building a Good Digital Sound Studio on the Cheap, Connecting
Legacy Devices to Your Computer, Stand Alone ADC/DACs, A–E
Analyze menu, Analyze Menu
angle handle, for point label, Creating and Managing Labels
antistatic brush, Preparing Vinyl LPs for Copying
antivirus software, The Secret of Recording Your Own Great Audio

aplay command, Hardware Testing with alsa-utils, Testing Recording
Apogee DA16X, Stand Alone ADC/DACs
appending to existing track, Audacity Quick-Start
Apple, What Are WAV, AIFF, and FLAC?, File Formats and Audio Quality
Arch Linux, Using Distributions with Real-Time Kernels
archiving studio masters, What Bit Depth Is Best?
Ardour, Multitrack Recording
arecord command, Testing Recording
ART USB Phono Plus V2, Connecting a Turntable to Your Computer
aRts (KDE), The Tangled History of Linux Audio
ASF (Advanced Systems Format) container, Proprietary Audio File Formats
ASIO (Audio Streaming Input/Output) driver, Low-Latency Recording and
Audio Driver Fun
Asunder, Transferring Legacy Media
asynchronous mode, USB or FireWire?
attack, Noise Removal, Noise Removal, Compressing Dynamic Range, Noise
Removal, Compressor Settings, Chris's Dynamic Compressor
Audacity, Audacity Quick-Start, Audacity Quick-Start, Multichannel Recording,
PCI, USB, FireWire, Operating Systems, DVD-Audio Overview, Customizing
Audacity, Customizing Audacity, Customizing Audacity
customizing, Customizing Audacity, Customizing Audacity
default options, Customizing Audacity
high-quality recordings from, DVD-Audio Overview
quick-start, Audacity Quick-Start
support for multiple tracks, Multichannel Recording, PCI, USB, FireWire
system requirements, Operating Systems
window on Windows PC, Audacity Quick-Start
audience noise, recording, Creating and Editing Live Tracks for CD
audio CDs, Audio CDs
audio components, Getting Sound In and Out of the Computer, An Example
Studio, Microphone Preamp, Tuning Windows Vista and 7
configuration in Windows, Tuning Windows Vista and 7
example studio, An Example Studio
special effects, Microphone Preamp
audio files, Audacity in Detail, Audacity in Detail, Managing Audacity Projects,
Audio File Formats and Quality Settings, Portable Recording, Writing Your
Songs to CD, Making Graceful Fades and Song Breaks, MP3 Quality Settings
adding, Audacity in Detail
formats, Audio File Formats and Quality Settings, MP3 Quality Settings

lossy formats, MP3 Quality Settings
resampling, Making Graceful Fades and Song Breaks
secret of recording, Portable Recording
storage requirements, Audacity in Detail
vs. data project, Writing Your Songs to CD
Audio Grabber, Ripping CDs
Audio Interchange File Format (AIFF) files, Authoring Super High-Fidelity
Audio DVDs, Multichannel Surround
audio sample, 16/44.1, 24/96, 32-Bit Float
Audio Streaming Input/Output (ASIO) driver, Low-Latency Recording and
Audio Driver Fun
audio tape, Which Is Better: Vinyl, Tape, or CDs?
Audio-Technica AT-PL120, Connecting a Turntable to Your Computer
Audio-Technica headphones, Speakers and Headphones
Audio-Technica stereo condenser mic, Microphones, Microphones
Audiograbber, Transferring Legacy Media
audiophiles, myth about, The Myth That You Don’t Need Tone Controls
AudioScience ASI564I sound card, Audio Hardware
Auto Duck effect, Editing a Two-Track Recording as Two Mono Tracks, Auto
Duck
Automatic Updates, Tuning Windows XP, Tuning Windows Vista and 7
autosave interval, Audacity in Detail
Average bitrate setting, for MP3, MP3 Quality Settings
B
B&H Photo Video, Audio Hardware
Bach, Johann Sebastian, “Toccata and Fugue in D Minor”, The Digital
Advantage
background music track, Editing a Two-Track Recording as Two Mono Tracks,
Adding a Background Music Track, Compress Dynamic Range
adding, Editing a Two-Track Recording as Two Mono Tracks
dynamic range compression, Compress Dynamic Range
backups, Saving Your Work, Your Computer Must Have Muscle and Vast
Drawers
balanced cables, Microphone Cables
bandwidth, for self-hosting, Self-Hosting
Beats per Minute (BPM), Change Tempo
Behringer ADA8000, Stand Alone ADC/DACs

Behringer dynamic mic, Sorting Out Connectors, Microphones
Behringer mixers, An Example Studio, An Example Studio, Sorting Out
Connectors, Multichannel Recording, PCI, USB, FireWire, Audacity Settings for
Recording, PCMCIA
Behringer UCA222, PCMCIA
Bell, Alexander Graham, A–E
bidirectional polar pattern, Microphones, Polar Patterns
bit depth, Saving Your Work, Track Panel, Understanding File Formats, 16/44.1,
24/96, 32-Bit Float, 16/44.1, 24/96, 32-Bit Float, 16/44.1, 24/96, 32-Bit Float,
Audacity Settings for Recording, What Are WAV, AIFF, and FLAC?, More
Power, A–E
and file size, 16/44.1, 24/96, 32-Bit Float
default for recording, 16/44.1, 24/96, 32-Bit Float
for DVD-Audio, What Are WAV, AIFF, and FLAC?
for high-quality recording, More Power
BitPim, How to Transfer Files to Your Phone
bitrate, 16/44.1, 24/96, 32-Bit Float, MP3 Quality Settings, Customizing Audio
for a Mobile Phone
black-and-white broadcast frame rate, NTSC, PAL, and CDDA Frames
blank label tracks, inserting, Aligning and Moving Tracks
blue noise, Generating Noise
Bluetooth, How to Transfer Files to Your Phone
Blumlein pair, Microphones
boom stands, Smart Miking
BPM (Beats per Minute), Change Tempo
Brasero, CD Writers and Software, CD Writers and Software, Single Audacity
Track + CD-Mastering Program, Transferring Legacy Media
breaks, creating, Cutting a Single Long Track into Individual Song Tracks,
Cutting a Single Long Track into Individual Song Tracks, Splitting Stereo Tracks
for Surgical Repairs, Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs, Working with
Clips
in songs, Cutting a Single Long Track into Individual Song Tracks,
Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs
in track, Working with Clips
brown noise, Generating Noise
bulk CD duplication, Online Music Distributors
business of recording artist, File Formats and Audio Quality, The Business of a
Recording Artist, Establishing an Online Presence, Self-Hosting, To DRM or
Not to DRM?

copyrights and legal issues, To DRM or Not to DRM?
online music distribution, Establishing an Online Presence
online presence development, The Business of a Recording Artist
self-hosting, Self-Hosting
busses, for mixer, Multitrack Recording of a Live Performance
C
C* Audio Plugin Suite (CAPS), Time-Shifting Inside Tracks, Metronome Track,
Linux LADSPA Plugins
C* Click Metronome plug-in, Metronome Track
cables, Which Microphones for Which Occasions?, Microphone Cables, The
Myth of Tube Superiority
for microphones, Which Microphones for Which Occasions?
myths about, The Myth of Tube Superiority
Campcaster, Self-Hosting
Cannon Electric, Sorting Out Connectors
cannon plug, Sorting Out Connectors
Capel, Chris, Chris's Dynamic Compressor
CAPS (C* Audio Plugin Suite), Time-Shifting Inside Tracks, Metronome Track,
Linux LADSPA Plugins
C* Click Metronome plug-in, Metronome Track
Captchas, Establishing an Online Presence
Cardbus, Getting Sound In and Out of the Computer
cardioid polar pattern, Microphones
cassette recorders, Which Is Better: Vinyl, Tape, or CDs?
cassette tapes, Which Is Better: Vinyl, Tape, or CDs?
cathode ray tube (CRT) monitor, radiation and noise from, The Secret of
Recording Your Own Great Audio
CD Baby, Online Music Distributors
CD frames, timing for, Special CD Settings in Audacity
CD players, The Digital Advantage, Audio CDs
problems reading discs, Audio CDs
CD ripper, Ripping CDs, Transferring Legacy Media
CD settings, Special CD Settings in Audacity
CD text, Optional Track Metadata
CD writers, There Is Not a Special Audio CD
CD-quality audio, 16/44.1, 24/96, 32-Bit Float, Speakers and Headphones,
Authoring Super High-Fidelity Audio DVDs, A–E

storage requirements, Speakers and Headphones
vs. DVD-Audio, Authoring Super High-Fidelity Audio DVDs
CD-R, vs. CD-RW, Longevity, Writing Your Songs to CD
CD-ready files, exporting single track to, Exporting to CD-Ready Files, One
Long Audacity Track
CD-RW, vs. CD-R, Longevity, Writing Your Songs to CD
CDDA (Compact Disk Digital Audio) frame rate, NTSC, PAL, and CDDA
Frames
CDDA frames, CD Writers and Software, Single Audacity Track Compilation
Project, NTSC, PAL, and CDDA Frames
cdrecord, Longevity
CDRWin, CD Writers and Software, Single Audacity Track + CD-Mastering
Program
CDs, An Example Studio, An Example Studio, Transferring Vinyl LPs (and
Other Legacy Media) to CD, Transferring Vinyl LPs (and Other Legacy Media)
to CD, Preparing Vinyl LPs for Copying, Eight Steps to Converting Records to
CDs, Recording, Recording, Writing Songs to a CD, Connecting a Turntable to
Your Computer, The Digital Advantage, The Digital Advantage, Writing Your
Songs to CD, Writing Your Songs to CD, Computer Media Players, Establishing
an Online Presence, Compress Dynamic Range
copying vinyl LPs to, An Example Studio, Transferring Vinyl LPs (and
Other Legacy Media) to CD, Preparing Vinyl LPs for Copying, Eight Steps
to Converting Records to CDs, Recording, Recording
basic steps in process, Preparing Vinyl LPs for Copying
fixing defects, Recording
recording, Recording
settings, Eight Steps to Converting Records to CDs
custom-mix, The Digital Advantage
dynamic range for, Compress Dynamic Range
mass duplication, Writing Your Songs to CD, Establishing an Online
Presence
purchasing blank, Writing Songs to a CD
ripping, Computer Media Players
technical advantages, The Digital Advantage
vs. vinyl LPs or tape, Connecting a Turntable to Your Computer
writing songs, Writing Your Songs to CD
cell phones. See also ringtones, Proprietary Audio File Formats, Proprietary
Audio File Formats
transferring files to, Proprietary Audio File Formats

Change Pitch effect, Audacity in Detail, Change Pitch, Change Pitch
Change Speed effect, Audacity in Detail, Link Tracks and Track Groups, Change
Speed
Change Tempo effect, Audacity in Detail, Cleaning Up Your Recording, Link
Tracks and Track Groups, Measuring and Fixing Latency, Risset Drum, Change
Tempo
channel coupling, in Ogg Vorbis, File Formats and Quality Settings
channels, Final Mixdown, Tracks, Channels, and Clips, Mixdown to Stereo,
Control Your Channel Mapping, A–E
assigning tracks to, Mixdown to Stereo
mapping, Final Mixdown, Control Your Channel Mapping
Chris’s dynamic compressor, Chris's Dynamic Compressor
Cirago USB Bluetooth interface, How to Transfer Files to Your Phone
circle handle, Creating and Managing Labels
Cirlinca, DVD-Audio Authoring Software
classical music, compressing, Chris's Dynamic Compressor
cleaning up recording for voicecast, Audacity Settings
CleanSpeech mode, Interface
Click Removal effect, Fixing Skips and Pops
click track, Time-Shifting Inside Tracks
Click Track effect, Metronome Track, Click Track
clicks, Audacity in Detail, Which Microphones for Which Occasions?, Fixing
Skips and Pops, NTSC, PAL, and CDDA Frames, Normalization
removing, Audacity in Detail, Fixing Skips and Pops, Normalization
clipboard, Audacity in Detail
ClipBook, Tuning Windows XP
clipped segments, finding, What Bit Depth Is Best?
clipping, Audacity Quick-Start, Recording, Fixing Skips and Pops, Splitting
Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs, Too Loud! Clipping!, A–E
finding and repairing, Fixing Skips and Pops
fixing, Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs
viewing, Recording
clips, Tracks, Channels, and Clips, Splitting Tracks
CMS (content management system), Self-Hosting
CMT (Computer Music Toolkit), Linux LADSPA Plugins
collapsing track, Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks
combining tracks, and volume increase, Making Graceful Fades and Song
Breaks
commercial CDs, longevity, Longevity

Commodore-Amiga, What Are WAV, AIFF, and FLAC?
Compact Disk Digital Audio (CDDA) frame rate, NTSC, PAL, and CDDA
Frames
Compact Flash card, Editing Live Recordings
compilation CD, Authoring a Compilation CD, CD Writers and Software, CD
Writers and Software, CD Writers and Software, One Track per Song Project,
Single Audacity Track Compilation Project, CD Cue Sheets and BIN Files
authoring in Audacity, CD Writers and Software, CD Writers and Software,
CD Writers and Software, One Track per Song Project, Single Audacity
Track Compilation Project
one track per song project, CD Writers and Software
single Audacity track and CD-mastering program, Single Audacity
Track Compilation Project
single Audacity track compilation project, CD Writers and Software,
One Track per Song Project
fixes and cleanups, CD Cue Sheets and BIN Files
compression. See dynamic range compression, Compressing Dynamic Range,
How Much Dynamic Range?
Compressor effect, Compressing Dynamic Range, How Much Dynamic Range?
computer media players, File Formats and Quality Settings
Computer Music Toolkit (CMT), Linux LADSPA Plugins
computer tape for audio, Which Is Better: Vinyl, Tape, or CDs?
computers, Speakers and Headphones, Speakers and Headphones, The Secret of
Recording Your Own Great Audio, Copying Vintage 78s, Connecting Legacy
Devices to Your Computer, Connecting a Turntable to Your Computer
connecting legacy devices to, Copying Vintage 78s
connecting tape deck to, Connecting a Turntable to Your Computer
connecting turntable to, Connecting Legacy Devices to Your Computer
dedicated to recording, The Secret of Recording Your Own Great Audio
operating systems, Speakers and Headphones
condenser mics, Microphones, Which Microphones for Which Occasions?
cables for, Which Microphones for Which Occasions?
connecting legacy devices to computers, Copying Vintage 78s
connectors, An Example Studio, Sorting Out Connectors, Copying Vintage 78s,
The Myth of Uber Cables
for legacy components, Copying Vintage 78s
gold-plated, The Myth of Uber Cables
constant bitrate, for MP3, File Formats and Quality Settings, MP3 Quality
Settings, File Formats and Audio Quality

content management systems (CMS), Self-Hosting
control nodes, Fade In, Fade Out
Control Panel (Windows), Sound module, Audacity Quick-Start
Control toolbar, Audacity in Detail
converting, Transferring Vinyl LPs (and Other Legacy Media) to CD,
Transferring Vinyl LPs (and Other Legacy Media) to CD, There Is Not a Special
Audio CD
analog media to digital, Transferring Vinyl LPs (and Other Legacy Media)
to CD
MP3 files to Red Book standard, There Is Not a Special Audio CD
Copy button (Edit toolbar), Audacity in Detail, Audacity in Detail
copy protection, Ripping CDs, A–E
copying, An Example Studio, Transferring Vinyl LPs (and Other Legacy Media)
to CD, Transferring Vinyl LPs (and Other Legacy Media) to CD, Preparing
Vinyl LPs for Copying, Eight Steps to Converting Records to CDs, Recording,
Recording, Writing Songs to a CD, Copying Vintage 78s
vintage 78s, Copying Vintage 78s
vinyl LPs to CDs, An Example Studio, Transferring Vinyl LPs (and Other
Legacy Media) to CD, Transferring Vinyl LPs (and Other Legacy Media) to
CD, Preparing Vinyl LPs for Copying, Eight Steps to Converting Records
to CDs, Recording, Recording
basic steps in process, Preparing Vinyl LPs for Copying
fixing defects, Recording
preparation, Transferring Vinyl LPs (and Other Legacy Media) to CD
recording, Recording
settings, Eight Steps to Converting Records to CDs
copyrights, To DRM or Not to DRM?
Cowboy Junkies, Trinity Session, Polar Patterns
CPU, Your Computer Must Have Muscle and Vast Drawers, DVD-Audio
Overview
for high-resolution recording, DVD-Audio Overview
crash recovery mechanism, Audacity in Detail
Creative Commons license, Establishing an Online Presence, Copyrights and
Legal Issues
credit card payments, processing online, Selling Stuff Online
Credit Card Swiper Program, Establishing an Online Presence
cross-fades, Making Graceful Fades and Song Breaks, Audacity Plugins for
Special Effects, A–E
crossed figure eight, Microphones

CRT (cathode ray tube) monitor, radiation and noise from, The Secret of
Recording Your Own Great Audio
cue sheets, CD Cue Sheets and BIN Files
custom-mix CDs, The Digital Advantage, Authoring a Compilation CD
customer service, Selling Stuff Online
Cut button (Edit toolbar), Audacity in Detail, Audacity in Detail
Cut Preview, Playback
D
damping, Metronome Track, Reverberation
for reverberation, Reverberation
DAO (disc-at-once) support, There Is Not a Special Audio CD
data CDs, Writing Your Songs to CD, Audio CDs, Configuring Audacity for
Orange Book CDs
vs. audio CDs, Writing Your Songs to CD
DAW (digital audio workstation), A–E
dBFS (decibels relative to full scale), A–E
DC offset, Making Quiet Recordings Louder, Normalization, Normalization
decay, Noise Removal, Noise Removal, Compressing Dynamic Range, Audio
Effects Glossary, Noise Removal, Compressor Settings, Chris's Dynamic
Compressor
Decay value (Risset Drum effect), Risset Drum
decibel scale, in Track panel, Reducing Too-Tall Peaks
decibels, Track Panel, A–E
decibels relative to full scale (dBFS), A–E
default bit depth, 16/44.1, 24/96, 32-Bit Float
default noise reduction level, Noise Removal
defects in recording, fixing, Recording
delay, Linux Nyquist Plugins
delete key, Cutting Out Unwanted Chunks, Recording
deleting tracks, Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks
depth, for phaser, Phaser
deselecting, all tracks with Ctrl-A, Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks
device drivers, audio for Windows, Enabling WMA, M4A/M4P Support
Device toolbar, Audacity Quick-Start, Audacity in Detail, Overdubbing
Devices dialog, Devices
dial-up Internet users, File Formats and Audio Quality
Digigram sound cards, Portable Digital Recorder, Audio Hardware, PCMCIA

digital audio decibel scale, Audacity Quick-Start
digital audio myths, Seven Myths of Digital Audio
digital audio workstation (DAW), A–E
digital audio, quality of copies, The Digital Advantage
digital rights management (DRM), Authoring Super High-Fidelity Audio DVDs,
To DRM or Not to DRM?, A–E
digital-to-analog conversion, Understanding File Formats, Building a Good
Digital Sound Studio on the Cheap, Connecting Legacy Devices to Your
Computer, Stand Alone ADC/DACs, A–E
Direct Stream Digital (DSD), Transferring Legacy Media
Directories dialog, Directories
disc-at-once (DAO) support, CD Writers and Software
discovery mode, for Bluetooth, How to Transfer Files to Your Phone
discrete playback channels, A–E
discrete tracks, Multitrack Recording
Discwasher brushes, Preparing Vinyl LPs for Copying
discWelder for Windows, Authoring Super High-Fidelity Audio DVDs, DVD-
Audio Authoring Software
disk ID, reading, Longevity
diskDVD Identifier, Longevity
distortion, Audacity Quick-Start, Audacity Quick-Start
distributing recordings. See online music distribution, Exporting to 16-Bit,
Quality
dithering, Exporting to 16-Bit, Quality
domain name, registering, The Business of a Recording Artist
Dotster, The Business of a Recording Artist
downmixing, Editing Live Recordings, Editing and Downmixing Multitrack
Recordings, A–E
multichannel recording, Editing and Downmixing Multitrack Recordings
multitrack recordings, Editing Live Recordings
downsampling, Making Graceful Fades and Song Breaks, A–E
Draw button (Tools toolbar), Audacity in Detail, Audacity in Detail, Click
Removal
DRM (digital rights management), Authoring Super High-Fidelity Audio DVDs,
Selling Stuff Online, A–E
drop frame rate, NTSC, PAL, and CDDA Frames
dropouts, from CPU overload, What Bit Depth Is Best?
drum synthesizer, Hydrogen, Using JACK with Audacity
drum track, Risset Drum

drums, compression for, Noise Removal
Drupal, Self-Hosting
dry signal, Audio Effects Glossary
Dry signal level (Gverb plug-in), Reverberation
DSD (Direct Stream Digital), Transferring Legacy Media
DTMF tones effect, Frequency Range of Generated Tones
DTS files, channel mapping for, Multichannel Surround
dual-tone multifrequency (DTMF), Frequency Range of Generated Tones
dust cover, for turntables, The Digital Advantage
DVD Audio Tools for Linux, Authoring Super High-Fidelity Audio DVDs,
Exporting to 16-Bit
DVD Media Inspector for Mac, Longevity
dvd+rw-mediainfo for Linux, Longevity
DVD-Audio format, Transferring Vinyl LPs (and Other Legacy Media) to CD,
Authoring Super High-Fidelity Audio DVDs, What Are WAV, AIFF, and
FLAC?, DVD-Audio Authoring Software, Multichannel Surround
authoring software, DVD-Audio Authoring Software
channel mapping for, Multichannel Surround
overview, What Are WAV, AIFF, and FLAC?
DVD-AUDIO Solo Plus, Authoring Super High-Fidelity Audio DVDs, DVD-
Audio Authoring Software
dvd::rip, Ripping DVDs, Transferring Legacy Media
DVDFab, Ripping DVDs
DVDFab Platinum, DVD-Audio Authoring Software
DVDInfo for Windows, Longevity
DVDs, Ripping DVDs, Ripping DVDs, Authoring Super High-Fidelity Audio
DVDs
ripping, Ripping DVDs
super high-fidelity audio, Authoring Super High-Fidelity Audio DVDs
dynamic compression, Chris's Dynamic Compressor
dynamic expansion, Chris's Dynamic Compressor
dynamic mics, Microphones, Which Microphones for Which Occasions?
cables for, Which Microphones for Which Occasions?
dynamic range, 16/44.1, 24/96, 32-Bit Float, What Bit Depth Is Best?
dynamic range compression, Transferring Vinyl LPs (and Other Legacy Media)
to CD, Noise Removal, Compressing Dynamic Range, Customizing Audio for a
Mobile Phone, Compress Dynamic Range, Compress Dynamic Range,
Compressor Settings, Chris's Dynamic Compressor
Chris’s dynamic compressor, Chris's Dynamic Compressor

customizing, Noise Removal
for ringtones, Customizing Audio for a Mobile Phone
recommendations, Compress Dynamic Range
settings, Compressor Settings
dyne:bolic, Linux LADSPA Plugins, Specialized Multimedia Linux Distributions
E
EAC algorithm, Track Panel
Early reflection level, for reverberation, Reverberation
Echo AudioFire 2, USB Recording Interfaces
Echo effect, Generating Noise
Edirol FA-101, Multitrack Recording, USB Recording Interfaces
Edit menu, Cutting Out Unwanted Chunks, Cutting Out Unwanted Chunks,
Fixing Clipping and Too-Loud Passages, Fixing Clipping and Too-Loud
Passages, Cleaning Up Your Recording, Reducing Too-Tall Peaks, How to Make
Multitrack Recordings, How to Make Multitrack Recordings, How to Make
Multitrack Recordings, Creating and Managing Labels, Using Labels to Edit
Multiple Tracks, Aligning and Moving Tracks, Aligning and Moving Tracks,
Splitting Tracks, Splitting Tracks, Splitting Tracks, Customizing Audio for a
Mobile Phone
Cut, Using Labels to Edit Multiple Tracks
Join, Aligning and Moving Tracks
Preferences. See Preferences dialog, How to Make Multitrack Recordings
Redo, How to Make Multitrack Recordings
Silence, Fixing Clipping and Too-Loud Passages
Silence Audio, Cutting Out Unwanted Chunks
Split, Aligning and Moving Tracks
Split Cut, Fixing Clipping and Too-Loud Passages, Splitting Tracks
Split Delete, Cleaning Up Your Recording, Splitting Tracks
Split New, Splitting Tracks
Trim, Cutting Out Unwanted Chunks, Customizing Audio for a Mobile
Phone
Undo, Reducing Too-Tall Peaks, How to Make Multitrack Recordings
Edit toolbar, Audacity in Detail
Effect menu, Audacity Quick-Start, Audacity in Detail, Audacity in Detail,
Audacity in Detail, Making Quiet Recordings Louder, Making Quiet Recordings
Louder, Making Quiet Recordings Louder, Fixing Skips and Pops, Fixing Skips
and Pops, Fixing Skips and Pops, Fixing Skips and Pops, Noise Removal, Noise

Removal, Normalization, Editing and Downmixing Multitrack Recordings,
Editing and Downmixing Multitrack Recordings, Editing and Downmixing
Multitrack Recordings, Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs, Splitting
Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs, Noise Removal, Compressing Dynamic
Range, Compressing Dynamic Range, Compressing Dynamic Range,
Normalization, Single Audacity Track Compilation Project, Single Audacity
Track Compilation Project, Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs,
Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs, Making Graceful Fades and Song
Breaks, Making Graceful Fades and Song Breaks, Making Graceful Fades and
Song Breaks, Cleaning Up Your Recording, Cleaning Up Your Recording,
Cleaning Up Your Recording, Cleaning Up Your Recording, Cleaning Up Your
Recording, Cleaning Up Your Recording, Normalization, Editing a Two-Track
Recording as Two Mono Tracks, Link Tracks and Track Groups, Link Tracks
and Track Groups, Measuring and Fixing Latency, Creating Loops, Customizing
the Mixer Board, Customizing the Mixer Board, Customizing Audio for a
Mobile Phone, Customizing Audio for a Mobile Phone, Applying Dynamic
Range Compression, Applying Dynamic Range Compression, Applying
Dynamic Range Compression, Applying Dynamic Range Compression,
Applying Dynamic Range Compression, Generating Noise, Risset Drum, Effect
Menu, Reverberation, Reverberation, Reverberation, Auto Duck, Change Pitch,
Phaser, Reverse, Sliding Time Scale/Pitch Shift, WahWah, Repeat Last Effect,
Noise Removal, Noise Removal, Noise Removal, Normalization, Repair,
Truncate Silence, Change Tempo, Change Pitch, Change Speed, Compress
Dynamic Range, Compress Dynamic Range, How Much Dynamic Range?,
Chris's Dynamic Compressor, Chris's Dynamic Compressor, Leveller
Amplify, Making Quiet Recordings Louder, Fixing Skips and Pops, Editing
and Downmixing Multitrack Recordings, Splitting Stereo Tracks for
Surgical Repairs, Compressing Dynamic Range, Single Audacity Track
Compilation Project, Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs, Making
Graceful Fades and Song Breaks, Cleaning Up Your Recording, Cleaning
Up Your Recording, Customizing the Mixer Board, Reverberation, Noise
Removal, Compress Dynamic Range
Auto Duck, Editing a Two-Track Recording as Two Mono Tracks, Auto
Duck
Change Pitch, Audacity in Detail, Change Pitch, Change Pitch
Change Speed, Audacity in Detail, Link Tracks and Track Groups, Change
Speed
Change Tempo, Audacity in Detail, Cleaning Up Your Recording, Link
Tracks and Track Groups, Measuring and Fixing Latency, Risset Drum,

Change Tempo
Click Removal, Fixing Skips and Pops
Compressor, Compressing Dynamic Range, How Much Dynamic Range?
Echo, Generating Noise
Equalization. See Equalization effect, Customizing Audio for a Mobile
Phone, Applying Dynamic Range Compression, Chris's Dynamic
Compressor
Fade In/Out. See Fade In/Out effects, Customizing Audio for a Mobile
Phone, Applying Dynamic Range Compression, Chris's Dynamic
Compressor
Leveller, Applying Dynamic Range Compression, Applying Dynamic
Range Compression, Leveller
Noise Removal, Noise Removal, Noise Removal, Noise Removal, Noise
Removal
Normalize, Audacity Quick-Start, Making Quiet Recordings Louder,
Normalization, Editing and Downmixing Multitrack Recordings,
Normalization, Making Graceful Fades and Song Breaks, Normalization,
Applying Dynamic Range Compression, Normalization
Phaser, Phaser
Repair, Fixing Skips and Pops, Cleaning Up Your Recording, Repair
Repeat, Creating Loops
Repeat Last Effect, Effect Menu, Repeat Last Effect
Reverberation, Reverberation
Reverse, Reverse
Sliding Time Scale/Pitch Shift, Sliding Time Scale/Pitch Shift
Truncate Silence, Truncate Silence
WahWah, WahWah
Effects dialog, Warnings
effects. See Effect menu; Generate menu, Warnings
electric lines, interference from, Microphone Cables
electrical inteference, and internal sound cards, Multichannel Recording, PCI,
USB, FireWire
Electronic Arts, What Are WAV, AIFF, and FLAC?
EMU 1616M PCI, Multichannel Recording, PCI, USB, FireWire
eMusic, Online Music Distributors
Enhanced Windows Driver Model (EWDM) drivers, Low-Latency Recording
and Audio Driver Fun
Enlightened Sound Daemon (ESD), Sorting Out Linux Audio, The Tangled
History of Linux Audio

Envelope button (Tools toolbar), Audacity in Detail, Audacity in Detail, Cutting
Out Unwanted Chunks, Fixing Defects, Fixing Clipping and Too-Loud Passages,
Compressing Dynamic Range, Cutting a Single Long Track into Individual Song
Tracks, Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs, Reducing Too-Tall Peaks,
Editing a Two-Track Recording as Two Mono Tracks
Equalization effect, Noise Removal, Connecting a Turntable to Your Computer,
Making Your Own Ringtones, Customizing Audio for a Mobile Phone,
Equalization
Draw curves view, Customizing Audio for a Mobile Phone
for ringtone, Making Your Own Ringtones
Error Reporting Service, Tuning Windows XP
ESD (Enlightened Sound Daemon), Latency Is Not That Scary, The Tangled
History of Linux Audio
EWDM (Enhanced Windows Driver Model) drivers, Low-Latency Recording
and Audio Driver Fun
Exact Audio Copy, Ripping CDs
expanding track, Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks
Export dialog, Audacity Quick-Start, Saving Your Work, What Bit Depth Is
Best?, Ogg Vorbis Quality Settings, Other Lossy Formats, File Formats and
Audio Quality, Customizing Audio for a Mobile Phone, Proprietary Audio File
Formats, Proprietary Audio File Formats
Export Multiple, Saving Your Work, Exporting to CD-Ready Files, One Long
Audacity Track, Editing and Downmixing Multitrack Recordings, Final Export,
What Bit Depth Is Best?, Tracks, Channels, and Clips, Analyze Menu
exporting recording, Audacity Quick-Start, Exporting to CD-Ready Files, One
Long Audacity Track, Exporting to CD-Ready Files, One Long Audacity Track,
Exporting to CD-Ready Files, One Long Audacity Track, Optional Track
Metadata, Exporting to 16-Bit, Exporting to 16-Bit, Normalization, Ogg Vorbis
Quality Settings, Ogg Vorbis Quality Settings, Other Lossy Formats
podcasts, Other Lossy Formats
to 16-bit, Exporting to 16-Bit
to CD-Ready files, Exporting to CD-Ready Files, One Long Audacity
Track, Exporting to CD-Ready Files, One Long Audacity Track, Exporting
to CD-Ready Files, One Long Audacity Track
multiple tracks, Exporting to CD-Ready Files, One Long Audacity
Track
single long track, Exporting to CD-Ready Files, One Long Audacity
Track
to MP3 or Ogg, Normalization

to MP3, quality settings, Ogg Vorbis Quality Settings
to Ogg Vorbis, quality settings, Ogg Vorbis Quality Settings
to playable audio file, Audacity Quick-Start
to WAV file, Optional Track Metadata
ExpressCard sound card, Getting Sound In and Out of the Computer
F
Facebook, Establishing an Online Presence
Fade In/Out effects, Cutting Out Unwanted Chunks, Fixing Defects, Creating
Graceful Breaks Between Songs, Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs,
Reducing Too-Tall Peaks, Audacity Plugins for Special Effects, Truncate
Silence, A–E
Truncate Silence effect and, Truncate Silence
fades, creating, Audacity in Detail, Cutting a Single Long Track into Individual
Song Tracks, Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs, Reducing Too-Tall
Peaks, Audacity Plugins for Special Effects
fair use, Ripping CDs, To DRM or Not to DRM?
feedback, for phaser, Phaser
ffado device driver, Using JACK with Audacity
FFADO drivers for FireWire recording interfaces, Configuring Linux for Best
Audio Quality
FFmpeg encoder, File Formats and Audio Quality, Proprietary Audio File
Formats, Enabling WMA, M4A/M4P Support
FFmpeg library, Other Lossy Formats
field recording, Portable Recording
file converter application, Proprietary Audio File Formats
file formats, Putting an Orange Book CD Collection Together, Becoming an
Online Star, Becoming an Online Star
and quality settings, Putting an Orange Book CD Collection Together
for online music distribution, Becoming an Online Star
File menu, Audacity Quick-Start, Audacity Quick-Start, Managing Audacity
Projects, Managing Audacity Projects, Adding Audio Files: Import vs. Open,
Adding Audio Files: Import vs. Open, Saving Your Work, Saving Your Work,
Saving Your Work, Saving Your Work, Track Metadata, Recording, Exporting to
CD-Ready Files, One Long Audacity Track, Exporting to CD-Ready Files, One
Long Audacity Track, Audacity Settings for Recording, Editing Live
Recordings, Editing Live Recordings, Editing and Downmixing Multitrack
Recordings, Creating Graceful Breaks Between Songs, Final Export, One Track

per Song Project, One Track per Song Project, Single Audacity Track
Compilation Project, What Bit Depth Is Best?, What Bit Depth Is Best?, Ogg
Vorbis Quality Settings, Other Lossy Formats, Adding a Background Music
Track, File Formats and Audio Quality, Tracks, Channels, and Clips, How to
Make Multitrack Recordings, Label Tracks, Mixdown to Stereo, Making Your
Own Ringtones, Customizing Audio for a Mobile Phone, Proprietary Audio File
Formats, Proprietary Audio File Formats, Analyze Menu, Interface, Interface
Edit Chains, Interface
Export, Audacity Quick-Start, Saving Your Work, What Bit Depth Is Best?,
Ogg Vorbis Quality Settings, Other Lossy Formats, File Formats and Audio
Quality, Customizing Audio for a Mobile Phone, Proprietary Audio File
Formats, Proprietary Audio File Formats
Export Labels, Label Tracks
Export Multiple, Saving Your Work, Exporting to CD-Ready Files, One
Long Audacity Track, Editing and Downmixing Multitrack Recordings,
Final Export, What Bit Depth Is Best?, Tracks, Channels, and Clips,
Analyze Menu
Export Selection, Mixdown to Stereo
Import, Adding Audio Files: Import vs. Open, Saving Your Work, One
Track per Song Project, Single Audacity Track Compilation Project,
Adding a Background Music Track, How to Make Multitrack Recordings,
Making Your Own Ringtones
Audio, One Track per Song Project, Single Audacity Track
Compilation Project, Adding a Background Music Track, How to
Make Multitrack Recordings, Making Your Own Ringtones
Open, Adding Audio Files: Import vs. Open, Editing Live Recordings
Open Metadata Editor, Track Metadata, Exporting to CD-Ready Files, One
Long Audacity Track, Creating Graceful Breaks Between Songs, One Track
per Song Project
Save, Managing Audacity Projects
Save As, Managing Audacity Projects
Save Project, Audacity Settings for Recording
Save Project As, Audacity Quick-Start, Saving Your Work, Recording,
Editing Live Recordings
file transfer, to mobile phones, Proprietary Audio File Formats
files, Saving Your Work, 16/44.1, 24/96, 32-Bit Float, 16/44.1, 24/96, 32-Bit
Float
bit depth and size, 16/44.1, 24/96, 32-Bit Float
sharing across projects, Saving Your Work

firewalls, and performance, Tuning Windows for Best Performance
FireWire, USB or FireWire?, USB or FireWire?, USB or FireWire?
future of, USB or FireWire?
vs. USB devices, USB or FireWire?
FireWire audio interface, Getting Sound In and Out of the Computer,
Multichannel Recording, PCI, USB, FireWire
FireWire recording interfaces, How to Make Multitrack Recordings, Using
JACK with Audacity, USB Recording Interfaces
connecting with JACK, Using JACK with Audacity
Fit in Window for view, Cutting Out Unwanted Chunks
Fit Project button (Edit toolbar), Audacity in Detail, Audacity in Detail
Fit Selection button (Edit toolbar), Audacity in Detail, Audacity in Detail
FLAC (Free Lossless Audio Codec), Understanding File Formats, Audio CDs,
Putting an Orange Book CD Collection Together, Authoring Super High-Fidelity
Audio DVDs, What Bit Depth Is Best?, File Formats and Audio Quality, How to
Make Multitrack Recordings, Multichannel Surround
channel mapping for, Multichannel Surround
for archiving studio masters, What Bit Depth Is Best?
importing, How to Make Multitrack Recordings
flanger, Phaser
flexible cables, Microphone Cables
floating decimal point, 16/44.1, 24/96, 32-Bit Float, What Bit Depth Is Best?
floppy tape drives, Longevity
Fluxbox, Linux System Tweaks
Focusrite Saffire Pro 26, Microphone Preamp, How to Make Multitrack
Recordings, Connecting a FireWire Recording Interface, USB Recording
Interfaces
ffado-mixer for, Connecting a FireWire Recording Interface
Focusrite Saffire Pro 40, Multichannel Recording, PCI, USB, FireWire
formatting SD card, How to Transfer Files to Your Phone
frame rate for CD audio, Audacity Settings, CD Writers and Software
frames, NTSC, PAL, and CDDA Frames
Frampton, Peter, “Do You Feel Like We Do”, WahWah
Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft, Proprietary Audio File Formats
Free Lossless Audio Codec (FLAC). See FLAC (Free Lossless Audio Codec),
dyne:bolic
Free Software Foundation, dyne:bolic
Freesound Project, Noise Removal
Freeverb, Reverberation

frequency, F–J
Frequency smoothing, Noise Removal, Noise Removal
full-speed, USB or FireWire?
fundamental frequency, Audio Effects Glossary, F–J
G
Gain slider, Track Panel, Mixer Board, Mixdown to Stereo, Too Loud! Clipping!
gapless burning, CD Writers and Software
Generate menu, Fixing Defects, Creating Graceful Breaks Between Songs,
Making Graceful Fades and Song Breaks, What Bit Depth Is Best?, Cleaning Up
Your Recording, Editing a Two-Track Recording as Two Mono Tracks, Time-
Shifting Inside Tracks, Metronome Track, Generate Menu, Generate Menu,
Frequency Range of Generated Tones, Chirps, Generating Noise, Generating
Noise, Test Tones, Click Track
Chirp, Chirps
Click Track, Metronome Track, Click Track
DTMF tones, Frequency Range of Generated Tones
Noise, Generating Noise
Silence, Fixing Defects, Creating Graceful Breaks Between Songs, Making
Graceful Fades and Song Breaks, Cleaning Up Your Recording, Editing a
Two-Track Recording as Two Mono Tracks, Time-Shifting Inside Tracks,
Generating Noise
Tone, What Bit Depth Is Best?, Generate Menu, Test Tones
genre, choosing distributors by, Online Music Distributors
Get Noise Profile button, Noise Removal
gigahertz (GHz), F–J
GNOME, Linux System Tweaks
Gnome CD Master, CD Writers and Software, CD Writers and Software, Single
Audacity Track + CD-Mastering Program
GoDaddy, The Business of a Recording Artist
gold-plated connectors, The Myth of Uber Cables
golden ear, myth of, Seven Myths of Digital Audio
Google Checkout, Selling Stuff Online
gooseneck stand, Microphone Cables
Graphic EQ view, Customizing Audio for a Mobile Phone, Equalization
graphical environment for Linux, Linux System Tweaks
graphics processing unit, Linux System Tweaks
Grip, Ripping CDs, Transferring Legacy Media

Grooveshark, File Formats and Quality Settings
ground wires, for turntables, Connecting Legacy Devices to Your Computer
Guinness World Records, for lowest note by human voice, F–J
Gverb plug-in, Reverberation
H
half-omnidirectional polar pattern, Polar Patterns
HandBrake, Ripping DVDs, Transferring Legacy Media
handles, Audacity in Detail, Audacity in Detail, Cutting a Single Long Track
into Individual Song Tracks
for dragging toolbars, Audacity in Detail
for labels, Cutting a Single Long Track into Individual Song Tracks
hard drives, CD-quality audio requirements, Speakers and Headphones
hardware, Audacity from Start to Finish, Audio Hardware, Audio Hardware,
PCMCIA, USB Recording Interfaces
basics, Audacity from Start to Finish
FireWire recording interfaces, USB Recording Interfaces
sound cards, Audio Hardware
USB recording interfaces, PCMCIA
harmonic frequencies, The Digital Advantage, What Bit Depth Is Best?, Audio
Effects Glossary, F–J
headphones, Speakers and Headphones, Starting, Stopping, and Pausing
Recording
for monitoring live recording, Starting, Stopping, and Pausing Recording
hearing ranges, The Secret of Recording Your Own Great Audio
hemispherical polar pattern, Polar Patterns
Hempton, Gordon, The Secret of Recording Your Own Great Audio
Hendrix, Jimi, Electric Ladyland, The Digital Advantage
hertz, F–J
hh:mm:ss + CDDA frames, CD Writers and Software, Single Audacity Track
Compilation Project
high frequencies, What Sampling Rate Is Best?
high-fidelity audio DVDs, Authoring Super High-Fidelity Audio DVDs
high-pass filter, Noise Removal, Audio Effects Glossary
high-quality recordings, DVD-Audio Overview, DVD-Audio Overview, What
Bit Depth Is Best?, What Bit Depth Is Best?
bit depth for, What Bit Depth Is Best?
from Audacity, DVD-Audio Overview

sampling rate, What Bit Depth Is Best?
high-resolution recording, CPU for, DVD-Audio Overview
High-Z, F–J
hosts, for plugins, Audacity Plugins for Special Effects
hotplug, Tracks, Channels, and Clips, F–J
human hearing, range for, Compress Dynamic Range
human psychoacoustics, MP3 Quality Settings, P–T
Hydrogen drum synthesizer, Using JACK with Audacity
hyper-cardioid polar pattern, Microphones
I
IBM, What Are WAV, AIFF, and FLAC?
ICANN (Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers), Establishing
an Online Presence
Icecast, Self-Hosting
IceWM, Linux System Tweaks
IFF (Interchange File Format), Authoring Super High-Fidelity Audio DVDs
impedance, F–J
Import/Export dialog, Tracks
importing, recording into Audacity, Starting, Stopping, and Pausing Recording
Independent Online Distribution Alliance (IODA), Online Music Distributors
Indexing Service, Tuning Windows XP, Tuning Windows Vista and 7
Infrared Monitor, Tuning Windows XP
inkjet printable DVD blanks, DVD-Audio Authoring Software
Inner fade, for Auto Duck, Adding a Background Music Track
Input bandwidth setting, for reverberation, Reverberation
input channels, Tracks, Channels, and Clips
Input Level Meter, Audacity Quick-Start, Audacity Quick-Start, Setting
Recording Volume Levels
inserting silence, Fixing Defects
integers, 16/44.1, 24/96, 32-Bit Float
Intel, vs. AMD, Speakers and Headphones
intellectual property, Ripping CDs, F–J
Interchange File Format (IFF), What Are WAV, AIFF, and FLAC?
Interface dialog, Interface
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), Establishing
an Online Presence
Internet distribution strategy, Establishing an Online Presence

Internet Information Services, Tuning Windows Vista and 7
Internet radio, The Digital Advantage
interpolation, for seamless join, Cleaning Up Your Recording
IODA (Independent Online Distribution Alliance), Online Music Distributors
isynchronous mode, USB or FireWire?
iTunes, Online Music Distributors, To DRM or Not to DRM?, Proprietary Audio
File Formats
AAC format for, Proprietary Audio File Formats
and DRM, To DRM or Not to DRM?
J
JACK, Latency Is Not That Scary, Sorting Out Linux Audio, Querying Your
Sound Card, Using JACK with Audacity, Using JACK with Audacity,
Connecting a FireWire Recording Interface, Creating Persistent Configurations
connecting FireWire recording interface, Using JACK with Audacity
creating persistent configurations, Connecting a FireWire Recording
Interface
Hydrogen configuration to use, Using JACK with Audacity
settings, Creating Persistent Configurations
using with Audacity, Querying Your Sound Card
jacks, An Example Studio, Connecting Legacy Devices to Your Computer
joint stereo, MP3 Quality Settings, MP3 Quality Settings
Jones, Rickie Lee, “The Magazine”, How Much Dynamic Range?
Joomla, Self-Hosting
jump ahead feature, Devices
K
K3b (Linux), There Is Not a Special Audio CD, CD Writers and Software,
Ripping CDs, Ripping CDs, DVD-Audio Authoring Software
K9copy, Ripping DVDs, Transferring Legacy Media
KAudioCreator, Ripping CDs, Transferring Legacy Media
KDE, Linux System Tweaks
Keyboard dialog, Warnings
kilohertz (kHz), F–J
Kodak, CDs, Audio CDs

L
labels, Customizing Dynamic Range Compression, Exporting to CD-Ready
Files, Multiple Audacity Tracks, Exporting to CD-Ready Files, Multiple
Audacity Tracks, Compressing Dynamic Range, Cutting a Single Long Track
into Individual Song Tracks, Writing Your Songs to CD, Labeling Your CD,
DVD-Audio Authoring Software, Playback Tips and Tricks, Creating and
Managing Labels
for CDs, Exporting to CD-Ready Files, Multiple Audacity Tracks, Writing
Your Songs to CD
for DVDs, DVD-Audio Authoring Software
for editing multiple tracks, Creating and Managing Labels
for song break, Compressing Dynamic Range
for song tracks, Customizing Dynamic Range Compression
for tracks, Playback Tips and Tricks
moving, Cutting a Single Long Track into Individual Song Tracks
LADSPA (Linux Audio Developer’s Simple Plugin API), Audacity Plugins for
Special Effects, WahWah
ladspa-sdk package, Linux LADSPA Plugins
LAME MP3 encoder, MP3 Quality Settings, MP3 Quality Settings, Enabling
MP3 Support
laptops, Operating Systems, Portable Digital Recorder, Audacity Settings,
Audacity Settings
for portable recording, Operating Systems, Portable Digital Recorder
microphone input, Audacity Settings
large diaphragm (LDM) condenser mics, Microphones
latency, USB or FireWire?, Overdubbing, Equalization, Building a Real-Time
Kernel, Recording, K–O
and Linux, Building a Real-Time Kernel
fixing errors, Equalization
measuring and fixing, Overdubbing
legacy devices, connecting to computer, Copying Vintage 78s
legacy media, transferring, DVD-Audio Authoring Software
legal issues, To DRM or Not to DRM?
Leveller effect, Applying Dynamic Range Compression, Applying Dynamic
Range Compression, Leveller
LFE (low-freqency effects) channel, DVD-Audio Overview, Multichannel
Surround

libdvdcss, Transferring Legacy Media
Libraries dialog, Libraries
licenses, Creative Commons, Establishing an Online Presence
LightScribe disk type, Exporting to CD-Ready Files, Multiple Audacity Tracks,
Writing Your Songs to CD
LightScribe DVD burner, DVD-Audio Authoring Software
limiter, Applying Dynamic Range Compression
Line In port, on sound card, Connecting Legacy Devices to Your Computer
line level, Microphone Preamp
line matching transformer, F–J
linear phase, Test Tones
linear pulse-code modulation (LPCM), What Are WAV, AIFF, and FLAC?
linear scale, Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks
Link Tracks button (Edit toolbar), Audacity in Detail, Audacity in Detail, Editing
Live Recordings, Cutting a Single Long Track into Individual Song Tracks, Link
Tracks and Track Groups
Linn Records, What Are WAV, AIFF, and FLAC?
Linux, Audacity Quick-Start, Audacity Quick-Start, USB or FireWire?,
Operating Systems, There Is Not a Special Audio CD, File Formats and Quality
Settings, Self-Hosting, WahWah, Configuring Linux for Best Audio Quality,
Configuring Linux for Best Audio Quality, Using Distributions with Real-Time
Kernels, dyne:bolic, Building a Real-Time Kernel, Building a Real-Time Kernel,
Latency Is Not That Scary, Linux System Tweaks, The Tangled History of Linux
Audio
and latency, Building a Real-Time Kernel
audio, Latency Is Not That Scary, The Tangled History of Linux Audio
history, The Tangled History of Linux Audio
CD writers, There Is Not a Special Audio CD
for USB 2.0 audio devices, USB or FireWire?
for web hosting, Self-Hosting
media players, Audacity Quick-Start, File Formats and Quality Settings
plugins, WahWah
real-time kernels, Configuring Linux for Best Audio Quality, dyne:bolic,
Building a Real-Time Kernel
building, Building a Real-Time Kernel
distributions with, Configuring Linux for Best Audio Quality
sound device, Audacity Quick-Start
specialized multimedia distributions, Using Distributions with Real-Time
Kernels

system tweaks, Linux System Tweaks
Linux Audio Developer’s Simple Plugin API (LADSPA), Audacity Plugins for
Special Effects, WahWah
live tracks for CD, Creating and Editing Live Tracks for CD, Creating and
Editing Live Tracks for CD, Multitrack Recording of a Live Performance,
Multitrack Recording of a Live Performance, Starting, Stopping, and Pausing
Recording, Starting, Stopping, and Pausing Recording
Audacity settings for recording, Multitrack Recording of a Live
Performance
editing recordings, Starting, Stopping, and Pausing Recording
making good recordings, Creating and Editing Live Tracks for CD
monitoring recording, Starting, Stopping, and Pausing Recording
multitrack recording of live performance, Multitrack Recording of a Live
Performance
logarithmic decibel scale, Track Panel
longevity, of recording media, The Digital Advantage
loopback cable, Measuring and Fixing Latency, Fix Timing and Latency Errors
loops, creating, NTSC, PAL, and CDDA Frames
lossy channel coupling, in Ogg Vorbis, Ogg Vorbis Quality Settings
lossy formats, Audacity Quick-Start, MP3 Quality Settings
loudness, A–E
Love, Courtney, File Formats and Audio Quality, Copyrights and Legal Issues
low noise floor, 16/44.1, 24/96, 32-Bit Float, Setting Recording Volume Levels
low-frequency effects (LFE) channel, DVD-Audio Overview, Multichannel
Surround
low-frequency oscillation, Change Pitch
low-pass filter, Noise Removal, Audio Effects Glossary
Low-Z, F–J
LPCM (linear pulse-code modulation), What Are WAV, AIFF, and FLAC?
LXDE, Linux System Tweaks
M
M-Audio Delta sound cards, Multichannel Recording, PCI, USB, FireWire,
Multitrack Recording, Audio Hardware
M-Audio Fast Track Ultra 8R, USB or FireWire?, PCMCIA
M-Audio Micro Track II, Portable Recording
M-Audio MobilePre USB, An Example Studio, An Example Studio,
Microphone Cables, Connecting Legacy Devices to Your Computer, Laptop with

Audacity, Audacity Settings for Recording, How to Make Multitrack
Recordings, Using JACK with Audacity, PCMCIA
and JACK, Using JACK with Audacity
M-Audio NRV10, Multichannel Recording, PCI, USB, FireWire, Multitrack
Recording
Mac support, for USB 2.0 audio devices, USB or FireWire?
Magnatune, File Formats and Quality Settings, What Are WAV, AIFF, and
FLAC?, Online Music Distributors
mailing lists, Establishing an Online Presence
make oldconfig command, Building a Real-Time Kernel
Make Stereo Track command, Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks, Fixing
Defects
MAM-A, Mass CD Duplication
Mambo, Self-Hosting
mapping tracks to surround channels, multichannel mixer for, Creating 5.1
Surround
Marantz PMD digital recorders, Portable Recording
mass CD duplication, Writing Your Songs to CD
masters, saving, What Bit Depth Is Best?
Max spike width value, Fixing Skips and Pops
maximum amplitude, Audacity Quick-Start
Maximum Pause, for Auto Duck, Adding a Background Music Track
megahertz (MHz), F–J
Menees, Roger, F–J
Meridian Lossless Packing (MLP) lossless compression, DVD-Audio Overview,
Exporting to 16-Bit
Messenger, Tuning Windows XP
metadata, Exporting to CD-Ready Files, One Long Audacity Track, Creating
Graceful Breaks Between Songs, One Track per Song Project, Putting an Orange
Book CD Collection Together, K–O
Metadata Editor, Track Metadata
Meter toolbar, Audacity in Detail, Setting Recording Volume Levels
metronome track, Metronome Track
MHz (megahertz), F–J
micro-minis, Connecting Legacy Devices to Your Computer
microphone preamps, Microphone Preamp
microphones, Audacity from Start to Finish, Microphones, Polar Patterns, Polar
Patterns, Which Microphones for Which Occasions?, Microphone Cables,
Microphone Cables, Multitrack Recording of a Live Performance, Creating

Podcasts, Tracks, Channels, and Clips, F–J
3-to-1 rule for placement, Microphone Cables
cables, Which Microphones for Which Occasions?
for live performance recording, Multitrack Recording of a Live
Performance
for studio recording, Tracks, Channels, and Clips
for voicecast recording, Creating Podcasts
impedance, F–J
placement, Microphone Cables
polar patterns, Polar Patterns
selecting based on occasion, Polar Patterns
microSD card reader, How to Transfer Files to Your Phone
microSD cards, Proprietary Audio File Formats, How to Transfer Files to Your
Phone
for phones, Proprietary Audio File Formats
Microsoft, What Are WAV, AIFF, and FLAC?
Microsoft Visual Studio, Low-Latency Recording and Audio Driver Fun
Microsoft.NET Framework, Tuning Windows Vista and 7
MIDI note table, for click track, Click Track
mini-jacks, Connecting Legacy Devices to Your Computer
miniSD cards, for phones, Proprietary Audio File Formats
Minnetonka Audio Software discWelder, Authoring Super High-Fidelity Audio
DVDs, Exporting to 16-Bit
mirroring, with RAID 10, Speakers and Headphones
Mitsui, CDs, Audio CDs
mixdown, to stereo, Mixdown to Stereo
Mixer Board, Mixer Board, Editing and Downmixing Multitrack Recordings,
Editing a Two-Track Recording as a Single Stereo Track, Mixdown to Stereo,
Mixdown to Stereo
customizing, Mixdown to Stereo
for adjustments to relative volumes of stereo channel, Editing a Two-Track
Recording as a Single Stereo Track
Mixer toolbar, Audacity Quick-Start, Audacity in Detail, Audacity Settings
mixing console, Multitrack Recording of a Live Performance
MLP (Meridian Lossless Packing) lossless compression, DVD-Audio Overview,
Exporting to 16-Bit
MME (MultiMedia Extensions), Audacity Quick-Start, Enabling WMA,
M4A/M4P Support
mobile phones. See cell phones, Starting, Stopping, and Pausing Recording

monitoring live recording, Starting, Stopping, and Pausing Recording
mono tracks, Multitrack Recording, How to Make Multitrack Recordings
mono TRS plugs, Sorting Out Connectors
Mouse dialog, Warnings
moving, Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks, Cutting a Single Long Track
into Individual Song Tracks, Cutting a Single Long Track into Individual Song
Tracks, Aligning and Moving Tracks
labels, Cutting a Single Long Track into Individual Song Tracks
tracks, Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks, Aligning and Moving
Tracks
MP3 files, Audacity Quick-Start, Understanding File Formats, Audio CDs,
There Is Not a Special Audio CD, Putting an Orange Book CD Collection
Together, File Formats and Quality Settings, Normalization, File Formats and
Audio Quality, File Formats and Audio Quality, Configuring Windows for Best
Audio Quality
converting to Red Book CD, There Is Not a Special Audio CD
enabling Windows support, Configuring Windows for Best Audio Quality
exporting to, Normalization
patent conflicts, File Formats and Audio Quality
variable bitrate, File Formats and Audio Quality
Mplayer, Audacity Quick-Start, File Formats and Quality Settings
MultiMedia Extensions (MME), Audacity Quick-Start, Enabling WMA,
M4A/M4P Support
Multi-Tool button (Tools toolbar), Audacity in Detail, Audacity in Detail
multichannel mixer, Multitrack Recording of a Live Performance, Multitrack
Recording of a Live Performance, Creating 5.1 Surround
digital, Multitrack Recording of a Live Performance
interface, Creating 5.1 Surround
multichannel recording, Multichannel Recording, PCI, USB, FireWire, Editing
and Downmixing Multitrack Recordings, Tracks, Channels, and Clips
multichannel surround sound, Normalization, Too Loud! Clipping!
multicore CPUs, Your Computer Must Have Muscle and Vast Drawers, DVD-
Audio Overview
multitrack recordings, Multitrack Recording of a Live Performance, Editing Live
Recordings, What Bit Depth Is Best?, Multitrack Recording, Tracks, Channels,
and Clips
editing and downmixing, Editing Live Recordings
making, Tracks, Channels, and Clips
of live performance, Multitrack Recording of a Live Performance

saving, What Bit Depth Is Best?
music CD, creating, Exporting to CD-Ready Files, Multiple Audacity Tracks
music track, adding as background to podcast, Editing a Two-Track Recording
as Two Mono Tracks
Musix, Musix
Mute button (Mixer Board), Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks, Editing a
Two-Track Recording as Two Mono Tracks, How to Make Multitrack
Recordings
MySpace, Establishing an Online Presence
N
National Television System Committee (NTSC) frames, NTSC, PAL, and CDDA
Frames
ncurses interface, Sorting Out Linux Audio
Nero, CD Writers and Software, Ripping CDs
netbook, for portable recording, Operating Systems
Network DDE, Tuning Windows XP
Neumann KU-81i Dummy Head, The Secret of Recording Your Own Great
Audio
node control points, Cutting a Single Long Track into Individual Song Tracks,
Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs
noise, Multichannel Recording, PCI, USB, FireWire, Which Microphones for
Which Occasions?, The Secret of Recording Your Own Great Audio, Recording,
Fixing Skips and Pops, The Digital Advantage, Creating and Editing Live Tracks
for CD, Noise Removal, CD Writers and Software, Exporting to 16-Bit, Noise
Removal
and internal sound cards, Multichannel Recording, PCI, USB, FireWire
blocking unwanted, The Secret of Recording Your Own Great Audio
CDs vs vinyl LPs, The Digital Advantage
clicking, CD Writers and Software
deliberately adding, Exporting to 16-Bit
recording audience, Creating and Editing Live Tracks for CD
recording before and after music, Recording
removal, Fixing Skips and Pops, Noise Removal, Noise Removal
noise floor, Compressing Dynamic Range, How Much Dynamic Range?, A–E
setting for compression, Compressing Dynamic Range, How Much
Dynamic Range?
noise profile, Noise Removal, Noise Removal

Noise Removal effect, Fixing Skips and Pops, Noise Removal, Noise Removal,
Repeat Last Effect
Nokia, RTTTL
nondrop frame rate, NTSC, PAL, and CDDA Frames
normalization, Audacity Quick-Start, Customizing Dynamic Range
Compression, Compressing Dynamic Range, Normalization, Splitting Stereo
Tracks for Surgical Repairs, Putting an Orange Book CD Collection Together,
Normalization, Normalization
and compression, Compressing Dynamic Range
for audio from vinyl LPs, Customizing Dynamic Range Compression
for setting songs to same volume level, Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical
Repairs
to raise volume, Audacity Quick-Start
Normalize effect, Audacity Quick-Start, Making Quiet Recordings Louder,
Customizing Dynamic Range Compression, Editing and Downmixing Multitrack
Recordings, Creating Graceful Breaks Between Songs, Making Graceful Fades
and Song Breaks, Normalization, Applying Dynamic Range Compression,
Normalization
NTSC (National Television System Committee) frames, NTSC, PAL, and CDDA
Frames
Nyquist, Audacity Plugins for Special Effects, Linux Nyquist Plugins
Nyquist-Shannon theorem, 16/44.1, 24/96, 32-Bit Float
O
Ogg Vorbis files, Audacity Quick-Start, Understanding File Formats, Audio
CDs, Putting an Orange Book CD Collection Together, File Formats and Quality
Settings, Normalization, File Formats and Audio Quality
Olympus LS10, Portable Recording
omnidirectional polar pattern, Microphones, Polar Patterns
online credit card payments, processing, Selling Stuff Online
online music distribution, Becoming an Online Star, Establishing an Online
Presence
file formats and audio quality, Becoming an Online Star
Open Sound System (OSS), Sorting Out Linux Audio, The Tangled History of
Linux Audio
open source streaming servers, Self-Hosting
operating systems, Speakers and Headphones
Orange Book standard, Audio CDs, Making Graceful Fades and Song Breaks,

Putting an Orange Book CD Collection Together
configuring Audacity for, Making Graceful Fades and Song Breaks
OSS (Open Sound System), Latency Is Not That Scary, The Tangled History of
Linux Audio
OSSwin project, MP3 Quality Settings
Outer Fade, for Auto Duck, Adding a Background Music Track
output channels, Tracks, Channels, and Clips
overdubbing, Tracks, Channels, and Clips, Metronome Track, Overdubbing,
Equalization, K–O
latency and, Overdubbing, Equalization
P
padding track with silence, Working with Clips
paging file, Tuning Windows for Best Performance, Tuning Windows XP,
Tuning Windows XP
for Windows Vista/7, Tuning Windows XP
for Windows XP, Tuning Windows for Best Performance
pain, threshold of, P–T
PAL (Phase Alternating Line), NTSC, PAL, and CDDA Frames
Pan slider, Track Panel, Mixer Board, Mixdown to Stereo, Customizing the
Mixer Board
Paste button (Edit toolbar), Audacity in Detail, Audacity in Detail
Patchbay, Connecting a FireWire Recording Interface
patents, on file formats, Understanding File Formats, Normalization, Enabling
WMA, M4A/M4P Support
Pause button (Control toolbar), Audacity Quick-Start, Audacity in Detail,
Recording
pausing recording, Starting, Stopping, and Pausing Recording
PayPal account, Selling Stuff Online
PCI Express, Multichannel Recording, PCI, USB, FireWire
PCI sound card, Building a Good Digital Sound Studio on the Cheap,
Multichannel Recording, PCI, USB, FireWire, Multichannel Recording, PCI,
USB, FireWire, Audio Hardware
PCI-E sound card, Getting Sound In and Out of the Computer, Audio Hardware
PCMCIA sound card, Laptop with Audacity, PCMCIA
peak level, Audacity Quick-Start, K–O
peak ratings, Track Panel
peaks, reducing too-tall, Cleaning Up Your Recording

perception of sound, P–T
performance in Windows, Low-Latency Recording and Audio Driver Fun
phantom power, Microphones, Portable Recording, Multitrack Recording of a
Live Performance, Tracks, Channels, and Clips
phase, Test Tones, P–T
Phase Alternating Line (PAL), NTSC, PAL, and CDDA Frames
phase shifting, Test Tones, P–T
Phaser effect, Change Pitch
Phillips, CDs, Audio CDs
phono plugs, Connecting Legacy Devices to Your Computer
phonograph records. See vinyl LPs, Latency Is Not That Scary
Phonon, Sorting Out Linux Audio, Querying Your Sound Card, JACK Settings
and JACK, Querying Your Sound Card
turning off, JACK Settings
Pink Floyd, “Time”, The Digital Advantage
pink noise, Generating Noise, Generating Noise
Pioneer stereo amplifiers, An Example Studio, Microphone Preamp
piracy, The Business of a Recording Artist
pitch, Audacity in Detail, Metronome Track, F–J, K–O
and MIDI Note Number values, Metronome Track
Pitch (EAC) view, Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks
Planet CCRMA packages, WahWah, Linux LADSPA Plugins, Using
Distributions with Real-Time Kernels
Plantronics USB headset, Speakers and Headphones, Making a Simple Voicecast
Play button (Control toolbar), Audacity Quick-Start, Audacity in Detail
play region, Playback Tips and Tricks
playback, Audacity Quick-Start, Audacity in Detail, Audacity in Detail,
Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks, Track Panel, How to Make Multitrack
Recordings, Playback Tips and Tricks
selecting one track for, Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks
speed of, Audacity in Detail
starting, Playback Tips and Tricks
starting point, Audacity in Detail
tips and tricks, How to Make Multitrack Recordings
volume, Audacity Quick-Start
Playback dialog, Playback
Plone, Self-Hosting
Pluck plug-in, Click Track
plugins, Audacity Plugins for Special Effects

plugs, An Example Studio, Connecting Legacy Devices to Your Computer
pocket digital recorders, Portable Recording
podcasts, Creating Podcasts, Creating Podcasts, Creating Podcasts, Making a
Simple Voicecast, Audacity Settings, Cleaning Up Your Recording, Other Lossy
Formats, Other Lossy Formats, Editing a Two-Track Recording as Two Mono
Tracks, Compress Dynamic Range
background music track for, Editing a Two-Track Recording as Two Mono
Tracks
dynamic range compression, Compress Dynamic Range
exporting, Other Lossy Formats
steps for creating, Creating Podcasts
two-person, Other Lossy Formats
voicecasts, Creating Podcasts, Making a Simple Voicecast, Audacity
Settings, Cleaning Up Your Recording
Audacity settings, Making a Simple Voicecast
cleaning up recording, Audacity Settings
replacing segment, Cleaning Up Your Recording
point labels, Creating and Managing Labels
polar patterns, for microphones, Microphones
pops, fixing, Fixing Warps
portable digital recorder, Portable Digital Recorder
portable recording, Operating Systems
preamp, Connecting a Turntable to Your Computer
preemptive multitasking, and latency, Configuring Linux for Best Audio Quality
prefab storefront, Selling Stuff Online
Preferences dialog, Audacity Quick-Start, Audacity Quick-Start, Audacity in
Detail, Saving Your Work, Saving Your Work, Track Metadata, Final Mixdown,
Audacity Settings, Fixing Skips and Pops, Exporting to CD-Ready Files, One
Long Audacity Track, Copying Vintage 78s, Copying Vintage 78s, Multitrack
Recording of a Live Performance, Audacity Settings for Recording, Audacity
Settings for Recording, Editing and Downmixing Multitrack Recordings,
Optional Track Metadata, One Track per Song Project, One Track per Song
Project, One Track per Song Project, Single Audacity Track Compilation
Project, Single Audacity Track Compilation Project, Making Graceful Fades and
Song Breaks, Configuring Audacity for Orange Book CDs, What Are WAV,
AIFF, and FLAC?, Creating 5.1 Surround, Creating 5.1 Surround, Exporting to
16-Bit, Making a Simple Voicecast, Audacity Settings, Audacity Settings,
Reducing Too-Tall Peaks, Tracks, Channels, and Clips, How to Make Multitrack
Recordings, Overdubbing, Measuring and Fixing Latency, Mixdown to Stereo,

Control Your Channel Mapping, Customizing Audio for a Mobile Phone,
Customizing Audio for a Mobile Phone, Equalization, Latency Is Not That
Scary, Enabling WMA, M4A/M4P Support, Customizing Audacity's Default
Options, Devices, Playback, Recording, Quality, Interface, Tracks, Tracks,
Import/Export, Libraries, Spectrograms, Directories, Warnings, Warnings,
Warnings, Warnings
Devices, Audacity Quick-Start, Audacity Quick-Start, Copying Vintage
78s, Audacity Settings for Recording, One Track per Song Project, Single
Audacity Track Compilation Project, Configuring Audacity for Orange
Book CDs, Creating 5.1 Surround, Audacity Settings, Tracks, Channels,
and Clips, Devices
Directories, Directories
Effects, Warnings
Import/Export, Track Metadata, Final Mixdown, Exporting to CD-Ready
Files, One Long Audacity Track, Copying Vintage 78s, Editing and
Downmixing Multitrack Recordings, Optional Track Metadata, One Track
per Song Project, Creating 5.1 Surround, Mixdown to Stereo, Control Your
Channel Mapping, Customizing Audio for a Mobile Phone, Tracks
Interface, Reducing Too-Tall Peaks, Interface
Keyboard, Warnings
Libraries, Enabling WMA, M4A/M4P Support, Libraries
Mouse, Warnings
Playback, Fixing Skips and Pops, How to Make Multitrack Recordings,
Customizing Audio for a Mobile Phone, Playback
Projects, Saving Your Work, Import/Export
Quality, Saving Your Work, Audacity Settings, What Are WAV, AIFF, and
FLAC?, Exporting to 16-Bit, Making a Simple Voicecast, Quality
Recording, Audacity Settings for Recording, One Track per Song Project,
Single Audacity Track Compilation Project, Making Graceful Fades and
Song Breaks, Audacity Settings, Overdubbing, Measuring and Fixing
Latency, Equalization, Latency Is Not That Scary, Recording
Spectrograms, Spectrograms
Tracks, Tracks
Warnings, Warnings
Preset bitrate setting, for MP3, MP3 Quality Settings
PreSonus AudioBox 2×2, USB Recording Interfaces
PreSonus StudioLive 16-Channel FireWire Digital Mixer, Multitrack Recording
of a Live Performance
Preview button, changing duration, Customizing Audio for a Mobile Phone

preview, default length, Fixing Skips and Pops
printing CD labels, Writing Your Songs to CD
Pristine Classical, File Formats and Quality Settings
ProJect Phono Box II USB Phono Preamp, USB Recording Interfaces
processes, top command for viewing active, Linux System Tweaks
profile of noise, Fixing Skips and Pops, Fixing Clipping and Too-Loud Passages,
Noise Removal
project management, Audacity in Detail
projects, Audacity Quick-Start, Audacity Quick-Start, Saving Your Work
.aup files for, Audacity Quick-Start
sharing files across, Saving Your Work
Projects dialog, Projects
proprietary file formats, for ringtone, Proprietary Audio File Formats
proximity effect, Polar Patterns
psychoacoustics, MP3 Quality Settings, P–T
PulseAudio, Sorting Out Linux Audio, Sorting Out Linux Audio, JACK
Settings, The Tangled History of Linux Audio
turning off, JACK Settings
vs. JACK, Sorting Out Linux Audio
pumping and breathing, compression and, Compressor Settings
pure:dyne, pure:dyne
purple noise, Generating Noise
Q
QIC (quarter-inch cartridge) tapes, Which Is Better: Vinyl, Tape, or CDs?
Qjackctl, Using JACK with Audacity, JACK Settings
Quality dialog, Quality
quality of recordings, factors affecting, DVD-Audio Overview
quality settings, Saving Your Work, Audacity Settings for Recording, Audacity
Settings for Recording, Putting an Orange Book CD Collection Together
and file formats, Putting an Orange Book CD Collection Together
consistency for recording and editing, Audacity Settings for Recording
default export for WAVs, Saving Your Work
quarter-inch cartridge (QIC) tapes, Which Is Better: Vinyl, Tape, or CDs?
querying sound cards, ALSA Applications
R

Rademacher function, Test Tones
RAID, Speakers and Headphones
RAM, Your Computer Must Have Muscle and Vast Drawers
Ratio setting, for compression, Compressing Dynamic Range, How Much
Dynamic Range?
RCA audio connectors, Connecting Legacy Devices to Your Computer
Realtime Conversion settings, Quality
real-time preemption, Using Distributions with Real-Time Kernels
receivers, Connecting a Turntable to Your Computer
Record button (Control toolbar), Audacity Quick-Start, Audacity in Detail,
Recording
record production, history, Preparing Vinyl LPs for Copying
recording, Audacity Quick-Start, Audacity Quick-Start, Audacity Quick-Start,
Saving Your Work, Operating Systems, Portable Recording, Audacity Settings
for Recording, Starting, Stopping, and Pausing Recording, Overdubbing, Testing
Recording
default quality setting, Saving Your Work
new track, during playback, Overdubbing
portable, Operating Systems
secrets for quality, Portable Recording
session display, Audacity Quick-Start
starting, stopping and pausing, Starting, Stopping, and Pausing Recording
testing, Testing Recording
volume level, Audacity Quick-Start, Audacity Settings for Recording
recording artist, business, File Formats and Audio Quality
Recording dialog, Recording
recording engineers, The Myth That Someone Else Knows Better Than You
Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), There Is Not a Special
Audio CD
recording interfaces, PCMCIA, USB Recording Interfaces, USB Recording
Interfaces
FireWire, USB Recording Interfaces
USB, PCMCIA
recording media, longevity of, The Digital Advantage
rectangular dither, Exporting to 16-Bit, Quality
Red Book CD Audio standard, Audacity Settings, Exporting to CD-Ready Files,
Multiple Audacity Tracks, Optional Track Metadata, Writing Your Songs to CD,
Audio CDs, There Is Not a Special Audio CD
converting MP3 files to, There Is Not a Special Audio CD

red noise, Generating Noise
Redo button (Edit toolbar), Audacity in Detail, Audacity in Detail
redo operation, How to Make Multitrack Recordings
reel tapes, Which Is Better: Vinyl, Tape, or CDs?
reflectivity, Audio CDs
region labels, Cutting a Single Long Track into Individual Song Tracks, Creating
and Managing Labels, Using Labels to Edit Multiple Tracks
Register.com, The Business of a Recording Artist
registering domain name, The Business of a Recording Artist
renting snail mailbox, Establishing an Online Presence
Repair effect, Fixing Skips and Pops, Cleaning Up Your Recording, Repair
Repeat Last Effect command, Risset Drum, Repeat Last Effect
replacing segment, in podcast, Cleaning Up Your Recording
resampling, Making Graceful Fades and Song Breaks, A–E
reverberation, Audio Effects Glossary
Reverberation effect, Risset Drum
Reverse effect, Phaser
Rhapsody, To DRM or Not to DRM?
Rhythmbox, Audacity Quick-Start, File Formats and Quality Settings
RIAA (Recording Industry Association of America), Audio CDs
RIAA equalization curve, Connecting a Turntable to Your Computer, Connecting
a Turntable to Your Computer
ribbon mics, Microphones
Ridata, Mass CD Duplication
Ring Tone Text Transfer Language (RTTTL), Phone Audio File Formats
ringtones, Making Your Own Ringtones, Making Your Own Ringtones,
Customizing Audio for a Mobile Phone, Customizing Audio for a Mobile Phone,
Phone Audio File Formats, Proprietary Audio File Formats, Proprietary Audio
File Formats
customizing, Making Your Own Ringtones
dynamic range compression, Customizing Audio for a Mobile Phone
file formats, Customizing Audio for a Mobile Phone, Phone Audio File
Formats, Proprietary Audio File Formats
proprietary, Proprietary Audio File Formats
transferring to phones, Proprietary Audio File Formats
ripping, Computer Media Players, Ripping DVDs, Transferring Legacy Media
CDs, Computer Media Players
DVDs, Ripping DVDs
Risset Drum effect, Click Track

Risset, Jean Claude, Risset Drum, P–T
RME Fireface 800, USB Recording Interfaces
RME Hammerfall sound card, Multitrack Recording, Audio Hardware,
PCMCIA
RMS (root-mean-square), Track Panel, P–T
Roomsize setting, for reverberation, Reverberation
root-mean-square (RMS), Track Panel, P–T
Routing and Remote Access, Tuning Windows XP
Roxio, CD Writers and Software, CD Writers and Software, Single Audacity
Track + CD-Mastering Program
rt patch, dyne:bolic
RTTTL (Ring Tone Text Transfer Language), Applying Dynamic Range
Compression
runlevel command, Turning PulseAudio and Phonon Off
S
SACD (Super Audio CD), Transferring Legacy Media
sample format, Saving Your Work, Track Panel, Audacity Settings for
Recording, A–E
sampling rate, Understanding File Formats, Audacity Settings for Recording,
What Bit Depth Is Best?, Quality, A–E, P–T
default, Quality
for high-quality recordings, What Bit Depth Is Best?
SAO (session-at-once), There Is Not a Special Audio CD
satellite radio, The Digital Advantage
saving, Audacity Quick-Start, Saving Your Work, Saving Your Work, What Bit
Depth Is Best?, What Bit Depth Is Best?
masters, What Bit Depth Is Best?
projects, Audacity Quick-Start, Saving Your Work
tracks as separate WAV files, Saving Your Work
sawtooth waveform, Test Tones, Audio Effects Glossary
SCMS (Serial Copy Management System), Writing Songs to a CD, Audio CDs
scratches, Recording, Fixing Defects, Normalization
fixing, Recording
removing, Normalization
screensavers, The Secret of Recording Your Own Great Audio
SD card, Proprietary Audio File Formats
SDL (Simple DirectMedia Layer), The Tangled History of Linux Audio

SDM (small diaphragm) condenser mics, Microphones
seamless join, interpolation for, Cleaning Up Your Recording
Seek Time, Playback
segments of tracks, selecting, Saving Your Work
Select threshold setting, Fixing Skips and Pops
selecting, Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks, Selecting Tracks and
Segments of Tracks, Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks, Selecting Tracks
and Segments of Tracks, Creating and Managing Labels, Splitting Tracks
all tracks with ctrl-A, Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks
multiple clips, Splitting Tracks
nonadjacent tracks, Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks
to end of track, Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks
track segments across multiple tracks, Creating and Managing Labels
Selection button (Tools toolbar), Audacity in Detail, Audacity in Detail, Saving
Your Work
Selection toolbar, Audacity in Detail, Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks,
Special CD Settings in Audacity, CD Writers and Software, Customizing Audio
for a Mobile Phone
self-hosting, Self-Hosting
selling online, Selling Stuff Online
Serial Copy Management System (SCMS), Writing Songs to a CD, There Is Not
a Special Audio CD
services, disabling, Tuning Windows XP, Tuning Windows Vista and 7, Tuning
Windows Vista and 7
in Windows Vista/7, Tuning Windows Vista and 7
in Windows XP, Tuning Windows XP
session-at-once (SAO), CD Writers and Software
shaped dither, Exporting to 16-Bit, Quality
sharing files, across projects, Saving Your Work
short-play records, Writing Songs to a CD
shotgun polar pattern, Microphones, Polar Patterns
Shoutcast, Self-Hosting
Shure M78S Phono Cartridge, Writing Songs to a CD, Connecting a Turntable to
Your Computer
Shure X2U XLR-to-USB Signal Adapter, USB Recording Interfaces
signal processing, Audacity Plugins for Special Effects
signal-to-noise ratio, Audacity Quick-Start
signed WAV settings, File Formats and Audio Quality
silence, Fixing Defects, Cutting a Single Long Track into Individual Song

Tracks, Cutting a Single Long Track into Individual Song Tracks, Splitting
Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs, Truncate Silence
creating, Cutting a Single Long Track into Individual Song Tracks
inserting, Fixing Defects, Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs
truncating, Truncate Silence
Silence button (Edit toolbar), Audacity in Detail, Audacity in Detail, Cutting Out
Unwanted Chunks, Recording
Silence Finder, Analyze Menu
Simple DirectMedia Layer (SDL), The Tangled History of Linux Audio
sine wave, What Bit Depth Is Best?, Sine Wave Example, Test Tones, Test
Tones, Risset Drum, Phaser, Audio Effects Glossary
creating, What Bit Depth Is Best?
for testing effects, Risset Drum
Skip to End button (Control toolbar), Audacity in Detail, Selecting Tracks and
Segments of Tracks
Skip to Start button (Control toolbar), Audacity in Detail, Selecting Tracks and
Segments of Tracks
skips, fixing, Fixing Warps
Sliding Time Scale/Pitch Shift effect, Phaser
Slinky, Phaser, Phaser
small diaphragm (SDM) condenser mics, Microphones
Smart Card, Tuning Windows XP
smoking, The Secret of Recording Your Own Great Audio
snail mailbox, renting, Establishing an Online Presence
Snap Guide, Cleaning Up Your Recording, Aligning and Moving Tracks,
Working with Clips
sockets, An Example Studio
software, File Formats and Quality Settings, Exporting to 16-Bit, DVD-Audio
Authoring Software
DVD-Audio authoring, DVD-Audio Authoring Software
media players, File Formats and Quality Settings
solid-state amplifier, vs. tube, Which Microphones for Which Occasions?, The
Myth of the Golden Ear
Solo button (Mixer Board), Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks, Editing a
Two-Track Recording as Two Mono Tracks
Songbird, File Formats and Quality Settings
songs, Cutting a Single Long Track into Individual Song Tracks, Cutting a
Single Long Track into Individual Song Tracks, Writing Your Songs to CD,
Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs, Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical

Repairs
creating graceful breaks, Cutting a Single Long Track into Individual Song
Tracks, Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs
writing to CDs, Writing Your Songs to CD
sonic cannons, A–E
Sony BMG, copy protection, Ripping CDs
Sony PCM-D50, Portable Recording
Sony’s Creative Software CD Architect, CD Writers and Software, CD Writers
and Software, Single Audacity Track + CD-Mastering Program
Sound Activated Recording, Timer Record and Sound Activated Recording,
Recording
Sound Blaster 16, The Tangled History of Linux Audio
sound cards, Multichannel Recording, PCI, USB, FireWire, Connecting Legacy
Devices to Your Computer, How to Make Multitrack Recordings, ALSA
Applications, Audio Hardware
as ADC/DAC, Connecting Legacy Devices to Your Computer
problem with internal, Multichannel Recording, PCI, USB, FireWire
querying, ALSA Applications
sound chips, and stereo microphone inputs, Tracks, Channels, and Clips
Sound control panel (Windows 7), Configuring Windows for Best Audio Quality
sound engineers, interacting with, Multitrack Recording of a Live Performance
Sound module, Audacity Quick-Start
sound quality, Microphones, Microphones, Which Microphones for Which
Occasions?, Connecting a Turntable to Your Computer
characterizations, Microphones
subjectivity in, Which Microphones for Which Occasions?
vinyl LPs vs. CDs, Connecting a Turntable to Your Computer
sound, perception of, P–T
SoundJuicer, Transferring Legacy Media
source code, browsing, Audacity Plugins for Special Effects
spam, Establishing an Online Presence
speaker-test command, Hardware Testing with alsa-utils
speakers, Speakers and Headphones, Testing Speakers
Specify Uncompressed Options dialog, Saving Your Work
Spectrograms dialog, Spectrograms
Spectrum view, Track Panel
speed of playback, Audacity in Detail
Split Stereo to Mono, Track Panel
Split Stereo Track command, Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks,

Recording, Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs, Tracks, Channels, and
Clips, How to Make Multitrack Recordings, Fix-its and Cleanups
split tracks, rejoining, Aligning and Moving Tracks
splitters, Multitrack Recording of a Live Performance
splitting, Special CD Settings in Audacity, Special CD Settings in Audacity, CD
Cue Sheets and BIN Files, Fixes and Cleanups, Splitting Tracks
stereo track for repairs, Special CD Settings in Audacity, CD Cue Sheets
and BIN Files
tracks, Splitting Tracks
square waveform, Test Tones, Audio Effects Glossary
stands, for microphones, Microphone Cables
starting, Starting, Stopping, and Pausing Recording, How to Make Multitrack
Recordings, Playback Tips and Tricks
playback, How to Make Multitrack Recordings
recording, Starting, Stopping, and Pausing Recording
Steely Dan, “Haitian Divorce”, WahWah
Steinberg, Authoring Super High-Fidelity Audio DVDs, DVD-Audio Authoring
Software, Windows Plugins, Low-Latency Recording and Audio Driver Fun
Virtual Studio Technology (VST), Windows Plugins
Wavelab, Authoring Super High-Fidelity Audio DVDs, DVD-Audio
Authoring Software
stereo channel, Mixer Board for adjusting relative volumes, Editing a Two-Track
Recording as a Single Stereo Track
stereo mic, Tracks, Channels, and Clips
stereo recordings, Making Good Live Recordings, Mixdown to Stereo
mixdown to, Mixdown to Stereo
stereo track, Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks, Selecting Tracks and
Segments of Tracks, Special CD Settings in Audacity, CD Cue Sheets and BIN
Files, What Are WAV, AIFF, and FLAC?, Tracks, Channels, and Clips
creating, Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks
DVD-Audio support for, What Are WAV, AIFF, and FLAC?
splitting for repairs, Special CD Settings in Audacity, CD Cue Sheets and
BIN Files
stereo TRS plugs, Sorting Out Connectors
Steve Harris’s plugins, Linux LADSPA Plugins
stiff cables, Microphone Cables
stiffness, Audio Effects Glossary
Stop button (Control toolbar), Audacity Quick-Start, Audacity in Detail,
Recording

stopping point, for playback, Playback Tips and Tricks
stopping recording, Starting, Stopping, and Pausing Recording
storage requirements, for bit depth/sampling rate combinations, What Bit Depth
Is Best?
storefront, prefab, Selling Stuff Online
striping, Your Computer Must Have Muscle and Vast Drawers
studio recording, microphones for, Tracks, Channels, and Clips
studio, sound reduction for, Portable Recording
stylus, care of, Preparing Vinyl LPs for Copying
sub-cardioid polar pattern, Microphones
subwoofer channel, Multichannel Surround
Super Audio CD (SACD), Transferring Legacy Media
super-cardioid polar pattern, Microphones
surround channel, DVD-Audio support for, What Are WAV, AIFF, and FLAC?
synchronizing tracks, Audacity in Detail, Editing Live Recordings
System Properties dialog, Tuning Windows for Best Performance, Tuning
Windows XP, Tuning Windows Vista and 7
Windows Vista/7, Tuning Windows XP
Windows XP, Tuning Windows for Best Performance
System Restore, and performance, Tuning Windows Vista and 7
T
Tablet PC, Tuning Windows Vista and 7
Tail level, for reverberation, Reverberation
Taiyo Yuden, Longevity, Mass CD Duplication, Audio CDs
TAO (track-at-once), There Is Not a Special Audio CD
TAP (Tom’s Audio Processing) plugins, Linux LADSPA Plugins
tape deck, connecting to computer, Connecting a Turntable to Your Computer
tape, vs. vinyl LPs or CDs, Connecting a Turntable to Your Computer
Task Manager (Windows), Audacity priority in, Tuning Windows for Best
Performance
TDK CDs, Longevity, Audio CDs
Telnet, Tuning Windows XP, Tuning Windows Vista and 7
tempo, Changing Tempo, P–T
changing, Changing Tempo
Terminal Services, Tuning Windows XP
testing, Multichannel Surround, Multichannel Surround, Risset Drum, Testing
Speakers, Testing Recording

channel mappings, Multichannel Surround
recording, Testing Recording
sine wave for, Risset Drum
speakers, Testing Speakers
Themes, Tuning Windows XP
threshold of pain, P–T
Threshold setting, for compression, Compressing Dynamic Range, How Much
Dynamic Range?
timbre, P–T
Time Record, Timer Record and Sound Activated Recording
Time Scale, Audacity Quick-Start, How to Make Multitrack Recordings
for playback starting point, How to Make Multitrack Recordings
Time Shift button (Tools toolbar), Audacity in Detail, Audacity in Detail,
Making Graceful Fades and Song Breaks, Cleaning Up Your Recording, Tracks,
Channels, and Clips, Aligning and Moving Tracks, Link Tracks and Track
Groups, Link Tracks and Track Groups, Working with Clips, Audacity Plugins
for Special Effects, Equalization, A–E, K–O
for cross-fades, Audacity Plugins for Special Effects
for multiple tracks, Link Tracks and Track Groups
for track group, Link Tracks and Track Groups
inside tracks, Working with Clips
timecodes, NTSC, PAL, and CDDA Frames
timing, fixing, Equalization
tip-ring-sleeve (TRS). See TRS (tip-ring-sleeve), There Is Not a Special Audio
CD
Tom’s Audio Processing (TAP) plugins, Linux LADSPA Plugins
tone controls, myth of unneeded, The Myth of Tube Superiority
tones, Generate Menu, Generate Menu, Generate Menu, Frequency Range of
Generated Tones
creating, Generate Menu
DTMF, Frequency Range of Generated Tones
frequency range of, Generate Menu
too-loud passages, fixing, Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs
toolbars, handles for dragging, Audacity in Detail
Tools toolbar, Audacity in Detail
top command, Linux System Tweaks
touch-tone telephones, dual-tone multifrequency (DTMF) tones from, Frequency
Range of Generated Tones
track focus, vs. track selection, Saving Your Work

track groups, Link Tracks and Track Groups
Track menu, Recording, Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs, Splitting
Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs, Editing a Two-Track Recording as Two
Mono Tracks, Tracks, Channels, and Clips, Tracks, Channels, and Clips, How to
Make Multitrack Recordings, How to Make Multitrack Recordings, How to
Make Multitrack Recordings, How to Make Multitrack Recordings, Mixdown to
Stereo, Making Your Own Ringtones, Fix-its and Cleanups, Split Stereo Tracks
Make Stereo Track, Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs, How to
Make Multitrack Recordings, Split Stereo Tracks
Move Track Up/Down, How to Make Multitrack Recordings
Split Stereo to Mono, Tracks, Channels, and Clips, How to Make
Multitrack Recordings, Making Your Own Ringtones
Split Stereo Track, Recording, Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs,
Editing a Two-Track Recording as Two Mono Tracks, Tracks, Channels,
and Clips, How to Make Multitrack Recordings, Fix-its and Cleanups
track names, Saving Your Work, Mixdown to Stereo
mixer board icons to match, Mixdown to Stereo
Track panel, Track Panel, Reducing Too-Tall Peaks, How to Make Multitrack
Recordings
decibel scale, Reducing Too-Tall Peaks
Solo button, How to Make Multitrack Recordings
track segments, creating, Aligning and Moving Tracks
track-at-once (TAO), CD Writers and Software
tracks, Audacity Quick-Start, Audacity Quick-Start, Audacity in Detail, Saving
Your Work, Saving Your Work, Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks,
Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks, Selecting Tracks and Segments of
Tracks, Cutting Out Unwanted Chunks, Final Mixdown, Preparing Vinyl LPs for
Copying, Fixing Defects, Customizing Dynamic Range Compression, Exporting
to CD-Ready Files, One Long Audacity Track, Compressing Dynamic Range,
Creating Graceful Breaks Between Songs, Making Graceful Fades and Song
Breaks, Ripping DVDs, Creating 5.1 Surround, Creating Podcasts, Other Lossy
Formats, Editing a Two-Track Recording as a Single Stereo Track, Multitrack
Recording, Playback Tips and Tricks, Aligning and Moving Tracks, Aligning
and Moving Tracks, Splitting Tracks, Working with Clips, Metronome Track,
Overdubbing, Mixdown to Stereo, P–T
aligning and moving, Aligning and Moving Tracks
appending to existing, Audacity Quick-Start
combining, and volume increase, Making Graceful Fades and Song Breaks
cutting single into song tracks, Customizing Dynamic Range Compression,

Compressing Dynamic Range
deleting, Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks
editing two-track as two mono tracks, Editing a Two-Track Recording as a
Single Stereo Track
editing two-track recording as a single track, Other Lossy Formats
for each song title, Preparing Vinyl LPs for Copying
from DVDs, Ripping DVDs
labels for, Playback Tips and Tricks
linking, Aligning and Moving Tracks
mapping to channels, Final Mixdown, Creating 5.1 Surround
metadata for, Exporting to CD-Ready Files, One Long Audacity Track,
Creating Graceful Breaks Between Songs
metronome, Metronome Track
recording, during playback, Overdubbing
removing parts, Cutting Out Unwanted Chunks
saving each as separate WAV file, Saving Your Work
selecting all with ctrl-A, Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks
selecting nonadjacent, Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks
selecting whole, Audacity Quick-Start, Saving Your Work
splitting, Splitting Tracks
synchronizing, Audacity in Detail
time shift inside, Working with Clips
volume level, Mixdown to Stereo
Tracks dialog, Interface
Tracks menu, Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks, Editing Live
Recordings, Final Export, Making Graceful Fades and Song Breaks, Adding a
Background Music Track, Label Tracks, Creating and Managing Labels,
Creating and Managing Labels, Creating and Managing Labels, Aligning and
Moving Tracks, Aligning and Moving Tracks, Link Tracks and Track Groups,
Mixdown to Stereo, Control Your Channel Mapping, Customizing Audio for a
Mobile Phone, Generate Menu, Generate Menu, Fix Timing and Latency Errors
Add Label At Selection, Creating and Managing Labels
Add New, Label Tracks, Aligning and Moving Tracks, Generate Menu,
Generate Menu
Audio Track, Generate Menu
Label Track, Label Tracks, Aligning and Moving Tracks
Align Tracks, Aligning and Moving Tracks, Fix Timing and Latency Errors
Edit Labels, Creating and Managing Labels, Creating and Managing Labels
Link Audio and Label Tracks, Link Tracks and Track Groups

Mix and Render, Editing Live Recordings, Making Graceful Fades and
Song Breaks, Adding a Background Music Track, Mixdown to Stereo,
Control Your Channel Mapping
Resample, Final Export, Customizing Audio for a Mobile Phone
Transcription toolbar, Audacity in Detail
transferring legacy media, DVD-Audio Authoring Software
transient response, Microphones, P–T
transitions, smoothing, Fixing Clipping and Too-Loud Passages
Transport menu, Timer Record and Sound Activated Recording, Overdubbing,
Overdubbing, Measuring and Fixing Latency, Measuring and Fixing Latency,
Analyze Menu
Overdub, Overdubbing, Measuring and Fixing Latency
Sound Activation Level, Timer Record and Sound Activated Recording
Timer Record, Analyze Menu
triangle waveform, Audio Effects Glossary
triangular dither, Exporting to 16-Bit, Quality
Trim button (Edit toolbar), Audacity in Detail, Audacity in Detail, Cutting Out
Unwanted Chunks
trimming, Fixing Defects, Special CD Settings in Audacity
TRS (tip-ring-sleeve), Sorting Out Connectors, Microphones, Connecting
Legacy Devices to Your Computer, Connecting Legacy Devices to Your
Computer
adapter, Connecting Legacy Devices to Your Computer
plugs, Microphones, Connecting Legacy Devices to Your Computer
Truncate Silence effect, Truncate Silence
tube amplifier, vs. solid-state, Which Microphones for Which Occasions?, The
Myth of the Golden Ear
Tucows, The Business of a Recording Artist
TuneCore, Online Music Distributors
turntables, connecting to computer, Connecting Legacy Devices to Your
Computer
TweakHound, Tuning Windows XP, Tuning Windows Vista and 7
two-person podcasts, Other Lossy Formats
two-track recording, Other Lossy Formats, Other Lossy Formats, Editing a Two-
Track Recording as a Single Stereo Track
editing as single track, Other Lossy Formats
editing as two mono tracks, Editing a Two-Track Recording as a Single
Stereo Track

U
Ubuntu Linux PC, Audacity Quick-Start, Configuring Linux for Best Audio
Quality
Ubuntu Studio, Linux LADSPA Plugins, Specialized Multimedia Linux
Distributions
unbalanced cables, Microphone Cables
Undo button (Edit toolbar), Audacity in Detail, Audacity in Detail
undo operation, Audacity Quick-Start, Special CD Settings in Audacity,
Cleaning Up Your Recording, How to Make Multitrack Recordings
Unix, for USB 2.0 audio devices, USB or FireWire?
unlocked phone, How to Transfer Files to Your Phone
upsampling, Audacity Settings for Recording, Making Graceful Fades and Song
Breaks, U–Z
USB devices, Audacity from Start to Finish, Audacity Quick-Start, Audacity in
Detail, Getting Sound In and Out of the Computer, Multichannel Recording,
PCI, USB, FireWire, USB or FireWire?, Connecting a Turntable to Your
Computer, Connecting a Turntable to Your Computer, CD Writers and Software,
Making a Simple Voicecast, How to Transfer Files to Your Phone, PCMCIA
and Audacity, Audacity from Start to Finish, Audacity in Detail
audio interface, Getting Sound In and Out of the Computer
cable for file transfer to phone, How to Transfer Files to Your Phone
CD/DVD burners, CD Writers and Software
mixers, Multichannel Recording, PCI, USB, FireWire
phono preamps, Connecting a Turntable to Your Computer
recording interfaces, Making a Simple Voicecast, PCMCIA
turntable with phono preamp, Connecting a Turntable to Your Computer
vs. FireWire, USB or FireWire?
V
variable bitrate, File Formats and Quality Settings, Ogg Vorbis Quality Settings,
MP3 Quality Settings, File Formats and Audio Quality
Variable bitrate setting, for MP3, File Formats and Quality Settings, MP3
Quality Settings
Verbatim CDs, Longevity, Writing Your Songs to CD, Audio CDs
video card, for Linux system, Linux System Tweaks
video time, measurement, NTSC, PAL, and CDDA Frames

View menu, Audacity in Detail, Fade In and Out, Recording, Finding and
Repairing Clipping, Editing and Downmixing Multitrack Recordings, Editing
and Downmixing Multitrack Recordings, Trimming, Trimming, Trimming,
Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs, Fixing Clipping and Too-Loud
Passages, Making Graceful Fades and Song Breaks, What Bit Depth Is Best?,
Cleaning Up Your Recording, Too Loud! Clipping!, Equalization
Clipping, Editing and Downmixing Multitrack Recordings
Fit in Window, Trimming, Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs
Fit Vertically, Trimming
Mixer Board, Editing and Downmixing Multitrack Recordings
Show Clipping, Recording, Finding and Repairing Clipping, Fixing
Clipping and Too-Loud Passages, Making Graceful Fades and Song Breaks,
What Bit Depth Is Best?, Cleaning Up Your Recording, Too Loud!
Clipping!, Equalization
Toolbars, Audacity in Detail
Zoom to Selection, Trimming
vintage 78s, Copying Vintage 78s, Connecting a Turntable to Your Computer
vinyl LPs, An Example Studio, Transferring Vinyl LPs (and Other Legacy
Media) to CD, Transferring Vinyl LPs (and Other Legacy Media) to CD,
Preparing Vinyl LPs for Copying, Eight Steps to Converting Records to CDs,
Recording, Recording, Noise Removal, Customizing Dynamic Range
Compression, Customizing Dynamic Range Compression, Exporting to CD-
Ready Files, One Long Audacity Track, Exporting to CD-Ready Files, One
Long Audacity Track, Exporting to CD-Ready Files, Multiple Audacity Tracks,
Copying Vintage 78s, Connecting a Turntable to Your Computer, Which Is
Better: Vinyl, Tape, or CDs?, Compress Dynamic Range
copying to CD, An Example Studio, Transferring Vinyl LPs (and Other
Legacy Media) to CD, Preparing Vinyl LPs for Copying, Eight Steps to
Converting Records to CDs, Recording, Recording, Noise Removal,
Customizing Dynamic Range Compression, Customizing Dynamic Range
Compression, Exporting to CD-Ready Files, One Long Audacity Track,
Exporting to CD-Ready Files, One Long Audacity Track, Exporting to CD-
Ready Files, Multiple Audacity Tracks
basic steps in process, Preparing Vinyl LPs for Copying
dividing long track into individual songs, Customizing Dynamic
Range Compression
dynamic range compression customization, Noise Removal
exporting single long track to CD-ready files, Exporting to CD-Ready
Files, One Long Audacity Track

exporting to CD-ready files, multiple tracks, Exporting to CD-Ready
Files, One Long Audacity Track
fixing defects, Recording
normalization, Customizing Dynamic Range Compression
recording, Recording
settings, Eight Steps to Converting Records to CDs
writing songs, Exporting to CD-Ready Files, Multiple Audacity Tracks
damage from use, Which Is Better: Vinyl, Tape, or CDs?
dynamic range for, Compress Dynamic Range
preparing for copying, Transferring Vinyl LPs (and Other Legacy Media) to
CD
vs. tape or CDs, Connecting a Turntable to Your Computer
Virtual Studio Technology (VST), Audacity Plugins for Special Effects
virus checkers, and performance, Tuning Windows for Best Performance
vision-impaired, web design for, Establishing an Online Presence
VLC Media Player, Audacity Quick-Start, File Formats and Quality Settings,
Ripping CDs, Ripping DVDs, DVD-Audio Authoring Software
voicecasts, Creating Podcasts, Making a Simple Voicecast, Other Lossy Formats
Audacity settings, Making a Simple Voicecast
two-person, Other Lossy Formats
volume level, Audacity Quick-Start, Audacity Quick-Start, Selecting Tracks and
Segments of Tracks, Making Quiet Recordings Louder, Normalization, Single
Audacity Track Compilation Project, Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical
Repairs, Tracks, Channels, and Clips, Tracks, Channels, and Clips
control setting before powering on, Tracks, Channels, and Clips
for recording or playback, Audacity Quick-Start
increasing, Making Quiet Recordings Louder
normalization to raise, Audacity Quick-Start, Normalization
setting songs for consistency, Single Audacity Track Compilation Project,
Splitting Stereo Tracks for Surgical Repairs
vertical scale for, Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks
volume unit (VU) meter, P–T
VST (Virtual Studio Technology), Audacity Plugins for Special Effects
VU (volume unit) meter, P–T
W
WahWah effect, WahWah
Wal-Mart, DRM servers, Selling Stuff Online

Warnings dialog, Warnings
warps, fixing, Fixing Defects
wattage, and amplifier rating, Microphone Preamp
WAV (Waveform Audio Format) files, Audacity Quick-Start, Saving Your Work,
Saving Your Work, Saving Your Work, Saving Your Work, Final Mixdown,
Exporting to CD-Ready Files, One Long Audacity Track, Optional Track
Metadata, Optional Track Metadata, Audio CDs, Putting an Orange Book CD
Collection Together, Authoring Super High-Fidelity Audio DVDs, What Bit
Depth Is Best?, File Formats and Audio Quality, How to Make Multitrack
Recordings, Too Loud! Clipping!, Customizing Audio for a Mobile Phone,
Hardware Testing with alsa-utils
32-bit float, Saving Your Work
aplay to play, Hardware Testing with alsa-utils
channel mapping for, Too Loud! Clipping!
exporting tracks to, Exporting to CD-Ready Files, One Long Audacity
Track, Optional Track Metadata
for Red Book CDs, Audio CDs
for ringtone, Customizing Audio for a Mobile Phone
importing, How to Make Multitrack Recordings
saving track as separate file, Saving Your Work
studio masters as, Saving Your Work, Saving Your Work, What Bit Depth Is
Best?
waveform, Track Panel, Audio Effects Glossary
Waveform (dB) view, Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks
Waveform Audio Format (WAV) files. See WAV (Waveform Audio Format)
files, Selecting Tracks and Segments of Tracks
WDM/KS (Windows Driver Model Kerning Streaming), Low-Latency
Recording and Audio Driver Fun
web designer, Establishing an Online Presence
web hosting services, The Business of a Recording Artist
web streaming, frame rates, NTSC, PAL, and CDDA Frames
WebClient, Tuning Windows XP
WebHostingTalk, Establishing an Online Presence, Self-Hosting
wet/dry balance, Audio Effects Glossary
white noise, Generating Noise, Generating Noise
wide-groove records, Writing Songs to a CD
Winamp, File Formats and Quality Settings, Transferring Legacy Media
wind sock, Microphones
Windows, Linux Nyquist Plugins, Configuring Windows for Best Audio Quality,

Configuring Windows for Best Audio Quality, Enabling WMA, M4A/M4P
Support, Enabling WMA, M4A/M4P Support, Low-Latency Recording and
Audio Driver Fun, Tuning Windows Vista and 7, Tuning Windows Vista and 7
audio devices configuration, Tuning Windows Vista and 7
configuring for best audio quality, Configuring Windows for Best Audio
Quality, Configuring Windows for Best Audio Quality, Enabling WMA,
M4A/M4P Support
MP3 support, Configuring Windows for Best Audio Quality
WMA, M4A/M4P support, Enabling WMA, M4A/M4P Support
low-latency recording and audio drivers, Enabling WMA, M4A/M4P
Support
plugins, Linux Nyquist Plugins
tuning for best performance, Low-Latency Recording and Audio Driver
Fun
Windows 7, Operating Systems, Configuring Windows for Best Audio Quality,
Tuning Windows XP
tuning for best performance, Tuning Windows XP
Windows DirectSound, Audacity Quick-Start, Audacity Settings for Recording
Windows Driver Model Kernel Streaming (WDM/KS), Low-Latency Recording
and Audio Driver Fun
Windows Media Audio (WMA) files. See WMA (Windows Media Audio) files,
Audacity Quick-Start, File Formats and Quality Settings, Computer Media
Players
Windows Media Player, Audacity Quick-Start, File Formats and Quality
Settings, Ripping CDs
Windows Meeting Space, Tuning Windows Vista and 7
Windows Vista, Audacity Quick-Start, Speakers and Headphones, Configuring
Windows for Best Audio Quality, Tuning Windows XP
default recording and playback devices, Audacity Quick-Start
tuning for best performance, Tuning Windows XP
Windows XP, Speakers and Headphones, Configuring Windows for Best Audio
Quality, Tuning Windows for Best Performance
performance tuning, Tuning Windows for Best Performance
wireless mics, Polar Patterns
WMA (Windows Media Audio) files, MP3 Quality Settings, Other Lossy
Formats, Multichannel Surround, Proprietary Audio File Formats, How to
Transfer Files to Your Phone, Enabling WMA, M4A/M4P Support
Audacity support, Enabling WMA, M4A/M4P Support
channel mapping for, Multichannel Surround

encoding ringtone in, How to Transfer Files to Your Phone
Work Made for Hire and Copyright Corrections Act of 2000, Copyrights and
Legal Issues
X
Xfce, Linux System Tweaks
XLR connectors, Sorting Out Connectors, Microphones
XLR plugs, Sorting Out Connectors
Xmms, File Formats and Quality Settings
Y
Y-adapter, Connecting Legacy Devices to Your Computer
Yahoo!, To DRM or Not to DRM?
Yamaha Pocketrak 2G, Portable Recording
Z
zero crossing point, Phaser
Zero Decibels Full Scale, Track Panel
Zoom button (Tools toolbar), Audacity in Detail, Audacity in Detail, Audacity in
Detail
Zoom H2 portable digital recorder, An Example Studio, Portable Recording,
Creating and Editing Live Tracks for CD
Zoom In/Out buttons (Edit toolbar), Audacity in Detail, Fixing Skips and Pops
Zoom to Selection for view, Cutting Out Unwanted Chunks
zZounds, Audio Hardware

About the Author
Carla Schroder is a systems and network administrator. She is the author of
Linux Cookbook and Linux Networking Cookbook (both O'Reilly), as well as
hundreds of how-to's for various technology publications. Carla enjoys playing
instruments and recording local bands using Audacity.

Colophon
The fonts used in The Book of Audacity are New Baskerville, Futura, The Sans
Mono Condensed and Dogma. The book was typeset with LATEX2ε package
nostarch by Boris Veytsman (2008/06/06 v1.3 Typesetting books for No Starch
Press).
This book was printed and bound by Transcontinental, Inc. at Transcontinental
Gagné in Louiseville, Quebec, Canada. The paper is Domtar Husky 60# Smooth,
which is certified by the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC). The book has an
Otabind binding, which allows it to lie flat when open.

