 
1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             The theory theory as an alternative to the innateness hypothesis. 
 
 
 
                                Alison Gopnik 
                             Dept. of  Psychology 
                          University of California at Berkeley 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Address for correspondence: Alison Gopnik, Dept. of Psychology, University of 
California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, 94704 gopnik@berkeley.edu 
 
In L. Antony & N. Hornstein (Eds). (2003)  Chomsky and his Critics . New York: Basil 
Blackwell 

 
2
 
      One of the deepest and most ancient problems in philosophy is what we might call the 
problem of knowledge. There seems to be an unbridgeable gap between our abstract, 
complex, highly structured knowledge of the world, and the concrete, limited and 
confused information provided by our senses. Since the Meno, there have been two basic 
ways of approaching this problem, rationalism and empiricism. Each era seems to have 
its matched pair of advocates of each view, making their way through the centuries like 
couples in some eternal philosophical gavotte, Plato and Aristotle, Descartes and Locke, 
Leibniz and Berkeley, Kant and Mill.  The rationalist approach says that although it looks 
as if we learn about the world from our experience, we don’t really. Actually, we knew 
about it all along. The most important things we know were there to begin with, planted 
innately in our minds by God or evolution (or chance). The empiricist approach says that 
although it looks as if our knowledge is far removed from our experience, it isn’t really. 
If we rearrange the elements of our experience in particular ways, by associating ideas, or 
putting together stimuli and responses, we’ll end up with our knowledge of the world. 
There is both a  tension and a kind of complementarity between these two ideas, and  
philosophy and psychology often seem to alternate between one view and the other. 
Rationalists can explain the abstract, complex, nature of our knowledge quite well, but 
they can’t explain, and so deny, the fact that we learn. Empiricists can explain the fact 
that we learn, but they can’t explain, and so deny, the fact that our knowledge is so far 
removed from our experience.  
    Chomsky made two very important contributions to this debate. The first was to cast it 
as an empirical, scientific, psychological question, rather than simply as a philosophical 
question. Chomsky has argued that we can develop a scientific account of  how  

 
3
knowledge develops in individual human minds, and that such an account will provide an 
answer to the problem of knowledge. Moreover, he suggested that such an account would 
involve representations of the outside world and rules for manipulating those 
representations. These representations and rules characterize the cognitive capacities of  
human minds, they are the theoretical entities of cognitive psychology. That idea is at the 
heart of cognitive science, and underlies its success.  It has been very widely influential. 
In fact, perhaps the greatest successes in cognitive science have been in domains that 
Chomsky didn’t himself investigate, particularly vision, using methods, psychological 
experimentation, detailed computational modelling, and, most recently, neuroscience, 
that he has eschewed. There were other earlier sources for this idea, too, including Piaget 
and the Gestalt psychologists. But none of that alters the fact that, in its modern 
incarnation, this foundational idea of cognitive science is largely due to Chomsky.  
     We might call this part of Chomsky’s view “cognitive naturalism”, the idea that 
knowledge can be understood by scientific investigation of  the mind. It assumes, of 
course, some version or other of scientific realism. If you think scientific investigation is 
the right course to find the truth of these questions, you must think that scientific 
investigation is the right course to find the truth, in general. 
     The second part of Chomsky’s contribution was to present a particular, rationalist 
hypothesis, the innateness hypothesis, as the empirical answer to the problem of  
knowledge.  Chomsky’s thesis is that human minds are highly constrained innately. We 
can only formulate a very small set of  possible representations and rules. Information 
from the outside world may trigger the development of those representations, and may 
narrow the set of possibilities even further by processes like parameter-setting, but the 

 
4
constraints remain unchanged throughout life. Representations and rules are not inferred 
or derived from the input. This rationalist answer was, of course, a radical, indeed 
revolutionary, departure  from the empiricist assumptions of  earlier psychology, 
particularly behaviorism. It has also been very widely influential. It has dominated 
Chomsky’s own field, syntax, and has influenced theories of  semantics (Pinker, 1989), 
and phonology (Eimas, 1975), and of our knowledge of everyday physics (Spelke, 
Breinlinger, Macomber, and Jacobson, 1992), biology (Atran, 1990), psychology (Leslie 
& Roth, 1993), and even ethics (Barkow, Cosmides, and Tooby, 1992).  
      There are a range of empirical phenomena, particularly developmental phenomena, 
that could be adduced to support the innateness hypothesis. But it is fair to say that these 
phenomena have played little role in Chomsky’s own thinking and argumentation. 
Chomsky’s arguments for innateness don’t come from studying the development of 
language and thought in children but from considering the characteristics of adult 
language and thought. Chomsky’s most important argument for rationalism is the same 
argument that Socrates originally formulated in the Meno, it has come to be called the 
poverty of  the stimulus argument. The learning mechanisms we know about are too 
weak to derive the kind of  knowledge we have from the kinds of information we get 
from the outside world.  
      The central argument I want to make in this paper is that these two important 
Chomskyan theses, cognitive naturalism, on the one hand, and the poverty of the stimulus 
argument, on the other, are at odds with one another. Suppose we apply the program of 
cognitive naturalism to scientific knowledge.  If we do, and if we are scientific realists, 
we must believe that there are learning mechanisms that allow human minds to derive 

 
5
abstract, complex, highly structured, veridical, representations and rules, namely theories, 
from limited input, namely evidence.  They are just the mechanisms we use in science. 
But if we believe this, then it is at least logically possible that those same learning 
mechanisms are involved in our development of other kinds of knowledge, such as 
everyday physical, , biological, psychological and even linguistic knowledge.  
      Moreover, recent empirical developmental research suggests that this is precisely the 
case. Within the last ten years the idea that there are deep similarities between scientific 
theory formation and cognitive development, an idea we have called “the theory theory”,  
has become, at the least, a serious developmental hypothesis. The cognitive abilities 
involved in science do seem to also be involved in everyday cognitive development. Of 
course, this still leaves open the question of whether this is the correct account of 
development in any particular domain.  But it also means that the poverty of the stimulus 
argument no longer applies. To discover whether any particular kind of  knowledge is 
due to innate Chomskyan devices or to theory-formation we need to do detailed empirical 
studies, and, in particular, detailed developmental studies. We can’t make those 
arguments simply by looking at the adult system. 
     The Theory Theory 
     First, I’ll present a very brief sketch of the theory theory as it has emerged in cognitive 
development (for more detailed recent accounts see Gopnik & Wellman, 1994, Wellman 
& Gelman, 1997, Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997). The basic idea is that children develop their 
everyday knowledge of the world by using the same cognitive devices that adults use in 
science. In particular, children develop abstract, coherent, systems of entities and rules, 
particularly causal entities and rules. That is, they develop theories. These theories enable 

 
6
. children to make predictions about new evidence, to interpret evidence, and to explain 
evidence. Children actively experiment with and explore the world, testing the 
predictions of the theory and gathering relevant evidence. Some counter-evidence to the 
theory is simply reinterpreted in terms of the theory. Eventually, however, when many 
predictions of the theory are falsified, the child begins to seek alternative theories. If the 
alternative does a better job of predicting and explaining the evidence it replaces the 
existing theory.  
      This account has been successfully applied to explain children’s developing 
understanding of  the physical world (Gopnik, 1988; Smith, Carey, and Wiser, 1985) the 
biological world (Carey, 1985; Gelman & Wellman, 1991; Keil, 1989) and the 
psychological world (Gopnik, 1993; Wellman, 1990; Perner, 1991). It has been applied to 
adults (Murphy & Medin, 1985) school-age children (Carey, 1985; Keil, 1989) 
preschoolers (Gelman & Wellman, 1991) and infants (Gopnik, 1988; Gopnik & Meltzoff, 
1997). We have suggested, in particular, that infants are born with initial innate theories, 
and that they begin revising those theories even in infancy itself. There are, of course, 
debates about which domains and which ages the theory applies to, and the theory is in 
competition with other accounts, including Chomskyan innateness theories. 
       While the theory theory has primarily been articulated in cognitive development, it 
also helps to explain science itself . On this view, the success of science depends on the 
fact that we adults retain natural learning capacities that are most clearly evident in 
children (and were probably designed by evolution to be used by children). Science 
simply puts these universal and natural capacities to work in a socially organized and 
institutionalized way. Moreover, in science, we typically tackle just the problems that we 

 
7
have not solved in childhood, particularly problems where evidence is scarce and 
difficult to come by. Many of the social institutions and technological inventions of 
science are adapted to the special demands of these problems. Nevertheless, these 
institutions and inventions would be useless without the foundation of a universal set of 
cognitive capacities, capacities to form, test and revise theories. These capacities were 
designed to give us a generally veridical view of the world, just as, for example, 
perceptual capacities give us a generally veridical view of the world. The theory theory 
then is both a theory of cognitive development and a scientific, naturalistic, 
psychological, account of scientific knowledge (see Gopnik, 1996, Kitcher, 1988; see 
also some essays in Giere, 1992).          
        We can translate the idea of the theory theory into the Chomskyan language of rules 
and representations, in a way that is consistent with Chomsky’s cognitive naturalism. A 
theory is a particular kind of system that assigns representations to inputs, in the way that 
the perceptual system assigns representations to visual input or the syntactic system 
assigns representations to phonological input. We can capture the distinctive structural 
features of these representations by talking about the specific abstract, coherent, causal 
entities and laws of the theory. The representations are operated on by rules that lead to 
new representations, for example, the theory generates predictions.  
       In a theory, however, unlike a Chomskyan grammar, the very patterns of 
representation that occur can alter the nature of the representational system itself. This is 
what makes theory-formation a kind of learning. The patterns of representation that occur 
can alter the nature of the relations between inputs and representations. As we get new 
inputs, and so new representations, the very rules that connect inputs and representations 

 
8
change. Eventually, we may end up with a system with a completely new set of 
representations and a completely different set of relations between inputs and 
representations than the system we started out with. This differentiates theories from 
other kinds of representational systems.  
     To borrow Neurath's philosophical metaphor, the theory-formation view sees 
knowledge as a boat that we perpetually rebuild as we sail in it. At each point in our 
journey there may be only a limited and constrained set of alterations we can make to the 
boat to keep it seaworthy. In the end, however, we may end up with not a single plank or 
rivet from the original structure, and the process may go on indefinitely. 
     This kind of system may sound so open-ended as to be uninteresting. But, in fact, the 
theory formation view proposes that the representational system will change in relatively 
orderly, predictable, and constrained ways. Moreover, there may still be some overall 
constraints on the kinds of representations that are generated, not every logically possible 
theory will be formulated or tested by human beings. These constraints reflect the basic 
presuppositions of scientific inquiry, for example, that the world has a causal structure 
that can be discovered. However, the range of theories that can be generated is very much 
wider than the limited set of representations that are possible on innateness views. It 
includes, for example, the theories of relativistic physics. 
      The theory theory vs. other empiricist alternatives 
      I want to argue, then, in favor of the theory theory as an empiricist alternative to the 
innateness hypothesis. However,  my argument is different in important ways from 
earlier empiricist arguments. One such argument is that unless we can specify just which 
learning mechanisms we are talking about, and we know for sure that there aren’t any 

 
9
other possible learning mechanisms, we can’t be certain that some capacity is innate. The 
poverty of the stimulus argument doesn’t go through. There may be general-purpose 
learning mechanisms that could account for the development of a particular type of 
knowledge. Putnam made this sort of argument many years ago when Chomsky first 
formulated the innateness hypothesis. Similarly,  Piagetians argue that vague, possible, 
general-purpose  processes of “assimilation” and “accomodation” can account for 
cognitive development.  Chomsky is right in thinking that these are weak arguments. It 
seems unsatisfactory to prefer an unspecified and vague general-purpose learning 
mechanism, a mechanism that may or may not exist, to a specific proposal for an innate 
structure.  
       Of course, there have also been more specific proposals about the kinds of learning 
mechanisms that could be opposed to innateness. These arguments typically have the 
following form. A particular mechanism explains some particular type of learning. In this 
type of learning, inputs are transformed into representations that are at least somewhat 
more abstract, complex and highly structured than the inputs themselves. The actual 
representations such mechanisms generate are not nearly as abstract, complex and highly 
structured as the representations we ultimately want to explain, either the representations 
of language or of everyday thought. But, the argument goes, if we just scale the system 
up, make the input richer, add more connections, we will get there eventually. Trust us.  
    This was, of course, precisely the argument of behaviorism. Operant reinforcement 
could get a pigeon from a series of specific experiences of lights and shocks to a 
representation that would allow it to perform  a complex behavior (though, of course, 
behaviorists didn’t like to talk about representations). Therefore, if the reinforcers and the 

 
10
stimuli and responses were complex enough, operant conditioning could get us to 
language and everyday cognition. It was also the argument of associationism. We could 
get from two specific simple experiences to a more complex representation (even on 
Hume’s view, for example, a causal representation) by associating the simple 
experiences. Therefore, we could get to all representations if we made the system 
sufficiently complex. 
     A corollary of this sort of argument, of course, was that, in fact, the representations  
were not actually as abstract, complex or highly structured as they appeared to be on the 
surface. If you looked more carefully you would see that they really were far more 
concrete, specific, context dependent and generally similar to the input. The two 
strategies go hand in hand as ways of bridging the gap between input and representation.      
     The most recent version of  this argument invokes connectionist learning systems. 
These systems generate often surprisingly abstract and complex representations from 
repeated patterns of input. The learning mechanisms these systems employ are more 
powerful than the mechanisms of  simple association or conditioning. Nevertheless, the 
representations these systems generate still look very different from the kinds of 
representations we want to explain.  In particular, they lack the componential and 
inferential character of the representations of ordinary language and thought. Even the 
strongest exponents of these views still have to resort to a scaling up argument (see e.g. 
Elman et al, 1996; Bates & Elman, 1992).   
         The theory formation alternative, in contrast, presents a very different kind of 
argument. If anything it’s actually a kind of scaling down argument.  No one would deny 
that scientific theories are very abstract, complex, highly structured kinds of knowledge, 

 
11
indeed, if anything, they seem more abstract, complex and highly structured than 
everyday knowledge. Nor would anyone deny that theory change is based on evidence, 
and so, ultimately, on sensory input. And very few people, no-one except perhaps Jerry 
Fodor, would accept that scientific theories are innately determined and are simply 
triggered by evidence. Scientific theory-formation is a kind of demonstration proof  that 
there are learning mechanisms in the universe that are powerful enough to generate the 
kinds of representations we want from the kinds of input we know we have. More than 
that, these learning mechanisms can be and have been instantiated in human brains right 
here on earth. 
     Theory-formation isn’t a vague general-purpose learning mechanism that may or may 
not exist. Nor is it a specific learning mechanism that may or may not be able to generate 
sufficiently abstract, complex, highly structured representations with enough scaling up. 
It’s a mechanism that does exist and that does generate the right kind of knowledge from 
the right kinds of input.  
     Innate theories and starting-state nativism  
    There is another aspect of the theory theory that makes it different from other 
empiricist alternatives. The classical empiricist views, as well as contemporary 
connectionist views, assume that all the representational structure comes from the nature 
of the input and the learning mechanisms themselves. Representational structure can be 
reduced to input. In contrast, scientific theory change never seems to involve raw, 
uninterpreted data, Instead, theory change is possible because theories themselves build 
on, revise or replace earlier theories. The earlier theories enabled us to select and 
interpret the evidence that eventually led to the new theories. In fact, as early as the 

 
12
1950’s, in Carnap’s late work, for example, this view of science as a succession of 
changing conceptions of the world replaced the earlier logical positivist attempt to reduce 
science to “sense data”.  
     In accounts of science, the origin of the first theory in this succession of changing 
theories is obscure. But if we think about theory-formation as a mechanism of cognitive 
development the origin of the first theories is quite simple. They are the theories we are, 
literally, born with. We learn by modifying, revising and eventually replacing those 
earlier theories with later ones. The empiricism of the theory theory is an empiricism of 
revision, not reduction. The idea that we are born with substantive theories of particular 
domains is also consistent with the empirical evidence of the last thirty years of infancy 
research. This idea, however, is not part of most empiricist theories in psychology. 
Notably, Piaget himself, was only willing to grant infants  reflex actions and 
accomodation and assimiliation mechanisms. 
     The reader may be reeling slightly at this point. I’ve been arguing that theory 
formation is an empiricist alternative to innateness and here I am attributing rich innate 
knowledge to newborn babies. There is, however, a very important difference between 
this kind of innateness, and the Chomskyan innateness hypothesis. On my view, which I 
have called “starting-state” nativism, these first theories are subject to radical revision 
and are indeed radically revised in the light of further evidence (Gopnik & Meltzoff, 
1997). By the time we reach adulthood the theories may look almost nothing like the 
initial theories we had at birth, and the further revision of theories in organized science 
may lead to still further radical changes. These changes are not arbitrary,  though, they 
are inferred from the evidence of the experience we accumulate in the course of 

 
13
development. This is very different from Chomsky’s innateness hypothesis, and from 
classical rationalism. On that view, innateness is a claim about the constraints on the final 
state of the system, not about the state the system starts out with. 
       Again, though, while other philosophers might object to the idea of innate 
knowledge in principle, Chomsky obviously should not. In fact, Chomsky has made quite 
convincing arguments in favor of the idea that innate knowledge is possible, though his 
own proposals about the character of such knowledge are unlike mine.  
       The theory theory, then, like other empiricist theories, sees the development of 
knowledge as a kind of learning. The representations and rules of new theories are 
inferred from evidence and they change, often quite radically, as a result of our 
experience of the outside world. These changes lead our theories to become increasing 
veridical. But the theory theory doesn’t face the same gap between input and knowledge 
as classical empiricist theories. By granting that there are innate theories, representations 
that are already abstract, complex and highly structured, the role of input becomes quite 
different. Input transforms existing abstract, complex and highly structured 
representations into new abstract, complex and highly structured representations, and this 
process can go on indefinitely. Most importantly, we have independent evidence that 
human beings can engage in this kind of learning, this is the kind of learning that goes on 
in science.  
       It has to be said right off that we still don’t know, in detail, how these theory-
formation mechanisms work, either in science or in cognitive development. We do, 
though, have a general outline, which is certainly more specific than the vague general-
purpose mechanisms that Putnam or Piaget invoked, and at least as specific as most 

 
14
nativist accounts. And, in fact, quite recently, we have begun to formulate some more 
detailed computational accounts of how at least some aspects of theory-formation might 
take place.  
One central problem in theory-formation, in both children and scientists, is the 
problem of how we infer causal structure from patterns of evidence. Over the last fifteen 
years or so philosophers of science and computer scientists have begun to formulate 
detailed, normative, computational accounts of how this can be done. (Glymour, 2001; 
Pearl, 2000; Spirtes et al. 2000). These accounts propose that causal structure can be 
represented by acyclic directed graphs, more commonly called “Bayes-Nets”.  They have 
also demonstrated how such graphs can be accurately derived from information about the 
conditional probabilities of types of events.  In our empirical work, we have begun to 
find that children as young as two-years-old use some of the same mechanisms that are 
proposed in these formalisms to accurately infer new causal facts (Gopnik & Glymour, in 
press; Gopnik et al. 2000).      
Moreover, while there is a good argument for rejecting vague alternative 
possibilities, there is not an equally good argument for rejecting vague alternative 
certainties.  Its not that we don’t know what the learning mechanism is like or even if it 
exists, we don’t know what it is like (in detail) but we do know that it exists, at least in 
scientific learning. 
     Of course, we might want to argue that our current inability to specify the nature of 
the learning mechanisms in science in detail is, in fact, a proof that they don’t exist. 
Perhaps it’s just an illusion that scientific theories provide us with veridical 
representations of the world based on evidence. Perhaps they are just arbitrary social 

 
15
constructions imposed by more powerful scientists on less powerful scientists. Just such a 
claim underpins the postmodern arguments against scientific realism. If the 
postmodernists were right, the theory theory would be doomed. But Chomsky can’t 
accept that argument and still be a scientific realist, and realism underpins his whole 
enterprise (and mine and that of every other scientist who is not accepting money under 
false pretences). Chomsky’s whole project of cognitive naturalism depends on the idea 
that science allows us to learn about the world by looking at evidence.      
        An alternative position that Chomsky might take, and sometimes indeed does seem 
to take, is that while science is veridical it is also intrinsically incomprehensible. 
Chomsky is usually both a realist about science and a naturalist about cognition. He 
believes that knowledge can be understood using the techniques of empirical science. But 
he sometimes seems to think that this is only true of some kinds of knowledge. He 
certainly believes that we can understand syntactic knowledge empirically, but there are 
times when he seems to say that we can’t understand such things as scientific knowledge 
(or ethical knowledge etc.). This view is consistent with the innateness hypothesis. If the 
innateness hypothesis is generally correct, then some things are simply incomprehensible, 
just contingently beyond the limits of our innate capacities, and understanding how we do 
science might be one of them.   
      There seems very little good reason for this apriori pessimism, particularly since there 
has been hardly any empirical research on the question. In an age in which we humans 
have developed theories of quantum mechanics and relativistic physics, arguments about 
our innate inability to understand certain things are bound to be unconvincing. But even 
if this pessimism were accurate, the poverty of the stimulus argument would still be 

 
16
undermined in the same way. Given a choice between a specific proposal and an 
unspecified possibility we might do well to at least tentatively adopt the specific 
proposal. But given a choice between two mechanisms that we have good reason to think 
exist, we can’t adopt one because there is some contingent reason that we find it difficult, 
even impossible, to understand the other in detail. For a realist, this would be like arguing 
that because we can’t know about events outside the light cone, we should believe that 
everything happens inside the light cone. It would be an unhappy outcome for 
psychologists if we had to accept that we could know nothing about scientific learning, 
but even that would not in itself be a reason for denying that scientific learning exists or 
accepting the innateness hypothesis. 
     Phenomenological and Social Objections      
     So far, I’ve been arguing that theory-formation is at least a possibility as an answer to 
the poverty of the stimulus argument, and that it is not subject to the same objections as 
other empiricist alternatives. Indeed,  Chomsky ought to accept that it is a possibility 
given his cognitive naturalism and scientific realism. But, of course, merely saying that it 
is a possible answer doesn’t make it a plausible answer, let alone the correct answer. The 
best argument that it is a plausible and correct answer is the detailed empirical 
developmental research I referred to earlier. Still, to many philosophers the very idea that 
children could be employing the same learning mechanisms as scientists generates a 
reaction of  shocked, even indignant, incredulity. (For some reason, I’ve found this initial 
reaction to be stronger in philosophers than in psychologists or, especially, practicing 
scientists, who seem to find the idea appealing and even complimentary. Its odd since 
you’d have thought philosophers, in particular, would, like the Red Queen, have had 

 
17
extensive practice in believing at least six impossible things before breakfast.)  There 
might be specific objections to the theory theory, even if it escapes the usual objections to 
empiricism. 
        Some of these objections, though, at least shouldn’t be Chomsky’s objections. In 
fact, the objections that philosophers raise to the theory theory are often just the same 
objections that were raised against Chomsky’s  cognitive naturalism, and Chomsky’s 
counter-arguments to those objections apply just as effectively.  In fact, the arguments of 
theory theory advocates sound very much like Chomsky in his cognitive naturalist mode. 
(This is hardly surprising since most advocates of the view, including me, come from a 
strongly Chomskyan intellectual tradition, indeed, sociologically and historically, you 
might think of the theory theory as a new species resulting from the cross-fertilization of 
that tradition and the Piagetian tradition in cognitive development). 
      Two of the principal objections to the theory theory are, in fact, reminiscent of similar 
objections to Chomsky’s account of linguistic knowledge as rules, and I would give 
replies that are very similar to his. Scientific theory formation, like the canonical kind of 
rule,  (say a traffic rule) is supposed to be typically conscious and even self-conscious, 
scientists consciously and reflectively consider how to gather evidence and how evidence 
tells on their specific hypotheses. The kinds of theory formation we see in children, the 
kind that lead to everyday knowledge do not, on the face of it, seem to be consciously 
accessible in the same way. In particular, children may not consciously assess evidence 
and consider its impact on theories. In the same way, of course, linguistic rules are not 
consciously accessible in the same way as traffic rules.   

 
18
      But, as Chomsky himself argues, it is difficult to see why conscious phenomenology 
of a particular kind would play an essential role in finding things out about the world. A 
characteristic lesson of the cognitive revolution in general and Chomskyan cognitive 
naturalism, in particular, is that human beings (or, for that matter, machines) can perform 
extremely complex feats of representation without any phenomenology at all. It is rather 
characteristic of human cognition that it is largely inaccessible to conscious reflection. 
Why should this be different in the case of scientific knowledge? 
    In fact, one might be rather skeptical about how much real scientists, as opposed to the 
idealized scientists of philosophy, have conscious access to their theory-formation 
mechanisms.  But even if scientists are, in fact, sometimes reflective about their theory-
formation processes, it seems, at least, much too strong to say that this is a necessary 
condition for theory- formation in science. It seems unlikely that it is the reflective 
phenomenology itself that is what give scientists their theory formation capacities or that 
give those theories their epistemological force. Rather, it seems that some set of abstract 
rules and representations must underlie the flow of phenomenal experience in science, as 
they do in language. 
       A second objection, again reminiscent of the objections to Chomsky’s account of 
language, is that science is a socially constructed enterprise rather than an individual 
psychological phenomenon.  One might have thought, in fact, that this objection applied 
more strongly to language. Again, though, Chomsky’s own arguments seem quite 
applicable. Even if science, like language, is part of a rich social context, it nevertheless, 
ultimately depends on individual cognitive processes in individual human minds.  The 
social character of science at some level must boil down to individual scientists making 

 
19
individual decisions about which theories to formulate and to accept. Moreover, the 
socially oriented view of philosophy of science has always had a difficult time explaining 
how science gets it right. It has been difficult to reconcile with scientific realism. Just as 
it is hard to see how phenomenology, by itself, could lead to veridicality it is hard to see 
how a particular social structure, by itself, could do so. Again, pursuing Chomskyan 
cognitive naturalism, I would argue that some abstract, individual set of psychological 
rules and representations underpins the social interactions of science. 
      So Chomsky, at least, ought to be unpersuaded by objections based on the apparently, 
conscious, social character of science, in contrast to the largely unconscious, and 
individual character of cognitive development in children. The same arguments he 
applies to language can be applied to science. In both cases we can postulate that, 
underlying the conscious, social phenomena, there is a cognitive system, a set of rules 
and representations that accomplish certain ends. 
     Universality, uniformity and learning   
    Another difference we might point to between children and scientists is that children 
converge on roughly similar representations at roughly similar times, both in language 
development but also in their understanding of the everyday world. It might be objected 
that scientists do not always show this sort of uniform development, and that this weighs 
against the theory-formation view.  This would be a more serious objection from a 
Chomskyan point of view, given that Chomsky has emphasized the universality and 
uniformity of language development as evidence for innateness.  
     The theory theory proposes that there are powerful cognitive processes that revise 
existing theories in response to evidence. If cognitive agents began with the same initial 

 
20
theory, tried to solve the same problems, and were presented with similar patterns of 
evidence over the same period of time they should, precisely, converge on the same 
theories at about the same time.  These assumptions are very likely to be true for children 
developing ordinary everyday knowledge. Children will certainly start with the same 
initial theory and the same theory-formation capacities.  Moreover, the evidence is 
ubiquitous and is likely to be very similar for all children. 
      Notice, however, that, for scientists, these basic assumptions are not usually going to 
be true. In science, the relevant evidence, far from being ubiquitous, is rare and difficult 
to come by, and often must be taken on trust from others. The social mechanisms of 
deference, authority and trust, are, like all social mechanisms, highly variable. Moreover, 
different scientists also often begin with different theories, and quite typically approach 
different problems. 
      In fact, when the assumption of common initial theories and common patterns of 
evidence, presented in the same sequence, does hold, scientists, like children, do 
converge on a common account of the world. Indeed, even the timing of scientific 
discoveries is often strikingly similar, given independent labs working on the same 
problem with a similar initial theory and similar access to evidence (hence all those 
shared Nobel prizes). This convergence to the truth itself is the best reason for thinking 
that some general cognitive structures are at work in scientific theory change. Scientists 
working independently converge on similar accounts at similar times, not because 
evolutionary theory or the calculus or the structure of DNA (to take some famous 
examples) are innate, but because similar minds approaching similar problems are 

 
21
presented with similar patterns of evidence. The theory theory proposes that the cognitive 
processes that lead to this convergence in science are also operating in children. 
      This example may be generalized to make another point. The uniformity and 
universality of development of a cognitive ability does not in itself speak to whether it is 
a result of an innate device or of learning. By definition, a learning mechanism with the 
same initial state given uniform evidence will show as much convergence, universality 
and uniformity as an innate device. 
      In fact, we have good reason to believe that this point is not lost on nature. 
Apparently, evolution doesn’t much care whether convergence is the result of an innate 
device or of learning mechanisms, provided that the results are good, good either because 
they are functional or veridical. Closely related species of animals may use very different 
mixes of innate structure and learning to acquire very similar abilities. To take a very 
simple example, there is a great deal of variation among different songbirds in the 
acquisition of song. Some birds appear to have particular songs innately programmed, 
others rely on a tutor in a critical period, others don’t have a critical period, for some the 
tutor must be of the same species, others will learn a  “foreign” song if the tutor interacts 
with them in the correct way and so on.  
     The difference between a learning account and an innateness account is not that an 
innate mechanism can lead to uniform outcomes and a learning mechanism can’t. It is 
that a learning mechanism can lead to either uniform outcomes when the evidence is 
uniform, or varied outcomes when the evidence is varied. The innate mechanism should 
always lead to uniform outcomes. In the case of the theory theory, the learning 
mechanism leads to generally uniform outcomes in children, where the evidence is 

 
22
uniform, and progressively less uniform outcomes in adults and in organized science 
where the evidence is much less uniform.       
     This is once again part of why the poverty of the stimulus argument is so central for 
an innateness argument. If we could point to a sufficiently powerful learning mechanism, 
like scientific theory formation, and also show that the input to that mechanism was 
relatively uniform in many cases, we could predict that in those cases the development 
would be as uniform and universal. The argument for innateness only works if we think 
there are no such mechanisms. 
      Theory-formation and language. 
       Chomsky’s innateness hypothesis is intended to apply quite widely, and it has been 
applied quite widely. Nevertheless, Chomsky himself clearly applies it centrally to 
language and, particularly, to syntax. In contrast, the theory theory has primarily been 
applied to our everyday knowledge of the world, our everyday understanding of biology, 
physics, psychology and so forth. How does the theory theory relate to language 
acquisition?  
     First, the theory theory clearly can be, and has been, applied to understanding 
semantic and lexical capacities. In particular, there are a number of “theory theory” 
accounts of our understanding of many types of words. For instance some accounts 
suggest that many nouns encode “natural kinds” which are further defined by particular 
theories (Carey, 1982; Keil, 1989;  Gelman & Coley, 1991, Murphy & Medin, 1985). We 
have shown that the acquisition of early words is, empirically, closely related to the 
child’s developing theoretical understanding of actions, appearances and kinds (Gopnik, 
1984;Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1987, 1986).  Bartsch & Wellman, (1995) have shown that 

 
23
children’s acquisition and use of mental state verbs tracks their development of 
successive theories of mind. Children seem to understand the meaning of the words they 
hear in terms of the theories they have, they treat the words of natural language the way 
that scientists treat theoretical terms. Moreover, rather than reflecting some fixed set of 
semantic primitives, children’s understanding of words changes in parallel with their 
changing theoretical understanding of the world. Finally, language itself seems to play an 
important role in theory-formation. We have also shown empirically that the words 
children hear influence the development of their theories (Gopnik, Choi, and 
Baumberger, 1996).  
     Since semantics, by definition, relates linguistic expressions to our understanding of 
the world, and I have argued that our everyday understanding of the world is theory-like, 
this is not surprising. Moreover, in so far as semantics provides a foundation for syntax, 
theory formation also may play a role in syntactic development. We seem to use theory 
formation to develop an understanding of the meaning of words and sentences, and, as 
many people have argued before, that understanding might itself play an important role in 
developing more strictly syntactic abilities.  
     No one so far has applied theory formation ideas to the development of syntax itself. It 
is possible that syntax is simply not the sort of thing you can have a theory about. In 
particular, theory formation depends on a kind of realism, it depends on the idea that 
there is something out there that you can have a theory about, and that you can get a 
continuous stream of information from the world about that something out there. 
Interestingly syntactic development is not like this. There is nothing out there that 
syntactic representations are representations of, knowing a syntactic structure and having 

 
24
a syntactic structure are just the same thing. Unlike other kinds of knowledge, adult 
syntactic knowledge isn’t defeasible even in principle. The phenomenon of creolization 
which is often invoked in support of innateness is a good example of this (Bickerton, 
1981). In creoles children don’t develop an incorrect account of the pidgin 
languagewhich is subject to correction, they simply develop a new language.   
     But even if  theory-formation can’t explain syntax for this reason, this outcome should 
not be an altogether happy one for Chomskyan theory. For the same arguments that say 
that syntactic knowledge is not a kind of theory, call into question whether it is really a 
kind of knowledge either. Chomsky rightly argues that philosophical attempts to define 
knowledge in terms of necessary and sufficient conditions are otiose, he thinks that 
knowledge is whatever a science of knowledge says it is.  But if we take the view of 
cognitive naturalism we can at least say that the cognitive natural kinds that emerge from 
the recent research, the varieties of knowledge, look very different from the Chomskyan 
picture.  
    There is a kind of knowledge that looks very much like the classical philosophical 
view of knowledge, a kind of knowledge that involves defeasible representations of an 
independent reality. The theory theory provides a naturalized account of such knowledge. 
There is also a kind of “knowledge” that is very different. It may be that we use 
representations and rules to guide our actions and, in particular, to coordinate our actions 
with the action of others, but not to get to a veridical account of the outside world. In this 
respect syntactic abilities look much more like certain kinds of social abilities, or perhaps 
motor abilities or musical abilities, than like scientific knowledge or our everyday 
understanding of the world. This doesn’t mean that we can’t  reach a naturalistic 

 
25
understanding of these abilities, or that they don’t involve rules and representations, or 
that we can’t call them knowledge if we want to. It does mean that they are very unlike 
other kinds of knowledge.  
      The innateness hypothesis may apply to these kinds of knowledge. But there also 
might be learning mechanisms that lead to these representations, though they might be 
quite different from theory formation. The answer to the poverty of the stimulus 
argument here would have to be a rather different one. It would depend on the richness of 
our everyday capacities to develop certain kinds of actions in coordination with the 
actions of others. In fact, those who propose alternatives to innateness for syntax depend 
on just such arguments (e.g. Slobin, 1985). If  researchers could point to specific learning 
mechanisms that allowed us to coordinate our actions with those of others, given certain 
types of interactions, they could oppose those mechanisms to the innateness hypothesis, 
just as I have opposed theory formation to innateness (for an example of such an 
argument for a learning mechanism for  phonological knowledge see Kuhl, 1994).      
     In any case, cognitive naturalism and the innateness hypothesis were exciting because 
they were supposed to explain language and knowledge in general, not just syntax. Even 
if Chomsky is right that syntactic structure is innate, syntax comes to look like a 
relatively isolated phenomenon using very different mechanisms than the rest of 
cognition, and even of semantic and lexical knowledge. In fact, sociologically speaking, 
at least, something like this seems to have come to pass. Where twenty or thirty years ago 
every cognitive psychologist knew the latest theories of syntax and employed them as 
models for cognition in general, now hardly any psychologists know even the names of 
the theories.  

 
26
       If we take the innateness hypothesis as a broad claim about the nature of language 
and mind then it is clearly seriously challenged by the theory theory. If we take it as a 
narrow hypothesis about a syntactic capacity that is quite different from other linguistic 
and cognitive capacities then it may survive, but it seems a rather pyrrhic victory.  
     On the other hand, if we think that Chomsky’s real contribution was his cognitive 
naturalism then the influence of Chomsky’s ideas is both broad and important. They have 
allowed us to make real progress in solving the problem of how we come to understand the 
world around us. Cognitive naturalism has helped us to understand the myriad devices we 
use to get to the truth about the world around us, from human vision to science itself. It has 
helped us to begin to solve the ancient problem of knowledge. 

 
27
 
References 
 
Atran, S. (1990). Cognitive foundations of natural history: towards an anthropology of 
science. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Barkow, J. H., Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (1992). The adapted mind: Evolutionary 
psychology and the generation of culture. New York, NY: Oxford University 
Press. 
 Bartsch, K., & Wellman, H. M. (1995). Children talk about the mind. New York, NY: 
Oxford University Press. 
Bates, E., & Elman, J. L. (1992). Connectionism and the study of change. In M. H. 
Johnson (Ed), Brain development and cognition: A reader . Oxford: Blackwell. 
Bickerton, D. (1981). Roots of language. Ann Arbor: Karoma Publishers. 
Carey, S. (1982). Semantic development: The state of the art. In E. Wanner, & L. R. 
Gleitman (Eds.), Language acquisition: the state of the art . New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual change in childhood. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press. 
Eimas, P. D.  (1975).  Speech perception in early infancy.  In L. B. Cohen                          
& P. Salapatek (Eds.), Infant perception:  Vol. 2.  From sensation to                           
cognition (pp. 193-231).  New York:  Academic Press.   
Gelman, S. A., & Coley, J. D. (1991). Language and categorization: The acquisition of 
natural kind terms. In S. A. Gelman, & J. P. Byrnes (Eds), Perspectives on 
language and thought: Interrelations in development (pp. 146-196.  xii, 524). 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Gelman, S. A., & Wellman, H. M. (1991). Insides and essence: Early understandings of 
the non-obvious. Cognition, 38(3), 213-244. 
Giere, R. N. (1992). Cognitive models of science (Minnesota studies in the philosophy of 
science ; v. 15  . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Glymour, C. (in press). The mind’s arrows: Bayes nets and graphical causal models in 
psychology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Gopnik, A. (1984). Conceptual and semantic change in scientists and children: Why there 
are not semantic universals. Linguistics, 20, 163-179. 
Gopnik, A. (1988). Conceptual and semantic development as theory change. Mind and 
Language, 3, 163-179. 
Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A. N. (1997). Words, thoughts and theories. Cambridge, MA: 
Bradford, MIT Press. 
Gopnik, A. (1996). The child as scientist.  Philosophy of Science, 63(4), 485-514. 
Gopnik, A. (1993). How we know our minds: The illusion of first-person knowledge of 
intentionality. Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 16(1), 29-113. 
Gopnik, A., Choi, S., & Baumberger, T. (1996). Cross-linguistic differences in early 
semantic and cognitive development. Cognitive Development, 11(2), 197-227. 
Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A. (1987). The development of categorization in the second year 
and its relation to other cognitive and linguistic developments. Child 
Development, 58(6), 1523-1531. 
Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A. N. (1986). Relations between semantic and cognitive 

 
28
development in the one-word stage: The specificity hypothesis. Child 
Development, 57(4), 1040-1053. 
Gopnik, A., & Wellman, H. M. (1994). The theory theory. In L. Hirschfield, & S. 
Gelman (Eds), Mapping the mind: Domain specificity in cognition and culture 
(pp. 257-293.  xiv, 516). New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Gopnik, A.; D. Sobel,  L. Schultz, & C. Glymour (2001). Causal learning mechanisms in 
very young children: Two, three, and four-year-olds infer causal relations from 
patterns of variation and covariation. Developmental Psychology, 37, 5, 620–629   
 
Gopnik, A.; & C. Glymour (in press). Causal maps and Bayes nets: A cognitive and 
computational account of theory-formation. In P. Carruthers, S. Stich, M. Siegal,(Eds.) 
The cognitive basis of science.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 
Keil, F. C. (1989). Concepts, kinds, and cognitive development (The MIT Press series in 
learning, development, and conceptual change . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Kitcher, P. (1988). The child as parent of the scientist. Mind and Language, 3, 217-228.2. 
  
Kuhl, PK. (1994). Learning and representation in speech and language. Current Opinion 
In Neurobiology, 4(6), 812-22. 
Leslie, A., & Roth, D. (1993). What autism teaches us about metarepresentation. In S. 
Baron-Cohen, H. Tager-Flusberg, & D. Cohen (Eds), Understanding other minds: 
Perspectives from autism (pp. 83-111.  xiii, 515). Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The role of theories in conceptual coherence. 
Psychological Review, 92(3), 289-316. 
Pearl, J. (2000). Causality. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Perner, J. (1991). Understanding the representational mind (Learning, development, and 
conceptual change . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
S. Pinker (1989). Learnability and cognition: The acquisition of argument structure. 
Learning, development, and conceptual change. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Slobin, D. I. (1985). The cross-linguistic study of the language-making capacity. In D. I. 
Slobin (Ed), The cross-linguistic study of language acquisition (pp. 1157-1256). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Smith, C., Carey, S., & Wiser, M. (1985). On differentiation: A case study of the 
development of the concepts of size, weight and density. Cognition, 21, 177-237. 
Spelke, E. S., Breinlinger, K., Macomber, J., & Jacobson, K. (1992). Origins of 
knowledge. Psychological Review, 99(4), 605-632. 
Spirtes, P., Glymour, C., & Scheines, R. (2001). Causation, prediction, and search 
(Springer Lecture Notes in Statistics, 2nd edition, revised). Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press. 
Wellman, H. (1990). The child's theory of mind. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 
Wellman, H., & Gelman, S. (1997). Knowledge acquisition in foundational domains. D. 
Kuhn, & R. Siegler (Ed.), Handbook of child psychology (5th ed., ). New York: 
Wiley. 
 

