
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 

EDWARD T. HALL 
\ \ 
THE 
SILENT 
LANGUAGE 
DOUBLEDAY 
& COMPANY, INC., 
GARDEN CITY, 
NEW YOU 
1959 


LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOG CARD NUMBER 59- 6359 
COPYRIGHT @ 1959· BY EDWARD T. HALL 
ALL RIGHTS RES·ERY.ED 
PRINTED IN TH'E UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
FIRST EDITION 
DESIGN: CHARLES KAPLAN 

To my friends and colleagues from foreign cultures 
who taught me so much about my own culture. 

CONTENTS 
INTRODUCTION 
chapter one 
chapter two 
chapter three 
chapter four 
chapter five 
chapter six 
chapter seven 
chapter eight 
chapter nine 
chapter ten 
chapter eleven 
APPENDIX I 
APPENDIX II 
APPENDIX III 
APPENDIX IV 
INDEX 
THE VOICES OF TIME 
2 3 
WHAT IS CULTURE? 
43 
THE VOCABULARY OF CULTURE 
57 
THE MAJOR TRIAD 
83 
' 
CULTURE IS COMMUNICATION 
119 
THE PERVASIVE SET 
127 
THE ILLUSIVE ISOLATE 
135 
THE ORGANIZING PATTERN 
143 
TIME TALKS: AMERICAN ACCENTS· 
165 
SPACE SPEAKS 
187 
LOOSENING THE GRIP 
211 
SCHEMA FOR SOCIAL SCIENTISTS 
217 
A MAP OF CULTURE 
218 
THREE STUDIES OF CHANGE 
225 
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY 
2 32 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
My friend and mentor, Ralph Linton, once observed that 
each book he wrote "came out of his hide." At this point 
I have no difficulty accepting the credibility of his observa-
tion. I would like to add that this book exacted a toll from 
my family and especially my wife, who had to put up with 
my 5 A.M. hours, a curtailed social life, my own irascibility 
during critical stages of the manuscript, as well as many ver-
sions of the manuscript which she read, criticized, and cor-
rected. Many books have been dedicated to the author's 
wife "without whose patience and understanding they would · 
never have seen the light of day." It is easy to see why this · 
dedication is so popular. Yet its popularity tends to de-
tract from the impact of the message and somehow makes 
the efforts of the wife seem less important than they 
really are. I do not know how to express adequately my 
appreciation for the vital part ·my wife played in the 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I 
11 
he learns from them about their cultures that makes his 
own culture more meaningful. 
Clarkson N. Potter first urged me to write this book and 
has provided the necessary encouragement and understand-
ing for its completion. I wish to express my appreciation 
for editorial assistance to Richard K. Winslow and Kermit 
Lansner. 
I wish to acknowledge the kindness of the following pub-
lishers who have permitted me to quote from these books: 
"A Case of Identity" in The Complete Sherlock Holmes 
by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. Reprinted by permission of the 
Trustees of the Estate of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle and John 
Murray, Ltd. 
Language, Thought, and Reality, Selected Writings of Ben-
jamin Lee Whorf, published jointly by the Technology 
Press and John Wiley & Sons of New York. Reprinted by 
permission. 

10 I 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
production of this book. There were many times when I 
would have delayed or let other pressing obligations in-
terrupt my writing if it had not been for her encourage-
ment. My first acknowledgment, therefore, is to my wife, 
Mildred Reed Hall. 
As an anthropologist and a scientist I owe a tremendous 
debt to my colleagues but especially to the late Ralph Lin-
ton, under whom I studied at Columbia University. We 
used to spend many pleasant hours together as he tried out 
ideas he was developing in an amazing range of subjects. 
As a student I used to find it difficult to communicate 
with professors and always experienced a gulf between us, 
not so much in status but in approach. With Linton this 
gulf was never present. He always seemed to be able to 
communicate clearly and enjoy a real exchange of ideas. 
While the content of this book is different from anything 
Linton would have written, I have the feeling that he would 
have understood the ideas I am presenting. 
Three other colleagues who provided encouragement and 
stimulation over the years are Erich Fromm, David Ries-
man, and John Useem. Much of the material in this book 
was worked out in collaboration with my friend and col-
league, George L. Trager, professor of anthropology and 
linguistics at the University of Buffalo. During the early 
phases of our work together, Trager and I were assisted and 
encouraged by Edward A. Kennard, Ralph Kepler Lewis, 
and Henry Lee Smith, Jr. However, I must take full re-
sponsibility for the form and content of the book. 
Many of the comments on other cultures are the result 
of direct observation and field work which I have done with 
the Spanish-American in New Mexico and Latin America, 
the Navajo, Hopi, Trukese, Western Mediterranean Arabs, 
and Iranians. Needless to say, the anthropologist always 
owes a great debt to the people he studies, because it is what 


INTRODUCTION 
Though the United States has spent billions of dollars on 
foreign aid programs, it has captured neither the affection 
nor esteem of the rest of the world. In many countries today 
Americans are cordially disliked; in others merely tolerated. 
The reasons for this sad state of affairs are many and varied, 
and some of them are beyond the control of anything this 
country might do to try to correct them. But harsh as it 
may seem to the ordinary citizen, filled as he is with good 
intentions and natural generosity, much of the foreigners' 
animosity has been generated by the way Americans behave:. 
As a country we are apt to be guilty of great ethnocen·~ 
trism. In many of our foreign aid programs we employ a 
heavy-handed technique in dealing with local nationals. We 
insist that everyone else do things our way. Consequently we 
manage to convey the impression that we simply regard for-
eign 'nationals as "underdeveloped Americans." Most of our 

INTRODUCTION I 
15 
silent language even though they use it every day. They are 
not conscious of the elaborate patterning of behavior which 
prescribes our handling of time, our spatial relationships, 
our attitudes toward work, play, and learning. In addition 
to what we say with our verbal language we are constantly 
communicating our real feelings in our silent language- the 
language of behavior. Sometimes this is correctly inter-
preted by other nationalities, but more often it is not. 
Difficulties in intercultural communication are seldom 
seen for what they are. When it becomes appurent to people 
of different countries that they are not understanding one 
another, each tends to blame it on "those foreigners," on 
their stupidity, deceit, or craziness. The following examples 
will ·illuminate some of these cross-cultural cross-purposes 
at their most poignant. 
Despite a host of favorable auspices an American mis-
sion in Greece was having great difficulty working out an 
agreement with Greek officials. Efforts to negotiate met with 
resistance and suspicion on the part of the Greeks. The 
Americans were unable to conclude the agreements needed 
to start new projects. Upon later examination of this exasper-
ating situation two unsuspected reasons were found for the 
stalemate: First, Americans pride themselves on being out-
spoken and forthright. These qualities are regarded as a 
liability by the Greeks. They are taken to indicate a lack 
of finesse which the Greeks deplore. The American direct: 
ness immediately prejudiced the Greeks. Second, when the 
Americans arranged meetings with the Greeks they tried to 
limit the length .of the meetings and to reach agreements 
on general principles first, delegating the drafting of details 
to subcommittees. The Greeks regarded this practice as a 
device to pull the wool over their eyes. The Greek practice 
is to work out details in front of all concerned and con-
tinue meetings for as long as is necessary. The result of this 

14 I 
INTRODUCTION 
behavior does not spring from malice but from ignorance, 
which is as grievous a sin in international relations. We are 
not only almost totally ignorant of what is expected in other 
countries, we are equally ignorant of what we are communi-
cating to other people by our own normal behavior. 
It is not my thesis that Americans should be universally 
loved. But I take no consolation in the remark of a govern-
ment official who stated that ''we don't have to be liked just 
so long as we are respected." In most countries we are neither 
liked nor respected. It is time that Americans learned how 
to communicate effectively with foreign nationals. It is time 
that we stop alienating people with whom we are trying to 
work. 
For many years I have been concerned with the selection 
and training of Americans to work in foreign countries for 
both government and business. I am convinced that much 
of our difficulty with people in other countries stems from 
the fact that so little is known about cross-cultural com-
munication. Because of this lack, much of the good will and 
great effort of the nation has been wasted in its overseas 
programs. When Americans are sent abroad to deal with 
other peoples they should first be carefully selected as to 
their suitability to work in a foreign culture. They should 
also be taught to speak and read the language of the country 
of assignment and thoroughly trained in the culture of the' 
country. All of this takes time and costs money. However, 
unless we are willing to select and train personnel, we 
simply sell ourselves short overseas. 
Yet this formal training in the language, history, govern-
ment, and customs of another nation is only the first step 
in a comprehensive program. Of equal importance is an 
introduction to the non-verbal language which exists in every 
country of the world and among the various groups within 
each country. Most Americans are only dimly aware of this 

16 I 
INTRODUCTION 
misunderstanding was a series of unproductive meetings 
with each side deploring the other's behavior. 
In the Middle East, Americans usually have a difficult 
time with the Arabs. I remember an American agricultur-
alist who went to Egypt to teach modern agricultural meth-
ods to the Egyptian farmers. At one point in his work he 
asked his interpreter to ask a farmer how much he expected 
his field to yield that year. The farmer responded by be-
coming very excited and angry. In an obvious attempt to 
soften the reply the interpreter said, "He says he doesn't 
know." The American realized something had gone wrong, 
but he had no way of knowing what. Later I learned that 
the Arabs regard anyone who tries to look into the future as 
slightly insane. When the American asked him about his 
future yield, the Egyptian was highly insulted since he 
thought the American considered him crazy. To the Arab 
only God knows the future, and it is presumptuous even to 
talk about it. 
In Japan I once interviewed an American scholar who was 
sent to Japan to teach American history to Japanese uni-
versity professors. The course was well under way when the 
American began to doubt if the Japanese understood his 
lectures. Since he did not speak Japanese, he asked for an 
interpreter. After a few lectures with the interpreter trans-
lating for him, the American asked the group to meet with-
out him and make a report on what they were learning from 
the course. The next time the American met with the class 
the interpreter told him that the class understood only about 
50 per cent of what had been going on. The American was 
discouraged and upset. \Vhat he didn't know was that he 
had inadvertently insulted the group by requesting an in-
terpreter. In Japan a sign of ap educated man is his ability 
to speak English. The Japanese professors felt that the 
American had caused them to lose face by implying that , 

INTRODUCTION I 
17 
they were uneducated when he requested the interpreter. 
Americans often do so badly in their jobs overseas that 
military officers have a real fear of being assigned to some 
countries. I once heard a retired admiral talking to an army 
general about a mutual acquaintance. "Poor old Charley," 
lamented the admiral, "he got mixed up with those Orien-
tals in the Far East and it ruined his career." Periodically, 
after an incident like the Girard case, which was a tragedy of 
errors by both American military and diplomatic personnel 
in Japan, there is a brief flurry of interest in "doing some-
thing about better selection of personnel for foreign assign-
ment." As one Pentagon aide remarked, "At least we ought 
to be able to select them so they don't shoot the local civil-
. 
" 
1ans. 
Obviously there are always going to be unavoidable in-
cidents when our forces are stationed in foreign countries. 
Many of the incidents are made worse, however, by the 
inept way the Americans handle the consequences. When 
incidents do occur, the Americans rarely know how to act 
in such a way as to avoid adding fuel to the fire. They are 
usually blind to the fact that what passes as ordinary, ac-
ceptable American behavior is often interpreted in such a 
way by foreigners that it distorts our true sentiments or our 
intentions. 
If this book does nothing more than to plant this idea, 
it will have served its purpose. Yet in writing these pages 
I have had a more ambitious goal. This book was written 
for the layman, the person who is at times perplexed by the 
life in which he finds himself, who often feels driven here 
and there by forces he does not understand, who may see 
others doing things that genuinely mystify him at home in 
America as well as oversea~ in another culture. I hope that 
I can show the reader that behind the apparent mystery, 

INTRODUCTION I 
19 
people learned informally by imitation. Man was able to 
exploit the potential of music only when he started writing 
musical scores. This is what must be done for culture. This 
book represents the cultural analogue of a musical primer. 

18 I 
INTRODUCTION 
confusion, and disorganization of life there is order; and that 
this understanding will set him to re-examine the human 
world around him. I hope that it will also interest the reader 
in the subject of culture and lead him to follow his own 
interests and make his own observations. 
Though they will probably disagree with some of the 
points I make, professionals in various specialized fields may 
find some useful insights in these pages. The architect might 
well learn to employ the knowledge available to him about 
space as a culturally patterned dimension in his work. The 
educator will undoubtedly bristle under some of my criti-
cisms, yet I sincerely hope that he will find the analysis 
in this book useful in its application to teaching. My col-
leagues in the field of psychiatry will find concepts here 
useful in their therapy, just as my collaboration with psychia-
trists has proved invaluable in the study of different varie-
ties of communication. Writers, artists, businessmen, and 
management experts have all contributed substantially to 
my knowledge. It is to be hoped that the social scientist 
will find the concept of culture as communication relevant 
to his work. 
In my research on culture I received invaluable collabo-
ration from my colleague, George L. Trager. Trager is an 
anthropologically trained linguist who has made a number 
of important contributions to the study of language. Trager . 
and I developed a theory of culture based on a communica-
tions model which is contained in this book and which 
gives it its theoretical underpinning. 
The pages that follow have been arranged in such a way 
as to lead the reader gradually from the known to the un-
known. It will be helpful if the reader thinks of culture as 
analogous to music. If a person hasn't heard music, it is 
impossible to describe. Before the days of written scores, 


THE SILENT LANGUAGE 

chapter 
one 
THE 
VOICES 
OF 
TIME 
Time talks. It speaks more plainly than words. The message 
it conveys comes through loud and clear. Because it is ma-
nipulated less consciously, it is subject to less distortion 
than the spoken language. It can shout the truth where 
words lie. 
I was once a member of a mayor's committee on human 
relations in a large city. My assignment was to estimate: · 
what the chances were of non-discriminatory practices be- · 
ing adopted by the different city departments. T he first step 
in this project was to interview the deparbnent heads, two 
of whom were themselves members of minority groups. If 
one were to believe the words of these officials, it seemed 
that all of them were more than willing to adopt non-dis-

I 

24 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
criminatory labor practices. Yet I felt that, despite what they 
said, in only one case was there much chance for a change. 
\Vhy? The answer lay in how they used the silent language 
of time and space. 
Special attention had been given to arranging each in-
terview. Department heads were asked to be prepared to 
spend an hour or more discussing their thoughts with me. 
Nevertheless, appointments were forgotten; long waits in 
outer offices (fifteen to forty-five minutes) were common, 
and the length of the interview was often cut down to ten 
or fifteen minutes. I was usually kept at an impersonal dis-
tance during the interview. In only one case did the depart-
ment head come from behind his desk. These men had a 
position and they were literally and figuratively sticking to 
it! 
The implication of this experience (one which public-
opinion pollsters might well heed) is quite obvious. What 
people do is frequently more important than what they say. 
In this case the way these municipal potentates handled 
time was eloquent testimony to what they inwardly believed, 
for the structure and meaning of time systems, as well as 
the time intervals, are easy to identify. In regard to being 
late there are: "mumble something" periods, slight apology 
periods, mildly insulting periods requiring full apology, rude 
periods, and downright insulting periods. The psychoana-
lyst has long been aware of the significance of communica- · 
tion on this level. He can point to the way his patients 
handle time as evidence of "resistances" and "transference." 
Different parts of the day, for example, are highly signifi-
cant in certa.in contexts. Time may indicate the importance 
of the occasion as well as on what level an interaction be-
tween persons is to take place. In the United States if you 
telephone someone very early in the morning, while he is 
shaving or having breakfast, the time· of the call usually 

THE VOICES OF TU.·IE I 25 
signals a matter of utmost importance and extreme urgency. 
The same applies for calls after 11 :oo P.M. A call received 
during sleeping hours is apt to be taken as a· matter of life 
and death, hence the rude joke value of these calls among 
the young. Our realization that time talks is even reflected 
in such common expressions as, "What time does the clock 
say?" 
An example of how thoroughly these things are taken 
for granted was reported to me by John Useem, an American 
social anthropologist, in an illuminating case from the South 
Pacific. The natives of one of the islands had been having 
a difficult time getting their white supervisors to hire them 
in a way consistent with their traditional status system. 
Through ignorance the supervisors had hired too many of 
one group and by so doing had disrupted the existing bal-
ance of power among the natives. The entire population of 
the island was seething because of this error. Since the Amer-
icans continued in their ignorance and refused to hire ac-
cording to local practice, the head men of the two factions 
met one night to discuss an acceptable reallocation of jobs. 
When they finally arrived at a solution, they went en masse 
to see the plant manager and woke him up to tell him what 
had been decided. Unfortunately it was then between two 
and three o'clock in the morning. They did not know that 
it is a sign of extreme urgency to wake up Americans at 
this hour. As one might expect, the American plant man-
ager, who understood neither the local language nor the 
culture nor what the hullabaloo was all about,. thought he · · 
had a riot on his hands and called out the Marines. It 
simply never occurred to him that the parts of the day have· 
a different meaning for these people than they have for us. 
On the other hand, plant managers in the United States 
are fully aware of the significance of a communication made 
during the middle of the morning or afternoon that takes 

THE VOICES OF TIME I 
27 
was reluctantly granted. Arriving a little before the hour 
(the American respect pattern), he waited. The hour came 
and passed; five minutes-ten minutes-fifteen minutes. At 
this point he suggested to the secretary that per haps the 
minister did not know he was waiting in the outer office. 
This gave him the feeling he had done something concrete 
and also helped to overcome the great anxiety that was stir-
ring inside him. Twenty minutes-twenty-five minutes-
thirty minutes-forty-five minutes (the insult period)! 
He jumped up and told the secretary that he had been 
"cooling his heels" in an outer office for forty-five minutes 
and he was "damned sick and tired" of this type of treat-
ment. This message was relayed to the minister, who said, 
in effect, "Let him cool his heels." The attache's stay in the 
country was not a happy one. 
The principal source of misunderstanding lay in the fact 
that in the country in question the five-minute-delay in-
terval was not significant. Forty-five minutes, on the other 
hand, instead of being at the tail end of the waiting scale, 
was just barely at the beginning. To suggest to an American's 
secretary that perhaps her boss didn't know you were there 
after waiting sixty seconds would seem absurd, as would 
raising a storm about "cooling your heels" for five minutes. 
Yet this is precisely the way the minister registered the 
protestations of the American in his outer office! He felt, 
as usual, that Americans were being totally unreasonable. 
Throughout this unfortunate episode the attache was act~ 
ing according to the way he had been brought up. At home 
in the United States his responses would have been normal 
ones and his behavior legitimate. Yet even if he had been 
toid before he left home that this sort of thing would hap-
pen, he would have had difficulty not feeling insulted after 
he had been kept waiting forty-five minutes. If, on the other 
hand, he had been taught the details of the local time sys-

26 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
everyone away from his work. Whenever they want to make 
an important announcement they will ask: "When shall we 
let them know?" In the social world a girl feels insulted 
when she is asked for a date at the last minute by someone 
whom she doesn't know very well, and the person who ex-
tends an invitation to a dinner party with only three or four 
days' notice has to apologize. How different from the people 
of the Middle East with whom it is pointless to make an 
appointment too far in advance, because the informal struc-
ture of their time system places everything beyond a week 
into a single category of "future," in which plans tend to 
"slip off their minds." 
Advance notice is often referred to in America as "lead 
time," an expression which is significant in a culture where 
schedules are important. vVhile it is learned informally, 
most of us are familiar with how it works in our own culture, 
even though we cannot state the rules technically. The rules 
for lead time in other cultures, however, have rarely been 
analyzed. At the most they are known by experience to those 
who lived abroad for some time. Yet think how important 
it is to know how much time is required to prepare people, 
or for them to prepare themselves, for things to come. Some-
times lead time would seem to be very extended. At other 
times, in the Middle East, any period longer than a week 
rna y be too long. 
How troublesome differing ways of handling time can be 
is well illustrated by the case of an American agriculturalist 
assigned to duty as an attache of our embassy in a Latin 
country. After what seemed to him a suitable period he let 
it be known that he would like to call on the minister who 
was his counterpart. For various reasons, the suggested time 
was not suitable; all sorts of cues came back to the effect 
that the time was not yet ripe to visit the minister. Our 
friend, however, persisted and forced an appointment which 

28 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
tern just as he should have been taught the local spoken 
language, it would have been possible for him to adjust him-
self accordingly. 
\Vhat bothers people in situations of this sort is that they 
don't realize they are being subjected to another form of 
communication, one that works part of the time with lan-
guage and part of the time independently of it. The fact 
that the message conveyed is couched in no formal vocabu-
lary makes things doubly difficult, because neither party can 
get very explicit about what is actually taking place. Each 
can only say what he thinks is happening and how he feels 
about it. The thought of what is being communicated is 
what hurts. 
AMERICAN TIME 
People of the Western world, particularly Americans, tend 
to think of time as something fixed in nature, something 
around us and from which we cannot escape; an ever-present 
part of the environment, just like the air we breathe. That 
it might be experienced in any other way seems unnatural 
and strange, a feeling which is rarely modified even when 
we begin to discover how really differently it is handled by 
some other people. \Vithin the West itself certain ·cultures 
rank time much lower in over-all importance than we do. 
In Latin America, for example, where time is treated rather . 
cavalierly, one commonly hears the expression, "Our time or 
your time?'' "Hora americana, hora mej_icana?" 
As a rule, Americans think of time as a road or a ribbon 
stretching into the future, along which one progresses. The 
road has segments or compartments which are to be kept 
discrete ("one thing at a time"). People who cannot sched-
ule time are looked down upon as impractical. In at least 
some parts of Latin America, the North American (their 

THE VOICES OF TIME I 
29 
term for us) finds himself annoyed when he has made an 
appointment with somebody, only to find a lot of other 
things going on at the same time. An old friend of mine of 
Spanish cultural heritage used to run his business according 
to the "Latino" system. This meant that up to fifteen people 
were in his office at one time. Business which might have 
been finished in a quarter of an hour sometimes took a whole 
day. He realized, of course, that the Anglo-Americans were 
disturbed by this and used to make some allowance for 
them, a dispensation which meant that they spent only an 
hour or so in his office when they had planned on a few 
minutes. The American concept of the discreteness of time 
and the necessity for scheduling was at variance with this 
amiable and seemingly confusing Latin system. However, 
if my friend had adhered to the American system he would 
have destroyed a vital part of his prosperity. People who 
came to do business with him also came to find out things 
and to visit each other. The ten to fifteen Spanish-Ameri-
cans and Indians who used to sit around the office (among 
whom I later found myself after I had learned to relax a lit- . 
tie) played their own part in a particular type of communi-
cations network. 
Not only do we Americans segment and schedule time, 
but we look ahead and are oriented almost entirely toward 
the future. We like new things and are preoccupied with 
change. We want to know how to overcome resistance to 
change. In fact, scientific theories and even some pseudo-
scientific ones, which incorporate a striking theory of change,., · 
are often given special attention. 
· 
Time with us is handled much like a material; we earn 
it, spend it, save it, waste it. To us it is somewhat immoral 
to have two things going on at the same time. In Latin 
America it is not uncommon for one man to have a number 
of simultaneous jobs which he either carries on from one 

THE VOICES OF TIME I 
31 
know-how, to assess the prognosis for success in the future. 
Promptness is also valued highly in American life. If 
people are not prompt, it is often taken either as an insult 
or as an indication that they are not quite responsible. There 
are those, of a psychological bent, who would say that we 
are obsessed with time. They can point to individuals in 
American culture who are literally time-ridden. And even 
the rest of us feel very strongly about time because we have 
been taught to take it so seriously. We have stressed this 
aspect of culture and developed it to a point unequaled 
anywhere in the world, except, perhaps, in Switzerland and 
north Germany. Many people criticize our obsessional 
handling of tune. They attribute ulcers and hypertension to 
the pressure engendered by such a system. Perhaps they are 
right. 
SOME OTHER CONCEPTS OF TIME 
Even within the very borders of the United States there 
are people who handle time in a way which is almost incom-
prehensible to those who have not made a major effort to 
understand it The Pueblo Indians, for example, who live in 
the Southwest, have a sense of time which is at complete 
variance with the clock-bound habits of the ordinary 
American citizen. For the Pueblos events begin when the 
time is ripe and no sooner. 
I can still remember a Christmas dance I attended some 
twenty-five years ago at one of the pueblos near the Rio· 
Grande. I had to travel over bumpy roads for forty-five 
miles to get there. At seven thousand feet the ordeal of 
winter cold at one o'clock in the morning is almost unbeara-
ble. Shivering in the still darkness of the pueblo, I kept 
searching for a clue as to when the dance would begin. 
Outside everything was impenetrably quiet. Occasionally 

30 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
desk or which he moves between, spending a small amount 
of time on each. 
\Vhile we look to the future, our view of it is limited. The 
future to us is the foreseeable future, not the future of the 
South Asian that may involve centuries. Indeed, our per-
spective is so short as to inhibit the operation of a good 
many practical projects, such as sixty- and one-hundred-year 
conservation works requiring public support and public 
funds. Anyone who has worked in industry or in th~ govern-
ment of the United States has heard the following: "Gentle-
men, this is for the long term! Five or ten years." 
For us a "long time" can be almost anything- ten or 
twenty years, two or three months, a few weeks, or even a 
couple of days. The South Asian, however, feels that it is 
perfectly realistic to think of a "long time" in terms of 
thousands of years or even an endless period. A colleague 
once described their conceptualization of time as follows: 
"Time is like a museum with endless corridors and alcoves. 
You, the viewer, are walking through the museum in the 
dark, holding a light to each scene as you pass it. God is the 
curator of the museum, and only He knows all that is in it. 
One lifetime represents one alcove." 
The American's view of the future is linked to a view 
of the past, for tradition plays an equally limited part in 
American culture. As a whole, we push it aside or leave it 
to a few souls who are interested in the pasl for very special 
reasons. There are, of course, a few pockets, such as New 
England and the South, where tradition is emphasized. But 
in the realm of business, which is the dominant model of 
United States life, tradition is equated with experience, and 
experience is thought of as being very close to if not synony-
mous with know-how. Know-how is one of our -prized 
possessions, so that when we look · backward it is rarely to 
take pleasure in the past itself but usually to calculate the 

32 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
there was the muffled beat of a deep pueblo drum, the open-
ing of a door, or the piercing of the night's darkness with a 
shaft of light. In the church where the dance was to take 
place a few white townsfolk were huddled together on a 
balcony, groping for some clue which would suggest how 
much longer they were going to suffer. "Last year I heard 
they started at ten o'clock." "They can't start until the priest 
comes." "There is no way of telling when they will start." 
All this punctuated by chattering teeth and the stamping 
of feet to keep up circulation. 
Suddenly an Indian opened the door, entered, and poked 
up t_he fire in the stove. Everyone nudged his neighbor: 
"Maybe they are going to begin now." Another hour passed. 
Another Indian came in from outside, walked across the 
nave of the church, and disappeared through another door. 
"Certainly now they will begin. After all, it's almost two 
o'clock." Someone guessed that they were just being ornery 
in the hope that the white men would go away. Another 
had a friend in the pueblo and went to his house to ask 
when the dance would begin. Nobody knew. Suddenly, 
when the whites were almost exhausted, there burst upon 
the night the deep sounds of the drums, rattles, and low male 
voices singing. Without warning the dance had begun. 
After years of performances such as this, no white man 
in his right mind will hazard a guess as to when one of these 
ceremonial dances will begin. Those of us who have learned 
now know that the dance doesn't start at a particular time. 
It is geared to no schedule. It starts when "things" are ready! 
As I pointed out, the white civilized Westerner has a shal-
low view of the future compared to the Oriental. Yet set 
· beside the Navajo Indians of northern Arizona, he seems a 
model of long-term patience. The Navajo and the European-
American have been trying to adjust their concepts of time 
for almost a hundred years. So far they have not done too 

THE VOICES OF TIME I 
3 3 
well. To the old-time Navajo time is like space- only the 
here and now is quite real. The future has little reality to it. 
An old friend of mine reared with the Navajo expressed 
it this way: "You know how the Navajo love horses and how 
much they love to gamble and bet on horse races. Well, if 
you were to say to a Navajo, 'My friend, you know my quar-
ter horse that won all the races at Flagstaff last Fourth of 
July?' that Navajo would eagerly say 'yes, yes,' he knew the 
horse; and if you were to say, 'In the fall I am going to give 
you that horse,' the Navajo's face would fall and he would 
turn around and walk away. On the other hand, if you were 
to say to him, 'Do you see that old bag of bones I just rode 
up on? That old hay-bellied mare with the knock-knees and 
pigeon toes, with the bridle that's falling apart and the saddle 
that's worn out? You can have that horse, my friend, it's 
yours. Take it, ride it away now.' Then the Navajo would 
beam and shake your hand and jump on his new horse and 
ride away. Of the two, only the immediate gift has reality; 
a promise of future benefits is not even worth thinking 
about." 
In the early days of the range control and soil conserva-
tion programs it was almost impossible to convince the 
Navajo that there was anything to be gained from giving up 
their beloved sheep for benefits which could be enjoyed ten 
or twenty years in the future. Once I was engaged in the 
supervision of the construction of small earth dams and like 
everyone else had little success at first in convincing Navajo . 
workmen that they should work hard and build the dam 
quickly, so that there would be more dams and more water 
for the sheep. The argument that they could have one dam 
or ten, depending on how hard they worked, conveyed 
nothing. It wasn't until I learned to translate our behavior 
into their terms that they produced as we knew they could. 
The solution came about in this way. I had been discuss-

THE VOICES OF TIME I 
35 
by the traders and the missionaries. Imagine a Navajo 
Indian living some forty or fifty miles from a trading store 
that is a hundred miles north of the railroad deciding that he 
needs flour and maybe a little lard for bread. He thinks 
about the flour and the lard, and he thinks about his friends 
and the fun he will have trading, or may be he wonders if the 
trader will give him credit or how much money he can get 
for the hide he has. After riding horseback for a day and 
a half to two days he reaches the store all ready to trade. 
The store is locked up tight. There are a couple of other 
Navajo Indians camped in the hogan built by the trader. 
They say the trader is inside but he won't trade because it's 
Sunday. They bang on his door and he tells them, ''Go 
away, it's Sunday," and the Navaj"o says, "But I came from 
way up on Black Mesa, and I am hungry. I need some 
food." What can the trader do? Soon he opens the store 
and then all the Navajo pour in. One of the most frequent 
and insistent Sunday visitors was a man who earned for him-
self the sobriquet "Big Sunday." "Little Sunday," it turns 
out, ran a close second. 
The Sioux Indians provide us with another interesting 
example of the differing views toward time. Not so long ago 
a man who was introduced as the superintendent of th~ 
Sioux came to my office. I learned that he had been born 
on the reservation and was a product of both Indian and 
white cultures, having earned his A.B. at one of the Ivy 
League colleges. 
During a long and fascinating account of the many prob-: 
lems which his tribe was having in adjusting to our way 
of life, he suddenly remarked: "What would you think of a 
people who had no word for time? My people have no word 
for 'late' or for 'waiting,' for that matter. They don't know 
what it is to wait or to be late." He then continued, "I de-
cided that until they could tell time and knew what time 

34 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
ing the problem with a friend, Lorenzo Hubbell, who had 
lived on the reservation all of his life. When there were 
difficulties I used to find it helpful to unburden myself to 
him. Somewhere in his remarks there was always a key to 
the underlying patterns of Navajo life. As we talked I 
learned that the Navajo understood and respected a bargain. 
I had some inkling of this when I noticed how unsettled 
the Indians became when they were permitted to fall down 
on the job they had agreed to do. In particular they seemed 
to be apprehensive lest they be asked to repay an unfulfilled 
obligation at some future time. I decided to sit down with 
the Navajo crew and talk to them about the work. It was 
quite useless to argue about the future advantages which 
would accrue from working hard; linear reasoning and logic 
were meaningless. They did respond, however, when I indi-
cated that the government was giving them money to get 
out of debt, providing jobs near their families, and giving 
them water for their sheep. I stressed the fact that in ex-
change for this, they must work eight hours every day. This 
was presented as a bargain. Following my clarification the 
work progressed satisfactorily. 
One of my Indian workmen inadvertently provided an-
other example of the cultural conflict centering around 
time. His name was "Little Sunday." He was small, wiry, 
and winning. Since it is not polite to ask the Navajo about 
their names or even to ask them what their name is, it was 
necessary to inquire of others how he came to be named 
"Little Sunday." The explanation was a revealing one. 
In the early days of the white traders the Indians had 
considerable difficulty getting used to the fact that we 
Europeans divided time into strange and unnatural periods 
instead of having a "natural" succession of days which be-
gan with the new moon and ended with the old. They were 
particularly. perplexed by the notion of the week introduced 

36 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
was they could never adjust themselves to white culture. So 
I set a bout to teach them time. There wasn't a clock that was 
running in any of the reservation classrooms. So I first 
bought some decent clocks. Then I made the school buses 
start on time, and if an Indian was two minutes late that 
was just too bad. The bus started at eight forty-two and he 
had to be there." 
He was right, of course. The Sioux could not adjust to 
European ways until they had learned the meaning of time. 
The superintendent's methods may have sounded a bit ex-
treme, but they were about the only ones that-would work. 
The idea of starting the buses off and making the drivers 
hold to a rigid schedule was a stroke of genius; much kinder 
to the Indian, who could better afford to miss a bus on the 
reservation than lose a job in town because he was late. 
There is, in fact, no other way to teach time to people 
who handle it as differently from us as the Sioux. The quick-
est way is to get very technical about it and to make it mean 
something. Later on these people can learn the informal . 
variations, but until they have experienced and then mas-
tered our type of time they will never adjust to our culture. 
Thousands of miles away from the reservations of the 
American Indian we come to another way of handling time 
which is apt to be completely unsettling to the unprepared 
visitor. The inhabitants of the atoll of Truk in the Southwest 
Pacific treat time in a fashion that has complicated life for 
themselves as well as for others, since it poses special prob-
lems not only for their civil and military governors and the 
anthropologists recording their life but for their own chiefs 
as well. 
Time does not heal on Truk! Past events stack up, placing 
an ever-increasing burden on the Trukese and weighing 
heavily on the present. They are, in fact, treated as though 
they had just occurred. This was borne out by something 

THE VOICES OF TIME I 
37 
which happened shortly after the American occupation of 
the atoll at the end of World War II. 
A villager arrived all out of breath at the military govern-
ment headquarters. He said that a murder had been commit-
ted in the village and that the murderer was running around 
loose. Quite naturally the military government officer be-
came alarmed. H e was about to dispatch M.P.s to arrest the 
culprit when he remembered that someone had warned him 
about acting precipitously when dealing with "natives." A 
little inquiry turned up the fact that the victim had been 
"fooling around" with the murderer's wife. Still more 
inquiry of a routine type, designed to establish the place and 
date of the crime, revealed that the murder had not occurred 
a few hours or even days ago, as one might expect, but seven-
teen years before. The murderer had been running around 
loose in the village all this time. 
A further example of how time does not heal on Truk is 
that of a land dispute that started with the German occupa-
tion in the 189os, was carried on down through the 
Japanese occupation, and was still current and acrimonious 
when the Americans arrived in 1946. 
Prior to Missionary Moses' arrival on Uman in 1867 life 
on Truk was characterized by violent and bloody warfare. 
Villages, instead of being built on the shore where life was a 
little easier, were placed on the sides of mountains where 
they could be better protected. Attacks would come without 
notice and often without apparent provocation. Or a fight 
might start if a man stole a coconut from a tree that was not 
his or waylaid a woman and took advantage of her. Years 
later someone would start thinking about the wrong and 
decide that it still had not been righted. A village would be 
attacked again in the middle of the night. 
When charges were brought against a chief for things he 
had done to his people, every little slight, every minor graft 

THE VOICES OF TIME I 
39 
appliances, liquor, and diamonds in the respective cities. 
This would mean that as you traveled about the day of the 
week would keep changing, depending on where you were. 
A requisite of our own temporal system is that the compo-
nents must add up: Sixty seconds have to equal one minute, 
sixty minutes one hour. The American is perplexed by 
people who do not do this. The African specialist Henri 
Alexandre Junod, reporting on the Thonga, tells of a 
medicine man who had memorized a seventy-year chro-
nology and could detail the events of each and every year in 
sequence. Yet this same man spoke of the period he had 
memorized as an "era" which he computed at "four months 
and eight hundred years' duration." The usual reaction to 
this story and others like it is that the man was primitive, 
like a child, and did not understand what he was saying, 
because how could seventy years possibly be the same as 
eight hundred? As students of culture we can no longer 
dismiss other conceptualizations of reality by saying that 
they are childlike. We must go much deeper. In the case 
of the Thonga it seems that a "chronology" is one thing 
and an "era" something else quite different, and there is no 
relation between the two in operational terms. 
· 
If these distinctions between European-American time 
and other conceptions of time seem to draw too heavily on 
primitive peoples, let me mention two other examples-
from cultures which are as civilized, if not as industrialized, 
as our own. In comparing the United States with Iran anc;l. 
Afghanistan very great differences in the handling of time 
appear. The American attitude toward appointments is an 
example. Once while in Tehran I had an opportunity to 
observe some young Iranians making plans for a party. After 
plans were made to pick up everyone at appointed times and 
places everything began to fall apart. People would leave 
messages that they were unable to take so-and-so or were 

38 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
would be listed; nothing would be forgotten. Damages would 
be asked for everything. It seemed preposterous to us 
Americans, particularly when we looked at the lists of 
charges. "How could a chief be so corrupt?" "How could 
the people remember so much?" 
Though the Truk islanders carry the accumulated burden 
of time past on their shoulders, they show an almost total 
inability to grasp the notion that two events can take place 
at the same time when they are any distance apart. When 
the Japanese occupied Truk at the end of World War I they 
took Artie Moses, chief of the island of Uman, to Tokyo. 
Artie was made to send a wireless message back to his people 
as a demonstration of the wizardry of Japanese technology. 
His family refused to believe that he had sent it, that he had 
said anything at all, though they knew he was in Tokyo. 
Places at a distance are very real to them, but people who 
are away are very much away, and any interaction with them 
is unthinkable. 
An entirely different handling of time is reported by the 
anthropologist Paul Bohannan for the Tiv, a primitive 
people who live in Nigeria. Like the Navajo, they point to 
the sun to indicate a general time of day, and they also 
observe the movement of the moon as it waxes and wanes. 
\Vhat is different is the way they use and experience time. 
For the Tiv, time is like a capsule. There is a time for visit-
ing, for cooking, or for working; and when one is in one of 
these times, one does not shift to another. 
The Tiv equivalent of the week lasts five to seven days. 
It is not tied into periodic natural events, such as the phases 
of the moon. The day of the week is named after the things 
which are being sold in the nearest "market." If we had the 
equivalent, Monday would be "automobiles" in Washing-
ton, D.C., "furniture" in Baltimore, and "yard goods" in 
New York. Each of these might be followed by the days for 

40 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
going somewhere else, knowing full well that the person who 
had been given the message couldn't possibly deliver it. One 
girl was left stranded on a street corner, and no one seemed 
to be concerned about it. One of my informants explained 
that he himself had had many similar experiences. Once 
he had made eleven appointments to meet a friend. Each 
time one of them failed to show up. The twelfth time they 
swore they would both be there, that nothing would inter-
fere. The friend failed to arrive. After waiting for forty-five 
minutes my informant phoned his friend and found him 
still at home. The following conversation is an approxima-
tion of what took place: 
"Is that you, Abdul?" "Yes." "\Vhy aren't you here? I 
thought we were to meet for sure." "Oh, but it was raining," 
said Abdul with a sort of whining intonation that is very 
common in Parsi. 
If present appointments are treated rather cavalierly, the 
past in Iran takes on a very great importance. People look 
back on what they feel are the wonders of the past and the 
great ages of Persian culture. Yet the future seems to have 
little reality or certainty to it. Businessmen have been 
known to invest hundreds of thousands of dollars in fac-
tories of various sorts without making the slightest plan as 
to how to use them. A complete woolen mill was bought 
and shipped to Tehran before the buyer had raised enough 
money to erect it, to buy supplies, or even to train personnel. 
When American teams of technicians came to help Iran's 
economy they constantly had to cope with what seemed to 
them an almost total lack of planning. 
Moving east from Iran to Afghanistan, one gets farther 
afield from American time concepts. A few years ago in 
Kabul a man appeared, looking for his brother. He asked 
all the merchants of the market place if they had seen his 
brother and told them where he was staying in case his 

THE VOICES OF TIME I 41 
brother arrived and wanted to find him. The next year he · 
was back and repeated the performance. By this time one 
of the members of the American embassy had heard about 
his inquiries and asked if he had found his brother. The man 
answered that he and his brother had agreed to meet in 
Kabul, but neither of them had said what year. 
Strange as some of these stories about the ways in which 
people handle time may seem, they become understandable 
when they are correctly analyzed. To do this adequately re-
quires an adequate theory of culture. Before we return to 
the subject of time again-in a much later chapter of this 
book-! hope that I will have provided just such a theory. 
It will not only shed light on the way time is meshed with 
many other aspects of society but will provide a key to 
unlock some of the secrets of the eloquent language of 
culture which speaks in so many different ways. 

chapter 
two 
WH A T 
IS 
C U LT URE? 
Culture is a word that has so many meanings already that 
one more can do it no harm. Before this book is finished I 
will redefine it again- in such a way, I hope, as to clarify 
what has become a very muddied concept. For anthropolo-
gists culture has long stood for the way of life of a people, 
for the sum of their learned behavior patterns, attitudes, and 
material things. Though they subscribe to this general view, 
most anthropologists tend to disagree however, on what the 
precise substance of culture is. In practice their work often 
leads some of them to a fascination with a single category of · 
events among the many which make up human life, and 
they tend to think of this as the essence of all culture. Others, 
looking for a point of stability in the flux of society, often 
become preoccupied with identifying a common particle or 
element which can be found in every aspect of culture. ln 
sum, though the concept of culture was first defined in print 


44 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
in 1871 by E. B. Tylor, after all these years it still lacks the 
rigorous specificity which characterizes many less revolu-
tionary and useful ideas. 
Even more unfortunate is the slowness with which the 
concept of culture has percolated through the public con-
sciousness. Compared to such notions as the unconscious 
or repression, to use two examples from psychology, the idea 
of culture is a strange one even to the informed citizen. 
The reasons for this are well worth noting, for they suggest 
some of the difficulties which are inherent in the culture 
concept itself. 
From the beginning, culture has been the special province 
of the anthropologist, who usually gained a firsthand experi-
ence of its pervasive power in the field during the internship 
which follows the prescribed period of classroom training. 
As the fledgling anthropologist moved deeper and deeper 
into the life of the people he was studying he inevitably 
acquired the conviction that culture was real and not just 
something dreamed up by the theoretician. Moreover, as he 
slowly mastered the complexities of a given culture he was 
apt to feel that they could be understood in no other way 
than by prolonged experience; and that it was almost 
impossible to communicate this understanding to anyone 
who had not lived through the same experience. 
This frame of mind alone would have been enough to 
isolate the growing skills of the anthropologist from the 
everyday society about him which might have well used his 
special insights and knowledge. But there were other reasons 
too. What technical training the anthropologists had was 
rather lengthy and detailed. It concerned subjects which 
seemed to have little relevance to the problems of the lay-
man engrossed in his own little society. Moreover, until the 
last war few Americans had even heard of the places the 
anthropologists frequented or the people they studied, who 

WHAT IS CULTURE? I 
45 
were generally small isolated populations with little place in 
the power politics of the modern world. There seemed to be 
no ''practical" value attached to either what the anthropolo-
gist did or what he made of his discoveries. Except for a 
certain curiosity or nostalgia which might be satisfied, what 
point was there in studying the American Indian, who was 
usually viewed as the romantic red man, a remnant of the 
days long gone, or as an embarrassing reminder that there 
had been a time when Americans were ruthless with those 
who stood in the way of progress? Despite an occasional 
flurry of popular interest, anthropology (and the culture con-
cept which is at its heart) was long associated in men's 
minds with subject matter and individuals who are far re-
moved from the realities of the everyday world of business 
and politics. Though it still persists in some quarters, this 
viewpoint was at its strongest up until the time of the early 
1930s. 
T he depression changed many things. It led to the peace-
ful introduction of many ideas which had been considered 
revolutionary. One was the application of social science 
theory and techniques to the mundane problems of the 
nation's domestic economy. Anthropologists, for example, 
were suddenly called from their academic refuge and put to 
work trying to relieve some of the more pressing burdens of 
the nation's minority groups. 
Among this long-suffering population were the Indians, 
living miserably depressed lives on reservations as wards of 
the government. Most of these Indians had neither the 
dignity of their old ways nor the advantages of the now 
dominant society that surrounded them. Up to this point . 
it had been the government's policy to treat all the different 
tribes alike, as if they were ignorant and somewhat stubborn · 
children- a mistake which is yet to be really rectified. A body 
of custom had grown up in the government's Indian Service 

WH.I\T IS CULTURE? I 47 
we tried to point it out our explanations didn't make sense. 
Most of our attempts were anecdotal and very little was 
specific. 
Apart from having problems with laymen who often did 
not really care about a definition of culture, we had certain 
methodological difficulties in the field itself. The most 
pressing one was consistency of basic information. Field 
workers would record their interpretations of what inform-
ants told them, but if someone else visited the same group 
and interviewed a different set of informants or even the 
same informants (a practice frowned upon by anthropolo-
gists) the second man would usually come back with a 
different set of interpretations. There was no. way to gather 
data that could be legitimately checked, no way to reproduce 
field procedures, no way to equate an event in culture A 
with culture B except to try to describe each and then say 
that they were different. It was difficult, if not impossible, 
to say in precise terms what it was that made one culture 
really different from another, except to point out that there 
were people who raised sheep· and others who gathered food; 
that there were those who hunted and those who cultivated 
plants; that people worshiped different gods and organized 
their societies in varying ways. The anthropologist knew 
that there were even more profound differences, but his 
readers and often the very officials he was advising preferred 
to ignore them. Without being quite aware of it these well-
meaning gentlemen assumed a naively evolutionary view . 
which classified most foreigners as "underdeveloped Ameri-
cans." 
Even now, when the populations of the so-called "under-
developed" areas balk at the introduction of new techniques 
of health and agriculture by the Americans, they are thought 
to be backward and stubborn, or thought to be led by grasp-
ing leaders who have no concern for their people's welfare. 

46 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
as to how to "handle" Indians and Indian problems. Like 
the State Department's Foreign Service, the Indian Service 
transferred its employees from post to post so often that they 
could put in a lifetime of service without learning anything 
about the people they were administering. The bureaucracy 
that grew up was more oriented toward the problems of the 
employees than those of the Indians. Under such conditions 
it was almost impossible to introduce the disturbing anthro-
pological idea that the Indians were deeply and significantly 
different from European-Americans, for that would have 
threatened to upset the bureaucratic applecart. Though the 
treatment of the Indians by the government still leaves much 
to be desired, it has been vastly improved during the years in . 
which trained anthropologists have worked on the reserva-
tions. 
In World War II many anthropologists such as myself 
were not only put to work on various projects having to do 
with the natives of the Southwest Pacific but were even 
asked to deal with the Japanese. Under the pressure of war 
some of the advice we gave was heeded-though, like many 
wartime innovations, much that was done was forgotten in 
the peace that followed. 
However, the field work which anthropologists did as pure 
research, plus the applied projects on which we worked, was 
not entirely wasted. If this rich experience taught us one 
thing it was that culture is more than mere custom that 
can be shed or changed like a suit of clothes. The people 
we were advising kept bumping their heads against an 
invisible barrier, but they did not know what it was. We 
knew that what they were up against was a completely dif-
ferent way of organizing life, of thinking, and of conceiving 
the underlying assumptions about the family and the state, 
the economic system, and even of man himself. The big 
problem was how to communicate this brute fact. When 

48 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
Leaders were usually blamed and sometimes even accused 
of coercing their people to resist innovation because it would 
break their stranglehold on the economy. 
Unfortunately some of these things are true, and they 
offer a convenient excuse for this country's failures abroad 
on the technical assistance, military aid, and diplomatic 
fronts. Most of our difficulties stem from our own ignorance. 
Honest and sincere men in the field continue to fail to grasp 
the true significance of the fact that culture controls behavior 
in deep and persisting ways, many of which are outside of 
awareness and therefore beyond conscious control of the 
individual. When the anthropologist stresses this point he is 
usually ignored, for he is challenging the deepest popular 
American beliefs about ourselves as well as foreigners. He 
leads people to see things they might not want to see. 
Moreover, as I have pointed out, the solemn strictures 
of the anthropologist to the layman who might make use of 
his insights lack the necessary concreteness. There is no way 
to teach culture in the same way that language is taught. 
Until recently no one had defined any basic units of culture. 
There was no generally agreed upon underlying theory of 
culture-no way of being specific-no way forB to get to the 
field and check A's results. Even today a volume examining 
the various concepts and theories of culture, written by the 
nation's two most distinguished anthropologists, A. L. 
Kroeber and Clyde Kluckhohn, calls for such qualities as 
"empathy" in the investigator. The authors also state that 
no constant elemental units of culture have as yet been sat-
isfactorily established. 
This state of affairs had been a source of irritation for a 
number of years, and it drove me to work toward an inte-
grated theory of culture which would overcome the short-
comings I have just sketched. In 1951, when I came to 
Washington to train Point Four technicians, I had a very 

WHAT IS CULTURE? I 49 
practical reason for pressing this work toward a tangible 
conclusion. Prior to this time I had been teaching at a uni-
versity and a small college. College students are content to 
take subjects for their general interest. Point Four techni-
cians and Foreign Service officers, on the other hand, are ex-
pected to go overseas and get results, and they have to be well 
prepared. In general I found that they are not too interested 
in the anthropologist's preoccupation with "what culture is" 
and tend to become impatient unless they have been abroad 
previously and have had some actual experience. Foreign 
Service officers in particular used to take great delight in say-
ing that what the anthropologists told them about working 
with the Navajo didn't do them much good, for we didn't 
have an embassy on the Navajo reservation. Unfortunately 
the theory we were able to bring to bear at the time I began 
working in Washington simply had no relevance to the opera-
tor in the field. His defenses were too well entrenched and 
we could show him no compelling reasons to change. Ad-
ditional harassment caine from the government administra-
tors who failed to grasp the fact that there was something 
really different about overseas operation; that what was 
needed was something bold and new, not just more of the 
same old history, economics, and politics. 
Those Foreign Service officers and other trainees who did 
take seriously what they heard and managed to make some-
thing out of it came up against another problem. They 
would say, "Yes, I can see that you have something there. 
Now I'm going to Damascus. Where can I read something 
that will help me to do business with the Arabs?" We were 
stumped! If they were going to Japan we could tell them to 
read Ruth Benedict's excellent book, The Chrysanthemum 
and the Sword, with the caution that it was for background 
only and they shouldn't expect to find conditions exactly 
like those that Benedict described. Of course the remarkable 

WHAT IS CULTURE? I 
51 
. turely the rigors of formal mathematics and the "scientific 
method." Our view was that it was necessary for anthro-
pology to develop its own methodology adapted to its own 
subject matter. 
This book outlines both a theory of culture and a theory 
of how culture came into being. It treats culture in its 
entirety as a form of communication. 
It sketches in the biological roots from which most if not 
all of culture grew and outlines the ten basic foci of activity 
that combine to produce culture. Chapters Three and Four 
describe how man experiences things on three different 
levels, how he communicates to his children in three ways 
while in the process of rearing them, how he alternates be-
·tween three different types of awareness or consciousness 
and embues each experience with three different types of 
emotional overtones. I have called this crl}cial trio the 
formal, informal, and technical. An understanding of what 
these terms mean is basic to an understanding of the rest of 
the book. Since man progresses from formal belief to in-
formal adaptation and finally to technical analysis, a theory 
of change is also implied in this tripartite division which is 
at the heart of my theory. 
The next chapters (Five through Eight) specify and deal 
with the communication spectrum. Little is said about mass-
communication media such as the press, radio, and tele-
vision, which are the instruments used to extend man's 
senses. Rather these chapters are focused on one main as: 
pect of communication, the ways in which man reads mean-
ing into what other men do. Language is the most technical 
of. the message systems: It is used as a model for the analysis 
of the others. In addition to language there are other ways in 
which man communicates that either reinforce or deny what 
he has said with words. Man learns to read different seg-
ments of a communication spectrum covering events of a 

so I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
thing about Benedict's book was that, while she had never 
been to Japan and could only work with Japanese who were 
in the United States (the book was written during the war), 
it showed extraordinary insight into the psychological proc-
esses of the Japanese. It is one of the best pieces of evidence 
that the anthropologist has something crucial and practical 
to say if he can only systematize it. 
Just about this time George L. Trager and I began our 
collaboration to develop a method for the analysis of culture. 
Our ultimate objectives included five basic steps. 
1. To identify the building blocks of culture-what we 
later came to call the isolates of culture, akin to the notes 
in a musical score. 
2 . To tie these isolates into a biological base so that they 
could be compared among cultures. We also stipulated that 
this comparison be done in such a way that the conditions 
be repeatable at will. Without this, anthropology can lay 
no claim to being a science. 
3· To build up a body of data and a methodology that 
would enable us to conduct research and teach each cultural 
situation in much the same way that language is taught 
without having to depend upon such qualities as "empathy" 
in the researcher. 
4· To build a unified theory of culture that would lead 
us to further research. 
5· Finally, to find a way to make our discipline tangibly 
useful to the non·specialist. 
Trager and I felt that much of the preoccupation of 
anthropologists with statistics was having a stultifying effect 
on our discipline and that the methodologies and theories 
borrowed from sociology, psychology, and other biological 
and physical sciences had been ineptly used. In many in-
stances social scientists, under pressure from physical 
scientists, have been virtually panicked into adopting prema-

52 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
fraction of a second up to events of many years. This book 
deals with only a small part of this spectrum. Other chapters 
describe the content of messages of the man-to-man variety 
and how they are put together. 
The final chapters are a more detailed analysis of time 
and space. Time, that silent language which was sketched 
so broadly in the first chapter, is analyzed in more detail 
as an example of one of the types of primary message 
systems. Chapter Eleven deals with space (territoriality) as 
communication. 
If this book has a message it is that we must learn to 
understand the "out-of-awareness" aspects of communica-
. tion. We must never assume that we are fully aware of what 
we communicate to someone else. There exists in the world 
today tremendous distortions in meaning as men try to 
communicate with one another. The job of achieving 
understanding and insight into mental processes of others 
is much more difficult and the situation more serious than 
most of us care to admit. 
Up to this point I have talked primarily of problems that 
have grown out of attempts to teach others to apply anthro-
pological knowledge to foreign relations. I have also empha-
sized the need for more systematic understanding of local 
culture on the part of our citizens who are working abroad. 
The average reader who hasn't lived abroad, who finds the 
work of the diplomat and the Point Four technician 
exceedingly remote, may be inclined to ask, "What's this 
got to do with me?" This point touches on the ultimate 
purpose of this book, which is to reveal the broad extent to 
which culture controls our lives. Culture is not an exotic 
notion studied by a select group of anthropologists in the 
South Seas. It is a mold in which we are all cast, and it 
controls our daily lives in many unsuspected ways. In my 
discussion of culture I will be describing that part of man's 

WHAT IS CULTURE? I 
53 
behavior which he takes for granted-the part he doesn't 
think about, since he assumes it is universal or regards it as 
idiosyncratic. 
Culture hides much more than it reveals, and strangely 
enough what it hides, it hides most effectively from its own 
participants. Years of study have convinced me that the real 
job is not to understand foreign culture but to understand 
our own. I am also convinced that all that one ever gets from 
studying foreign culture is a token understanding. The ulti-
mate reason for such study is to learn more about how one's 
own system works. The best reason for exposing oneself to 
foreign ways is to generate a sense of vitality and awareness-
an interest in life which can come only when one lives 
through the shock of contrast and difference. 
Simply learning one's own culture is an achievement of 
gargantuan proportions for anyone. By the age of twenty-five 
or thirty most of us have finished school, been married, 
learned to live with another human being, mastered a job, 
seen the miracle of human birth, and started a new human 
being well on his way to growing up. Suddenly most of what 
we have to learn is finished. Life begins to settle down. 
Yet man's tremendous brain has endowed him with a 
drive and a capacity for learning which appear to be as strong 
as the drive for food or sex. This means that when a middle-
aged man stops learning he is often left with a great drive 
and highly developed capacities. If he goes to live in another 
culture, the learning process is often reactivated. For most 
Americans tied down at home this is not possible. To fore- · 
stall atrophy of his intellectual powers man can begin 
learning about those areas of his own culture which have 
been out of awareness. He can explore the new frontier. 
The problem which is raised in talking about American 
culture without reference to other cultures is that an audi-
ence tends to take the remarks personally. I once addressed 

WHAT IS CULTURE? I 
55 
For those who are familiar with the subject the remarks 
I have just made should be a clear indication that what 
follows is not simply a rehash of what previous writers on 
the subject of culture have said. The approach is new. It 
involves new ways of looking at things. Indians and natives 
of the South Pacific, the hallmarks of most anthropological 
texts, are used. However, they are introduced solely to clarify 
points about our own way of life, to make what we take for 
granted stand out in perspective. Some of what appears 
between these covers has been presented before in short 
articles in technical journals by either Trager or myself. Most 
of it is presented to the public for the first time. The com-
plete theory of culture as communication is new and has 
not been presented in one place before. If the reader is look-
ing for a book on strange customs, he will be sorely disap-
pointed. This book stresses more than anything else, not 
what people talk about, but what people do and the hidden 
rules that govern people. 
Some of what follows will make the reader self-conscious. 
He will discover that he is conveying ta others things that 
he never dreamed he was revealing. In some instances he will 
learn things that he has been hiding from himself. The 
language of culture speaks as clearly as the language of 
dreams Freud analyzed, but, unlike dreams, it cannot be 
kept to oneself. When I talk about culture I am not just 
talking about something in the abstract that is imposed on 
man and is separate from him, but about man himself, about 
you and me in a highly personal way. 

54 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
a group of school principals on the subject of culture. We 
were discussing the need for Americans to progress in their 
jobs, to get ahead, and to receive some recognition so that 
they would know in a tangible way that they were actually 
getting someplace. One of the audience said to me, "Now 
you are talking about something interesting, you're talking 
about me." When the man in the audience learned some-
thing about himself, the study of culture got lost in the 
shuffie. He did not seem to realize that a significant propor-
tion of the material which was highly personal to him was 
also relevant cultural data. 
A knowledge of his own culture would have helped this 
same man in a situation which he subsequently described 
for the audience. In the middle of a busy day, it seems, his 
son had kept him waiting for an hour. As a result he was 
aware that his blood pressure had risen rather dangerously. 
If both the father and the son had had a cultural perspective 
on this common and infuriating occurrence the awkward 
quarrel which followed might have been avoided. Both 
father and son would have benefited if the father had 
understood the cultural basis of his tension and explained, 
"Now, look here. If you want to keep me waiting, O.K., but 
you should know it is a real slap in the face to anyone to be 
kept waiting so long. If that's what you want to communi-
cate, go ahead, but be sure you know that you are communi-
cating an insult and don't act like a startled fawn if people 
react accordingly." 
The best reason for the layman to spend time studying 
culture is that he can learn something useful and enlighten-
ing about himself. This can be an interesting process, at 
times harrowing but ultimately rewarding. One of the most 
effective ways to learn about oneself is by taking seriously 
the cultures of others. It forces you to pay attention to those 
details of life which differentiate them from you. 


chapter 
three 
THE 
VOCABULARY 
OF 
CULTURE 
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's success with his creation, Sherlock 
Holmes, is largely attributable to the fact that Holmes knew 
how to make the most of non-verbal communication and 
extracted the maximum from what he observed. The follow-
ing excerpt from "A Case of Identity" aptly illustrates this 
point. 
He had risen from his chair and was standing between 
the parted blinds, gazing down into the dull neutral-
tinted· London street. Looking over his shoulder, I saw 
that on the pavement opposite there stood a large woman 
with a heavy fur boa around her neck, and a large curling 
red feather in a broad-.brimmed hat which was tilted in 

THE VOCABULARY OF CULTURE I 
59 
say very much to get his point across; a nod of the head 
or a grunt as he leaves the store is sufficient. People take 
him as he is. On the other hand, strangers disturb him, 
not because their mannerisms are different, but because he 
knows so little about them. When Jones meets a stranger, 
communication, which is normally as natural as breathing, 
suddenly becomes difficult and overly complex. 
Most of us move around so much these days that we 
seldom achieve that comfortable stage that Jones has 
reached with his cronies-though there are always enough 
familiar landmarks around so that we are never at a total 
loss for orientation. Yet in many cases people who move 
from one part of the country to another require several years 
before they are really worked into the new area and feel 
completely at ease. Not only do Americans engage in a con-
stint internal migration, but a million and a half of us are 
Jiving overseas in foreign surroundings and the number is 
increasing each year. Jones's anxieties when he meets an 
unfamiliar person or environment are trivial compared to 
what our overseas travelers go through when they land on 
foreign soil. At first, things in the cities look pretty much 
alike. There are taxis, hotels with hot and cold running 
water, theaters, neon lights, even tall buildings with elevators 
and a few people who speak English. But pretty soon the 
American discovers that under.neath the familiar exterior 
there are vast differences. When someone says "yes" it often 
doesn't mean yes at all, and when people smile it doesn't 
always mean that they are pleased. When the American--
visitor makes a helpful gesture he may be rebuffed; when he · · 
tries to be friendly nothing happens. People tell him they 
will do things and don't. The longer he stays, the more 
enigmatic the new country looks, until finally he begins to 
learn to observe new cues that reinforce or negate the words 
people are saying with their mouths. He discovers that even 

5s 1 
THE siLENT LANGUAGE 
a coquettish Duchess of Devonshire fashion over her ear. 
From under this great panoply she peeped up in a nervous, 
hesitating fashion at our windows, while her body oscil-
lated backward and forward, and her fingers fidgeted with 
her glove buttons. Suddenly, with a plunge, as of the 
swimmer who leaves the bank, she hurried across the road 
and we heard the sharp clang of the bell. 
'1 have seen those symptoms before," said Holmes, 
throwing his cigarette into the fire. "Oscillation upon the 
pavement always means an affaire de coeur. She would 
like advice, but is not sure that the matter is not too 
delicate for communication. And yet even here we may 
discriminate. When a woman has been seriously wronged 
by a man she no longer oscillates, and the usual symptom 
is a broken bell wire. Here we may take it that there is a 
love matter, but that the maiden is not so much angry as 
perplexed, or grieved. But here she comes in person to 
resolve our doubts." 
Sir Arthur made explicit a highly complex process which 
many of us go through without knowing that we are in-
volved. Those of us who keep our eyes open can read 
volumes into what we see going on around us. The citize~s 
of a typical American farming community, for example, do 
not have to be told why old Mr. Jones is going to town. 
They know that every other Thursday he makes a trip to the 
druggist to get his wife a bottle of tonic and that after that 
he goes around to the feed store, visits with Charley, drops 
in to call on the sheriff, and then goes home in time for the 
noonday meal. Jones, in turn, can also tell whenever any-
thing is bothering one of his friends, and the chances are 
that he will be able to figure out precisely what it is. He 
feels comfortable in his way of life because most of the 
time he "knows what the score is." He doesn't have to 

6o 1 THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
Sherlock Holmes would be helpless in a country so different 
as Japan and that only his Japanese counterpart could play 
such a role. 
At this point the American abroad may either burst with 
exasperation and try to withdraw as much as he can from the 
foreign life about him or begin to wonder, rather shrewdly, 
about what he must do to escape a frustrating comedy of 
errors. If he is charitable he may even begin to reflect on 
how he can help a new arrival avoid the wearing experience 
of doing all the wrong things. This can be the beginning of 
cultural wisdom, for it leads to systematic thinking about 
the learning process which nearly everyone goes through as 
he becomes familiar with a new culture. 
In pursuing this problem of how one culture differs from 
another and how one can communicate this difference in 
general terms I first decided that there was no single toueh-
stone which could be used to explain any given culture. In 
this I found myself in disagreement with many anthro-
pologists who look upon culture as a single category. I was 
led to my conclusion by the realization that there is no break 
between the present, in which man acts as a culture-
producing animal, and the past, when there were no men 
and no cultures. There is an unbroken continuity between 
the far past and the present, for culture is bio-basic- rooted 
in biological activities. Infra-culture is the term which can 
be given to behavior that preceded culture but later became 
elaborated by man into culture as we know it today. Ter-
ritoriality is an example of an infra-cultural activity. It has 
to do with the way in which territory is claimed and de-
fended by everything from fish to lions to modern man. 
By going back to infra-culture it is possible to demonstrate 
that the complex bases- mainly biological- upon which hu-
man behavior have been built were laid down at different 
times in the history of evolution. Trager and I also reasoned 

. ;. . 
THE VOCABULARY OF CULTURE I 
6~ 
that the number of infra-cultural bases were probably very 
few and that they probably led to very different types of 
activities, things that on the surface bore little or no apparent 
relationship to each other. 
Since culture is learned, it also seemed clear that one 
should be able to teach it. Yet in the past there had been 
singularly little success in this regard with the important 
exception of language, one of the dominant threads in all 
cultures. Dramatic progress in teac:hing, analyzing, and 
working with language made possible by modern linguistic 
science prompted us to take a very careful look at how this 
success had been achieved. Our observations led to the 
establishment of criteria for other systems of culture. In 
order to qualify as a cultural system, each system had to be: 
A. Rooted in a biological activity widely shared with 
other advanced living forms. It was essential that there be 
no breaks with the past. 
B. Capable of analysis in its own terms without refer-
ence to the other systems and so organized that it contained 
isolated components that could be built up into more 
complex units, and paradoxically-
C. So constituted that it reflected all the rest of culture 
and was reflected in the rest of culture. 
These criteria are operational. That is, they are based on 
direct observation of the actual functioning of a cultural 
system, in this case language. The criteria, from an anthro-
pological point of view, are firm. There are ten separate 
kinds of human activity y;hich I have labeled Primary Mes'-' 
sage Systems ( PMS). Only the first PMS involves language. 
All the other PMS are non-linguistic forms of the com-
munication process. Since each is enmeshed in the others, 
one can start the study of culture with any one of the ten 
and eventually come out with a complete picture. The 
Primary Message Systems are: 

THE VOCABULARY OF CULTURE I 
63 
complex organisms are in reality societies of cells, most of 
which have highly specialized functions, and that the first 
associations along this line were between cells that banded 
together in colonies. Association, therefore, begins when 
two cells have joined. 
Years ago psychologists attracted considerable attention 
with their descriptions of the "pecking order" of chickens. 
It will be remembered that in each flock there is always 
one chicken that pecks all the others but does not get pecked 
by any others, and at the bottom there is one that gets pecked 
by all the rest. Between the extremes the flock is arranged 
in an orderly progression ranging from the one that is second 
from the bottom and has only one chicken it can peck, up 
to the '#2 bird, who is pecked only by the leader. As it 
happens, all living things arrange their lives in some sort of · 
recognizable pattern of association. Chickens have a peck 
order, horses a "kick~bite" order. In some cases a rigidly 
ordered hierarchy is replaced by another form of association. 
Konrad Lorenz describes two different patterns of associa-
tion in his descriptions of dogs. These patterns are based on 
the ancestral behavior of wolves and jackals. The wolves have 
a very highly developed loyalty to the pack as well as to the 
leader, which is established early and persists through life. 
Jackals, on the other hand, seem to form much more loosely 
knit associations that are situational in character. They do 
not have the loyalty of the wolf either to the leader or to the 
pack. They are much more fickle, quicker to make friends, 
and less loyal over the long haul. 
Other forms of association can be seen in flocks of sheep, 
herds of deer or cattle, schools of fish, paired relationships 
of some birds and mammals like the lion and the goose, 
and the family of the gorilla. Associational patterns persist 
over long periods of time, and if they change at all it is 
because of very strong pressure from the enviroximent: The 

62 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
1. Interaction 
2. Association 
3- Subsistence 
4· Bisexuality 
5· Territoriality 
6. Temporality 
7· Learning 
8. Play 
9· Defense 
10. Exploitation (use of materials) 
In ·discussing the PMS one by one I will stress three 
things: How biology pervades each PMS, how each can be 
examined by itself, and how each gears into the over-all 
network of culture. 
1. Interaction has its basis in the underlying irritability 
of all living substance. To interact with the environment 
is to be alive, and to fail to do so is to be dead. Beginnjng 
with the basic irritability of the simplest life forms, inter-
action patterns become more complex as they ascend the 
philogenetic scale. 
One of the most highly elaborated forms of interaction 
is speech, which is reinforced by tone of voice and gesture. 
Writing is a special form of interaction which uses a particu-
lar set of symbols. and specially developed forms. In ad-
dition to the well-known linguistic interaction there are 
specialized versions for each PMS. Man interacts with others 
as a function of living in groups (association). Time and 
space are dimensions in which interaction takes place. 
Teaching, learning, play, and defense also represent spe-
cialized forms of interaction. 
Ultimately everything man does involves interaction 
with something else. Interaction lies at the hub of the 
universe of culture and everything grows from it. 
2. Association. It is easy to forget that the bodies of 

64 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
famous anthropologist, Ralph Linton, pointed out that lions 
in Kenya used to hunt singly or in pairs. When game became 
scarce they took up hunting in packs. The interesting thing 
is that each lion had a function associated with his role in 
the group. The procedure was for the lions to form a large 
circle, leaving one of their number in the center. By roaring 
and closing in they would drive the game toward the middle, 
where it could be killed by the single lion. Changes in 
association of this sort anticipate the kind of adaptive 
behavior man exhibits. 
Man's elaborations on the simpler mammalian base are 
so complex and varied that only their grosser outlines have 
been analyzed and described. What I am dealing with here 
are the various ways in which societies and their components 
are organized or structured. 
The interrelation of the PMS of association and language 
is exemplified in the varieties of dialects of social classes. 
Other examples: the tone of voice of a person when he is 
acting as a leader; the very special elaboration of status and 
deference forms developed by the Japanese to fit their 
highly structured hierarchies; in our own society the defer-
ential ways of talking to individuals who are ranked higher 
in work or status situations (nurses to doctors, privates to 
captains, captains to generals, etc.). 
3· Subsistence. Like the other PMS, subsistence is basic 
and dates back to the very beginning of life. One of the 
first things anyone has to know about any living thing is 
its nutritional requirements; what does it eat and how does 
it go about getting food in its natural state? Man has elabo-
rated this matter of feeding himself, working, and making a 
living in the same way he has elaborated the other PMS. 
Included in the PMS of subsistence is everything from 
individual food habits to the economy of a country. Not 

THE VOCABULARY OF CULTURE I 
65 
only are people classified and dealt with in terms of diet, 
but each society has its own characteristic economy. 
In regard to the relationship of subsistence to the other 
PMS, one has only to mention such things as the special 
language behavior at meals. There are strict taboos covering 
discussion at the table of topics such as sex or the bodily 
functions. Then there are the special vocabulary and usage 
that have grown up around each occupation and profession, 
each a highly specialized form of subsistence. Work is of 
course always ranked, fitting very closely into the existing 
patterns of association. What is ranked high in one culture, 
however, may be ranked very low in the next. This is one of 
the many points which constantly confront an American 
abroad, whether he is in a government technical assistance 
program, an industrial operation, or traveling as a tourist. 
Americans attach no stigma to work with the hands, but 
in many other cultures manual labor is considered to be un-
dignified, a sign of low status. This difference alone creates 
innumerable difficulties and delays. Sometimes the role of 
the American is misinterpreted when he "pitches in" or 
demonstrates how something is to be done. On other oc-
casions the local nationals simply refuse to have anything to 
do with an occupation that is ranked so low that it has to be . 
done with the hands. For years throughout Latin America 
nursing was retarded beeause it ranked so near the bottom o:f 
the scale that only uneducated girls would become nurses. 
The handling of bedpans as well as many other duties nor-
mally linked with nursing were considered menial and dirt y. 
Similarly, attempts to teach industrial safety in Latin 
America foundered on cultural reefs when it was discovered 
that safety engineers had to wear coveralls and "demon-
strate" safety measures on machines in the plant. 
4· Bisexuality. Sexual reproduction and differentiation of 
both form and function along sex lines (bisexuality) is also 

THE VOCABULARY OF CULTURE I 
67 
way the American views them. In Latin America both sexes 
expect their will power to be provided by other people rather 
than by personal inhibition. 
In Iran one encounters another variation of the Pl\1S 
of bisexuality. Men are expected to show their emotions-
take Mossadegh's tantrums. If they don't, Iranians suspect 
they are lacking a vital human trait and are not dependable. 
Iranian men read poetry; they are sensitive and have well-
developed intuition and in many cases are not expected to 
be too logical. They are often seen em bracing and holding 
hands. Women, on the other hand, are considered to be 
coldly practical. They exhibit many of the characteristics we 
associate with men in the United States. A very perceptive 
Foreign Service officer who had spent a number of years 
in Iran once observed, "If you will think of the emotional 
and intellectual sex roles as reversed from ours, you will do 
much better out here." 
Remarks like this come as a shock to many people, be-
cause almost everyone has difficulty believing that behavior 
they have always associated with "human nature" is not 
human nature at all but learned behavior of a particularly 
complex variety. Possibly one of the many reasons why the 
culture concept has been resisted is that it throws doubts on 
many established beliefs. Fundamental beliefs like our con-
cepts of masculinity and femininity ar~ shown to vary widely 
from one culture to the next. It is easier to avoid the idea 
of the culture concept than to face up to it. 
Speech and sex are linked in obvious ways. Let the reader; .,· 
if he doubts this, start talking like a member of the op-
posite sex for a w bile and see how long people let him get 
away with it. Sex and territory are also intermingled. For 
many birds there are breeding grounds, nesting territories, 
and, for many species, areas defended by males against other 
males. For humans there are places where the behavior of 

66 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
deeply rooted in the past. Its primary function can best be 
explained in terms of a need to supply a variety of combina-
tions of genetic background as a means of meeting changes 
in the environment. Without sex, progeny follow only one 
line and maintain one set of characteristics. In man the 
combinations of genes are practically unlimited. 
People who have had anything to do with animals know 
how basic sexual differences are within a species. One of 
the first things that must be known about an animal is 
whether it is the male or female of the species. The fact 
that behavior in animals is predominately sex-linked has led 
to certain misconceptions concerning the role of sex in man. 
It is a great mistake to assume that the behavior which is 
observed in man is linked to physiology. Studies of culture 
have shown us that this is usually not the case. Behavior 
that is exhibited by men in one culture may be classed as 
feminine in another. All cultures differentiate between men 
and women, and usually when a given behavior pattern be-
comes associated with one sex it will be dropped by the 
other. 
In much of Latin America it was long thought that a 
man could not possibly suppress the strong urges that took 
possession of him every time he was alone with a woman. 
Women, of course, were considered unable to resist a man. 
The result was that the patterns of association contained 
safeguards and protective measures. Americans who were 
going to Latin America had to be cautioned that if they let 
themselves get into a situation with a member of the op-
posite sex where something could have happened, it would 
be no use to tell people that it had not. The Latin response 
would be, "After all, you're a man, aren't you? She's a 
woman, isn't she?" The point the Americans couldn't get 
through their heads was that these people really considered 
that men and women were constituted differently from the 

68 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
the sexes toward each other is prescribed, like the parlor or 
the bedroom. We can see an intermingling of sex and ter-
ritory in pool halls or in the old-time saloon from which 
"ladies" were excluded. 
Time also enters the picture, dating back to the era when 
there were mating seasons for many species. Man, having 
freed himself from the limitations formerly imposed by 
biology, has burdened himself with many more, including 
those having to do with the determination of the age at 
which heterosexual relations are supposed to begin. Mali-
nowski, when he described the Trobriand Islanders, told how 
the sex life of the Trobriander is usually in full progress at 
the ages of six to eight for girls and ten to twelve for boys. 
5· Territoriality. Territoriality is the technical term used 
by the ethologist to describe the taking possession, use, and 
defense of a territory on the part of living organisms. Birds 
have recognizable territories in which they feed and nest; 
carnivorous animals have areas in which they hunt; bees 
have places in which they search for honey, and man uses 
space for all the activities in which he engages. The balance 
of life in the use of space is one of the most delicate of 
nature. Territoriality reaches into every nook and cranny of 
life. When they are in the ring, even the fighting bulls of 
Spain are likely to establish safe territories from which it is 
difficult to get them to move. 
The history of man's past is largely an account of his 
efforts to wrest space from others and to defend space from 
outsiders. A quick review of the map of Europe over the 
past half century reflects this fact. A multitude of familiar 
examples can be found to illustrate the idea of human ter-
ritoriality. Beggars have beats, as do the policemen who try 
to get them to leave, and prostitutes work their own side 
of the street. Salesmen and distributors have their own ter-

THE VOCABULARY OF CULTURE I 69 
. ritories which they will defend like any other living organ-
ism. The symbolism of the phrase "to move in on someone" 
is completely accurate and appropriate. To have a territory 
, is to have one of the essential components of life; to lack 
one is one of the most precarious of all conditions. 
Space (or territoriality) meshes very subtly with the rest 
of culture in many different ways. Status, for example, is 
indicated by the distance one sits from the head of the 
table on formal occasions; shifts take place in the voice as 
one increases the distance (whispering to shouting); there 
are areas for work, play, education, and defense; and there 
are instruments such as rulers, chains, and range finders for 
measuring space and boundaries for everything from a house 
to a state. 
6. Temporality. Temporality, as I have pointed out in the 
·past chapter, is tied into life in so many ways that it is diffi-
cult to ignore it. Life is full of cycles and rhythms, some 
of them related directly to nature- the respiration rate, 
heartbeat, menstrual cycle, and so on. Such practices as age-
grading (dividing society according to rather rigid age 
groups) combine both time and association. Mealtimes, of 
course, vary from culture to culture, as do tempos of speech. 
It should be mentioned that there are students of culture 
who look at everything as a historical process, and there 
can be no doubt that if you know the temporal relationships 
between events you know a tremendous amount. 
7· Learning. Learning assumed primary importance as 
an adaptive mechanism when an unknown common ances-
tor of birds and mammals became warm-blooded at some· 
time either late in the Permian or early Triassic periods, 
over IOo,ooo,ooo years ago. 
Before this time all life's tempo was tied to the tempera-
ture of · the external environment. As the temperature 
dropped, movement slow~d down. This did not represent a 

. t' 
THE VOCABULARY OF CULTURE I 
71 . 
to be forewarned in the absence of an actual demonstration. 
Animals' have no way of symbolically storing their learning 
against future needs. 
Psychologists of late have been preoccupied with learn- · 
ing theory, and one anthropologist, John Gillin, has worked 
learning theory into his text on anthropology. What com-
plicates matters, however, is that people reared in different 
cultures learn to learn differently. Some do so by memory 
and rote without reference to "logic" as we think of it, while 
some learn by demonstration but without the teacher re-
quiring the student to do anything himself while "learn-
ing." Some cultures, like the American, stress doing as a 
principle q.f learning, while others have very little of the 
pragmatic-l'fhe Japanese even guide the hand of the pupil, 
while our teachers usually aren't permitted to touch the other 
person> Education and educational systems are about as 
laden With emotion and as characteristic of a given culture 
as its language. It should not come as a surprise that we 
encounter real opposition to our educational system when 
we make attempts to transfer it overseas. 
Learning to learn differently is something that has to be 
faced every day by people who go overseas and try to train 
local personnel. It seems inconceivable to the average person 
brought up in one culture that something as basic as this 
could be done any differently from the way they themselves 
were taught. The fact is, however, that once people have 
learned to learn in a given way it is extremely hard for them 
to learn in any other way. 
· 
The rest of culture reflects the way one learns, since cul-
ture is "learned and shared behavior." Learning, then, is one 
of the basic activities of life, and educators might have a 
better grasp of their art if they would take a leaf out of the 
book of the early pioneers in descriptive linguistics and 
learn about their subject by studying how other people learn. 

70 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
disadvantage to any given species when all were cold-
blooded, because everything slowed down together. With 
the internalization of temperature controls, the warm-
blooded animals were freed from the restrictions imposed 
upon them by the fluctuations in external temperature. This 
endowed them with a tremendously enhanced survival value, 
enhanced sensory perceptions, and at the same time placed 
a premium on adaptations- such as migrations, nests, lairs, 
etc.- that enabled the organism to cope with temperature 
extremes. 
One result of warm-bloodedness is that it imposes on the 
organism a minimal size below which it cannot fall since 
it would perish of heat loss. When body size falls below 
a certain minimum the increased surface in relation to vol-
ume is such that the animal cannot eat fast enough to keep 
its metabolic fires going. It has been established that a 
fat hummingbird can fly 7·7 hours before its reserve of fat 
( 1 gram ) is consumed. Thin ones would fare less well, while 
some shrews apparently will die of starvation in a few hours. 
With the increase in size associated with warm-blooded-
ness, a ceiling is set on n urn bers. Birds, mammals, and in-
sects have all demonstrated high aptitude for adaptation to 
environmental changes. The insect kingdom compensated 
for the short life span of its members by breeding in enor-
mous numbers. Warm-blooded animals obviously needed 
some other adaptive technique because of their great size, 
long life, and relatively small numbers of offspring. They 
grew to depend more and more on learning as an adaptive 
device. Learning really came into its own as an adaptive 
mechanism when it could be extended in time and space by 
means of language. A fawn can learn about men with guns by 
the reaction of its mother when a man with a gun appears, 
but there is no possible way, lacking language, for that fawn 

72 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
Men like Sapir revolutionized linguistic theory and ulti-
mately language-teaching methods as the direct consequence 
of their having to deal with problems that arose from study-
ing the "primitive" languages. 1The so-called "army method" 
of World War II was deeply influenced by anthropologically 
trained linguistic scientists. So was the current State De-
partment language program:_, 
The educator has much to learn about his own systems 
of learning by immersing himself in those that are so dif-
ferent that they raise questions that have never been raised 
before. Americans in particular have too long assumed that 
the U.S. educational system represents the ultimate in evo-
lution and that other systems are less advanced than our 
own. Even the highly elaborated and beautifully adapted 
educational techniques of Japan have been looked down 
upon. Just why we feel so complacent and smug can be 
explained only by the blindness that culture imposes on its 
members. Certainly there is very little reason for compla-
cency when one looks, not at others, but at ourselves. The 
fact that so many of our children dislike school or finish 
their schooling uneducated suggests that we still have much 
to learn about learning as a process. 
As one watches one's own children grow up and learn, 
one reflects upon the vital role of learning as an agent of 
culture, to say nothing of its strategic place in the mecha-
nism of survival. Any child, from the time it is born, with-
out culture, until the time it is four or five, absorbs what 
goes on around him at a rate which is never equaled again 
in his lifetime. At six to ten children are still going strong, 
provided that the educational system hasn't produced blocks 
to learning. 
Yet the schools are not the only agents responsible for 
education. Parents and older people in general play a part. 
Having learned to learn in a particular fashion, a.dults can 

!f~lt~:;;.~~ 
~i~-' 
THE VOCABULARY OF CULTURE 
/ 
73 
:1<:;". · communicate their prejudices or convictions in a variety of 
._;;:i · subtle and often not so subtle ways. Here is an example 
: _;:. 
of this which has been experienced in one way or another 
by almost everyone who shares in our culture. 
This story begins when a great-grandmother visits her 
; " 
three-year-old great-granddaughter. The child, like most 
three-year-olds, is toddling around and absorbing everything 
that's going on. Apart from eating and sleeping, one of her 
main concerns is to gain control of the communications 
taking place around her in order to be able to interact with 
. others on their own terms. Great-grandmother watches this. 
Something in what she sees makes her anxious. She sits still 
.for a moment and suddenly blurts out without warning and 
in a disapproving tone of voice, "Look at the little copycat. 
. -
.. -Louise, stop that! Don't be such a copycat." By withholding 
approval the great-grandmother was demonstrating one of 
· the principal ways in which learning is directed away from 
conscious imitation, which she obviously disapproves. 
Children, of course, are exceedingly sensitive to this process. 
In order to serve mankind, learning, like sex, cannot run 
wild but has to be channeled and at times directed. There 
is much to learn of the details of how this process works . 
in different cultures, and it is just barely possible that by 
studying others we Americans, who pride ourselves on our 
efficiency, might actually learn things that would help us 
to break our'\.Cducational log jam\Our current approach to 
the teaching of reading is just one of the many obvious de- .. 
fects in American pedagogy. It is a symptom that something 
is wrong with our way of teaching. Instead of being reward-
ing for the child, learning has often become painful and 
difficult. 
On Truk, the atoll in the Southwest Pacific, children are 
permitted to reach the age of nine or ten before anyone 
begins to get technical with them about what they are 

THE VOCABULARY OF CULTURE I 
75 
tell jokes, and if you can learn the humor of a people and 
really control it you know that you are also in control of 
nearly everything else. Many peoples around the world have 
what are known as "joking relationships," and even in our 
own culture there is a category of relationship known as the 
"playmate." There are places and times for play-such as 
recreation rooms in houses and recreation areas in parks-
as well as a vast amusement industry which keeps flourishing. 
Play and learning are intimately intertwined, and it is not 
too difficult to demonstrate a relationship between intelli-
gence and play. Some games like chess and Chinese checkers 
are almost entirely a function of a specific type of intellectual 
development. 
Play and the PMS of defense are also closely related; hu-
mor is often used to protect or hide vulnerabilities. Another 
example of the close relationship between play and defense 
is the practice exercises and maneuvers of the military which 
are spoken of as "war games." 
One of the cardinal features of much western European 
play is that often it involves competition. As a consequence, 
games among the Pueblo of New Mexico, even races, seem 
very strange to us because they may involve an old man and 
a little boy in the same race with young men. The function 
of the race is not to beat someone else but only to "do one's 
very best." In fact, play with us is seldom an autonomous 
activity. In the Old West, to take an extreme example, there 
was often a ce~tain amount of violence associated with play . 
- jokes had an earthy flavor and often hurt or embarrassed 
the butt of the joke. In general,{b.merican humor is a binary 
type of humor, which is either turned on or off. In the Far 
East, however, one encounters a continuum, a wide spec-
trum of subtle degrees of enjoyment) 
. 
·9· Defense. For man and animal alike, defense is a spe-
cialized activity of tremendous importance; The ethologist 

74 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
supposed to know. As the Trukese phrase it, "He doesn't 
know yet, he is only a child." Americans tend to correct 
children rather impatiently. With us, learning is supposed 
to be endowed with a certain amount of pressure so that 
the person who learns fast is valued over the one who learns 
slowly. Some cultures seem to place less emphasis on speed 
and perhaps a little more on learning correctly)On the other 
hand, the current educational mode in the United States is 
to tell the child to guess if he doesn't know the meaning of 
a word. Not very good training for future scientists. 
Americans like to think that children must "understand" 
what they have learned. What happens, of course, is that a 
good deal of material that would be simple enough to learn 
without frills is made more difficult by the complex, and 
often erroneous, explanations that go with it. Somehow the 
fetish of explanation and logic as a process does not seem 
to weigh down the Arab or the Japanese, yet both have made 
singular contributions to the world of science. 
How people learn to learn differently will continue to be 
an area of investigation for some time to come. As it now 
stands, however, these differences represent one of the bar-
riers that have to be overcome each time two people raised 
in different cultures interact over any but the shortest period 
of time. The American will say, "Why can't the South 
Americans learn to be on time?'' or "Why can't the Thai 
learn to boil the water for the ice cubes?" The answer, of 
'course, is because no one taught them in a way which was 
consistent with how they learned everything else in life. 
8. Play. In the course of evolution, play has been a rela-
tively recent and not too well understood addition to living 
processes. It is well developed in mammals but not so easily 
recognizable in birds, and its role as an adaptive mecha-
nism is yet to be pinned down. However, one can say that 
it is interwoven into all of the other PMS. People laugh and 

76 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
studying lower life forms has traditionally examined and 
described the defensive mechanisms of the organisms he 
studies. He may be familiar with these even before he un-
covers such basic things as the details of an animal's diet. 
The opossum plays dead, the lizard changes the color of its 
coat to match the surrounding background, the turtle draws 
into its shell, the skunk deploys its odors and the squid 
its cloud of ink, birds travel in flocks to confuse hawks. 
These are only a few of the defensive devices that can be 
named by any schoolboy. 
Man has elaborated his defensive techniques with astound-
ing ingenuity not only in warfare, but also in religion, medi-
cine, and law enforcement. He has to defend himself not 
only against' potentially hostile forces in nature but against 
those within human society. Moreover, he also has to cope 
with the destructive forces within his own person. Religion 
is concerned with warding off both the dangers in nature and 
within the individual. Law-enforcement agencies have been 
developed to deal with offenders against society, and armies 
are used against other societies. Medicine, too, defends the 
welfare of the groups as well as the individual against disease. 
Since the functions of religion have been more completely 
documented and are more widely understood in the cross-
cultural sense than those of medicine, law enforcement, or 
warfare, it will be treated only briefly. There is, however, one 
main point which should be kept in mind about the way 
different cultures tend to treat religion. With the possible 
exception of the people of the U.S.S.R., Americans have 
tended to compartmentalize religion and to reduce its social 
function more than any other people. The Navajo regard 
many activities, such as medicine, entertainment, sports, 
and science, as religious activities. In the Middle East, 
Islam plays a more pervasive role than Christianity does 
today in Europe. People in the Western world have dif-

'"·~·;}. 
~. 
.~~!·?·:. 
t;,:~-::;·· 
THE VOCABULARY OF CULTURE I 77 
:f ~ <: · ficulty grasping the extent to which religion infiltrates all 
j: · · aspects of life in the Arab world. The content of religion, 
r;;..: its organization, and the manner in which it is integrated 
·. 
with the rest of life varies greatly from culture to culture. 
Medicine varies too as one moves about the globe. 
Though Western medicine has achieved remarkable suc-
cesses, we should not close our minds to the possibilities 
that other systems of healing can prevent untold suffering. 
Scholars have accumulated extensive material on the curing 
practices of other societies. The voodoo of Haiti, medicine 
men of the Navajo, and the herb doctor of the Chinese are 
well known to almost everyone. Like religion, medical prac-
tices are rigidly adhered to and given up only after everything 
else has failed. Basic attitudes toward sickness also differs. 
As Margaret Mead once pointed out, the American has the 
underlying feeling that if he is sick he is bad. The Navajo, 
in turn, rarely blames himself; he feels that if he is sick 
he may have inadvertently stepped on a place that was 
taboo or that a bad person has bewitched him. 
Like medicine, which is a defense against the ravages of 
disease, warfare, which man uses against his human enemies, -
is also held in the tight vise of culture. In many ways it 
-is as ritualistic as religion in its formal patterns. A striking · 
example of this occurred during World War II. Since the 
Japanese cultural system ignored the contingency that 
Japanese troops might be taken alive, it provided no in-
struction for its soldiers as to how they should behave as 
prisoners. The result was that most POWs had no sense of 
·military security, freely responded to interrogation, and co-
operated with their captors to a degree which Europeans 
consider traitorous. In Korea, the American military as-
sumed that U.S. prisoners would act properly even without . 
specific training on how to behave under the stress of cap-
ture. Reports from the Korean War on the behavior of 

·.r -
'.i 
;· 
.t.~ 
THE VOCABULARY OF CULTURE I 
79 
mental conditions. A few examples: the long neck of the 
giraffe (adapted to high foliage of trees), the teeth of the 
saber-toothed tiger, toes of the tree sloth, hoof of the horse, 
and man's opposable thumb. Occasionally organisms have 
developed specialized extensions of their bodies to take the 
place of what the body itself might do and thereby free 
the body for other things. Among these ingenious natural 
developments are the web of the spider, cocoons, nests of 
birds and fish. When man appeared with his specialized 
body, such extension activities came into their own as a 
means of exploiting the environment. 
Today man has developed extensions for practically every-
thing he used to do with his body. The evolution of weapons 
begins with the teeth and the fist and ends with the atom 
bomb. Clothes and houses are extensions of man's bio-
logical temperature-control mechanisms. Furniture takes the 
place of squatting and sitting on the ground. Power tools, 
glasses, TV, telephones, and books which carry the voice 
across both time and space are examples of material ex-
tensions. Money is a way of extending and storing labor. 
Our transportation networks now do what we used to do 
with our feet and backs. In fact, all man-made material 
things can be treated as extensions of what man once did 
with his body or some specialized part of his body. 
Materials and the rest of culture are intimately entwined. 
People sometimes mistake material elaboration or its 
absence for the whole of culture, but, in fact, each Primary 
Message System (PMS) has a material aspect which is 
closely associated with it. Men and women dress differently, 
tools go with work, time and space are measured with in-
struments, there are toys for play, books for learning, and 
even material signs of status. The relationship between ma-
terials and language is particularly close. Not only does each 
material thing have a name, but language and materials are 

78 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
American men who were taken prisoner indicate that 
Americans are quite vulnerable pyschologically. The simple 
rule of "tell 'ern your name, rank, and serial number, nothing 
else," didn't work. Many Americans talked too much. Need-
less numbers died, many defected or were killed, and none 
escaped. The main reason was that they were operating ac-
cording to one culture pattern and were unprepared to cope 
with either the North Korean or Chinese Communist pat-
tern. Most had been led to believe that they would be treated 
very badly by the Communists and were thrown off base 
when they occasionally got "soft" treatment. Small kind-
nesses by Communists became magnified because of the 
physical hardship of prison life. Some Americans assumed 
that because they were prisoners the war was over for them 
and that they were no longer under military control. The 
cultural glue which held their life together-crumbled under 
the pressure which the Communists applied so artfully. On 
their part, the Communists were miscued by the American 
pattern of egalitarianism, the lack of clear-cut class bounda-
ries, and the fact that American leadership has to emerge 
informally for each new situation. When the Communists 
saw American prisoners going to one man with their prob-
lems or to get advice, they would suspect a conspiracy. The 
Communists would then remove this potential leader of 
the group and send him away. As a result, group support, 
sanctions, and controls failed to develop. The Turks fighting 
in Korea fared much better. They simply told the Com-
munists who their leader was and made it clear that, in 
the event of his removal, the next in line would be leader, 
and so on down to the lowliest private. This meant that 
there was always a replacement for any leader the Com-
munists removed. The Turk organization remained intact. 
10. Exploitation. In order to exploit the environment all 
organisms adapt their bodies to meet specialized environ-

8o I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
often handled by man in much the same way. It is im-
possible to think of culture without language or materials. 
Think how difficult it would be to teach someone how to 
make a stone ax without being able to talk at all. At least 
you would need to be able to communicate something that 
stands for "No, not this way, that way." 
One reason for stressing the relationship between lan-
guage and materials is that there has been considerable dis-
cussion among anthropologists as to when language first 
came into being. It is generally accepted that it started a 
long time ago, but it is difficult to say just how long ago. 
My own estimate would be that, because of the intimate 
relationship between language and material culture, verbal 
communication arose at the same time as tool-making, some-
time between 5oo,ooo and 2,ooo,ooo years ago. 
The close relationship between language and materials 
finds parallels in the linkage between other Primary Mes-
sage Systems. For example, association and defense are 
functions of each other (people form "protective associa-
tions," etc.), as are work and play, bisexuality and learning, 
and space and time. Of this group only the relation between 
bisexuality and learning may seem obscure, and then only 
to a member of our own culture. Those who belong to other 
societies may make this connection immediately. In our 
own culture the dividing line between the sexes has become 
fuzzy, but it is still true, even in the United States, that 
what one learns is largely a function of one's sex. If this were 
not true, there would be little cultural difference between 
the sexes. 
By the way of summary, it is important to remember 
that culture is not one thing but a complex series of activi-
ties interrelated in many ways, activities with origins deeply 
buried in a past when there were no cultures and no men. 
The development of language and technology, an interre-

1<1'--
: -~ 
THE VOCABULARY OF CULTURE I 
81 
lated pair, made possible the storing of know ledge. It gave 
man a lever to pry out the secrets of nature. It was the 
necessary condition for that burst of creativeness which we 
think of as culture in the highest sense. Well-developed 
language and technology are somehow closely associated 
with man in his present form, although just how this came 
about is not clearly understood. None of this would have 
been possible if it had not been for the highly evolved infra-
cultural systems elaborated by lower organisms. By the time 
man came along a good deal of evolution basic to culture 
had taken place in the very systems that are thought of as 
most characteristically human. 
Each PMS is obviously so rich and complex that it can 
be made the subject of a lifetime's work. It is embarrass-
ing to deal with such broad and inclusive fields in such a 
summary manner, but to skip over them would be. to de-
prive the reader of a sense of how densely intricate the 
origins of culture are. The last generalization that should be 
made about culture is that it not only has great breadth and 
depth in the historical sense but that it also has other 
dimensions of equal importance. Culture is saturated with 
both emotion and inteiligence. Many things that man does 
are not even experienced, for they are accomplished out-
of-awareness. But a great part of human activity is either 
the direct result of conscious thought or suffused with emo-
tion and feeling. The way behavior-and culture- can be 
divided by the degree of awareness or feeling which attaches · 
to it is the subject of the chapters which foiiow. 

'chapter 
four 
THE 
MAJOR 
TRIAD 
One of the most dramatic and tevolutionary of Freud's 
achievements was his elaborate analysis of the role of the 
unconscious. Those who are familiar with his writings will 
recall how much tim~ he spent trying to convince people 
that such events as a slip of the lip or pen, as well as dreams, 
were all evidence of hidden forces in man over which he 
exercised no conscious control. This revelation of an un~ 
conscious world led to further psychological explorations 
which introduced a new dimension into human behavior .. 
No longer was man considered to be entirely rational, ruled 
by logic. No longer could he be conceived of as an elegantly 
tooled machine run from the higher centers of the brain. 
Man became much less predictable but much more interest~ 
ing when he was viewed as a battleground of conflicting 
drives and emotions, many of them hidden. After Freud it 


84_ I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
became common to think of man as a being who existed on 
a number of different levels at once. 
Freud also relied heavily on the communicative signifi-
cance of man's acts rather than his words. He distrusted the 
spoken word, and a good deal of his thinking was based on 
the assumption that words hid much more than they re-
vealed. He depended more on communication in the larger 
context; on the symbols of dreams and the meaning of 
insignificant events which would ordinarily go unnoticed 
and were therefore not subject to the censors that we all 
have within us. Despite his massive discoveries, what Freud 
really lacked was a theory of communication. Today, years 
after the major part of his theory was laid down, psychoa-
nalysis still lacks a systematic way of describing the events 
of communication which occur between doctor and patient. 
Revolutionary as Freud's conception of the unconscious 
was, his view that it is inaccessible to direct examination 
was a stumbling block to further systematic analysis for a 
time. Among those who did not agree with the Freudian 
scheme was the late Washington psychiatrist, Harry Stack 
Sullivan. Sullivan regarded the unconscious as the !dis-
sociated facet~of the personality that are out of the person's 
awareness. His formulations were of great value to the social 
scientist because they cleared the way for further research. 
Sulliv~n believed that man has an ideal self which he ap-
proves of though it is not realized in everyday life. His 
workaday, actual, operating self is a composite of behavior 
patterns which Sullivan called dynamisms. The dynamisms 
are ways of integrating with other human beings. A person 
is aware of some of them, while others are dissociated and 
therefore hidden to the individual but revealed to the world. 
This notion that there are significant portions of the per-
sonality that exist out of one's own awareness but which 
are there for everyone else to see may seem frightening. The 

THE MAJOR TRIAD I 85 
point, however, is a crucial one and will grow in importance 
as men begin to grasp its implications. What Sullivan said, 
in effect, was that the Gnconscious is not hidden to anyone 
except the individual who hides from himself those parts 
which persons significant to him in his early life have dis-
approved .. /While they are dissociated or hidden from him-
self, they are there for trained observers to see and they 
can therefore be analyzed. 
Sullivan's contribution was a great one. It helped to dispel 
a good deal of psychoanalytic mumbo jumbo, and it opened 
up wide horizons for research into the interpersonal process. 
Both Freud and Sullivan drew heavily on the works of 
anthropologists-Freud indirectly, using anthropology to 
support his views, Sullivan in a more immediate way. Sul-
livan worked actively with the greatest descriptive linguist 
of our time, Edward Sapir, the man who laid the foundations 
·for modern descriptive linguistics. While the psychologists 
were looking to anthropology to learn more about man as a 
social being, the anthropologists were using the theories of 
psychoanalysis in their attempts to formulate more satisfy-
ing theories of culture. One of the most significant of these 
borrowed theories was that culture existed on two levels: 
overt culture, which is visible and easily described, and 
covert culture, which is not visible and presents difficulties 
even to the trained observer. The iceberg analogy was com-
monly used when teaching this theory to students and lay-
men alike. When it soon turned out that this theory was.; 
inadequate to describe the cultural picture, anthropologists .,. 
like Kluckhohn started speaking of explicit and implicit cul-
ture. Explicit culture, such things as law, was what people 
talk a bout and can be specific a bout. Implicit culture, such 
as feelings about success, was what they took for granted or 
what existed on the fringes of awareness. 
Much has been written about the implicit assumptions 

THE MAJOR TRIAD I 87 
has three levels. I have termed these the formal, informal, 
and technical, familiar terms but with new and expanded 
meanings. 
Trager and I arrived at this tripartite theory as a result 
of some rather detailed and lengthy observations as to the 
way in which Americans talk about and handle time. We 
discovered that there were three kinds of time:[formal time_,) 
which everyone knows about and takes for granted and 
which is well worked into daily life;Gnformal time,\ which 
has to do with situational or imprecise references like 
"awhile," "later," "in a minute," and so on; (technical time, ) 
an entirely different system used by scientists and techni-
cians, in which even the terminology may be unfamiliar to 
the non-specialist. Having observed how these time systems 
are used and learned, and knowing something of their his-
tory, we realized that in other areas of his life man also 
approaches activities as formal, informal, or technical. In 
other words, we discovered that man has not two but three 
modes of behavior. Our generalizations about time had 
much broader applications than we originally supposed. 
The sport of skiing offers an excellent example of the 
formal, informal, and technical modes. Some years ago in 
the town of Grand Lake, Colorado, on the snowy western 
slope of the Rockies, there was a tradition that everyone 
had to use skis to get around in the wintertime. New school-
teachers transferred into the area had to learn to ski, and 
even the school principal and the school band were on skis;, 
Small children learned to ski soon after they could walk. 
When one watched these people move about it was as though 
the skis were an actual extension of the foot, a highly 
adapted organ for locomotion. Each person had developed 
·. his own highly individualistic style, just as everyone has his 
own way of walking. When skiing competitions took place 
some of the villagers were better than others, while many 

86 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
of various cultures, including our own. This approach is a 
good one and has been responsible for a number of valuable 
insights. However, the level of abstraction in the implicit-
explicit culture concept is so high that it is impossible to 
build on it easily. The discovery that one of the implicit 
assumptions of American life is that hard work will be re-
warded may explain a good deal about behavior in this 
country, but it is difficult to combine with other similar in-
sights to form a broader generalization of American life. Like 
many othe£ abstractions about culture, this one leaves us 
with the feeling, "Where do we go from here?'' Despite 
its level of abstraction, the view that culture comprises some 
aspects that can be talked about and some that cannot re-
mains a valuable one. It also provides another example of 
how we have come to see behavior on two levels. 
Freud distinguished between conscious and unconscious; 
Sullivan between the in-awareness and out-of-awareness. 
Anthropologists like the late Ralph Linton spoke of overt 
and covert culture; others used terms like implicit and ex-
plicit, which were applied to the assumptions undr:;rlying 
behavior as well as the patterns controlling it. This lpipolar 
way of analyzing events soon spread to other fields)such as 
political science and scientific management. Both disciplines 
adopted the terms formal and informal when describing 
behavior patterns, management procedures, and organiza-
tional structure. The use of these polarized categories made 
it possible to make distinctions which were important and 
which had not been made before. Moreover, they were con-
sistent with the American tendency to see things as op-
posites-in black and white. The ease with which Americans 
tend to polarize their thoughts about events may make it 
difficult for them to embrace an approach which employs 
three categories rather than two. Yet that is what I would 
like to propose here: a theory which suggests that culture 

88 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
did not compete at all. The main thing was that everyone 
skied. No one questioned the fact that this was desirable. 
Skiing was taken for granted as a part of the daily life of 
the town; it was, to use the term which will reappear in 
these pages again and again, a formal tradition. 
At the same time, there were a few hardy souls in Denver 
and other nearby towns who used to take to skis for pleasure, 
as a part-time activity. There was no pressure on these per-
sons to ski. They simply liked to get out in the open. Some 
of them had very real talent, others weren't so skilled. This 
group skied because it enjoyed the fun and the exercise and · 
the beautiful scenery of the mountains and the camaraderie 
of the sport. They were not highly conscious of how they 
skied, what technique they used, or how the skill could be 
taught. They would say, "Watch me," or "Do it like this," 
and that was about as far as they could go. I never will 
forget the time when one of my friends who had been watch-
ing this. weekly trek to the mountains finally decided to 
come along. He was an excellent athlete who had once been 
a Golden Gloves champion, so he had no lack of natural 
co-ordination and control. However, when he first put on 
skis the result was comic and disastrous at once. As soon 
as he tried to· take a step, down he went. Encumbered by 
his skis, he could barely get up. The newcomer was(_beset 
by)all sorts of problems which demanded skilled and tech-
nical analysis if they were to be solved quickly. Unfortunately 
the best that these Sunday skiers could manage was some-
thing like this: "You bend your knees and take off. Eventu-
ally you'll get the hang of it." Their conception of skiing 
was informal, a view which is no better expressed than in 
the phrase, "You'll get the hang of it." 
At the same time that the townspeople on the western 
slope were teaching their children to ski and the informal 

THE MAJOR TRIAD I 
89 
skiers from Denver were making their weekly pilgrimage to 
the mountains, thousands of feet of film were being taken 
in the Alps of wonderfully skilled skiers rushing down 
slopes, turning, climbing, and coming to a stop. These films 
were analyzed, and the whole process was broken down into 
its components or isolates, as they can be called. In addition 
to the components, broader patterns were also analyzed. 
After a while it was decided that skiing was not an art which 
had to be restricted to the gifted. Anyone with patience and 
a modicum of control could be taught to ski, since the 
components had been so well identified that they could 
be talked about and described technically. Moreover, the 
uniformity of skill that could be achieved by these new 
technically trained skiers was so amazing that it made pos-
sible the later tremendous popularity of the sport. Few 
people like to fail in what they do, and with the new 
methods of teaching, a few hours' instruction could give 
enough skill and confidence so that a newcomer wasn't likely 
to kill himself and could still have fun. 
In the light of our previous hypothesis that all cultural 
behavior is biologically based, it might be assumed that the 
formal, informal, and technical aspects of life are also rooted 
in man's physiological organism. Unfortunately, however, 
the subtle chain of connections between the physiology of 
the nervous system and human behavior still remains a 
comparative mystery. At present the most we can say is . 
that one would expect to find that these three types of 
behavior spring from three different parts of the nervous 
system. This assumption can be inferred from a character-
istic of behavior which everyone has experienced: It is ex-
tremely difficult to practice more than one element of the 
formal, informal, technical triad at the same time without 
paralyzing results. A woman who types as an informal ac-

THE MAJOR TRIAD I 91 
goes under the heading of science would more appropriately 
be classed as a new formal system which is very rapidly 
displacing or altering our older formal systems centered in 
folk beliefs and religion. 
Most medicine as it is practiced, in contrast to medical 
research, can be more appropriately classed as formal. This 
is not meant to be a criticism of doctors. If they did not 
develop formal systems their patients would force them into 
it. The so-called social sciences or behavioral sciences are 
shot through with procedural ritual that graduate students 
learn and later pass on to their own students. One zealous 
sociologist is reported to have developed an index to reflect 
the degree to which a paper was "scientific." He devised a 
rating system derived from the relative proportion of text 
to footnotes and the quantity of statistics in relation to 
text! 
FORMAL LEARNING 
Formal activities are taught by (precept)and \(ldmonition. l 
The adult mentor molds the young' according to patterns he 
himself has never questioned. He will correct the child say-
ing, "Boys don't do that," or "You can't do that," using 
a tone of voice indicating that what you are doing is un-
thinkable. There is no question in the rnind of the speaker 
about where he stands and where every other adult stands. 
In correcting their children's speech, parents will say, "Not . 
'goed'! Went!" The burden of this communication is that 
no other form is conceivably acceptable. Formal patterns 
are almost always learned when a mistake is made and some-
one corrects it. Technical learning also begins with mistakes 
and corrections, but it is done with a different tone of 
voice and the student is offered reasons for the correction. 

90 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
tivity knows that if she starts thinking in detail technically 
about what she is doing with her fingers and where the 
letters are located she will have trouble. Beginners who are 
studying shorthand are told that they "have to get it in their 
fingers" or they will not pick up any speed. A friend of mine, 
a neuropsychiatrist, once pointed out that it was enough to 
draw attention to one level of activity while a person was 
operating on another to stop all coherent thought. He used 
the example of a mother who is mad at her son and is 
berating him. The boy looks up and says sweetly, "Gee, 
Mommy, your mouth moves funny when you're mad." The 
mother is apt to become speechless. 
One more generalization that should be kept in mind 
about formal, informal, and technical integrations is that 
while one will dominate, all three are present in any given 
situation. To refer back to the skiers for a moment, it is 
easy to see that even those who approach skiing as a formal 
activity will have to get mildly technical about it, other-
wise they would have difficulty talking about the details of 
skiing. Everyone has his own style (the informal), but the 
informal has the formal as a base. If one were to compare 
the three groups of skiers, one would find that the formal 
mountain skiers and the informal skiers from the plains had 
much more in common with each other than either of them 
had with the Europeai1 technical skiers. The technical, of 
course, very quickly develops its own new formal systems. 
Science, for example, which we think of as being the very 
essence of the technical, actually has built up within it a 
large number of formal systems that nobody questions. 
These have to do with the methodology of science, the in-
sistence on the objectivity of the members of the scientific 
community, their honesty in regard to their own work and 
the work of others. As a matter of fact, a good deal of what 

92 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
An error made by many parents and teachers these days 
is to try to explain formal behavior in the same way one 
goes about outlining the reasons for technical behavior. This 
is a signal to the child that there is an alternative, that 
one form is as good as another! A great mistake. The details 
of formal learning are binary, of a yes-no, right-wrong 
character. You either break a taboo or you don't, you steal 
your neighbor's coconut or you don't, you say "boyses" for 
boys or you don't. Hundreds of little details add up until 
they amount to a formal system which nobody questions. 
INFORMAL LEARNING 
Informal learning is of an entirely different character from 
either the technical or the formal. The principal agent is a 
model used for imitation. Whole clusters of related activi-
ties are learned at a time, in many cases without the knowl-
edge that they are being learned at all or that there are 
patterns or rules governing them. A child may be puzzled 
about something and ask her mother for the rules. "You'll 
find out about that later, dear," or "Look around you and 
see what people are doing; use your eyes!" Whenever state-
ments like the one that follows are made, one can be sure 
that the activity is ari informal one: "Mother-how does a 
woman get a man to marry her?" "Well, it's a little hard to 
describe, but when you get bigger you'll find out. There's 
plenty of time for learning." The child is treated to this 
kind of remark so often that he automatically translates it 
as, "Don't ask questions, look around and see what people 
do." In the United States the most important area in which 
this type of learning operates is sex. For the most part, sex 
is learned informally- a fact which might account for the 
morbid fascination it exercises on people. When someone 

·' ' 
'l'HE MAJOR TRIAD I 93 
like the late Alfred Kinsey tried to systematize the available 
knowledge about sexual behavior he was commonly greeted 
with the question, "How do you know? Were you there?" 
Hollywood is famous for hiring various experts to teach 
people technically what most of us learn informally. A case 
in point is the story about the children of one movie couple 
who noticed a new child in the neighborhood climbing a 
tree. The children immediately wanted to be given the name 
of his instructor jn tree climbing. 
Entire systems of behavior made up of hundreds of thou-
sands of details are passed from generation to generation, and 
nobody can give the rules for what is happening. Only when 
these rules are broken do we realize they exist. For example, 
the writer used to ask his audience of people going abroad to 
give the rule for first naming in the United States. They could 
give a few, in vague terms, but pretty soon they would be 
floundering. In the end they would remark, "You know, when 
you look at it that way it's pretty hard to pin these things 
down." 
Unconsciously a great many people recognize the validity 
of using models as the major instrument of informal learn-
ing. As a whole, women in the United States are more aware 
of this than men, though they too are apt to overlook imita-
tion for what it is-a way of learning-a way of becoming a 
member of society. Everyone has seen small boys mimic 
their father's walk or imitate a TV hero or, at the worst,., 
mimic some unsavory character who hangs out at the cor~ · 
ner drugstore. In many cases the mother does not approve 
of Junior's selection of models, though she may not even 
be aware of her reasons. By disapproving strongly, she may 
make a hash of the informal learning propensities of her 
children by interfering with their early attempts at imita-
tion. 

THE MAJOR TRIAD I 95 
to be suffused with emotion. Informal learning is largely 
a matter of the learner picking others as models. Some~imes 
this is done deliberately, but most commonly it occurs out-
of-awareness. In most cases the model does not take part 
in this process except as an object of imitation. Technical 
learning moves in the other direction. The knowledge rests 
with the teacher. His skill is a function of his knowledge 
and his analytic ability. If his analysis is sufficiently clear 
and thorough, he doesn't even have to be there. He can 
write it down or put in on a record. In real life one finds 
a little of all three in almost any learning situation. One 
type, however, will always dominate. 
FORMAL AWARENESS 
Compared to many other societies, ours does not invest 
tradition with an enormous weight. Even our most powerful 
traditions do not generate the binding force which is com-
mon in some other cultures. For example, the Zuni of New 
Mexico have a predominantly formal culture that exerts a 
heavy pressure on its members. People simply cannot dis-
regard social pressures and remain in the pueblo. If they 
want to leave and live with strangers the rest of their lives, 
they can fly in the face of tradition, otherwise they have to 
conform. We Americans have emphasized the informal at 
the expense of the formal. There are, however, pockets, like 
old New England and certain parts of the South, where : 
tradition plays a vital role in life. This style of life in 
which formal awareness predominates has been elegantly 
sketched in novels like J. P. Marquand's The Late George 
Apley. Formal awareness is an approach to life that asks 
with surprise: "Is there any other way?" Formally aware 
people are more likely to be influenced by the past than 

94 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
TECHNICAL LEARNING 
Technical learning, in its pure form, is close to being 
a one-way street. It is usually transmitted in explicit terms 
from the teacher to the student, either orally or in writing. 
Often it is preceded by a logical analysis and proceeds in 
coherent outline form. Some of the best examples of techni-
cal teaching can be found in the armed services, where tech-
niques have been worked out for handling large masses of 
recruits. This success is further confirmation of the point 
that technical learning is an inevitable concomitant of teach-
ing large numbers of people. Unlike informal learning, it 
depends less on the aptitude of the student and the selection 
of adequate models, but more on the intelligence with 
which the material is analyzed and presented. 
During World War II, when great numbers of trained 
technicians were in demand, it was assumed that those who 
had mechanical aptitude would make good airplane me-
chanics. A careful analysis of this assumption proved other-
wise. It turned out that a good shoe clerk in civilian life 
would become a better mechanic for military purposes than 
someone who had fixed cars most of his life and learned on a 
Model-TFord. The critical traitwas not mechanical aptitude 
but the ability of the trainee to follow instructions. The 
Army then worked out its instruction manuals so meticu-
lously that the best recruit turned out to be a mildly obses-
sional person who could read and follow directions. The last 
thing they wanted was someone with his own ideas on how 
to fix equipment. 
To recapitulate briefly: The formal is a two-way process. 
The learner tries, makes a mistake, is corrected ("No, not 
t'he right side of the horse, the left side! Remember, never 
approach a horse from the right!") . Formal learning tends 

96 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
they are by the present or future. Formal awareness is aware-
ness of what Apley would call "what's right, what ought 
to be there." 
I NFORMAL AWARE NESS 
The term informal awareness is paradoxical because it 
describes a situation in which much of what goes on exists 
almost entirely out-of-awareness. Nothing, however, is hid-
den in any sense of the word. In fact, it is doubtful if there 
is any part of culture which is really hidden once we know 
how to go about looking for the eloquent signs. 
In informal activity the absence of awareness permits 
a high degree of patterning. A moment's reflection will show 
that in walking or in driving a car awareness of the process 
is apt to be an impediment to smooth performance; similarly, 
too much awareness of the process of writing or speaking 
can get in the way of what one is trying to say. The informal 
is therefore made up of activities or mannerisms which we 
once learned but which are so much a part of our everyday 
life that they are done automatically. They are, in fact, often 
blocked when cerebration takes place. 
All this has been known in one way or another for a 
long time, but no one has understood the degree to which 
informal activities permeate life nor how the out-of-aware-
ness character of informal acts often leads to untold dif-
ficulty in a cross-cultural situation. The tone of voice of the 
upper-class English which sounds so affected to many Amer-
icans is an example of just this kind of activity which, un-
less properly understood, can be a stumbling block between 
individuals from different cultures. 
· 
What I have described is not to be confused with neuroses 
in which certain aspects of the personality are also out-of-

THE MAJOR TRIAD I 
97 
'}~;'/awareness. The psychological literature is filled with ref-
~?(\etences to dissociated behavior, unconscious behavior, and 
!;;~·;;f:; ~ so on, but these are deviations from the norm and should 
~:.z:; .. not be confused with the informal. 
~~"--~ .. ;:. . 
.... ~. 
~-·l.
: 
flb . 
TECHNICAL AWARENESS 
l!'- ' f 
~f.~·. 
., ,, .. , 
~~. 
r;--~:r· 
' ,_ 
L~ . 
l-~ ' • 
[""' .· 
'. 
;-. 
~-~ . 
While all technical behavior has in it some of the for-
mal as well as the informal, it is characterized by the fact 
that it is fully conscious behavior. Its very explicitness and 
the fact that it can be written down and recorded and even 
taught at a distance differentiates it from the other two 
types of integration. The very essence of the technical is 
that it is on the highest level of consciousness. 
FORMAL AFFECT 
Affect is a technical term used by psychologists to de-
scribe feelings as distinct from thought. The non-technical 
reader may prefer to substitute "emotion:' or "feeling" when-
ever the term "affect" is used. Whenever violations of formal 
norms occur, they are accompanied by a tide of emotion. 
One can get an idea of how people feel a bout formal systems 
by thinking of a person who has been supported all his 
life by a very strong prop. Remove the prop and you shake 
the foundations of life. Deep emotions are associated with 
the formal in almost every instance. 
Part of the success of the late Clarence Darrow was at-
tributable to his being a past master at invoking formal 
systems to sway juries. Darrow was and remains a contro-
versial figure. Many people used to look upon him as a 
scoundrel who succeeded in having thieves and murderers 
acquitted when they should have been executed. Today he 
is still a figure of great popular interest, but those who write 

THE MAJOR TRIAD I 
99 
"-:..· 
... :" ~NFORMAL AFFECT 
~('-;'·. · '. . 
¥'·'· 
~r-.: : · There is little or no affect attached to informal behavior 
1.~;.' . 
h 
I 
I 
d 
h 
:~( . as long as t ings are going a ong nice y accor ing to t e 
:;::. . unwritten or unstated rules. Anxiety, however, follows 
'" 
quickly when this tacit etiquette is breached. Extreme dis-
·~--
comfort is apt to occur when someone stands too close or 
uses a first name prematurely. What happens next depends 
· upon the alternatives provided by the culture for handling 
anxiety. Ours includes withdrawal and anger. In Japan men 
giggle or laugh nervously. The alternative responses are com-
. · 
paratively restricted and automatic. The leeway for emo-
tional response in the informal is much less than one might 
expect. The point is that the emotions associated with de-
viation from informal norms are themselves learned infor-
mally and are limited by the fact that people do not realize 
that their response is learned or that there is any other way 
to respond. A comparable situation exists in language: In 
English, one of the most common ways of indicating that 
one is asking a question is by ending with a rising inflection. 
That there might be other inflections which achieve the 
same purpose simply does not occur to one. In this sort of 
thing it seems "natural" that the repertoire would be some-
what limited. 
TECHNICAL AFFECT 
The technical is characterized by a suppression of feelings, 
since they tend to interfere with effective functioning. One 
of the great differences between the real professional and 
the amateur boxer is that the amateur is likely to become 
really angry, whereas the professional prides himself in keep-
ing his wits about him and .his temper in control. The 
scientist's approach to his work is so well known that we 

98 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
about him tend to see him in a new way. They like to 
emphasize his humanity rather than his superb command 
of the law. For the law is technical and dry and supposedly 
blind to human emotions-a cardinal sin in this age. Darrow 
dressed in an old sloppy suit. He appealed to the common 
man-people could identify with him. He was their type, 
the country bumpkin who outsmarts the city slicker. Now 
it is obvious that in addition to knowing his law well he also 
knew his culture. He realized that most people do not under-
stand the law but will stand up for their own formal systems 
and even weep over them when they see them outraged. 
This was Darrow's strength, and the only time he really 
failed to capitalize on it was when he was called to Hono.Iulu 
for the Massie case in 1932. There he faced a jury made up 
of members who had different formal systems. The Chinese 
jurors weren't a bit moved by his culture-rooted strategies. 
In time, as formal systems become firmer they become 
so identified with the process of nature itself that alterna-
tive ways of behavior are thought of as unnatural- if not 
impossible. Yet this rigidity has its advantages. People who 
live and die in formal cultures tend to take a more re-
laxed view of life than the rest of us because the boundaries 
of behavior are so -clearly marked, even to the permissible 
deviations. There is never any doubt in any body's mind that, 
as long as he does what is expected, he knows what to 
expect from others. Those who are familiar with the dif-
ference between Catholicism in Latin. America, where the 
population is so predominantly Catholic that religion is not 
an issue, and in the United States, where we are more tech-
nical about religion, have an excellent example of how peo-
ple live under the same institution of religion yet react differ-
ently, depending upon whether it is administered formally 
or technically. 

100 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
need say little about it. In general the technical person be-
comes emotionally involved only when the technical rules 
of the game are not followed. Once a technical foundation 
is laid down, it seems to be terribly important to adhere to it. 
Because it is so explicit, the technical in our society has 
become associated with authority and law and other struc-
tures which embody uncompromising attitudes. A mother 
who is provoked by a child may find herself using the child's 
full name as she calls him to account. The child immediately 
knows that he has stepped out of line and Mother means 
business because she is getting technical. The formal and the 
technical are often confused. For one thing, the formal is 
supported by technical props. It is the technical that people 
often resort to when all else fails. 
The whole matter of deviation from norms bristles with 
complexity. For example, children never know where the 
line is until they step across it. The manner in which they 
are reprimanded provides the glue that holds together these 
systems in later life. The child never knows until he finds 
out by trial and error whether he has violated a formal, in-
formal, or technical norm. There are gross differences in 
regard to norms from one culture to another. Within the 
confines of a diverse culture such as our own, what is a 
formal matter at one time may become informal later, what 
is viewed technically by one group may be informal with the 
next. To return to children, it seems to be important that 
they know that there are norms and lines beyond which 
they cannot go despite the leeway allowed them. They also 
need to know that there are some norms that are compara-
tively unchangeable and which can be depended upon 
throughout life. From a theoretical point of view the rela-
tion of the formal, informal, and technical to norms 
becomes of great importance. 

·!4·,,: \, 
;;L:~:. 
THE MAJOR TRIAD I 
101 
·:f' 'FORMAL ATTITUDES TOWARD CHANGE 
r~;:·~;,~:: . 
'?.-'' · 
Formal systems are characterized by a very great tenacity, 
~~.:. · ' a trait which satisfies a deep need in a11 societies and 
lf~i .! · individuals. Without this tenacious consistency in 1ife, life 
~: · . itself would not be possible. Origina11y, with the very ear1y 
~J;; .. 
'·; ,. 
·vertibrates, instincts or innate behavior patterns provided 
';,:' 
,v 
for this consistency. With the advent of ]earning as an 
{ 
additional adaptive mechanism the role of the instinct be-
.. 
gan to fade until in man it plays a negligible part. It is 
formal culture that does a job closely analogous to instinct. 
Everybody can depend upon it almost as though it were 
instinctual. It is the base from which the rest of culture 
springs and around which it is built. 
\·!! .. 4: 
Except under special circumstances, the forma] changes 
slowly, almost imperceptibly. It is also highly resistant 
to forced change from the outside- a point now we11 known 
to many of our technicians working in foreign countries. 
Since the formal is seldom recognized as such, the American 
abroad often has the impression that other people's formal 
systems are unnecessary, immoral, crazy, backward, or a 
remnant of some outworn· value that America gave up some 
time ago. Afif Tannous, a Lebanese-American sociologist, 
tells of a case of the Arab vi11agers who refused to let out-
siders clean up a water hole contaminated with typhoid and 
insta11 a pump. The reader may wonder what there was 
about having a nice clean water supply that violated the . 
formal norms of Arab vi11agers. Strange as it seems to us, 
Arab vi11agers like the water they drink. It has a nice strong 
taste which it gets from the camels. Water with them is 
thought to be almost sacred. If the men of a given vi11age 
are strong or brave or fertile or smart it is because of the 
water they drink. In some parts of the Arab wor1d it is con-
sidered sissy to drink clean water. T he vi11agers saw no 

~~-:.: :. If 
THE MAJOR TRIAD I 
;,;. ·;. 
extension agent who could work with the Taos. Finally a 
~;,} < 
young man was chosen who liked tl1e Taos and who was 
careful to approach them slowly. Everything went along 
very well, and it seemed that he was, indeed, the right man 
for a very ticklish job. When spring arrived, however, Evans 
was visited in Albuquerque by the agriculturist, who was 
wearing a very long face. Evans asked, "What's the matter? 
You look depressed." His visitor replied, "As a matter of 
fact, I am. I don't know what's wrong. The Indians don't 
like me any more. They won't do any of the things I tell 
them." Evans promised to find out what he could. The next 
time there was a council meeting at Taos he took one of the 
older Indians aside and asked him what was wrong between 
the tribe and the young man. His friend looked him in the 
eye and said, "John, he just doesn't know certain things! 
You know, John-think . ... " 
Suddenly Evans understood. In the spring the Taos be-
lieve that Mother Earth is pregnant. To protect the surface 
of the earth they do not drive their wagons to town, they 
take all the shoes off their horses, they refuse to wear hard-
soled shoes themselves. Our agriculturist had been trying 
to institute a program of early-spring plowing! 
Often, however, the conflict between different formal 
s·ystems in different cu]tures has a tragic outcome. During 
the Spanish conquest of the New World one of the reasons 
the Spaniards were able to take so much territory was that 
their formal systems were so radically different from the. 
Indian system. The Spaniards fought to kill; the Aztecs 
fought to take prisoners. Like the Plains Indians to the 
north, the Aztecs were at a loss in dealing with an enemy 
who killed in battle. Because this was a formal system the 
Aztecs were not able to change it in time to save themselves 
or their society. Similarly, some American prisoners of war 
during World War II were not able to adapt to the deference 

102 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
relation between disease and the water that made their men 
strong. Babies died because God willed it, and who were 
they to go tampering with the will of God? This story under-
lines the necessity of understanding and accepting the 
formal systems of other peoples first in order to work effec-
tively within them. 
Alexander Leighton's excellent book, The Governing of 
Men, also provides a penetrating example of how a mis-
understanding about formal systems of leadership stalled a 
government program with the Japanese internees during the 
war. Once this was corrected, these same systems were used 
quite successfully. The American mistake was to select 
construction foremen according to their qualifications-a 
natural error, considering the great emphasis we put on 
technical competence. The Japanese, who had suffered in-
sult, the loss of their possessions, and forcible imprisonment 
without losing their patience, finally went on strike when 
this happened. They were outraged that the Americans had 
completely disregarded the social hierarchy which figures so 
importantly in Japanese society. The solution to this prob-
lem lay in allowing the internees to choose their own leaders 
from among those who had the proper status. It mattered 
little that these honored old men spoke no English and knew 
less about engineering. They promptly picked young engi-
neers as their advisers. 
I am indebted to John Evans, onetime superintendent 
of the Northern Pueblo Agency, who spent many years as a 
young man in Taos, for an exquisite example of a formal 
pattern. The Taos are a very independent people who care-
fully guard all their culture from the white man. They even 
make a secret of how to say "Thank you" in Taos. This 
makes it exceedingly difficult for the governmental repre-
sentatives whose job it is to work with them. According to 
Evans, there had been some difficulty finding an agricultural 

104 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
patterns of their Japanese captors and thus save themselves 
needless torture. The Japanese formal view of life is that 
there must be order in the relations between men and that 
this order is expressed by people taking and demonstrating 
their positions in a hierarchy. People of higher status are 
addressed by certain polite forms; respect is shown by bow-
ing quite low with the upper part of the body held rigid. 
The Americans who were captured by the Japanese felt it 
was a violation of their dignity to have to bow. The Japanese 
thought this showed extreme disrespect and threatened the 
very foundations of life. 
The formal provides a broad pattern within whose out-· 
lines the individual actor can fill in the details for himself. 
If he stays within the boundaries, life goes along smoothly. 
If not, he finds himself in trouble. For instance, if two men 
have a business appointment in the middle or late morning 
and one of them is five minutes late, there is no serious 
difficulty. A simple apology usually suffices. Though the for-
mal system in our culture says that one must be punctual, 
it also provides for a certain amount of l.eeway. The norm 
can be violated in two principal ways: first, by going way 
beyond the permissible limit, so that it is obvious that 
you are deliberately flying in the face of custom; second, 
by ignoring the permissible informal leeway, becoming 
overly technical, and demanding an apology if someone is 
only twenty seconds late. 
INFORMAL ATTITUDES TOWARD CHANGE 
Mishandling the informal can often lead to serious diffi-
culties which are apt to become aggravated since the 
participants in an informal situation are not fully conscious 
of what is going on. They only know that under a certain set 
of unstated rules they can act in a certain way and depend 

~ll::s·, 
~h\'· 1. 
THE MAJOR TRIAD I 
105 
:t~ ... ; upon other people to react appropriately. This informal . 
· . expectancy is often ruptured when there is a conflict between 
two patterns within the context of our own culture or in 
the more familiar case of a cross-cultural situation. 
An example of a rather wearing cross-cultural conflict 
occurred in the West a number of years ago. Since no one 
was directly aware of what was going on, the result was a 
ludicrously tragic situation which persisted for some twenty 
years. The two cultures involved were the Spanish and the 
American; at the heart of the prolonged crisis was the differ-
ing view which each group takes of law, government, and 
family. The Latin-American Spanish have developed the 
institution of the family to a size, stability, and influence 
that are incredible to us. Their governments on the other 
hand do not occupy such an important position in the 
scheme of things as ours does. If something should happen 
or if something is wanted in a Latin-American country, 
families are apt to be better at handling the affair than the 
government. This informal tradition is associated with a dif-
ferent concept of law from our own. Law in Latin America 
is enforced technically (by the book), but it is mediated 
by family relationships. With us law courts, and particularly 
enforcement officers, are not supposed to be harsh and 
should be guided by the formal systems of the culture. That 
is, the law is never expected to be stricter than the rest of 
the culture. If it works undue hardships on people, then it 
has to be changed. When the American comes across a law 
which he considers to be unjust or which doesn't make sense,,· 
he is much more likely to violate it than if he considers it 
realistic and sensible. 
The point at which the Spanish and American patterns 
collided in the western town was over the enforcement of 
the speed limit. For many years the town- predominantly 
Spanish in population and government-had a motorcycle 

THE MAJOR TRIAD I 
107 
tend to get tough (and technical) once the machinery of 
·. the law is set in motion. The idea of holding people precise] y 
to 15 mph violates both our attitude toward laws (they 
· should make sense) and our sense of informal leeway. 
Sancho's trouble was that he never had a model to show 
·him how to deal with americanos. 
On the whole, Americans have developed no system for 
making the law easy to live with, as have the Latin Ameri-
cans. Our own formal system says that it is reprehensible to 
use influence and doubly so for public officials to show 
favoritism. We allow very little leeway here, on the grounds 
that unless a person is either foolish or guilty he would 
not have run afoul of the law in the first place. Laws may 
~~ 
be broken in the United States, but there is a great reluctance 
r.:-.. c to tamper with the legal machinery once it has got under 
way. As products of American culture we tend to have a 
difficult time overseas when the laws lack informal leeway 
in their enforcement. We see no alternative ways of making 
them livable. We find it hard to discover those points where 
there is leeway and, when we do, we are hesitant in using 
what we find out because it violates our own formal systems. 
,:.. 
,·~;. What Americans really like and usually hold out for is for 
others to change their systems so. that it "makes sense" like 
ours. 
There is, of course, a little of the informal in everything. 
What is confusing to people who travel or work overseas 
is that there is no way of knowing just where the leeway 
has been built into a situation. To make this doubly difficult, 
the local nationals can't describe the rules either. Further-
more, a formal system with very little give in it one time 
may show a great deal of flexibility a few years later. Arab 
attitudes toward women, for example, are changing very 
rapidly. What was constant for centuries no longer holds. 

106 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
policeman named Sancho, of Spanish cultural descent. His 
job was to enforce the speed limit of 1 5 mph which extended 
to the outskirts and included a stretch of two national high-
ways. So assiduous was Sancho in his work that he was 
famous to all the townspeople as well as to the americanos 
who lived in the surrounding communities. Acting on the 
letter of the law, he would arrest people going 16 mph-an 
offense which was punishable by a fine of $12.75, a considera-
ble sum of money during the depression years of the thirties. 
The Spanish-Americans brought before the court usually 
had a cousin or an uncle sitting on the bench and were 
quickly acquitted. The americanos, who were rarely that 
lucky, became increasingly furious at the situation. Finally 
they began plotting against Sancho. Once he was led out of 
town at 6o mph and then run off the road. His legs were so 
badly broken that he could no longer ride a motorcycle. 
When he emerged from the hospital he bought a fast road-
ster and went back to work. But from then on for the next 
ten or fifteen years life for Sancho became a series of "acci-
dents." He no longer trusted anyone and arrested speeders 
with a drawn pistol. Even this did not prevent him from 
being severely beaten up from time to time by the Ameri-
cans who resented being arrested for going 16 mph and who 
had to pay their fines. \Vhat the Americans did not under-
stand- and for this they may easily be forgiven-is that the 
two cultures treat the same point of behavior quite differ.-
ently and structure the informal into different parts of their 
respective systems. Technically, to the Spanish, the law was 
the law and 16 mph was an infraction of the law. Only 
after they were arrested did they invoke the informal by 
turning to that system of relatives which is equipped to deal 
with a weak government. Americans, on the other hand, 
allow themselves a certain amount of informal leeway in 
their interpretation of what constitutes a violation, but they 

108 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
TECHNICAL ATTITUDES TOWARD CHANGE 
When American technicians are prepared to work abroad, 
they must be warned to avoid introducing changes that 
violate formal norms. The technician may ask: "In what 
area, then, can I try to help these people help themselves 
and still pot run afoul of the formal and the informal? Where 
can I have some real control over what goes on?" The 
answer, of course, is in the technical. Here one can introduce 
changes with the greatest ease without violating the norms 
of the other two systems. Just as the United States suffers 
no disruption in the course of constant progress in such 
things as the design of automobile engines, fuels, oil and 
metals, antibiotics and medicine, so comparable changes can 
be made in countries that have not progressed as far as we 
have technologically. Whatever changes are introduced have 
to. be made in those parts of the lives of the local people 
that are treated technically or else they must be offered as 
entirely new systems complete in themselves. ln many parts 
of Latin America, for example, air travel was introduced 
before the stage of the cart and the automobile had even 
been reached. It was easier to build airports than a road 
network. The same leapfrogging technology is being applied 
in Africa. 
Usually, however, technical changes are small changes 
which have to do with the details of an operation. You can 
change the bore and stroke of a motor without changing the 
over-all design. You can alter the pitch of a propeller to con-
form to special conditions, change the construction material 
for a house without violating the formal norms that dictate 
the over-all design, put a steel point on a wooden plow with-
out violating formal norms, make DDT in powder or liquid 
form to conform to local custom concerning insecticides. 
By changing the emphasis from one of "making the soil 

THE MAJOR TRIAD I 
109 
more productive" to "feeding" the soil with fertilizer, 
modern agriculture can be made more acceptable to the 
Indonesians, who, because of their formal religious beliefs, 
try to avoid controlling nature. 
One of the most remarkable changes that have come to 
light in recent years is the one described by Margaret Mead 
in her report about the unique people of Manus in the South 
Pacific. The Manus Islanders treat their culture technically. 
They apparently have done so for such a long time that 
there is little evidence that they could accept any other 
attitude without seriously disrupting their lives. They experi-
ment with their culture consciously, taking it apart and 
putting it together again to see how it works in different 
ways. With these propensities it was inevitable that close 
contact with Americans during the war would make available 
new systems of behavior and new ways of organizing society. 
This is what happened. The Manus apparently did the 
incredible thing of sitting down and saying to themselves, 
"Now let's organize a new society that's more in keeping 
with the outside world." They didn't wait for change to 
overtake them gradually, or drift off in small numbers and 
lose themselves among the white man. T hey sat down and 
designed a society from the ground up. What is not clear, 
of course, in view of the technical attitude toward life, is 
where the formal core is and what form it takes on Manus. 
One view that can be taken of what happened on Manus is 
that the things that were changed represented a relatively 
superficial fringe around a more stable and persisting core, 
just as the Pueblo potter may make variations in the designs 
she uses on the pot but is not likely to change the method 
of building up the walls, polishing, or firing. 
Maria, a famous New Mexico potter, provides us with 
an excellent example of how small changes occur and how 
far-reachi11g their effects can be. She practices an art bor-

THE MAJOR TRIAD I 
111 
Before the man could get them back to his store he had 
sold them. 
It was very easy for the Indians to make more black pots, 
since they were quite familiar with the mistake which 
caused them. Once Maria discovered that her pottery was 
even more popular than it had been formerly, she taught 
her sisters how to control this accident to satisfy the white 
man's taste. Eventually the rest of the women of the Pueblo 
were following her example. Maria's fame brought more 
tourists and more customers, so that everybody profited. 
Today San Ildefonso is associated with black pottery instead 
of red. The transformation of an informal, occasional blacl} 
pot into a technical change in pottery making had other 
striking results. First it improved the over-all quality of the 
pottery of the Pueblo. Then this change led to additional 
experimentation with pottery designs and finishes and 
opened the way for deviations from old patterns, which even 
led to the making of silver jewelry, traditionally associated 
with the Navajo and the Zuni. 
This example highlights a number of things about 
technical changes: 
They are always specific. In this case one makes a choice 
as to the type of firing, one step in a bout a hundred steps 
needed to make a pot. Technical changes are readily ob-
served, talked about, and transmitted to others. They open 
the way for additional changes and often improvement in 
the quality of a product. They often fly in the face of older 
formal norms and are far-reaching in their effects. Put 
together, they form the basis for a new formal system once 
they become consolidated and widely accepted. 
Our own calendric system is an example of a once techni-
cal innovation; the result of many, many small technical 
changes built into a pattern that became widely accepted, 
so widely accepted that such periods as the hour and the 

110 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
rowed indirectly from Mexico and carried on by Pueblo 
women for some thirteen to fifteen hundred years. 
The Pueblo women have always been notoriously con-
servative in their pottery making. Since slightly before the 
time of World War I their pottery began to deteriorate 
noticeably, a sign that Pueblo life was losing some of its 
integrative powers. As the Indian moved farther and farther 
down the socio-economic scale in comparison to the white 
man, he began to lose his self-respect. No one knows what 
would have happened if it had not been for three key figures: 
Maria and her husband Julian, both skilled craftsmen, and . 
Kenneth Chapman, an anthropologist who saw what was 
happening and dedicated himself to reviving Pueblo crafts. 
Julian helped Maria with the pottery by occasionally paint-
ing the designs for her. This was one of those small technical 
changes that leads to bigger things. Maria was the best 
potter in San Ildefonso. The care and attention to detail in 
her work were obvious even to those who were not experts. 
By Pueblo standards she was an individualist. Unlike many 
of the others, her work did not deteriorate and therefore 
became even more popular. Chapman selected her work for 
promotion in the white man's world. 
Once by accident two of Maria's pots turned black instead 
of red. A plain black pot that is not well made is hideous. 
A plain black pot that is beautifully made actually enables 
one to appreciate both the simplicity of the black as well · 
as the expertness of the technique. Despite this, the San 
Ildefonso people had no place in their world for a plain 
black pot. The white man, on the other hand, had no 
. tradition in regard to pottery, no preconception that it 
should be white or black or red. He thought it should be well 
made, smooth, and symmetrical. Once when Julian· and 
Maria ran out of the red pottery they sold through a Santa 
Fe storekeeper, they gave him the two black "spoiled" pots. 

112 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
week are thought of as "natural" divisions of time. In fact, 
it is so much a formal system that when the calendar was 
brought up to date in England in 1752 by gearing it to the 
Gregorian version, there were riots in the streets and people 
shouted, "Give us back our fourteen days." 
To this point we have been looking at the formal-informal-
technical triad as a fixed and static system. In actuality these 
states are constantly fluid, shifting one into the other-
formal activity tends to become informal, informal tends 
toward the technical, and very often the technical will take 
on the trappings of a new formal system. In this next section 
I suggest something of the inherent processes by which 
these chanaes occur. 
THE PROCESS OF CHANCE 
T heodosius Dobzhansky, the great geneticist, once ob-
served that life was the result of neither design nor chance 
but the dynamic interaction of living substance with itself. 
He meant that life, in a changing environment, places such 
strains on the organism to adapt that, if this does not take 
place constantly, the organism as a species dies out. This 
process of adaptation leads to the production of the many 
complex forms that inhabit this earth. Different cultures are 
analogous to different species in the sense that some of 
them survive while others perish. Some are more adaptive · 
than others. The study of change, therefore, is the study 
of survival. It is of more than academic interest, then, to see 
how the formal, informal, and technical exist in a relation-
ship of continuous change. The theory of the nature of these 
relationships is a theory of change. 
Because of the technical nature and complexity of the 
most available data I am including only one description of 
a changing culture pattern. (Three others will be found in 

THE MAJOR TRIAD I 
113 
Appendix III .) Its timeliness will be immediately recogniza-
ble, and it has in it many basic elements illustrating the 
principles by which culture change operates. It should be 
apparent to the reader that much of the material included 
under other headings also illustrates how change takes place. 
An often noted characteristic of culture change is that an 
idea or a practice will hold on very persistently, apparently 
resisting all efforts to move it, and then suddenly, without 
notice, it will collapse. The following case history, well 
known to most Americans, is a poignant illustration of this 
phenomenon. 
Taken at any given point, culture seems to be made up 
of formal behavior patterns that constitute a core around 
which there are certain informal adaptations. The core is 
also supported by a series of technical props. A classic case 
was provided one time during a discussion I had with a class 
of young college women. They were earnestly concerned 
with their future role in life. A topic very much on their 
minds, of course, was the matter of their relations with men. 
In a discussion of this subject one of the girls summarized 
the issue very succinctly and at the same time illustrated 
the principle outlined above. 
The problem she posed went as follows: Her family, 
principally her mother, had endowed her with a series of 
formal beliefs which stressed the importance of premarital 
chastity. The young lady did not want to violate these beliefs, 
yet here she was, riding around in cars at night alone with 
boys, petting, and going to unchaperoned house parties. In 
effect, the traditional supports (or restraints) on which 
sexual virtue had long been based had been cut away. More-
over, there was continual pressure on her to chuck the idea 
of premarital chastity. How, she asked, could she maintain 
her position in the absence of supports? How could she 

THE MAJOR TRIAD I 
115 
America will have to hinge on a new conception of the 
nature of man and woman. This may already be coming 
about as more and more Latin women are being brought 
into contact with men in other than purely formal social 
relationships. A stenographer working in an office in daily 
contact with men is viewed very differently from the old-
style well-chaperoned girl. 
The differing rate at which formal and technical systems 
change, however, can lead to a good deal of personal anxiety. 
In sex the technical props have gone first in the United 
States, but the fact that the formal belief still stands is 
manifest in the question posed by the student and many 
others like her. How long it can stand is questionable. A few 
years ago G. P. Murdock, a famous anthropologist, was re-
ported as saying that premarital chastity would not last 
another generation. People were appalled. He was attacked 
in the press, born barded with angry letters, and condemned. 
The reaction was typical of what happens when someone 
predicts the collapse of any formal system. 
Often technical systems turn into formal ones so quickly 
that people react to them as though they were still technical. 
Much of the worshiping at the shrine of scientific method-
ology in the social sciences these days smacks more of a 
formal system than a technical one. In these times it seems 
to be remarkably easy for scientists to turn into priests. 
Though unlike the ordained priest who knows he is a priest 
and receives the backing of a formal organization, the 
ritualistic scientist is engaged in a disconcerting masquerade:· 
A good example of this transition is what has happened 
to the psychoanalytic disciples of Freud in this country. 
Their operations have all the trappings of religion, including 
the laborious re-examination of matters of dogma and a 
sort of excommunication for heretics. Many of them 
function very well within the system and manage to adapt 

114 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
preserve the core of a formal system when all of the impor-
tant technical props had been removed? 
In retrospect we can laugh at the thousand and one little 
props which once made it easy for a woman to keep her 
virtue. But how useful they were. I remember hearing about 
an elderly New England lady who criticized her daughter-
in-law about the way in which she handled her body, 
especially her legs. Her admonition went somewhat like this: 
"My dear, in this family a woman never crosses her legs. 
She sits forward on her chair with her head erect, her hands 
folded in her lap, and her knees together. On informal 
occasions, in the home and in the presence of her father 
or her brothers, she may cross her ankles." Today this sort 
of talk seems quaintly comical. 
There used to be a separate vocabulary for men and 
women. There were words that women were never supposed 
to hear. There were different postures and dress for the two 
sexes, and there were areas that were taboo to women-
areas where they might not receive respectful treatment. 
Clothes hid everything but the face. Close chaperonage and 
limited times and places where young women could be seen 
with a man were enforced. All this occurred within the 
memory of a great many people living today. 
In Latin America, however, the technical props which 
support formal virtue are still firm and elaborate. Americans 
have come to hold the view that the controls exist in the 
person and not in the situation. The Latin countries to the 
south make a different assumption. A man is thought of as 
being incapable of resisting his libidinal impulses in the 
face of a woman if the situation is such that he can succeed. 
Women are conceived of as frail creatures who could not 
possibly stand up to any man. Thus the situation has to be 
controlled with the full force of custom. 
Obviously any change in the sexual manners of South 

116 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
because they know it's a formal system they are in-not a 
technical one. It is time, however, that we began to realize 
that much of what passes for science today may have been 
scientific yesterday but can no longer qualify because it does 
not make any additional meaningful statements about any-
thing. It blindly adheres to procedures as a church adheres 
to its ritual. 
Sometime in the future it will be possible to say more 
about the two types of technical statements which presume 
to be scientific. Type A seems to be designed to support a 
going concern and provides a prop for the formal core (laws, . 
statements about conduct and ritual, regulations, and the 
like), while type B often does just the opposite, tearing 
down existing props and building new ones in their place. 
Men like Darwin, Newton, and Einstein toppled old struc-
tures, clearing the way for new systems of thought. Type B 
tends toward the classic goal of true science, which is to 
explain more and more events with fewer and fewer theories. 
This contrast between the two aspects of the technical can 
best be summarized with the statement that all scientific 
statements are technical, but not all technical statements 
are scientific. 
In summary, change is a complex circular process. It 
proceeds from formal to informal to technical to new 
formal, with the emphasis shifting rather rapidly at certain 
junctures. The rapid shifts are explained by the fact that 
people cannot tolerate existing in two systems at the same 
time; they have to approach life at any given moment from 
one of these three levels of integration but not more than 
one. 
It is doubtful that anyone ever really changes culture in 
the sense that this term is ordinarily used. What happens 
is that small informal adaptations are continually being 
made in the day-to-day process of living. Some of them work 

;--------...., 
The forrmll (F), informal (1), and tecbnica1 m aspects of human activity. 
r--------.., 
// 
I
z 
c c;; 
en ... 
a: 
A. 
::i 
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
G> 
~ 
c: 
$. 
G> 
Q 
>. 
... 
a: 
bO 
c: 
·~ 
... ... 
G> .... 
', 
Rellclous ceremonies, 
111llltary defenses, 
Jlultll practices 
.Individual attitudes 
to supernatural, 
health, etc. 
Game$ 
Education 
lnforTNl 
learning (by 
observation) 
ExJIIoitation 
Interaction 
Technoloo 
Exploitation of 
resources (l~cluding 
agncu lture) 
Cycles 
Calendar, time measurement 
m 
uncuace 
(I) 
Gesture. 
Space 
r elations 
111cflvlduat 
space requirements 
Boundaries (all types) 
/ 
I
Caste 
Sex (biological) 
Government 
Oecupa· 
tlons 
and 
profes: 
slons 
• DreS$ and bchavforbt 
.men and women In 
technical fields 
,. 
~ 
... 
n 
Ai' 
e. 
... 
::1 
I
I
I
I
I
l
I
I
I
I
I
I
en 
I
g. I
.,. ~
·;;;· c 
-
:I
CD 
ro 
~ I
G 
I
I
I
l 
I
.. 
~ I
CD 
J
--~ J
~1!
Temporality 
Territoriality 
f', 
~ 
I 
I 
' 
'":7-----:::-------0RIEHTAliOM------------..J 
'.._ ___ ..._ __ ,__ . .J
\ . 
/ 
.: ,L-------.../ 
-~~{t:~~~:i:'/~~~·h_~ J'.::!::. 

chapter 
five 
CULTURE 
IS 
COMMUNICATION 
In recent years the physicist, the mathematician, and the 
engineer have accustomed themselves to looking at a wide 
range of events as aspects of communication. A book title 
such as Electrons, Waves and Messages does not seem in-
congruous. Another book title, The Mathematical Theory 
of Communication, seems so appropriate that it is readily 
accepted, at least by the scientifically inclined layman. How-
ever, the behavioral scientists have only recently begun to 
examine their respective fields as communication. 
The reader may wonder about the nature of the relation- · 
ship between communication as I use the term and the 
communication theory (information theory) of the elec-
tronics laboratory. In one way it might be said that the 
communication theory is shorthand for talking about com-
munication events that have already been subjected to 
considerable analysis, such as the phonetics of a language, 

118 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
better than others. These adaptations eventually become 
technicalized as improvements, and the improvements ac-
cumulate imperceptibly until they are suddenly acclaimed 
as "break-throughs." Steady, small improvements in air-
plane design have snowballed into machines undreamed of 
twenty years ago. 
If a person really wants to help introduce culture change 
he should find out what is happening on the informal level 
and pinpoint which informal adaptations seem to be the 
most successful in daily operations. Bring these to the level 
of awareness. Even this process can only accelerate change,. 
not actually control it in the manner desired by men of 
action. This is because the out-of-awareness nature of the 
informal is where all changes start. To paraphrase Dobzhan-
sky, life is due to the dynamic interaction of living substance 
with itself and is not the result of either chance or design. 

120 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
orthographies, telephone and television signals; and the like. 
This process inevitably seems to proceed in one direction-
toward symbolization. It must be remembered that when 
people talk they are using arbitrary vocal symbols to describe 
something that has happened or might have happened and 
that there is no necessary connection between these sym-
bolizations and what occurred. Talking is a highly selective 
process because of the way in which culture works. No 
culture has devised a means for talking without highlighting 
some things at the expense of some other things. It follows 
that writing is a symbolization of a symbolization. Com-
munication theory takes this process one step farther. The · 
principal difference, as I see it, between the electronic engi-
neer's approach and the approach of the cultural-communi-
cation specialist is that one works with highly compressed 
symbolic data while the other tries to find out what happens 
when people talk, before the data is stripped of all its 
overtones. 
In considering man's total life as communication we see 
a spectrum covering a wide range of communication events. 
It is possible to observe complete messages of differing 
duration, some of them very short (less than a minute) and 
others covering years and years. In general the study of 
culture deals with events of fairly short duration. The 
psychology of the individual in his cultural and social setting 
presents communication events of longer over-all duration. 
The study of government and political science may involve 
messages that take years to unfold. The following examples 
show how the duration of these messages can vary over a 
wide spectrum. 
When a husband comes home from the office, takes off 
his hat, hangs up his coat, and says "Hi" to his wife, the 
way in which he says 'fHi," reinforced by the manner in 
which he sheds his overcoat, summarizes his feelings about 

:1;.t. 
~.~-
··. 
~~"'! 
·~ 
.; 
CULTURE IS COMMUNICATION I 
121 
the way things went at the office. If his wife wants the 
details she may have to listen for a while, yet she grasps in 
an instant the significant message for her; namely, what 
kind of evening they are going to spend and how she is 
going to have to cope with it. 
Or take the example of a salesman who has been trying 
to sell something to an important client for a number of 
months. The client finally agrees to take up the business 
with his board of directors and promises to let the salesman 
know the verdict in a week. The first half second of the 
interview that follows usually tells the salesman what he 
wants to know-whether he has been successful or not. 
A political figure makes a speech which is supposed to be 
reassuring. It has the opposite effect. When the words are 
read they are reassuring. Yet the total message as delivered 
is not. Why? For the same reason that the housewife and 
the salesman know what to expect. Sentences can be mean-
ingless by themselves. Other signs may be much more 
eloquent. The significant components of a communication 
on the level of culture are characterized by their brevity as 
compared with other types of communication. By simply 
raising the pitch of the voice at the end of an utterance 
instead of letting it fade away, it is possible (in English) 
to change a statement of fact to a question. The fact that 
communication can be effected in so brief a time on the 
cultural level is often responsible for the confusion which 
so often occurs in cross-cultural exchanges. 
As one leaves the cultural part of the spectrum and pro- ;· 
ceeds to the personality portion, the wave length increases. · 
The analytic building blocks, instead of being sounds and 
the like, are whole interactions between people-mother 
and child, for instance. Thus first impressions may be wrong 
because neither person has had a chance to reveal himself 
fully in a brief period. As a whole, the personality comes 

CULTURE IS COMMUNICATION I 
123 
!~11¥':,. basic to understanding culture as communication. A good 
ir: ... · deal of what follows is an explication of these terms and 
:;p 
what lies behind them. 
~.·:_· ·~· 
To recapitulate, man is constantly striving to discover the 
: .. meaning of relationships between individuals and groups of 
r-!~ 
,. 
individuals. The professional scholar soon learns to disre-
l• 
gard the immediate explicit meaning of the obvious and to 
look for a pattern. He a!so has to learn to scale his percep-
tions up or down, depending upon what type of communi-
cation he is trying to unravel This leads to an understandable · 
occupational blindness which makes it almost impossible 
for him to pay close attention to communications of other 
types, on other wave lengths, as it were. An ability to 
decipher communications in a restricted area of speciali-
zation is what makes men experts. One person may be an 
expert in long-range events, another in short-term inter-
actions. Further, if we return to language as it is spoken (not 
written) as a specialized communication system, we can 
learn something of how other less elaborated systems work. 
Most of what is known about communications has been 
learned from the study of language. Because the work with 
language has been so fruitful, there are certain analogies 
drawn .from it which can be useful in the description of 
other communication systems. 
In the study of languages, one can safely assume nothing. 
No two languages are alike; each has to be approached afresh. 
Some are so dissimilar, English and Navajo, for example, 
that they force the speaker into two different images of · 
reality. Yet, whether a language is near or far, closely related 
or unrelated, there are certain steps which have to be taken 
in the analysis of the language in order that learning may 
proceed. 
At first the new language is nothing but a blur of sound. 
Soon, however, some things seem to stand out, recognizable 

122 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
through rather slowly and is only fully known after years. 
The portion of the communications spectrum which 
embraces political events is composed of units of much 
longer duration. Meanings must be found in the context of 
hundreds of years of history. In a total pattern, a govern-
ment's white paper is not just another document; it may be 
the equivalent of a period or a semicolon or even a question 
mark at the end of a message that has been building up for 
years. The message is composed of numerous situations and 
acts-something which is understood by any political 
scientist or statesman. Diplomacy and politic;al strategy can 
be seen as a kind of debate where the words cover years.' 
Beyond this, men like Toynbee have been trying to work 
out the grammar of a message which may last for several 
hundred years, thereby transcending the lifetime of an in-
dividual human being. They analyze the syntax of whole 
societies and civilizations. 
The trouble that social scientists have when they talk to 
someone who has been working on a different part of the 
communications spectrum is that what one sees clearly may 
be a diffuse blur or a microscopic dot to the other. Yet each 
researcher is trying his best to establish a pattern for ex-
tracting the meaning from what he studies. In the end all 
these patterns are relevant to one another. The language of 
politics and the language of culture are a long way apart, yet 
each subsumes the other. 
Like a telephone system, any communication system has 
three aspects: its over-all structure, comparable to the tele-
phone network; its components, comparable to switchboards, 
wires, and telephones; and the message itself, which is carried 
by the network. Similarly, messages can be broken down into 
three components: sets (like words), isolates (like sounds), 
and patterns (like grammar or syntax). A breakdown of 
messages into these components, sets, isolates, and patterns is 

124 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
events recur. There are, for instance, perceived breaks or 
pauses, spaces which set off one event from another. It is 
usually assumed that these breaks separate words. Actually, 
they may be words, or they may be sentences, or they may 
be something else. The point is that there is something 
which is perceived, and this is what the learner grasps. For 
the time being we will call the things which we perceive 
"words." This is only a convenience, however, because the 
word as we know it is very limited in meaning. 
In learning the new language, we discover, after having 
reproduced a number of words in our mouths, that the 
"words" are made up of sounds of various sorts, many of· 
which are quite different from the sounds of English. Then 
we find that there is a way of stringing the words together 
that c:;onstitutes a complete utterance_ which we think of as 
a sentence. 
To repeat, in discovering how a new language works and 
in learning that language, one starts with something akin 
to the word, made up of sounds, and put together in a 
particular way and according to certain set rules, which we 
call syntax. These are the basic steps and they identify the 
basic components of a language. 
Because the terminology of the linguist is specialized and 
overly complex, Trager and I introduced a new set of terms 
which apply to all types of communication, including lan-
guage. The cover terms are used to designate the three 
principal elements of a message. These are: sets, isolates, 
and patterns. The sets (words) are what you perceive first, 
the isolates (sounds) are the components that make up the 
sets, while the patterns (syntax) are the way in which sets 
are strung together in order to give them meaning. 
The idea of looking at culture as communication has·been 
profitable in that it has raised problems which had not been 
thought of before and provided solutions which might not 

CULTURE IS COMMUNICATION I 
125 
otherwise have been possible. The fruitfulness of the ap-
proach can be traced to the clear distinction which was made 
between the formal, informal, and the technical, as well as 
the realization that culture can be analyzed into sets, iso-
lates, and patterns. It is interesting to note that the early 
studies of the material culture of the American Indian were 
originally approached in this way but became entangled in 
a methodological bog because the study of linguistics had 
not progressed sufficiently at that time to enable the worker 
to draw any useful analogies from the way in which language 
worked. The data suggested, however, that there were things 
like the isolate which were called traits and catch-all com-
binations comparable to the word which were called trait-
complexes. 
In many instances the earlier attempts at handling 
material culture foundered because the living informant, if 
available at all, was not used properly to provide a true basis 
for the field worker's analysis. Somehow field work tended 
then, as it does today, to become contaminated by the 
culture of the scientist. 
Like the philosophers and alchemists of the past who 
looked for the right things in the wrong way, many anthro-
pologists have been searching for the essential building 
blocks of culture. Using the phoneme (the building block of 
language) as a model, they tried to discover its cultural 
equivalent, assuming in the process that culture was an 
entity, like language. Many of these efforts were based on 
incomplete understanding of the phoneme. In reality the 
phoneme is a cluster of sounds recognizable to the speakers 
of the language. The a as the New Englander pronounces 
it in the word "father," as well as its other regional varia-
tions, constitutes one phoneme. The p at the beginning of 
"pip" or "pop" is actually different from the p at the end, 

·· 
chapter 
SlX 
T H E 
PERVA SI V E 
SET 
As a general rule,· a set is a group of two or more constituent 
components that is perceived as being set apart from other 
things. Material objects such as chairs, tables, desks, and 
myriad other assemblages of things can be considered sets. 
So can words, periods of time, special measurements like 
the mile, and go.verning bodies, to mention only a few of the 
less tangible appurtenances of life which fit our definition. 
Because there are different types of sets, however- formal 
sets, informal sets, and technical sets-some sets are per-
ceived more easily than others. Formal sets, for example,-
are those things which people take for granted and which 
seem natural: words, buildings, governments, families, the 
day, the months, and the year. Yet all these dissolve as satis-
factory sets once one begins to look at them technically. 
We cannot think of words without languages, buildings 
without a civilization, time without periods. 

126 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
yet . they are both known as allophones (recognizable var-
iants) of the phoneme p. 
The phoneme, like all other isolates, is an abstraction that 
dissolves into a set as soon as it is pinned down. Since this 
was not understood by anthropologists, the phoneme did 
not provide a proper model for the rest of culture. The 
phoneme also represents just one structure point in a highly 
specialized communication system. It never pays to draw 
an analogy on the basis of structure points alone without 
reference to how the whole system behaves. The scientist 
has to be consistent in these things. If he is going to use a 
linguistic building block like the phoneme, then the rest of 
the system should be used too. It seems that linguistic 
analysis requires some adaptation before it constitutes a 
suitable model for the other systems of culture. The subse-
quent chapters will be devoted to an expansion of what is 
meant by the terms isolate, set, and pattern, which are used 
to replace the terms phoneme, morpheme, and syntax as 
used in linguistics. 

128 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
At whatever level, sets are seldom perceived in isolation. 
Normally they appear in context and as one of many in a 
series of similar or related events. In the cross-cultural 
situation the first thing that a person will learn about another 
society is the existence of certain formal sets. These are 
either pointed out right away or they are so obvious that 
they cannot be missed. Yet in many cases the newcomer 
never gets beyond this first step. For example, he may learn 
a great many words (or sets) of a foreign language but still 
use the linguistic isolates of his mother tongue- which gives 
him an accent. Moreover, he may, without knowing it, fit . 
the foreign words into the constructions, or patterns, of his 
native tongue-which can render his thoughts unintelligi-
ble. To take another example, we in America perceive all 
makes of cars as automobiles, whereas in certain parts of 
the Arab world only one make, the Cadillac, is considered 
an automobile. In such cases the foreigner (i.e., an Arab) 
feels he has mastered a set quite different from the ones he 
is familiar with and has the illusion of having understood 
another culture. In reality only the first hesitant step has 
been taken. To master a foreign culture it is necessary to 
master its patterns and isolates as well as its sets. 
Sets are limited only by the number of possible combina-
tions of their isolates and patterns. To try to deal with a 
foreign culture by learning more and more sets is a hopeless 
task. To collect sets in your mind is easy, but to decipher a · 
pattern is difficult. Talking about sets without bringing 
in patterns is like talking about bricks without saying any-
thing about houses. Thus, though this chapter is primarily 
devoted to sets, it is necessary to introduce the concept of 
pattern frequently. 
If people can recognize a pattern, it doesn't much matter 
what specific events they perceive. These can, in fact, be 
quite different and still be part of the same pattern, just as 

~!:r :· . 
: '! 
THE PERVASIVE SET I 
129 
houses are still houses even though made of different ma-
terials. Throughout the Middle East, for example, bargain-
ing is an underlying pattern which is significantly different 
from the activity which goes under that name in our culture. 
Yet what is perceived on the surface (i.e., Arab methods of 
bargaining) looks familiar and is assumed to be the same. 
Nothing could be farther from the truth. Our first mistake 
is in the assessment of the value of bargaining in the Middle 
East and the role it plays in everyday life. Americans tend 
to look down on people who haggle. They restrict their 
serious trading to houses and automobiles. To the Arab, on 
the other hand, bargaining is not only a means of passing a 
day but actually a technique of interpersonal relations. How-
ever, it is not just the value placed on bargaining that is 
different in the Middle East but the pattern as well. 
What we perceive on a first visit to an Arab country is a 
series of interactions that we recognize as something akin to 
bargaining. That is, we perceive the sets: the actions, the 
motions, the rises in the tone of voice, increases in loudness, 
the withdrawal, the handling of the merchandise. With all 
this going on before our eyes we do not ordinarily reflect 
on how our own pattern differs from this ostensibly familiar 
one. The American asks, "What percentage of the asking 
price shall I give as my first offer?" What he doesn't know 
is that there are several asking prices. Like the Eskimo who1. 
has many different words for snow, the Arab has many dif-
ferent asking prices, each with a different meaning. The 
American pattern is that the two parties have hidden prices· 
above and below which they will not go, and an asking price 
which is perceived and thought of as having some sort of 
fixed relationship to the hidden prices. A more detailed 
analysis of how this all works will be discussed in Chapter 
Eight. 
To return to sets, the principal point to remember is that 

'-:,· 
THE PERVASIVE SET I 
131 
sugar bowl with a plastic top. In the United Sta~es, no 
stretch of the imagination could put these diverse items in 
the same set. 
Another important point is that the same sets are classi-
fied differently as one moves about the globe. This provides 
us with some additional stumbling blocks and gives us the 
illusion that we are really learning something different. In 
English, nouns are not classified as to sex. In Arabic, they 
are. You have to know the sex of the noun if you are to use 
it properly. We, on the other hand, classify everything into 
animate and inanimate, which would mean that a Trobriand 
Islander who does not make these distinctions would have 
to remember every time he referred to something whether 
we thought it was alive or not. He would also experience 
some difficulty with our animal and vegetable classifications, 
because he conceives of vegetables as being like animals and 
able to migrate from one garden to the next. (A good gar-
dener to him is like a shepherd who is able to keep his own 
vegetables home and possibly even to entice a few, but not 
too many, of his neighbor's vegetables to enter his garden.) 
English also has mass and non-mass nouns. Mass nouns 
comprise such things as sand, snow, flour, and grass. They 
are indicated by the phrase, "Give me some--." Non-mass 
nouns include such objects as man, dog, thimble, and leaf. 
The phrase, "Give me a --" is the linguistic clue to their 
existence. The foreigner always has to learn, pretty much by 
rote, which nouns are mass and which are not. Grass is, leaf · 
isn't; there is no known consistent logic as to why a noun . 
exists in one category and not another. In fact, it is true of 
sets generally that there is a good deal of plain old repetitious 
learning involved in their use. Vocabulary, wherever and 
however you find it, always has to be memorized. 
We also distinguish between the various states of things-
that is, whether they are active or passive. How the person 

130 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
they are the first thing to be observed, their number is un-
limited, and the interpretation of their significance depends 
upon a know ledge of the patterns in which they are used. 
There are additional generalizations which one can make 
about sets, however. These can be of use to the field worker, 
for they point the way to deeper patterns. 
A large part of the vocabulary of a culture is devoted to 
sets. By looking at the vocabulary you can get a rough idea 
of the content of a culture and the things that are valued. 
The fact that we have only one word for snow while the 
Eskimos have several is a case in point. A highly developed 
technical vocabulary reflects a technical culture. Americans 
think nothing of having their advertising filled with words 
once known only to scientists and engineers, .such as 
chlorophyll, thermonuclear, chloromycetin, cardiovascular, 
and the like. 
The same set may be valued differently. The Latin Ameri-
can is likely to ask, if he comes from a place like Venezuela, 
why we emphasize something so dirty and unpleasant as 
plumbing. He may even want to know why we put the toilet 
in the bathroom. In Japan, to take another example, emo-
tion or feeling is ranked very high. They call it kimochi or 
dojo. Logic, as we think of it, is ranked low. Our ranking 
of these two sets is, of course, almost the reverse of the 
Japanese. 
Comparable sets are also composed of different compo-
nents in different cultures. We think of a set of china as 
being primarily the dishes, cups, and saucers made from 
the same material and bearing the same pattern or in the 
same style. In Japan this does not hold. One of the many 
sets which I saw in the modern department stores in the 
Ginza was a "coffee set" in a box. It included six cups,· six 
saucers, six spoons (all china), one aluminum percolator 
(kitchen variety), one cut-glass cream pitcher, and one plain 

132 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
speaking relates to natural events also varies. We say, "I'll 
see you in an hour." The Arab says, "What do you mean, 'in 
an hour'? Is the hour like a room, that you can go in and out 
of it?" To him his own system makes sense: "I'll see you 
before one hour," or "I'll see you after one week." We go 
out in the rain. The Arab goes under the rain. 
Not only are sets classified, but they are broken down into 
further categories. An analysis of the number of sets in a 
given category can sometimes tell you the relative impor-
tance of an item in the over-all culture. The first person to 
speak scientifically about this trait was Franz Boas in his 
discussion of such things as the Eskimo's use of several 
different "nouns" for the many states of snow. In our cul-
ture one can get some idea of the importance of women by 
examining the tremendous proliferation of synonyms for 
females, particularly the young ones-cupcake, doll, flame, 
skirt, tomato, queen, broad, bag, dish, twist, to mention only 
a few. Each indicates a different variety or a subtle distinc-
tion in the ranking scale. 
An additional attribute of sets, indicated by the above, 
is that they are almost always ranked within their category. 
The ranking, of course, varies as one moves about. White 
men are ranked above Negroes in the United States. In 
Liberia it's the other way around. In fine watchmaking, gold 
is ranked above steel when elegance or social display is the 
goal. If one is a sportsman, steel may take precedence. To 
the American public as a whole, Cadillac ranks Buick, which 
ranks Chevrolet. 
As a matter of fact, the ranking of sets is so subtle that 
one has to be more specific. It is not enough to say that sets 
are ranked. The categories of rankings, which reveal a pattern 
themselves, are of equal importance. In essence there are 
-three different ways in which the set is ranked: (a) for-
mally as a traditional item in a system of valued sets (lead, 

~·:::~·~~ 
~~y:-·. 
{i~.' 
THE PERVASIVE SET I 133 
~- ·. copper, gold, platinum); (b) informally, according to the 
~ . 
'< 
taste of the observer or the demands of a situation (rare, 
,. 
' 
medium, well-done steaks; red, green, blue, yellow); (c) 
technically, as points in a pattern: "Potatoes are selling for 
$5.00 a lot; yesterday they went for $4.95." The pattern in 
this case is the so-called law of supply and demand. On the 
Trobriand Islands a comparably comestible item like the 
yam was valued according to a completely different pattern. 
It was ranked according to its size, shape, when it was har-
vested, and who was to receive it. Supply and demand had 
nothing to do with the case. 
Americans treat colors informally as a whole-that is, 
situationally. We may use a spot of yellow or of red, or yellow 
and red to accent a gray wall. We would be unlikely to put 
the yellow and the red next to each other. The colors in them-
selves have little or no value. If they do the criterion is taste. 
To the Navajo the situation is quite different; colors are 
ranked just as we rank gold and silver-only more intensely. 
Not realizing this caused considerable embarrassment to a 
number of Indian Service employees years ago. · In their 
attempt to bring "democracy" to the Indians these well-
meaning souls tried to introduce a system of voting among 
the Navajo. Unfortunately a great many Navajo were 
illiterate, so someone conceived of the idea of assigning the 
various candidates for the tribal council different colors so 
that the Navajo could go into the booth and check the color 
he wanted. Since blue is a good color and red bad, the result 
was to load the dice for some candidates and against the 
others. Nowadays photographs are used on the ballots. 
Though Westerners tend to be impressed by big numbers 
and have an aversion to thirteen, one number is as good as 
the next now that superstition has dwindled away. Numbers 
only become meaningful in a technical context. The Japa-
nese, however, have numbers that mean good luck, wealth, 

chapter 
seven 
THE 
ILLUSIVE 
ISOLATE 
If the set is that aspect of existence which is most readily 
perceivable by man and the pattern is the organizational 
plan which gives it meaning, the isolate is an illusive ab-
straction, almost a phantom. It. is the element which goes 
to make up a set, yet, paradoxically, the moment one begins 
to examine the set closely for its isolates the distinction 
between sets and isolates dissolves. To be sure, the isolates 
will reveal themselves, but as soon as they are clearly per-
ceived, they are seen to be sets on their own level This _ . 
transition from set to isolate to set is of great importance. · 
It has caused innumera b]e problems for the scientist, because 
when the transition occurs the whole perceptual structure 
changes. Even the old sets become something different. For 
example, a set which we call a "word" is perceived. Yet, when 
it is broken down into its component sounds which are the 
isolates, we find that the word as it was thought of originally 

1 34 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
bankruptcy, and death. This fact <;omplicates the Japanese 
telephone system. Good numbers· bring a high price, un-
lucky ones are palmed off on foreigners. 
It is quite clear then that one of the readily perceivable 
differences between cultures is the category to which a set is 
assigned and, once it is assigned, how it is treated: formally, 
informally, or technically. 
In summary, we might point out that the only meaning 
which can be assigned to sets as sets is what we can call 
demoTI$tra#onal meaning: This is a "dog"; that is a "man"; 
there goes an "airplane." By themselves, sets are neutral. 
In patterns, on the other hand, sets take on all sorts of more 
complex types of meaning. The most thorough analysis of 
sets in patterns has been carried on in the study of semantics, 
which is concerned with the meaning of words in various 
contex.ts. Though semantic studies have made remarkable 
progress they still have far to go. Their principal defect, as 
they are now conducted, is that the patterns are taken for 
granted. 

1 36 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
has been lost forever. Every layman has noticed this pheno-
menon when he begins to play with the sounds of a word, 
disregarding the word itself. When the linguist operating in 
a much more sophisticated fashion begins to record and 
classify sounds in his search for isolates, he realizes that in 
addition to the usual vowels and consonants there are clusters 
of informal constants such as stress, pitch, and intonation. As 
a consequence, he is apt to find that the word does not break 
down and build up the way he thought it did. A series of new 
sets is perceived to take its place. 
An analogue of the uncertainty principle of physics would 
seem to apply to this dilemma. The uncertainty principle 
holds that the observer and his instrument are inextricably 
bound up with the phenomena under observation and that 
the act of observation alters the conditions under observa-
tion. The more precisely our linguistic components are ex-
amined, the more abstract and imprecise the old observa-
tions become. In other words, when working with cultural 
· data, one can only be precise on one analytic level at a time 
and then only for a moment. I call this "cultural indeter-
minacy." 
When one considers the remarkable order repeatedly 
demonstrated by nature it is not surprising to discover that 
as soon as one starts looking for isolates in a given category 
of sets, like the sounds in words, certain recurrent uniformi-
ties appear. T his fortunately puts definite limits to what 
otherwise might be an infinite job. One begins with the 
knowledge that what is being sought will ultimately turn 
out to be a discreet category of sets. In considering language, 
for example, one starts with the assumption that from a 
limited number of sounds all the words in English can be 
produced. We have also learned that there is a "sound 
system" for any language and that the speakers are bound 

THE ILLUSIVE ISOLATE I 
137 
by the system of their own language. This is why the first 
language one learns exerts an influence over all subsequent 
ones and gives them an accent. The binding effect of lan-
guage is not in the sets but in the isolates and patterns. 
Almost anyone can reproduce the sounds of a foreign 
language in isolation, but many find that it is difficult to join 
them into a word. When they try it they alter the sound, 
so strong is the tie of old habits. 
When the scientist, whatever his specialty, starts his search 
for isolates, he knows he will eventually find a system which 
will have an order and a pattern, and that his job will not 
last forever. There will come a time when he has mastered 
the system and can describe it. He can then teach people 
and by so doing create new systems, such as writing systems 
and alphabets and codifications of legal systems, to mention 
only a few of the intellectual constructs of man. 
The goal of the investigator who deals with human 
phenomena is to discover the patterns of isolates that exist 
hidden in the minds, the sensory apparatus, and the muscles 
of men. These systems cannot ordinarily be discovered by 
using machines and precise measuring instruments. They 
havetoo,much leeway in them and depend upon the capacity 
of man to recognize and respond to patterns. If the scientist 
is going to use machines, he must use them with tolerances 
that are appropriate to the data he is analyzing and the level 
on which he is conducting his analysis. If he is too precise, 
he turns up parts of systems which he is not yet ready to · 
handle. What is important are the distinctions the native 
speaker of the language makes when he talks and those that 
he hears when he listens. These are the same. They make up 
his hidden system, the one he shares with thousands, if not 
millions, of other people. The researcher is not concerned 
with individual variations, situational differences, dialects, 

THE ILLUSIVE ISOLATE I 
139 
variable he is trying to pin down. A representative sample of 
the "words" of the language is worked through until it ap-
pears that all the significant distinctions made by native 
speakers have been identified. In spoken English there are 
45 variables which combine to form all the sets and their 
combinations; 9 vowels, 3 semi-vowels, 21 consonants, 4 
stresses, 4 pitches, and 4 junctures. There are only 26 vari-
ables-the 26 letters of the alphabet-used in the writing 
system, plus commas, pe][iods, and question marks. 
To summarize our discussion of isolates: It is quite clear 
that since they are, by definition, abstractions, isolates are 
difficult to describe. The concept of the isolate or the build-
ing block, however, seems to be an integral part of human 
communication on every level. Moreover, isolates are some-
thing man is constantly trying to discover and analyze 
whether he does it consciously or not. The term isolate is 
also one which is used for convenience to denote the type 
of constituent event whiich goes to make up other events 
and is as much a designation of an analytic level as anything 
else. Despite their tendency to merge with one another, 
isolates and sets are firmly different in a good many respects. 
Isolates are limited in number, whereas sets are limited 
only by the possible patterned combinations of isolates. They 
are bound in a system and become sets only when they are 
taken out of that system. Sets, on the other hand, can be 
handled and perceived out of their systems but derive their · 
meaning from the context in which they occur. Unlike the · 
set which is clearly perceived, the isolate is an abstraction· 
for events that cluster about a norm recognized by the mem-
bers of a given culture. The actual difference between two 
isolates that are close to each other in the world of measure-
ments may be less than the range of variation within the 
norm of each; it is the pattern in which they occur that 

138 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
nor speech defects but with the system that makes it possible 
for people to understand others even when they are missing 
important parts of their vocal apparatus, such as their teeth. 
What he wants are the structure points around which be-
havior clusters and which are recognized as being related 
or thought to be the same. He is looking for those things 
which enable all normal participants of a given culture (not 
90 per cent or 8o per cent, but all) to distinguish between 
event A and event B. These events can be the conversation 
distance between two people, the waiting time on a street 
corner or antechamber, or, for that matter, anything in a 
culture that has meaning to the members of that culture. 
Actually, to ask what it is that enables a man to tell the 
difference between A and B involves a different procedure 
from asking what goes to make up A and B. The difference 
in procedure is due to the fact that the subject cannot give 
a precise account of how he goes about making distinctions. 
But he can tell whether A and B are the same or different. 
The scientist's job is to analyze the difference and thereby 
uncover the hidden system of his subjects. 
The procedure most commonly used is to work with the 
contrasting pairs of sets, taking up the differences pair by 
pair until all the distinctions have been identified. For ex-
ample, pit is different from pat, tit different from tat. Since 
initial p sound and final t are held constant in pit and pat, 
the only variable is the short i and a. The same holds for 
tit and tat, bit and bat, and so on. With this information it 
is, possible to construct a hypothesis that short i and a sounds 
are isolates and that speakers of the language will distinguish 
between them. Further, if one is substituted for the other in 
a word, the word will change. From this point on the scien-
tist is faced with a good deal of routine drudgery. He con-
tinues his analysis, holding everything constant qcept the 

140 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
enables man to distinguish between them. Speakers of the 
Mexican variety of Spanish, for example, can't distinguish 
between i as it occurs in "dish" and e as it occurs in "feet." 
For them, these are variants on the same sound. \Vhen 
they talk they don't know which they are reproducing. 
The procedure for testing whether any given element in 
a grouping is an isolate is to hold everything constant and 
vary the element at will. If this changes the meaning of the 
grouping then the element is an isolate. The way one ends 
an utterance, for example, can make it either a statement 
or a question depending upon whether the voice falls or 
rises. Rising inflection at the end of the sentence is one 
isolate, falling inflection is another. This applies to English 
and some related languages but is not universal. A variant 
of this test is to note the one thing that keeps changing 
when everything else under observation seems to be con-
stant. If this variation entails a change of meaning then the 
variable is apt to be an isolate. 
Up to now the isolate has been described primarily as a 
constituent of the set. It is also one of the key elements in a 
pattern. Moreover, it can now be demonstrated that the 
basic work done on isolates which once seemed so trivial 
has been of crucial value in analyzing patterns. The isolate 
provides the transition from the set to the pattern and is the 
principal means of differentiating between patterns. This 
isolate, so hard to get at and to define, is now discovered to 
be the key to a great deal of the analysis of communication 
because it functions on three levels in three different ways: 
on the set level as a component part (c-a-k-e= cake); on the 
isolate level as a set (each sound is built up of parts) which 
the phonetician analyzes; on the pattern level as a differenti-
ator of patterns. Thus the inability of a speaker to distinguish 
between initial v and w often patterns him as Scandinavian. 

THE ILLUSIVE ISOLATE I 
141 
Similarly, the transposition of the oy and er sounds in 
"oysters" and "birds" so that they come out as "ersters" and 
"boids" used to be a stereotype in most Americans' minds 
with native speakers of Brooklynese. 

eight 
THE 
ORGANIZING 
PATTERN 
Patterns are those implicit cultural rules by means of which 
sets are arranged so that they take on meaning. 
Too little has been knoWn about patterns and how they 
operate. True, the rules which hold for many aspects of cul-
ture could be quoted, but there was no theory of patterning, 
no account of how one analyzes and describes patterns. 
In this chapter I shall make explicit a number of points 
which were only hinted at earlier. Some of these points cut . 
quite deeply into our systems of belief and represent radical 
departures from our current ways of thinking and doing. The 
most basic is that there is no such thing as "experience" in 
the abstract, as a mode separate and distinct from culture. 
Culture is neither derived from experience nor held up to 
the mirror of experience. Moreover, it cannot be tested 
against some mystical thing thought of as experience. Ex-


144 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
perience is something man pro;ects upon the outside world 
as he gains it in its culturally determined form. 
Another series of basic points which I would like to stress 
is that there are laws governing patterns: laws of order, selec-
tion, and congruence. 
The idea that man as a cultural being is bound by hidden 
rules and is not master of his fate may come as a shock to 
some- it has always been hard to accept. The one thing that 
is quite clear, however, is that man is bound as long as he 
remains ignorant of the nature of the hidden pathways cul-
ture provides for him. To the traditional questions about 
free will, determinism, and his unique individuality which 
the ordinary citizen is apt to bring up when he meets the 
concept of a world of hidden rules, the anthropologist can 
give a convincing answer. Of course there are impulses that 
appear to have independent origins from within, but even 
these are radically altered by culture so that they are brought 
into play under controlled circumstances. The man who is 
attracted to a woman may want to invite her out for a date. 
The choice as to whether he acts or not is his. What is not 
his to decide fully is the language he will use, the presents 
he can give her, the hours he can call, the clothes he can 
wear, and the fact that in the United States the woman has 
the ultimate say in the matter. An American these days will 
.not normally consider the revenge of the brothers as a price 
for seeing a woman without her family's. permission, nor 
will it cross his mind that she might lose her life if she 
chooses to be intimate with him. These are not "alternatives" 
which occur to him as he is weighing the choice of patterns 
available to him. Death of the woman and revenge on the 
man are within the expected range of behavior in the less 
Europeanized parts of the Arab world. This sort of example 
is rather obvious and is the type of point which has been 
made many times and dismissed just as many times. Our 

THE ORGANIZING PATTERN I 
145 
rationalization is that it is "uncivilized" to kill one's sister 
just because she was intimate with a man. What we often 
don't know and have difficulty accepting is that such pat-
terns fit into larger over-all patterns and that what is being 
guarded is not the sister's life (though she may be deeply 
loved) but a centrally located institution without which the 
society would perish or be radically altered. This institution 
is the family. In the Middle East the family is important 
because families are tied together in a functional interlock-
ing complex. The accompanying network (and obligations) 
satisfies many of the same functions that our government 
satisfies. The sister is a sacred link between families and, like 
the judge in our own culture, she has to remain above re-
proach. Thus it is usually necessary to take a second look 
at the more obvious differences in behavior because they 
often hide or grow out of more fundamental differences that 
are just beginning to be studied: differences which control 
behavior in a way that was never dreamed of, that are not 
conventions implying a choice but rules that are so constant 
that they are not recognized as rules at all. 
Benjamin Whorf, using language as the object of his in-
vestigation, had a good deal to say about the deep-lying rules 
which control both thought and behavior. He was, in fact, 
one of the first to speak technically about the implications of 
differences which influence the way in which man experi-
ences the universe. Until very recently it was believed that 
the thing that every man shared with others regardless of 
culture was experience. Yet it now seems doubtful indeed·· 
that experience is shared or that there is a constant that one 
can call experience in terms of which everything can be 
judged or measured. All cultures, rather, can be said to be 
relative to each other on the pattern level. There is a growing 
accumulation of evidence to indicate that man has no direct 
contact with experience per se but that there is an interven-

....... 
THE ORGANIZING PATTERN I 
147 
is presented in a kaleidoscopic flux of impression which 
has to be organized by our minds- and this means largely 
by the linguistic systems in our minds. We cut nature up, 
organize it into concepts, and ascribe significances as we 
do, largely because we are parties to an agreement to or-
ganize it in this way-an agreement that holds throughout 
our speech community and is codified in the patterns of 
our language. The agreement is, of course, an implicit and 
unstated one, but its terms are absolutely obligatory; we 
cannot talk at all except by subscribing to the organization 
and classification of data which the agreement decrees. 
This fact is very significant for modern science, for it 
means that no individual is free to describe nature with 
absolute impartiality but is constrained to certain modes 
of interpretation even while he thinks himself most free. 
In another article titled "Linguistics as an Exact Science," 
\Vhoi:f continues: 
.. . we all hold an illusion about talking, an illusion that 
talking is quite untrammeled and spontaneous and merely 
'expresses' whatever we wish to have it express. This il-
lusory appearance results from the fact that the obligatory 
phenomena within apparently free flow of talk are so com-
pletely autocratic that the speaker and listener are bound 
unconsciously as though in the grip of a law of nature. 
[Italics mine.] 
The implications of these statements go very deep indeed. 
They mean for one thing that once we have begun to really 
understand another people by mastering their language, we 
will still find hidden barriers which separate one people from 
another. 
Yet there is a way to hurdle these hidden barriers. 

146 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
ing set of patterns which channel his senses and his thoughts, 
causing him to react one way when someone else with dif-
ferent underlying patterns will react as his experience dic-
tates. 
Americans and Spaniards at a bullfight provide a familiar 
example of how the same set of circumstances· can be ex-
perienced differently. The American experiences the fear he 
would have if he were in the ring; the Spaniard, vicariously, 
the joy in the control the matador exercises over the bull. 
Or take the brute fact of death as another example: Cora 
Du Bois, the well-known anthropologist, states that the 
people of Alor consider another person as dead long before 
Europeans would and often bury persons whom we consider 
still living. Ralph Linton, talking about the Tanala of Mada-
gascar, describes how what we call death is conceived of as 
the assumption of a new status that involves active participa-
tion with the living. A woman has to get a divorce from her 
dead husband in order to marry someone else. To much of 
this the reader will say, "Yes, of course, but those people 
don't know any better, they are backward and ignorant and 
have no science. They haven't come as far as we have. What 
else can you expect of savages?'' To this one can only answer, 
"Yes, but life and death are objective experiences and should 
. therefore be the same- whatever the culture." The fact re-
mains that they are not. 
Whorf was concerned with the unconscious nature of the 
underlying assumptions upon which many of our actions 
are based. He develops this point in part in his article, 
"Science and Linguistics": 
We dissect nature along lines laid down by our native 
languages. The categories and types that we isolate from 
the world of phenomena we do not find there because they 
stare every observer in the face; on the contrary, the world 

148 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
In terms of my earlier discussions of sets and isolates, the 
simplest definition of a pattern that one could arrive at was 
this: A pattern is a meaningful arrangement of sets. What 
is left unsaid here is that a pattern is only meaningful if 
analyzed on its own level. For instance, the linguist's pho-
neme is a meaningful arrangement of sets to the linguist 
but not to laymen. A tastefully decorated living room is a 
meaningful arrangement of sets to women who belong to 
the same group and who are aware of the art of decorating 
a room. Men are likely to look at the room as a set, to see 
it as one thing, and to respond to the over-all effect. What 
they don't see, which many women do, is the detail. It is the 
detail in a pattern that tells one woman so many things 
about another. To most people a horse is a horse, yet a 
trainer experienced in the buying and selling of horses ex-
amines a number of sets such as height, weight, length of 
barrel, thickness of chest, depth of chest, configuration of 
the neck and head, stance, coat condition, hoofs, and gait. 
To the non-expert these characteristics are seen as isolates, 
but the expert with his broader experience sees them in 
light of his own extensive experience. He ticks them off in 
·his mind to see what they add up to. That is, he places this 
horse into a pattern along with other horses that are similar, 
· just as a winetaster evaluates the "qualities" of a wine. The 
important thing to remember is that the pattern is seen as 
a pattern only if it is examined on its own level and without 
leaving that level. 
A given pattern is only obvious to certain categories of 
people. A man sees one thing in a room, a woman some-
thing else, a maid something else. This means there is a 
relationship between the people and patterns. In effect, 
groups can be defined by the relation of their members to a 
certain pattern. The individuals of a group share patterns 
that enable them to see the same thing and this holds them 

'J. 
., 
!i 
; 
~i' . 
,. 
THE ORGANIZING PATTERN I 
149 
together. In the light of this analysis it is necessary to expand 
the definition of a pattern. It should now read: A pattern is 
a meaningful arrangement of sets shared by a group. 
THE THREE TYPES OF PATTERNS 
At the beginning of the century Japanese businessmen 
were coming to this country in increasing numbers. Like all 
travelers, they had difficulty orienting themselves. One of 
them is said to have written a book for other Japanese busi-
nessmen who might travel to America. In interpreting the 
passage that follows, it should be remembered that relative 
status is the key to much of Japanese life. This hierarchical 
system is formal, yet a great many of the rules are technical. 
It comes as no surprise, then, to find that our Japanese author 
opens his book by telling his readers that American life is 
full of ceremony but that the ceremony is so complex that 
no foreigner can ever hope to master it. Courageously, how-
ever, the writer offers a guide to conduct by instancing ex-
amples of behavior which might be followed. When two 
American businessmen meet, he points out, there is a lot 
of noise, they beat each other on the back, then as though 
by signal they both reach for cigars which they offer to each 
other. Both men will refuse the other's cigar, but ultimately 
the man of inferior status will accept the cigar of the man of 
superior status. 
Despite this ludicrous analysis, most of us recognize the 
pattern. It is an informal one which is dying out. But we · 
also know that part of the pattern is that the senior will 
accept the cigar of the junior if the junior is on the way 
up-a cue to him that the "old man" recognizes this. The 
hierarchical emphasis which the Japanese observer gave this 
pattern suggests another aspect of our way of life which is 
ostensibly characterized by an underlying formal pattern of 

,. 
THE ORGANIZING PAITERN I 
151 
(!,,. more formal. The r_esult is t_hat_ the Austrian appears to be 
~~ -
much more easygomg. He IS, m fact, much ~ore relaxed 
1:; about a lot of thmgs and has a good deal of genume freedom, 
rf;~ · providing he stays within certain well-prescribed limits. 
~~ Americans, on the other hand, have comparatively few tech-
~~--
nical and formal restrictions placed upon them but are 
~;f:: 
loaded with informal ones. This means that Americans are 
~'·· 
apt to be quite inhibited, because they cannot state explicitly 
~; · what the rules are. They can only point to them when they 
~-·· 
are viola ted. 
!y 
I have already touched upon the differences between the 
United States and the Middle East in the art of bargaining. 
The example is worth further elaboration. The American 
pattern of bargaining is predicated on the assumption that 
each party has a high and a low point that is hidden (what 
~·;; . 
. ~ 
he would like to get and what he will settle for). The func-
: 
~ 
tion of the bargaining is to discover, if possible, what the 
opponent's points are without revealing one's own. The 
American in the .Middle East, projecting his own uncon-
scious pattern, will ask, "\Vhat percentage of the asking price 
do I give?" That is, "If he's asking ten pounds, will he settle 
for five?" This procedure is not only wrong but can end in 
trouble. The principle to be remembered is that instead of 
each party having a high and a low there is really only one 
principal point, which lies somewhere in the middle. Much 
like our latest stock market quotation, this point is deter-
mined, not by the two parties, but by the market or the 
situation. An important isolate in this pattern is that the, · 
price is never determined by the person or his wishes but 
always by some set of circumstances which are known to 
both parties. If they are not known it is assumed that they 
could be. Negotiation, therefore, swings around a central 
pivot. Ignorance of the position of the pivot opens one 
up to the worst type of exploitation, as well as loss of face. 

150 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
equality. It points up to the fact that we also have a very 
complex informally patterned status system. The counters 
on the mobility scale are numerous and so finely grained 
that while the average person can manipulate the system he 
cannot describe how it works technically. Many recent 
American novels such as The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit 
have tried to describe one segment of this system. Status, 
as a matter of fact, is a persistent thread running through 
the American novel. One theme is to play on the conflict be-
tween informal ranking system and the basic equality pat-
tern. Another deals with characters who rise too fast, find 
themselves caught in unfamiliar patterns, and are penalized 
for their unfamiliarity. 
Formal patterns in America hold that when we want to 
express joy we laugh, to express grief we cry. They insist, 
moreover, that it is much easier for women to laugh and 
· cry than for men. In Japan, as many an American discovered, 
laughter does not always mean that a person is happy. It may 
mean that he is embarrassed. Crying, too, may not neces-
sarily mean that a person is sad. Whenever the social sci-
entist tries to illustrate formal patterns and is of necessity 
restricted to a bit of a communication torn out of context, 
he has to deal with people who take great pleasure in saying 
such things as, "Oh yes, but in the United States people 
cry when they are happy too." This is quite true. But the 
fact is that we think it is "natural" to cry when sad and · 
laugh when happy. Luckily, as I have pointed out, formal 
patterns often offer a great deal of leeway in the way in which 
they can be expressed. The boundaries are usually well 
known by everyone concerned, and as long as they are not 
violated there is considerable range of variation allowed. The 
principal difference between the German and the Austrian 
illustrates this point. The German tends to be more tech-
nical in the restrictions he places upon himself, the Austrian 

152 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
It doesn't matter whether it is a squash in the bazaar or a 
hydroelectric dam in the international market. The pattern 
remains constant. Above and below the central point there 
is a series of points which indicate what the two parties 
feel as they enter the field. 
Here is how an Arab from Damascus described this proc-
ess. The pivotal point was six piasters, the price of squash 
on the day he described. Above and below this there were 
four points. Any one of the top four might be the first price 
asked by the seller. Any one of the lower four represents the 
first offer made by the prospective buyer. The hidden or 
implicit meaning of this code is given opposite each step 
on the scale below. This meaning is not exact but represents 
a clue as to the attitudes of the two parties as they enter 
the bargaining process. 
Piasters 
12 or more complete ignorance on the part 
of the seller · 
10 . . . . . . . 
an insult, arguments and fights 
ensue, seller doesn't want to sell 
8. . . . . . . . 
will sell, but let's continue bar-
gaining 
7 .... ... . 
6 . . .... . . 
5 . . .. ... . 
-4 · .. . ... . 
2 .. ..... . 
1 . . .. . .. . 
will sell under the market 
market price (the pivot) 
buyer really wants the squash, 
will pay over the market 
will buy 
arguments and fighting, buyer ' 
doesn't want to buy 
ignorance of the value of the 
item on the part of the buyer 
Seller's 
asking 
prices 
Buyer's 
offering 
prices 

THE ORGANIZING pATTERN I 
1 53 
Considering the difference of meaning which is carried by 
a variation of one piaster, the question, "What percentage 
of the asking price do I give?" seems meaningless. Which 
asking price? The let's-do-business one, the let's-not-do-busi-
ness one, or the let's-fight asking price? Other variations on 
this pattern have as many as five or six points above and 
below the line, each with its own meaning. 
One cannot underestimate the importance of such pat-
terns and the hold they have on people at all levels. In dis-
cussing our stand in Egypt during and directly following the 
Aswan Dam fiasco and before our position in the Middle 
East had deteriorated so badly, an Arab sympathetic to our 
cause expressed it this way. "If you don't give a little in 
bargaining, the other fellow will back up. If he gives two 
steps, you have to give two steps. If you don't, he will back 
up four." We didn't give our two steps and Nasser backed 
up four. 
\Vhen events of such magnitude may depend on such 
small understandings it seems clear that one of the most 
promising developments in the intercultural field has to do 
with research directed toward bringing informal patterns to 
awareness. In many ways this work is the most meticulous, 
painstaking, and difficult of all. Even the best of infor-
mants can never describe informal patterns though he has 
been born and raised in a culture and has all his wits about 
him. The scientist works in the dark, creating hypotheses 
about what he thinks are consistent behavior patterns and 
. then tests the hypotheses until he is sure he has pinned one 
down. \Vork of this type is highly rewarding because of the 
genuine sense of discovery. Once an informal pattern has 
been adequately described it can then be understood by 
others in the same culture with almost lightning speed since 
it has already been learned. By making it explicit all the 
scientist really does is to "put it in words." But if he does 

~~/.' 
i~~· 
THE ORGANIZING PATTERN I 
15 5 
tl'' r tween an adjectival and a nominal is signaled by the use of 
~!' 
superfixes, in this case varying degrees of loudness or stress. 
i? 
For example, in English the difference in the spoken lan-
£-
guage between green house (the color green), greenhouse 
·r. 
(where plants are grown), and the Green house (house 
owned by Mr. and Mrs. Green) is solely a function of vary-
ing stress. The French, incidentally, do not share this pat-
tern with us and cannot hear the difference between these 
three utterances. The new rules of grammar for English, 
when they eventually appear may describe adjectivals in 
terms of their stress pattern in relation to other items. 
It would not be right to blame early grammarians be-
cause they did not analyze all the informal patterns of lan-
guage or because much of what they did analyze fell short 
of the mark. We should distinguish, however, between the 
three types of patterns in order to help bolster our sagging 
educational system as well as for the peace of mind of our 
children. All three can be learned or taught but in entirely 
different ways. As has been said, the best way to learn an 
informal pattern is by selecting a good model and copying 
him as closely as possible .. Formal patterns, as stated pre-
viously, are learned by precept and admonition. Technical 
ones are spelled out. 
In addition to isolating the three principal types of pat-
terns, Trager and I discovered that all seem to be bound 
by three laws: those of order, selection, and congruence. 
It should be emphasized that there may be additional laws . 
governing the formation of patterns which have not yet been ' ·. 
discovered. These three seem to provide a beginning. 
· · 
ORDER 
The laws of order are those regularities governing changes 
in meaning when order is altered. "The cat caught the 

154 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
it well? the scientist will make it easy for informal patterns 
to be taught easily and effectively. 
Much of the difficulty in our schools today stems from 
the fact the teachers try to inculcate and teach patterns that 
are partially or incorrectly analyzed. In many instances the 
technical descriptions simply do not fit the facts. Instead of 
having a familiar ring to the child there is a decidedly un-
familiar ring. In fact, much of what he hears goes against 
everything he has learned outside the classroom. A good 
deal of the content taught under the rubric of "grammar" 
falls in this category. Take the "can" and "may" distinction 
that teachers spend so much time trying to instill in chil-
dren. It would seem that this distinction originally devel-
oped informally and was linked to sex; men and boys said 
"can," women and girls "may." "May" naturally 'Sounded 
more refined to the women so they insisted on foisting it 
on the men along with a lot of gobbledygook about possible 
and not possible. At the present time, what with the women 
trying to be like the men and the men doing more and 
more things women used to do, the may-can now is so mixed 
up it's almost impossible to develop any rules. It is possible 
for either to be applied in a great many situations. 
The can-may distinction illustrates one of the many dif-
ferent types of informal patterns that exist in our language. 
Another type is associated with the use of what is technically 
known as the superfix first identified by Trager. The reader 
is familiar with prefixes and suffixes that are added at the 
beginnings and ends of stems. T he superfix, as the word im-
plies, goes over or above the utterance. 
By identifying the superfix Trager raised a whole category 
of grammatical and other events from the informal to the 
technical. That ill-defined, highly significant agglomeration 
of vocalizations known as "tone of voice" began to be un-
raveled by identification of the superfix. The difference be-

156 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
mouse" means something obviously different from "The 
mouse caught the cat." A great sin in medieval times was 
the saying of the Black Mass in which the order of the 
service was reversed. Anyone who is a practitioner of any 
of the communicative arts is fully familiar with the effect 
of reorienting the sequence of words, sentences, and para-
graphs. Below the sentence level, the order in which the 
sounds are put together is the basis of the formation of 
words. Words that mean the same thing whether you read 
them forward or backward are a pleasant aberration from 
the rule of verbal order, as are words which have a real 
meaning when read backwards. Order is used differently in 
different cultures. \Vith us it is a basic part of our gram-
matical system. It should be noted that while order is of 
critical importance on the sentence level in English this is 
not the case in languages like Latin and Old English of the 
time of Alfred. Order has great importance in other cul-
tural systems besides language: order of birth, order of ar-
rival, order in line to get tickets. Order applies to the courses 
of a meal. Consider what it would be like to start dinner 
with dessert, then switch to potatoes, hors d'oeuvre, coffee, 
salad, and end with meat. 
Order permeates almost every activity in a culture like our 
own. Yet in some other cultures the activities in which 
order is important may represent basic pattern differences 
between cultures. American housewives who have had to 
train servants overseas are all too familiar with the difficulty 
of inculcating them with American ordering patterns, the 
order in which courses should be served, or the weekly sched-
ule of household cleaning. Anyone who has listened to the 
ever-increasing number of Americans who have lived abroad 
has probably heard an anecdote in which a servant suddenly 
appears with a lighted birthday cake in the middle of a meal. 

. 
'·,;; 
THE ORGANIZING PATTERN I 157 
In short, the placing of the c1imax of any event varies a11 
over the world. 
Understanding the variations in order is a major factor 
in overseas work. The American knows that in his own coun-
try the order in which people arrive at a restaurant is sup-
posed to determine when they get served and the order in 
which they are hired dictates when they are laid off. To 
Americans, to be first is to be more deserving. If an Ameri-
can has been sitting at a table in a restaurant for some time 
and a latecomer is served before he is, his blood pressure 
wi11 rise noticeably. Yet in most places outside of Europe 
ordering in situations of this type is unknown. Instead the 
laws of selection apply; that is, service is dependent upon 
a person's rank. 
Another type of order is that of societies like the Pueblo 
of New Mexico and Arizona where age (order of birth) 
determines prestige, status, respect, and deference. The es-
sential point is that societies will order the people, or the 
situation, or a station in life but not a11 three simultaneously. 
SELECTION 
Selection controls the combination of sets that can be 
used together. We say a boy and an arm. Struck and stricken 
i11ustrate another case in which the rule of selection is seen to 
function. We say that he was "awe-struck" but also that he 
was "stricken dumb." We may be struck by a car, but we are 
always stricken with grief. There is no inherent logic to selec-
tion. The most one can say is that in such and such a case the 
selection works as follows and state the over-all category. 
Why, for instance, should we drive on the right and the 
B.ritish on the left? Like a11 the rest of culture, the selection 
patterns change with time. There was a time, for example, 

THE ORGANIZING pATTERN I 
159 
areas where culture has tremendous leeway. Selection is a 
major exception. 
CONGRUENCE 
Congruence is more difficult to talk about precisely than 
either order or selection. Its subtle dictates may, neverthe-
less, be more binding. Unlike order and selection, which 
have to do with the patterning of sets, the law of congruence 
can be expressed as a pattern of patterns. Congruence is what 
all writers are trying to achieve in terms of their own style, 
and what everyone wants to find as he moves through life. 
On the highest level the human reaction to congruence is 
one of awe or ecstasy. Complete congruence is rare. One 
might say that it exists when an individual makes full use of 
all the potentials of a pattern. Lincoln's Gettysburg Address 
is an example. Complete lack of congruence occurs when 
everything is so out of phase that no member of a culture 
could possibly conceive himself creating such a mess. 
Lack of congruence .in dress is always obvious and often 
humorbus-witness the endless cartoons of natives wearing 
a loin cloth and a silk hat. In architecture when Culture A 
borrows architecture from Culture B, Culture A takes the 
sets but not the pattern. Witness the outrageous Greek 
columns on any suburban mansion. 
In many instances attempts are made to achieve congru-
ence on one level without regard to distortions introduced . · 
on another. For example, schoolteachers are apt to criticize 
their charges for saying "most unique," their argument be-
ing that uniqueness is not a matter of degree. What is hap-
pening, of course, is that the teacher is borrowing a crite-
rion from the level of logic and applying it to the level of 
language. Language, it so happens, works in such a way 
that any adjectival can have comparative and superlative 

158 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
when men wore much more jewelry and more fancy cloth-
ing than they do now. 
For every pattern there are certain points at which seleC-
tion applies, just as there are other points at which order 
is brought into play. What enables us to differentiate be-
tween patterns is that they do not use selection and order in 
the same way. 
Order has been mentioned as having an important part 
in our eating pattern. Selection also plays an important but 
different role. Breakfast usually consists of a number of items 
selected from a limited list of edibles: fruits and their juices, 
cereals in various forms, berries, bacon, sausage, eggs, pan-
cakes, waffles, rolls, toast, butter, jelly or jam, and coffee, 
tea or milk. Depending on the region of the United States, 
certain other items can become part of this pattern- like 
grits in the South and pan-fried potatoes in the Middle 
West, for example. Steak and potatoes are still eaten for 
breakfast by a few New Englanders and by cattlemen in the 
\Vest in diminishing numbers. The list does not include 
chateaubriant, green turtle soup, or oysters Rockefeller. 
Selection plays a prominent part in the patterns of social 
relations around the world in dress, sex, and in work and 
play-in fact, all of the basic primary message systems. The 
easiest way to determine when selection is being applied is 
to note whether there is something bound to something else. 
by custom when any number of other items could "logically" 
serve the same purpose. The law of selection demands a 
white tie with tails. This law also demands the residence of 
a wife or female relative o.f the President in the White 
House. I chose the term selection for the very reason that 
something is "selected" out of a category. Once the selection 
has occurred it is arbitrarily binding. The arbitrariness of 
culture is generally not understood because there are other 

100 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
de~rees. In order to obtain complete congruity, however, the 
word unique can only be used in certain situations. 
Many jokes are based on incongruities of one sort or an-
other, which is one reason why the reader (or listener) has 
to be almost a native speaker in order to appreciate the full 
implications of a joke. If he is unable to assess the degree 
of incongruity he can't appreciate the humor. The old joke 
about the girl from Brooklyn trying to put on airs in Schrafft's 
by ordering "ersters on the half shell" (using a very Bostonian 
a!) is funny because it is incongruous on several levels. Not 
only does she use two dialects but switches from substandard 
usage to what she thinks is upper-class. 
Pattern congruity or style in writing is a function of know-
ing what can and cannot be achieved within the limits of 
the pattern. Newspaper or journalistic writing is adapted to 
the medium and all that medium implies. When it is bad 
it's because the writer has not learned what can be done 
within the limits set by the pattern. To do this type of 
writing well is a highly skilled art and is learned only after 
years of experience. The writing of the scientist is often in-
congruous because it drags the reader from one analytic level 
to the next and then back again. This kind of writing treats 
the reader like the boor who says "get it," indicating the 
scientist's fear that people will twist, distort, and take. ex-
ception to what he says. He has to communicate on anum-
ber of different analytic levels at once by footnoting and 
overqualifying each statement. In defense of my fellow sci-
entists it should be said that one of the most difficult things 
in the world to do is to learn to keep the levels apart as well 
as to maintain congruity. Harry Stack Sullivan, a very great 
contributor to psychiatric thinking in this country, once 
described his own attempts at writing by saying that the 
person who appeared before him as he wrote and who ap-
praised his sentences as they \vere coming out was a cross 

THE ORGANIZING PATTERN I 
161 
between an imbecile and a bitterly paranoid critic! Sullivan 
was not alone in having this kind of self-image; he recog-
nized the difficulties and the humor of having to try to force 
one's writing onto such a Procrustean couch. Another point 
to make about scientists is that most of them are more con-
cerned about making precise statements than they are about 
writing. They depend upon their colleagues to know what 
they are talking about. Therefore, they can get by with less 
literary ability than writers. Scientific congruity and not 
literary congruity is their preoccupation. 
There is one thing that seems quite certain. While people 
demonstrate varying degrees of sensitivity for congruence, 
perfect congruence is seldom achieved. It lurks in every 
culture and is captured by man only in rare creations. True 
artistry exists when congruence is so high that everything 
appears simple and easy, when it communicates so clearly 
that people wonder why they didn't say it themselves. 
Men toil to perfect congruence. They pay endless atten-
tion to details, to sets and the isolates, and to the over-all 
pattern. Usually it is a matter of going over and over a 
statement and making it clearer and clearer so that finally 
everything fits and nothing comes between what is being 
communicated and the audience. 
One might assume that much is known about pattern 
congruity. Actually the field has hardly been delineated as a 
field of scientific study. The principal difference between the 
concept of congruence and the more widely held beliefs 
about ecstatic productions is that traditionally the artist's · 
productions are viewed as if he created the rules for his 
masterpieces without reference to the pattern of the culture. 
This is not to say that the artist has no control over what 
is "good" or "bad" art. He has. There is a close relationship 
between the person and the over-all pattern in which he 
participates. Some artists are more sensitive to lack of con-

THE ORGANIZING PATTERN I 
163 
wars! The sheer frustration of not being able to understand 
sometimes makes one want to strike out in the feeling that 
at least the blow will be understood. Yet it's quite obvious 
that mankind can do better than that; the drive toward con-
gruity would seem to be as strong a human need as the will 
to physical survival. The study of culture is beginning to 
provide insights. It could do more, but what is encouraging 
is the development of the tools for understanding. Two of 
the most promising leads are in the study of patterns of the 
informal type and in developing our knowledge of congru-
ence and how it functions. 

162 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
gruence than others and strive more strongly to reduce ten-
sions induced by incongruity. Indeed, it is this tremendous 
sensitivity to pattern incongruity that the artist brings to 
his work. He has a highly developed sense for working within 
patterns, making the most of them, pushing and stretching 
their boundaries but never crossing them, so that the spell 
can be maintained and not broken. The artist likes to play 
with patterns and finq out what really can be done with the 
material at hand. He often does this in the context of small 
groups of people concerned with or interested in areas of 
culture stress, tension, and change. Because many artists are 
participating in variants of the over-all pattern that are not 
widely shared, they often have the reputation for setting the 
pace for everyone else. They are credited with "creating" new 
patterns. Yet most artists know that what greatness they 
have lies in being able to make meaningful statements about 
what is going on around them. They say what others have 
tried to say but say it more simply, more directly, and more 
accurately. 
The artist does not lead cultures and create patterns; he 
holds up a mirror for society to see things it might not 
otherwise see. Proof that art reflects the culture and the 
times of the artist can be had by simply walking through 
any reasonably well-stocked museum or by looking at the 
illustrations in contemporary art books. 
T he "rule" of congruence, or style in the broadest sense, 
pervades not only the world of art but all kinds of com-
munication. T he present state of our understanding of how 
congruence works is so rudimentary, however, that we are 
barely able to provide evidence of faulty communications, 
much less specify what the faults may be. Yet in an in-
ternational debate serious errors are made in interpreting 
such supposedly simple matters as whether one participant 
is actually angry or merely bluffing. No wonder there are 


~-
.... .. 
chapter 
nine 
TIME 
TALKS: 
AM ERIC.A N 
ACCENTS 
At the beginning of this book I offered a cursory analysis 
of time as an element of culture which communicates as 
powerfully as language. Since my conceptual scheme had 
not yet been developed in detail at that point my survey 
was of necessity rather sketchy. Now that I have presented 
the technical tools for probing the secrets of culture, I re-
turn to time again. Here I shall consider the way Americans 
use time and communicate by it, stressing the details and 
the subtleties which close analysis turns up. Some of the 
points I make may arouse a shock of recognition, a feeling 
that here is something which the reader knew all along. This 
is the way it should be. The analysis of one's own culture 

TIME TALKS: AMERICAN ACCENTS I 
167 
lengths. Minutes, hours, months, and weeks are also used in 
all three contexts. It is only the total context that tells which 
type of time is being referred to. 
Almost anyone can recapture that moment of his child-
hood when the day was almost spent and Mother was asked, 
"Mommy, how long will it be before we get home? I'm 
tired." And Mother replies, "Just a little while, dear. Now 
you just be good and before you know it we'll be home." 
"How long is a while?" "It's hard to say, dear." "Is a while 
five minutes, Mommy?" "Sometimes, dear, but not always. 
In this case it will be a little longer than five minutes." "Oh." 
At this point the child gives up-for the time being at 
least. 
Not only are there three different categories of time, but 
each has its own subdivisions; its sets, its isolates, and its 
patterns, which make nine different types of time found for 
our culture. Fortunately, to simplify matters, the layman 
need not know the whole technical system in order to get 
along. Yet he depends upon others to know it. 
The layman, for example, thinking he is getting technical, 
may ask an astronomer exactly how long a year is. At which 
point he discovers his own ignorance by being asked what 
kind of year he has in mind- the tropical or solar year ( 365 
days, 5 hours, 48 minutes, 4 5· 51 seconds plus a fraction); the 
sidereal year (365 days, 6 hours, 9 minutes, 9·54 seconds); 
or the anamolistic year ( 365 days, 6 hours, 1 3 minutes, 
53.1 seconds). 
· 
Our formal time system is that part of the over-all system 
which we would not change and don't want others tampering 
with. Yet this formal system we take so much for granted 
was once a technical system known only to a few priests 
along the Nile who had perfected it in response to a need to 
forecast annual floods more accurately. 

166 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
simply makes explicit the many things we take for granted 
in our everyday lives. Talking about them, however, changes 
our relation with them. We move into an active and under-
standing correspondence with those aspects of our ·existence 
which are all too frequently taken for granted or which some-
times weigh heavily on us. Talking about them frees us 
from their restraint. 
A well-known authority on children in the United States 
once stated that it took the average child a little more than 
twelve years to master time. This estimate is probably some-
what conservative. Young people of this age know how our 
basic time system works but do not yet seem to have fully 
internalized either the details or the emotional overtones of 
the formal time system. 
Why does it take a child so long to learn time? The answer 
is not simple. In fact, when one begins to discover how 
many complications are involved he may wonder whether 
the full subtleties of time can be mastered at all. 
The three systems I have discussed-formal, informal, 
technical-often use identical items of vocabulary. This does 
not make it any easier for the child, or the foreigner, to 
learn them. The year, for instance, is a formal or traditional 
part of our time system. It means three hundred sixty-five 
days plus one fourth day which is accounted for by inserting 
leap year. It can also mean twelve months, as well as fifty-two 
weeks. 
Informally, we may say, "Oh, it takes years to get that 
done." You have to be there and know the person and the 
background of the remark before you know e~actly what his 
word "years" means. It may be a matter of minutes, weeks, 
or actual years. Technically, the year is quite another thing 
again. Not only is it counted in days, hours, minutes, sec-
onds! but there are different types of years of different 

168 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
FORMAL TIME: SETS, ISOLATES, AND PATTERNS 
A quick way to discover how our European time sets 
operate is to teach them to children. The day is a formal 
set deeply rooted in the past. It has two primary isolates, 
day and night, and is further broken down into morning and 
afternoon, punctuated by meals and naps, and other recur-
rent occasions. There are seven different categories of days: 
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, etc. They are valued dif-
ferently, Sunday being set apart. The child is usually in con-
trol of these notions by the age of six. At eight most children 
learn to tell time by the clock. This process can be simplified 
for them if it is explained that there are two types of time 
(two categories of sets): hours and minutes. The hours-
one to twelve-have to be learned so well that recognition is 
instantaneous. Before learning the minutes the child learns 
that the quarter hour is the isolate most useful to him. He 
can grasp these quite quickly: five-fifteen, five-thirty, and five 
forty-five begin to make sense. Minutes should not be taught 
as isolates first but as sets, of which there are sixty. How-
ever, to make life a little simpler since the child can't per-
ceive a minute, these cluster together in five-minute peri-
ods; five, ten, and fifteen after the hour, right on up to five 
fifty-five. Finally, the two sets of sets are blended into one 
system. 
In America any Easterner or urban Middle Westerner 
conversant with the way his own culture values time can 
perceive that five minutes is different from ten minutes. 
That is, the five-minute period is the smallest formal set. 
It has only recently crossed the boundary from isolate to set. 
Twenty years ago the five-minute period was an isolate of a 
particular type that went to make up the quarter hour. Now 
people are aware of whether they are five minutes late or not 
and will apologize. 

.. 
" 
TIME TALKS: AMERICAN ACCENTS I 
169 
ln Utah the Mormons have developed promptness to a 
degree that is unknown in the rest of the country. In their 
system the minutes would seem to be an inviolate set. On 
the northwest coast the traditional feelings about time are 
altered and are not experienced in as pressing a manner as 
they are elsewhere. The Northwest uses the same time 
structure as the rest of the country, but nobody seems par-
ticularly driven by it. The main difference is that they lack 
the informal isolate of urgency. 
Above the five-minute period there is the ten-minute pe-
riod, the quarter hour, the half hour, and the hour. Then 
there is the morning divided into early, middle, and late; 
the noon hour; early, mid- and late afternoon; and evening, 
as well as similar divisions for the nighttime. 
Formally, our day starts at midnight. The periods set 
off by meals and by sleeping and waking are probably the 
earliest of the perceived temporal sets for children. Televi-
sion is speeding up the process of helping children to notice 
the difference between, say, five o'clock and six o'clock, since 
these are the times when their pet programs come on. 
The week is also a set, introduced as a part of the Egyp-
tian's technical time system. It is not, however, universally 
grasped. The term fortnight, like many other Anglo-Saxon 
survivals, remains present in the system, a reminder of 
earlier times. It is still used as the pay period in the govern-
ment and as a publication period for certain periodicals. It 
is, however, a bit archaic and is slowly falling into disuse. 
The month, like the day, is a set that has been established 
as a component in our time system for a long time. It is 
used for payments and rendering of accounts, reports of 
almost every type, and jail sentences. 
The season is both a formal set and an informal one. It 
is probably one of the oldest of our sets. It used to mark 
plowing, planting, cultivating and harvesting time, as well 

TIME TALKS: AMERICAN ACCENTS I 
171 
Valuation is expressed in our attitude that time itself is 
valuable and should not be wasted. 
Tangibility is expressed in the fact that we consider time 
is a commodity. It can be bought, sold, saved, spent, wasted, 
lost, made up, and measured. 
For people raised in the European tradition time is some·. 
thing that occurs between two points. Duration is the most 
widely shared implicit assumption concerning the nature of 
time in the Western world. It seems inconceivable to those 
of us who have learned to take this one isolate so much for 
granted that it would be possible to organize life in any . 
other way. Yet one of the miracles of human existence is · 
the tremendous variety that occurs in such basic matters as 
this. For instance, the Hopi are separated from us by a tre-
mendous cultural gulf. Time, for example, is not duration 
but many different things for them. It is not fixed or meas-
urable as we think of it, nor is it a quantity. It is what hap-
pens when the corn matures or a sheep grows up-a charac-
teristic sequence of events. It is the natural process that takes 
place while living substance acts out its life drama. There-
fore, there is a different time for everything which can be 
altered by circumstances. One used to see Hopi houses that 
were in the process of being built for years and years. Ap-
parently the Indians had no idea that a house could or should 
be built in a given length of time since they could not at-
tribute to it its own inherent time system such as the corn 
and the sheep had. This way of looking at time cost the 
government untold thousands of dollars on construction proj-
ects because the Hopi could not conceive of there being a 
fixed time in which a dam or a road was supposed to be 
built. Attempts to get them to meet a schedule were in-
terpreted as browbeating and only made things worse. 
lt was mentioned earlier that in contrast to some of the 
African systems, the components of American time-the 

l:'JO I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
as the time when the soil could rest. Now, of course, there 
are hunting, fishing, skiing, tourist, or Christmas seasons, as 
well as the traditional summer, fall, winter, spring class of 
sets. The season and the quarter are probably related, al-
though the quarter is tied to the calendar while the season, 
being older, is rooted in climatic changes and activities as-
sociated with agriculture. 
Formal isolates are difficult to pin down. Like all isolates, 
they are abstractions, yet because they are formal abstrac-
tions which seem right and proper little attention has been 
paid to them. They are often overlooked because they seem 
so "natural." 
The list of true isolates which follows is undoubtedly in-
complete. It includes what I call ordering, cyclicity, synthe-
sisity, valuation, tangibility, duration, and depth. 
T he week is the week not only because it has seven days 
but because they are in a fixed order. Ordering as a formal 
isolate would seem to be an expression of order as in the 
laws of order, selection, and congruence. The Western world 
has elaborated this to some extent. That is, we keep constant 
track of all sorts of things which are otherwise identical and 
only distinguish between them because of their order. T he 
six millionth Ford built becomes a milestone, as does the 
fifty millionth passenger-mile flown by an airline. The first-
born, first president, first position, the number-two man, 
the tenth in a class of one thousand assume meaning be-
cause of their order. The seventh day is different from the 
first day; the middle of the week is different from the end, 
and so on. 
For most temporal events the cyclic element is taken for 
granted. One day follows the next, as does the week, month, 
year, and century. The common cycles are limited in number. 
The sixty-cycle series (minutes and seconds) the seven-day 
week, and the twelve-month year. 

172 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
minutes, the hours- have to add up. Americans start with 
the assumption that they are working with a synthesized 
system. Basically the reason why time has to add up is that 
we start with the assumption that we are dealing with a 
system and that there is order in the universe. We feel it 
is man's job to discover the order and to create intellectual 
models that reflect it. \Ve are driven by our own way of look-
ing at things to synthesize almost everything. Whenever we 
have to deal with people whose time systems lack this isolate 
of synthesisity we experience great difficulty. To us it's almost 
as if they were missing one of their senses and were there-
fore unaware of part of nature. The synthesisity isolate is 
basic to most if not all of our appraisal of life around us. 
Americans consider depth as a necessary component of 
time; that is, there is a past on which the present rests. 
Yet we have not elaborated the depth isolate to the extent 
that this has been done in the Middle East and South Asia. 
The Arab looks back two to six thousand years for his own 
origins. History is used as the basis for almost any modern 
action. T he chances are that an Arab won't start a talk or a 
speech or analyze a problem without first developing the 
historical aspects of his subject. The American assumes that 
time has depth but he takes this for granted. 
Most of the formal patterns of time in the United States· 
will seem immediately obvious to the American reader. 
though he may not have taken the trouble to think about 
them. They would not be formal patterns if they were not 
so easily recognized. But for the benefit of the foreign reader 
I will summarize briefly the American formal pattern. 
T he American never questions the fact that time should 
be planned and future events fitted into a schedule. He 
thinks that people should look forward to the future and not 
dwell too much on the past. His future is not very far ahead 
of him. Results must be obtained in the foreseeable future 

TIME TALKS: AMERICAN ACCENTS I 
173 
- one or two years or, at the most, five or ten. Promises to 
meet deadlines and appointments are taken very seriously. 
There are real penalties for being late and for not keeping 
commitments in time. From this it can be surmised that 
the American thinks it is natural to quantify time. To fail 
to do so is unthinkable. The American specifies how much 
time it requires to do everything. 'Til be there in ten min-
utes." "It will take six months to finish that job." "I was in 
the Army for four and a half years." 
The Americans, like so many other people, also use time 
as a link that chains events together. Post hoc, ergo propter 
hoc (after the fact, therefore because of the fact) is still an 
integral part of the traditional structure of our culture. The 
occurrence of one event on the heels of another results in-
evitably in attempts on our part to attribute the second to 
the first and to find a causal relationship between them. 
If A is seen in the vicinity of B's murder shortly after the 
crime has been committed we automatically form a con-
nection between A and B. Conversely, events which are sepa-
rated by too much time are difficult for us to connect in 
our minds. This makes it almost impossible for us as a nation 
to engage in long-range planning. 
INFORMAL TIME: SETS, ISOLATES, AND PATTERNS 
To complicate matters for the young who are trying to 
learn the culture and the scientist who is trying to analyze 
it, the vocabulary of informal time is often identical with 
that of technical and formal time. Words such as minute, 
second, year are common to all three. The context usually 
tells the hearer which level of discourse is being used. There 
are, of course, words which are typically informal and are 
recognized as such (a while, later, a long time, etc.). In 

,. 
' 
TIME TALKS: AMERICAN ACCENTS I 175 
high diving board for the first time, or it may be a month or 
two spent overseas away from one's family. 
Informally, for important daytime business appoint-
ments in the eastern United States between equals, there 
are eight time sets in regard to punctuality and length of 
appointments: on time, five, ten, fifteen, twenty, thirty, 
forty-five minutes, and one hour early or late. Keeping in 
mind that situations vary, there is a slightly different be-
havior pattern for each point, and each point on the scale 
has a different meaning. As for the length of appointments 
an hour with an important person is different from thirty 
minutes with that same person. Ponder the significance of 
the remark, "He spent over an hour closeted with the Presi-
de~ t. " Everyone knows the business must have been im-
portant. Or consider, "He could only spare ten minutes, so 
we didn't get much accomplished." T ime then becomes a 
message as eloquently direct as if words were used. As for 
punctuality no right-minded American would think of keep-
ing a business associate waiting for an hour; it would be too 
insulting. No matter what is said in apology, there is little 
that can remove the impact of an hour's heel-cooling in an 
outer office. 
Even the five-minute period has its significant subdivi-
sions. \Vhen equals meet, one will generally be aware of be-
ing two minutes early or late but will say nothing, since the 
time in this case is not significant. At three minutes a per-
son will still not apologize or feel that it is necessary to say 
anything (three is the first significant number in the one-to-
five series); at five minutes there is usually a short apology; 
and at four minutes before or after the hour the person will 
mutter something, although he will seldom complete the 
muttered sentence. The importance of making detailed 
observations on these aspects of informal culture is driven 
home if one pictures an actual situation. An American am-

174 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
describing informal time we begin with the sets, because it 
is the set that is most easily perceived. 
When a person says, "It'll take a while," you have to 
know him personally and also a good deal a bout the total 
context of the remark before you can say what the term "a 
while" means. Actually, it is not as vague as it seems at 
first, and people who have this information can usually tell 
what is meant. What is more, if a man whose normal "while" 
is thirty to forty-five minutes returns to his office after an 
hour, having said he would only be gone for "a while,'' he 
will usually apologize or make some remark about having 
been gone longer than he expected. This is proof that he 
himself realized that there was a limit to the degree to which 
you stretch "a while." 
The basic vocabulary of informal time is simple. There 
are only eight or nine different distinctions made by Ameri-
cans. It is as if we measured informal time with a rubber 
ruler which could be infinitely expanded or compressed but 
which would still maintain the integrity of the basic relation-
ships. The shortest time on the informal scale is the "in-
stantaneous event." The following additional distinctions 
are interposed between the "instantaneous event" and "for-
ever": very short duration, short duration, neutral duration 
(neither noticeably short nor long), long duration, very long 
duration, and impossibly long duration. The last is some-
times indistinguishable from "forever." 
In general, informal time is quite vague because it is situa-
tional in character. The circumstances vary, hence the meas-
ured time varies: The "longest time," "forever," and "an 
eternity" are all words or expressions which are used to de-
scribe any time which is experienced as being excessively 
drawn out. Depending on circumstances, "eternity" may be 
the time it takes to hit the water when one jumps from a 

176 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
bassador in an unnamed country interpreted incorrectly the 
significance of time as it was used in visits by local diplo-
mats. An hour's tardiness in their system is equivalent to 
five minutes by ours, fifty to fifty-five minutes to four min-
utes, forty-five minutes to three minutes, and so on for day-
time official visits. By their standards the local diplomats 
felt they couldn't arrive exactly on time; this punctuality 
might be interpreted locally as an act relinquishing their 
freedom of action to the United States. But they didn't want 
to be insulting- an hour late would be too late- so they ar-
rived fifty minutes late. As a consequence the ambassador 
said, "How can you depend on these people when they 
arrive an hour late for an appointment and then just mutter 
something? They don't even give you a full sentence of 
apology!" He couldn't help feeling this way, because in 
American time fifty to fifty-five minutes late is the insult 
period, at the extreme end of the duration scale; yet in the 
·country we are speaking of it's just right. 
For another way of apportioning informal time consider 
the eastern Mediterranean Arab. He makes fewer distinc-
tions than we do. His scale has only three discernible points 
to our eight. His sets seem to be: no time at all; now (or 
present), which is of varying duration; and forever (too 
long). In the Arab world it is almost impossible to get some-
one to experience the difference between waiting a long time 
and a very long time. Arabs simply do not make this tem-
poral distinction. 
Informal time isolates will be more significant to the 
reader if he will sit back for a minute and think in some 
detail about times when he was aware that time was either 
passing very rapidly or else dragging. It may even be helpful 
if he will note what it was in the situation that made time 
behave the way it did. If he goes even further and thinks 
at length about how he was able to distinguish between a 

TIME TALKS: AMERICAN ACCENTS 
/ 
177 
very short time and a long time regardless of the clock time, 
he will be well on the road to understanding how the Ameri-
can system works. What follows below merely attempts to 
simply put into words things that people know but have not 
formulated precisely. 
Four isolates enable people to distinguish between the 
duration sets mentioned above. The most difficult of all to 
characterize, they are: urgency, monochronism, activity, 
and variety. 
The impression of time as passing rapidly or slowly is 
related to urgency. The more urgent the need, the more 
time appears to drag. This applies to everything from basic 
physiological needs to culturally derived needs. A man who 
has an urgent need to succeed and reach the top will ex-
perience the passage of time on the way up with more an-
guish than will another man who is more relaxed about 
success. The parent with a sick child desperately in need of 
medical attention feels time moving very slowly; so does the 
farmer whose crops are withering for lack of rair1. One could 
list many more examples. However, more to the point is 
what is not included when we consider urgency as an in-
formal temporal isolate: First, urgency on different levels of 
analysis is both a set and a pattern. Second, our own variety 
of urgency distinguishes us from the rest of western European 
culture. A lack of a sense of urgency has been very apparent 
to Americans traveling abroad. 
Even physiological urgency is handled quite differently 
by people around the world. In many countries people need 
less of what Americans would call urgency in order to dis-
charge a tension. In the United States the need must be 
highly critical before people act. 
The distribution of public toilets in America reflects our 
tendency to deny the existence of urgency even with normal 
physiological needs. I know of no other place in the world 

... 
;_ 
t 
TIME TALKS: AMERICAN ACCENTS I 179 
Thus there are ageric cultures and non-ageric ones. A culture 
is non-ageric if, in the process of handling the matter of 
"becoming later," it makes no difference whether you do 
something or not. With us, we have to work to get ahead. 
We do not get ahead automatically. In the cultures men-
tioned above, this is not nearly so important. 
Variety enables us to distinguish between intervals such 
as short duration and long duration, or long duration and 
very long duration. Variety is a factor in boredom, while the 
degree of boredom experienced depends on how rapidly time 
passes. 
We look for variety in occupations, careers, and hobbies. 
Our public "demands" a variety of material objects, food, 
clothing, and so forth. Consider for a moment the fact that 
few of us can say what we are going to have for lunch or 
dinner three days from now, let alone next year. Yet there 
are millions of people in the world who know exactly what 
they are going to have, if they are to have anything at all. 
They will eat the same thing they had today, yesterday, and. 
the day before. 
For us it is a matter of importance whether or not there 
is variety in life. Take the teen-age girl who complains to 
her mother that there weren't any boys at the dance, mean-
ing that there weren't any new boys. Our demand for variety 
and for something new would seem to exceed that of almost 
any other culture in the world today. It is necessary to an 
economy like ours. Without constant innovation we could 
never keep our industrial plant expanding. 
On the informal level of time the basic distinction is 
between sameness and variety. With variety, time moves 
more rapidly. Peop]e who are imprisoned away from light 
where they cannot tell whether it is day or not apparently 
lose practically all sense of the passage of time. They become 

178 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
where anyone leaving home or office is put to periodic tor-
ture because great pains have been taken to hide the location 
of rest rooms. Yet Americans are the people who judge the 
advancement of others by their plumbing. You can almost 
hear the architect and owner discussing a new store's rest 
room. Owner: "Say, this is nice! But why did you hide it? 
You'd need a map to find it." Architect: ''I'm glad you like 
it. We went all out on this washroom, had a lot of trouble 
getting that tile to match. Did you notice the anti-splash 
a era ted faucets on the wash basins? Yes, it would be a little 
hard to find, but we figure people wouldn't use it unless they 
had to, and then they could ask a clerk or something." 
Monochronism means doing one thing at a time. Ameri-
can culture is characteristically monochronic. As Americans 
we find it disconcerting to enter an office overseas with an 
appointment only to discover that other matters require the 
attention of the man we are to meet. Our ideal is to center 
the attention first on one thing and then move on to some-
thing else. 
North Europeans and those of us who share in this cul-
ture make a distinction between whether or not a person is 
engaged in an activity. In fact, we distinguish between the 
"active" and "dormant" phases of everything. I therefore 
refer to this isolate, in terms of its Latin root, as an ageric 
isolate (from agere, to act ). Just plain sitting, trying to 
capture a sense of self, is not considered to be doing any-
thing. Hence, such remarks as, "You didn't seem to be doing 
anything, so I thought I would stop in and talk to you for a 
while." The exception is, of course, prayer, which has special 
and easily identified postures associated with it. 
In a number of other cultures, including the Navajo, 
Trukese, eastern Mediterranean Arab cultures, Japanese, and 
many of those of India, just plain sitting is doing something. 
The distinction between being active or not is not made. 

t8o I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
disoriented and if kept away long enough they may "lose 
their minds." 
As was the case with activity, we associate variety with · 
external events. Maturing and aging-just getting old-are 
not considered by us to constitute variety except in someone 
else, so that we will say, "My, he certainly has aged ·a lot 
since I last saw him." To the Pueblo of New Mexico, how-
ever, aging is something to be experienced. It means in-
creased stature in the community and a greater part in de-
cision making. Variety, from this point of view, is a natural 
part of living, and an inherent aspect of the self, providing 
a basically different view of life from our own. 
To summarize this discussion of informal time isolates 
we can say that Americans determine relative duration by 
four means: degree of urgency, whether they are trying to do 
more than one thing at a time, whether they are busy or not, 
and the degree of variety that enters into the situation. In 
the informal isolates of a culture, one finds the building 
blocks of time that go to make up the values and driving 
forces which characterize a culture. 
The informal patterning of time is one of the most con-
sistently overlooked aspects of culture. This is not because 
men are blind or stupid or pigheaded, although their capacity 
to hold on to informal patterns in the face of weighty evi-
dence sometimes makes them appear to be so. 
It seems that it is impossible to participate in two dif-
ferent patterns at the same time. As I will illustrate below, 
a person has to stop using one in order to take up another. 
Furthermore, patterns are anchored, when they are being 
learned and forever after, in the behavior of groups and 
institutions. They are the ways of doing things that one 
learns early in life and for which one is rewarded or punished. 
Hence, it is no wonder that people hold on to them so 
tenaciously and look askance at all other patterns. 

TIME TALKS: AMERICAN ACCENTS I 
1 8 1 
Informal patterns are seldom, if ever, made explicit. They 
exist like the air around us. They are either familiar and 
comfortable, or unfamiliar and wrong. Deviations from the 
pattern are usually greeted with highly charged emotion be-
cause people are not doing things our way. "Our way" is, 
of course, almost invariably supported or reinforced by a 
technical rationalization such as the following: "If you are 
five minutes late for a meeting and have kept ten people 
waiting, you have therefore wasted almost an hour of their 
time." 
In the United States the nature of the points on a time 
scale is a matter of patterning, as is the handling of the inter-
val between them. By and large, the space between the points 
is inviolate. That is, compared to some other systems, there 
is only a limited amount of stretching or distortion of the 
interval that is permissible. Conditioning for this way of 
conceiving time begins very early for us. A mother says, 
"I thought I told you you could play with Susan until five 
o'clock. What do you mean by staying over there until al-
most suppertime?" Later in life we hear Father saying to a 
friend, "I promised to spend an hour with Johnny working 
on his tree house, and I can't very well get off with much 
less." And in adult life, "But Mr. Jones, this is the third 
time Mr. Brown has tried to see you, and you promised to 
spend at least thirty minutes going over those specifications 
with him." 
Our pattern allows very little switching of t he position of 
"intervals" once they are set in a schedule, nor doe·s it allow 
for much tampering with either the content or the position 
of the points on the time scale. An appointment to talk a bout 
a contract scheduled to begin at ten o'clock and end at eleven 
o'clock is not easily moved, nor can you talk about anything 
but the contract without offending people. Once set, the 
schedule is almost sacred, so that not only is it wrong, ac-

TIME TALKS: AMERICAN ACCENTS I 
183 
have scheduled the time, you have to use it as designated, 
even when it turns out that this is not necessary or advan-
tageous. 
All of which seems very strange to the Arab. He starts at 
one point and goes until he is finished or until something 
intervenes. Time is what occurs before or after a given point. 
The thing to remember in contrasting the two systems is 
that Americans cannot shift the partitions of schedules with-
out violating a norm; Arabs can. With us the compartments 
are sacred. If we have allocated so much time to a certain 
activity, we can change it once, or maybe twice, when we are 
trying to discover the proper amount of time for the activity. 
We cannot continually move the walls of our time com-
partments back and forth, even though an activity may actu-
ally call for such flexibility. The pattern of the immovable 
time wall applies in most situations, even long periods of 
time, such as how long it takes to complete a college career. 
It is not necessary to leave the country to encounter sig-
nificantly different time patterns. There are differences be-
tween families and differences between men and women;: 
occupational differences, status differences, and regional 
differences. In addition there are two basic American pat-
terns that often conflict. I have termed these the "diffused 
point pattern" and the "displaced point pattern." The dif-
ference between them has to do with whether the leeway is 
on one side of the point or is diffused around it. 
Contrasting the behavior of two groups of people partici-
pating in the two patterns, one observes the following: Tak-
ing 8: 30 A.M. as the point, participants in the "displaced 
point" pattern will arrive ahead of time anywhere from 8 A.M. 
to 8:27 A.M. (cutting it fine), with the majority arriving 
around 8:25 A.M. Diffused point people will arrive any-
where from 8:25 A.M. to 8:45 A.M. As can be seen, there 
is practically no overlap between these two groups. 

182 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
cording to the formal dictates of our culture, to be late, but 
it is a violation of the informal patterns to keep changing 
schedules or appointments or to deviate from the agenda. 
How much this is a factor in other cultures has not been 
determined precisely. There are cases, however, where the 
content or "agenda" of a given period of time is handled 
quite differently. In the Middle East, again, refusal of one 
party to come to the point and discuss the topic of a meeting 
often means he cannot agree to your terms but doesn't want 
to turn you down, or simply that he cannot discuss the 
matters under consideration because the time is not yet ripe. 
He will not, moreover, feel it is improper to meet without 
ever touching on the topic of the meeting. 
Our pattern calls for the fixing of the agenda informally 
beforehand. We do not, as a whole, feel too comfortable 
trying to operate in a semi-public situation, hammering out 
an agenda, the way the Russians do. We prefer to assume 
that both parties want to talk about the subject, otherwise 
they wouldn't be there; and that they are sufficiently in-
volved in the topic to make it worth their while. With the 
Russians there is some indication that, while this is true, 
negotiation over the separate points of the agenda signals 
to the other side how the opponent is going to react during 
the actual conference. Softness on our part in early negotia-
tion, because we do not technically fix the agenda but agree 
informally about what should be taken up, is often inter-
preted as weakness. Or it may give the impression that we 
are going to give in on certain points when we aren't at all. 
Earlier it was mentioned that the content and limits of 
a period of time were sacrosanct. If, however, the topic for 
discussion is completed satisfactorily, or it is apparent that 
no progress can be made, then the meeting or visit may be 
cut short. This often leaves people feeling a little funny. 
By and large, the overriding pattern with us is that once you 

184 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
The reader can recall his own behavior during evening 
engagements. A person asked to spend the evening and ar-
rive about "nineish," wouldn't think of using the daytime 
"diffused point" pattern. The "displaced point" pattern is 
mandatory, usually at least ten or fifteen minutes after the 
hour but not more than thirty-five or forty minutes. If asked 
for dinner, with cocktails before, the leeway is much less. 
It is permissible to arrive for a seven o'clock engagement at 
7:05 but not much later than T 15. The "mutter something" 
period starts at 7:20 and by T p, people are looking around 
and saying, "I wonder what's happened to the Smiths!" The 
·, hostess may have a roast in the oven. In New York City 
there is a big difference between a "5 to 8" cocktail party, 
when people arrive between 6 and 7:30 to stay for hours, 
and dinner-party time when ten minutes late is the most 
allowed. 
In these terms, the actual displacement of the point is a 
function of three things: (a) the type of social occasion and 
what is being served; (b) the status of the individual who is 
being met or visited; (c) the individual's own way of han-
dling time. 
When a shift occurs in an office from diffused point to 
displaced point, people feel strongly about it. The diffused 
point people never really feel comfortable with the other 
pattern. Such shifts are often interpreted as robbing profes-
sional people of status. That is, they feel they have been 
lowered in the esteem of the boss. This is because of the 
use of this same pattern when meeting dignitaries and when 
great social distance exists between individuals. The dis-
placed pointers, on the other hand, regard everyone else as 
very unbusinesslike, sloppy, and as having poor organiza-
~ional morale. They feel the lack of control and are distrust-
ful of the academic types who are so cavalier about being 
·"on time." Persistent efforts to restrict scientists to the dis-

TIME TALKS: AMERICAN ACCENTS I 
185 
placed point pattern by enforcing rigid schedules is one of 
the many things that helped drive many scientists from 
government work in the last few years. 
Regionally in the United States there are seemingly end-
less variations in the way time is handled. These variations, 
however, are comparable to the variations in the details of 
speech associated with the different parts of the country. 
Everybody participates in the over-all pattern which makes 
it possible for us to be mutually understood wherever we go. 
In Utah, where the Mormons at first got somewhat tech-
nical about time and later developed strong formal systems 
emphasizing promptness, you find the displaced point pat-
tern with very little leeway. That is, the attempt is made 
to arrive "on time,'' which means a little before the hour 
and no more than one minute late. Since, according to 
their system, it's worse to be late than early, they arrive 
on the early side of the point, just as military personnel do. 
What this communicates to other Americans is that Mor-
mons are more serious about their work than the average 
American. 
The northwest coastal region of the United States does 
some very strange things with time, when looked at in terms 
of the rest of the country. They will ask a person for 6 P.M. 
if they want him to arrive by 6:30P.M., and then hope that 
he gets there. The detail of muttering an apology after four 
minutes is quite uncommon and is decried by many. 
The more traditional part of the South, on the other hand, 
seems to behave pretty much as predicted; people slow 
things down by allowing leeway in both patterns. One finds 
a greater permissible spread, or a wider range of deviation 
from the point, than in the urban Northeast. The same 
could be said for the Old West. 

chapter 
ten 
S PACE 
S PEAKS 
Every living thing has a physical boundary that separates 
it from its external environment. Beginning with the bacteria 
and the simple cell and ending with man, every organism 
has a detectable limit which marks where it begins and ends. 
A short distance up the phylogenetic scale, however, an-
other, non-physical boundary appears that exists outside 
the physical one. This new boundary is harder to delimit 
than the first but is just as real. We call this the "organisms' 
territory." The act of laying claim to and defending a· ter-
ritory is termed territoriality. It is territoriality with which 
this chapter is most concerned. In man, it becomes highly 
elaborated, as well as being very greatly differentiated from 
culture to culture. 
Anyone who has had experience with dogs, particularly 
in a rural setting such as ·on ranches and farms, is familiar 
with the way in which the dog handles space. In the first 


188 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
place, the dog knows the limits of his master's "yard" and 
will defend it against encroachment. There are also certain 
places where he sleeps: a ~pot next to the fireplace, a spot 
in the kitchen, or one in the dining room if he is allowed 
there. In short, a dog has fixed points to which he returns 
time after time, depending upon the occasion. One can also 
observe that dogs create zones around them. Depending 
upon his relationship to the dog and the zone he is in, a 
trespasser can evoke different behavior when he crosses the 
invisible lines which are meaningful to the dog. 
This is particularly noticeable in females with puppies. A 
mother who has a new litter in a little-used barn will claim 
the barn as her territory. When the door opens she may 
make a slight movement or stirring in one corner. Nothing 
else may happen as the intruder moves ten or fifteen feet 
into the barn. Then the dog may raise her head or get up, 
circle about, and lie down as another invisible boundary is 
crossed. One can tell about where the line is by withdrawing 
and watching when her head goes down. As additional lines 
are crossed, there will be other signals, a thumping of the 
tail, a low moan or a growl. 
One can observe comparable behavior in other vertebrates 
-fish, birds, and mammals. Birds have well-developed ter-
ritoriality, areas which they defend as their own and which 
they return to year after year. To those who have seen a 
robin come back to the same nest each year this will come 
as no surprise. Seals, dolphin, and whales are known to use 
the same breeding grounds. Individual seals have been 
known to come back to the same rock year after year. 
Man has developed his territoriality to an almost unbe-
lievable extent. Yet we treat space somewhat as we treat 
sex. It is there but we don't talk about it. And if we do, we 
certainly are not expected to get technical or serious about 
it. The man of the house is always somewhat apologetic 

SPACE SPEAKS I 
189 
about "his chair." How many people have had the experience 
of coming into a room, seeing a big comfortable chair and 
heading for it, only to pull themselves up short, or pause 
and turn to the man and say, "Oh, was I about to sit in 
your chair?" The reply, of course, is usually polite. Imagine 
the effect if the host were to give vent to his true feelings 
and say, "Hell, yes, you're sitting in my chair, and I don't 
like anybody sitting in my chair!" For some unknown rea-
son, our culture has tended to play down or cause us to 
repress and dissociate the feelings we have about space. We 
relegate it to the informal and are likely to feel guilty when-
ever we find ourselves getting angry because someone has 
taken our place. 
Territoriality is established so rapidly that even the second 
session in a series of lectures is sufficient to find a significant 
proportion of most audiences back in the same seats. What's 
more, if one has been sitting in a particular seat and someone 
else occupies it, one can notice a fleeting irritaton. There is 
the remnant of an old urge to throw out the interloper. 
The interloper knows this too, because he will turn around 
or look up and say, "Have I got your seat?" at which point 
you lie and say, "Oh no, I was going to move anyway." 
Once while talking on this subject to a group of Ameri-
cans who were going overseas, one very nice, exceedingly 
mild-mannered woman raised her hand and said, "You mean 
it's natural for me to feel irritated when another woman 
takes over my kitchen?" Answer: "Not only is it natural, 
but most American women have very strong feelings about 
their kitchens. Even a mother can't come in and wash the 
dishes in her daughter's kitchen without annoying her. The 
kitchen is the place where 'who will dominate' is settled. 
All women know this, and some can even talk about it. 
Daughters who can't keep control of their kitchen will be 

SPACE SPEAKS I 
191 
"pushy," all this means is that their handling of space re-
leases this association in our minds. 
What gets overlooked is that the response is there in toto 
and has been there all along. There is no point in well-mean-
ing people feeling guilty because they get angry when a for-
eigner presents them with a spatial cue that releases anger 
or aggression. The main thing is to know what is happening 
and try to find out which cue was responsible. The next 
step is to discover, if possible, whether the person really 
intended to release this particular feeling or whether he in-
tended to engender a different reaction. 
Uncovering the specific cues in a foreign culture is a pains-
taking and laborious process. Usually it is easier for the new-
comer to listen to the observations of old-timers and then 
test these observations against his own experience. At first 
he may hear, "You're going to have a hard time getting 
used to the way these people crowd you. Why, when you 
are trying to buy a theater ticket, instead of standing in line 
and waiting their turn they all try to reach in and get their 
money to the ticket seller at once. It's just terrible the way 
you have to push and shove just to keep your place. Why, 
the last time I got to the ticket window of the theater and 
poked my head up to the opening, there were five arms and 
hands reaching over my shoulder waving money." Or he 
may hear the following: "It's as much as your life is worth 
to ride the streetcars. They're worse than our subways. 
What's more, these people don't seem to mind it at all." 
Some of this stems from the fact that, as Americans we have a 
pattern which discourages touching, except in moments of 
intimacy. When we ride on a streetcar or crowded elevator 
we will "hold ourselves in," having been taught from early 
childhood to avoid bodily contact with strangers. Abroad, 
it's confusing when conflicting feelings are being released at 
the same time. Our senses are born barded by a strange lan-

190 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
forever under the thumb of any woman who can move into 
this area." 
The questioner continued: "You know that makes me 
feel so relieved. I have three older sisters and a mother, and 
every time they come to town they march right into tlie 
kitchen and take over. I want to tell them to stay out of 
my kitchen, that they have their own kitchens and this is 
my kitchen, but I always thought I was having unkind 
thoughts about my mother and sisters, thoughts I wasn't 
supposed to have. This relieves me so much, because now I 
know I was right." 
Father's shop is, of course, another sacred territory and 
best kept that way. The same applies to his study, if he has 
one. 
As one travels abroad and examines the ways in which 
space is handled, startling variations are discovered-differ-
ences which we react to vigorously. Since none of us is 
taught to look at space as isolated from other associations, 
feelings cued by the handling of space are often attributed 
to something else. In growing up people learn literally 
thousands of spatial cues, all of which have their own mean-
ing in their own context. These cues "release" responses 
already established in much the same way as Pavlov's bells 
started his dogs salivating. Just how accurate a spatial mem-
ory is has never been completely tested. There are indica-
tions, however, that it is exceedingly persistent. 
Literally thousands of experiences teach us unconsciously 
that space communicates. Yet this fact would probably never 
have been brought to the level of consciousness if it had 
not been realized that space is organized differently in each 
culture. The associations and feelings that are released in a 
member of one culture almost invariably mean something 
else in the next. When we say that some foreigners are 

192 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
guage, different smells, and gestures, as well as a host of 
signs and sym bois. 
However, the fact that those who have been in a foreign 
country for some time talk about these things provides the 
newcomer with advance warning. Getting over a spatial ac-
cent is just as important, sometimes more so, than elimina-
ting a spoken one. Advice to the newcomer might be: Watch 
where people stand, and don't back up. You will feel funny 
doing it, but it's amazing how much difference it makes in 
people's attitudes toward you. 
HOW DIFFERENT CULTURES USE SPACE 
Several years ago a magazine published a map of the 
United States as the average New Yorker sees it. The details 
of New York were quite clear and the suburbs to the north 
were also accurately shown. Hollywood appeared in some 
detail while the space in between New York and Hollywood 
was almost a total blank. Places like Phoenix, Albuquerque, 
the Grand Canyon, and Taos, New Mexico, were all crowded 
into a hopeless jumble. It was easy to see that the average 
New Yorker knew little and cared less for what went on in 
the rest of the country. To the geographer the map was a 
distortion of the worst kind. Yet to the student of culture it 
was surprisingly accurate. It showed the informal images 
that many people have of the rest of the country. 
· As a graduate student I lived in New York, and my land-
lord was a first-generation American of European extraction 
who had lived in New York all his life. At the end of the 
academic year as I was leaving, the landlord came down to 
watch me load my car. When I said good-by, he remarked, 
"Well, one of these Sunday afternoons I put my family in 
the car and we drive out to New Mexico and see you." 
The map and the landlord's comment illustrate how 

SPACE SPEAKS I 
193 
Americans treat space as highly personalized. We visualize 
the relationship between places we know by personal ex-
perience. Places which we haven't been to and with which 
we are not personally identified tend to remain confused. 
Traditionally American space begins with "a place." It is 
one of the oldest sets, comparable to, but not quite the same 
as, the Spanish lugar. The reader will have no difficulty think-
ing up ways in which place is used: "He found a place in 
her heart," "He has a place in the mountains," "I am tired 
of this place," and so on. Those who have children know 
how difficult it is to get across to them the whole concept 
of place-like Washington, or Boston, or Philadelphia, and 
so on. An American child requires between six and seven 
years before he has begun to master the basic concepts of 
place. Our culture provides for a great variety of places, in-
cluding different classes of places. 
Contrasted with the Middle East, our system is character-
ized by fine gradations as one moves from one space cate-
gory to the next. In the world of the Arab there are villages 
and cities. That is about all. Most non-nomadic Arabs think 
of themselves as villagers. T he actual villages are of varying 
population, from a few families up to several thousands. 
The smallest place category in the United States is not 
covered by a term like hamlet, village, or town. It is im-
mediately recognizable as a territorial entity, nevertheless, 
because such places are always named. They are areas with . 
no recognizable center where a number of families live-
like Dogpatch of the funny papers. 
Our Dogpatches present the basic American pattern in 
uncomplicated form. They have scattered residences with no 
concentration of buildings in one spot. Like time, place with 
us is diffused, so that you never quite know where its center 
is. Beyond this the naming of place categories begins with 
the "crossroads store" or "corner" and continues with the 

SPACE SPEAKS I 
195 
suggest to children that one thing is different from another 
come from shifts in tone of voice which direct attention in 
very subtle but important ways. Speaking a fully developed 
language as we do, it is hard to remember that there was a 
time when we could not speak at all and when the whole 
communicative process was carried on by means of varia-
tions in the voice tone. This early language is lost to con-
sciousness and functions out of awareness, so that we tend 
to forget the very great role it plays in the learning process. 
To continue our analysis of the way a child learns about 
space, let us turn to his conception of a road. At first a road 
is whatever he happens to be driving on. This doesn't mean 
that he can't tell when you take a wrong turn. He can, and 
often will even correct a mistake which is made. It only 
means that he has not yet broken the road down into its 
components and that he makes the distinction between 
this road and that road in just the same way that he learns 
to distinguish between the phoneme d and the phoneme b 
in initial position in the spoken language. 
Using roads for cross-cultural contrast, the reader will re-
call that Paris, being an old city as well as a French city, 
has a street-naming system that puzzles most Americans. 
Street names shift as one progresses. Take Rue St.-Honore, 
for example, which becomes Rue du Faubourg St.-Honore, 
A venue des Ternes, and A venue du Roule. A child growing 
up in Paris, however, has no more difficulty learning his 
system than one of our children learning ours. We teach 
ours to watch the intersections and the directions and that 
when something happens-that is, when there is a change 
of course at one of these points- you can expect the name to 
change. In Paris the child learns that as he passes certain 
landmarks- like buildings that are well known, or statues-
the name of the street changes. 
It is interesting and informative to watch very young chil-

194 I 
THE ~ENT LANGUAGE 
"small shopping center," the "county seat," the "small 
town," "large town," "metropolitan center," "city," and 
"metropolis." Like much of the rest of our culture, includ-
ing the social ranking system, there are no clear gradations 
as one moves from one category to the next. The "points" 
are of varying sizes, and there are no linguistic cues indieat-
ing the size of the place we are talking about. The United 
States, New Mexico, Albuquerque, Pecos are all said the 
same way and used the same way in sentences. The child 
who is learning the language has no way of distinguishing 
one space category from another by listening to others talk. 
The miracle is that children eventually are able to sort 
out and pin down the different space terms from the meager 
cues provided by others. Try telling a five-year-old the dif-
ference between where you live in the suburbs and the town 
where your wife goes to shop. It will be a frustrating task, 
since the child, at that age, only comprehends where he 
lives. His room, his house, his place at the table are the 
places that are learned early. 
The reason most Americans have difficulty in school with 
geography or geometry stems from the fact that space as an 
informal cultural system is different from space as it. is 
technically elaborated by classroom geography and mathe-
matics. It must be said in fairness to ourselves that other 
cultures have similar problems. Only the very perceptive 
adult realizes that there is anything really difficult for the 
child to learn about space. In reality, he has to take what 
is literally a spatial blur and isolate the significant points 
that adults talk about. Sometimes adults are unnecessarily 
impatient with children because they don't catch on. People 
do not realize that the child has heard older people talking 
about different places and is trying to figure out, from what 
he hears, the difference between this place and that. In this 
regard it should be pointed out that the first clues which 

196 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
dren as they learn their culture. They quickly pick up the 
fact that we have names for some things and not for others. 
First, they identify the whole object or the set-a room, for 
instance; then they begin to fixate on certain other discrete 
objects like books, ashtrays, letter openers, tables, and pen-
cils. By so doing they accomplish two things. First, they find 
out how far down the scale they have to go in identifying 
things. Second, they learn what are the isolates and patterns 
for handling space and object nomenclature. Fii:st children 
are often better subjects than second children, because, hav-
ing learned the hard way, the first one will teach the second 
one without involving the parents. 
The child will ask, "What's this?" pointing to a pencil. 
You reply, "A pencil." The child is not satisfied and says, 
"No, this," pointing to the shaft of the pencil and making 
clear that she means the shaft. So you say, "Oh, that's the 
shaft of the pencil." Then the child moves her finger one 
quarter inch and says, "\Vhat's this?" and you say, "The 
shaft." This process is repeated and you say, "That's still 
the shaft; and this is the shaft, and this is the shaft. It's all 
the shaft of the pencil. This is the shaft, this is the point, 
and this is the eraser, and this is the little tin thing that 
holds the eraser on." Then she may point to the eraser, and 
you discover that she is still trying to find out where the 
dividing lines are. She manages to worm out the fact that 
the eraser has a top and sides but no more. She also learns 
that there is no way to tell the difference between one side 
and the next and that no labels are pinned on parts of the 
point, even though distinctions are made between the lead 
and the rest of the pencil. She may glean from this that 
materials make a difference some of the time and some of 
the time they do not. Areas where things begin and end are 
apt to be important, while the points in between are 
often ignored. 

~ 
'!: 
-~. .·• 
SPACE SPEAKS I 197 
The significance of all this would undoubtedly have es-
caped me if it hadn't been for an experience on the atoll of 
Truk. In a rather detailed series of studies in technology 
I had progressed to the point of having to obtain the no-
menclature of the canoe and the wooden food bowl. At this 
point it was necessary for me to go through what children 
go through-that is, point to various parts after I thought I 
had the pattern and ask if I had the name right. As I soon 
discovered, their system of carving up microspace \vas radi-
cally different from our own. The Trukese treat open spaces, 
without dividing lines (as we know them), as completely 
distinct. Each area has a name. On the other hand, they 
have not developed a nomenclature for the edges of ob-
jects as elaborately as \Vesterners have done. The reader has 
only to think of rims of cups and the number of different 
ways in which these can be referred to. There is the rim 
itself. It can be square or round or elliptical in cross section; 
straight, flared, or curved inward; plain or decorated, and 
wavy or straight. This doesn't mean that the Trukese don't 
elaborate rims. They do; it just means that we have ways of 
talking about what we do and not as many ways of talking 
about what happens to an open area as they do. The Trukese 
separate parts which we think of as being "built in" to the 
object. 
A certain decoration or carving at either end of a canoe-
shaped food bowl is thought of as being separate or distinct 
from the rim in which it has been carved. It has an essence 
of its own. Along the keel of the canoe the carving, called 
the chunefatch, has characteristics with which it endows the 
canoe. The canoe is one thing, the chunefatch something 
else. Open spaces without obvious markers on the side of 
the bowl have names. Such distinctions in the dividing up 
of space make the settling of land claims unbelievably com-
plicated in these islands. Trees, for instance, are considered 

~-
1' 
SPACE SPEAKS I 
199 
to the village." His reply was short and to the point: "I 
know, but it's my right." He did have a right to a certain 
area laid down long before there was a road. The fact that 
the road had been used for many years meant nothing to 
him. Use and disuse of space in our terms had nothing to do 
with his ideas of possession. 
SPACE AS A FACTOR IN CULTURE CONTACT 
Whenever an American moves overseas, he suffers from 
a condition known as "culture shock." Culture shock is 
simply a removal or distortion of many of the familiar cues 
one encounters at home and the substitution for them of 
other cues which are strange. A good deal of what occurs 
in the organization and use of space provides important 
leads as to the specific cues responsible for culture shock. 
The Latin house is often built around a patio that is next 
to the sidewalk but hidden from outsiders behind a wall. 
It is not easy to describe the degree to which small architec-
tural differences such as this affect outsiders. American Point 
Four technicians living in Latin America used to complain 
that they felt "left out" of things, that they were "shut off." 
Others kept wondering what was going on "behi.nd those 
walls." I~ the United States, on the other hand, propinquity 
is the basis of a good many relationships. To us the neighbor 
is actually quite close. Being a neighbor endows one with 
certain rights and privileges, also responsibilities. You can 
borrow things, including food and drink, but you also have 
to take your neighbor to the hospital in an emergency. In 
this regard he has almost as much claim on you as a cousin. 
For these and other reasons the American tries to pick his 
neighborhood carefully, because he knows that he is going 
to be thrown into intimate contac~ with people. We do not 
understand why it is that when we live next to people abroad 

198 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
separate from the soil out of which they grow. One man 
may own the trees, another the soil below. 
Benjamin Whorf, describing how Hopi concepts of space 
are reflected in the language, mentions the absence of terms 
for interior three-dimensional spaces, such as words for room, 
chamber, hall, passage, interior, cell, crypt, cellar, attic, loft, 
and vault. This does not alter the fact that the Hopi have 
multi-room dwellings and even use the rooms for special 
purposes such as storage, grinding corn, and the like. 
'Whorf also notes the fact that it is impossible for the 
Hopi to add a possessive pronoun to the word for room and 
that in the Hopi scheme of things a room in the strict sense 
of the word is not a noun and does not act like a noun. 
Since there is a wealth of data on how strongly the Hopi 
feel about holding onto things which are theirs, one has to 
rule out the possessive factor in Whorf's references to their 
inability to say "my room." It's just that their language is 
different. One might be led to assume by this that the Hopi 
would then lack a sense of territoriality. Again, nothing could 
be. farther from the truth. They just use and conceive of 
space differently. We work from points and along lines. 
They apparently do not. VVhile seemingly inconsequential, 
these differences caused innumerable headaches to the white 
supervisers who used to run the Hopi reservation in the first 
part of this century. 
I will never forget driving over to one of the villages at 
the end of a mesa and discovering that someone was build-
ing a house in the middle of the road. It later developed 
that the culprit (in my eyes) was a man I had known for 
some time. I said, "Paul, why are you building your house 
in the middle of the road? There are lots of good places on 
either side of the road. This way people have to knock the 
bottoms out of their cars driving around on the rocks to get 

200 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
the sharing of adjacent space does not always conform to 
our own pattern. In France and England, for instance, the 
relations between neighbors are apt to be cooler than in the 
United States. Mere propinquity does not tie people to-
gether. In England neighbor children do not play as they do 
in our neighborhoods. When they do play, arrangements are 
sometimes made a month in advance as though they were 
coming from the other side of town! 
Another example has to do with the arrangement of of-
fices. In this case one notices great contrast between our-
selves and the French. Part of our over-all pattern in the 
United States is to take a given amount of space and divide it 
up equally. When a· new person is added in an office, almost 
everyone will move his desk so that the newcomer will have 
his share of the space. This may mean moving from posi-
tions that have been occupied for a long time and away 
from favorite views from the window. The point is that the 
office force will make its owri adjustments voluntarily. In 
fact, it is a signal that they have acknowledged the presence 
of the new person when they start rearranging the furniture. 
Until this has happened, the boss can be sure that the new 
person has not been integrated into the group. 
Given a large enough room, Americans will distribute 
themselves around the walls, leaving the center open for 
group activities such as conferences. That is, the center be-
longs to the group and is often marked off by a table or 
some object placed there both to use and save the space. 
Lacking a conference table, members will move their chairs 
away from their desks to form a "huddle" in the middle. 
The pattern of moving from one's place to huddle is sym-
bolized in our language by such expressions as, "I had tq 
take a new position on that point," or "The position of the 
office on this point is .. . " 
The French, by contrast, do not make way for each other 

:~ 
!: 
·' 
.~; 
' 
SPACE SPEAKS I 
201 
in the unspoken, taken-for-granted way that we do. They do 
not divide up the space with a new colleague. Instead they 
may grudgingly give him a small desk in a dark corner look-
ing toward the wall. This action speaks eloquently to Ameri-
cans who have found themselves working for the French. 
We feel that not to "make a place" accents status differences. 
If the rearrangement which says, "Now we admit you to the 
group, and you are going to stay," fails to take place, Ameri-
cans are likely to feel perilously insecure. In French offices 
the key figure is the man in the middle, who has his fingers 
on everything so that all runs smoothly. There is a cen-
tralized control. The French educational system runs from 
the middle, so that all students all over France take the 
same class at the same time. 
It has already been mentioned that ordering is an im-
portant element in American patterns. As a general rule, 
whenever services are involved we feel that people should 
queue up in order of arrival. This reflects the basic equali-
tarianism of our culture. In cultures where a class system or 
its remnants exist, such ordinality may not exist. That is, 
where society assigns rank for certain purposes, or w h~rever 
ranking is involved, the handling of space will reflect this. 
To us it is regarded as a democratic virtue for people to 
be served without reference to the rank they hold in their 
occupational group. The rich and poor alike are accorded 
equal opportunity to buy and be waited upon in the order 
of arrival. In a line at the theater Mrs. Gotrocks is no better 
than anyone else. However, apart from the English, whose 
queueing patterns we share, many Europeans are likely to 
look upon standing in line as a violation of their individual-
ity. I am reminded of a Pole who reacted this way. He 
characterized Americans as sheep, and the mere thought of 
such passiveness was likely to set him off crashing into a line 
at whatever point he pleased. Such people can't stand the 

SPACE SPEAKS I 
203 
north. Turn right on that road and go seven miles. It's the 
second farm on your left. You can't miss it." 
Our concept of space makes use of the edges of things. If 
there aren't any edges, we make them by creating artificial 
lines (five miles west and two miles north). Space is treated 
in terms of a co-ordinate system. In contrast, the Japanese 
and many other people work within areas. They name 
"spaces" and distinguish between one space and the next or 
parts of a space. To us a space is empty-one gets into it 
by intersecting it with lines. 
A technical pattern which may have grown out of an in-
formal base is that of positional value or ranking. We have 
canonized the idea of the positional value in almost every 
aspect of our lives, so much so that even children four years 
old are fully aware of its implications and are apt to fight 
with each other as to who will be first. 
In addition to positional value, the American pattern em-
phasizes equality and standardization of the segments which 
are used for measuring space or into which space is divided, 
be it a ruler or a suburban subdivision. We like our com-
ponents to be standard and equaL American city blocks 
tend to have uniform dimensions whereas towns in many 
other parts of the world are laid out with unequal blocks. 
This suggests that it was no accident that mass production, 
made possible by the standardization of parts, had its origins 
in the United States. There are those who would argue that 
there are compelling technological reasons for both mass 
production and parts standardization. However, an examina-
tion of actual practice indicates that Europeans have pro-
duced automobiles in the past- and very good ones too-
in which the cylinders were all of different sizes. The dif-
ference in dimensions was not great, of course, a matter of 
a very few thousandths of an inch. This, however, was 
enough to cause the car to make noise and use too much oil 

202 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
idea of being held down by group conformity as if they were 
an automaton. Americans watching the Pole thought he was 
''pushy." He didn't bother to hide the fact that he thought 
we were much too subdued. He used to say, "What does it 
matter if there is a little confusion and some people get 
served before others?" 
FORMAL SPACE PATTERNS 
Depending upon the culture in question, the formal pat-
terning of space can take on varying degrees of importance 
and complexity. In America, for example, no one direction 
takes precedence over another except in a technical or utili-
tarian sense. In other cultures one quickly discovers that 
some directions are sacred or preferred. Navajo doors must 
face east, the mosques of the ·Moslems must be oriented to-
ward Mecca, the sacred rivers of India flow south. Ameri-
cans pay attention to direction in a technical sense, but for-
mally and informally they have no preference. Since our 
space is largely laid out by technical people, houses, towns, 
and main _arteries are usually oriented according to one of 
the points of the compass. The same applies to roads and 
main highways when the topography allows, as it does in 
the flat expanses of Indiana and Kansas. This technical pat-
terning allows us to locate places by co-ordinates (a poiHt 
on the line) . "He lives at 1321 K Street, N.W." tells us that 
he lives in the northwest part of town in the thirteenth 
block west of the line dividing the town into east-west halves 
and eleven blocks north of the line dividing the town into. 
north-south halves, on the left side of the street, about one 
quarter of the way up the block. . 
In the country we will say, "Go out of town ten miles west 
on Highway 66 until you get to the first paved road turning 

204 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
if it was repaired by an American mechanic unfamiliar with 
the European patterns that lack the uniformity isolate. 
Japan, too, has a passion for uniformity, though it is 
somewhat different from ours. All mats ( tatami) on the 
floors of Japanese houses and all windows, doors, and panels 
are usually of identical dimensions in a given district. In 
newspaper advertisements of houses for sale or rent the di-
mensions are usually given in terms of the number of mats 
of a specific area. Despite this example of uniformity, the 
Japanese differ from us in a way which can have considerable 
economic results. In one case, for example, they manufac-
tured a very large order of electronics parts according to 
rigid specifications which they were quite able to meet. 
When the product arrived in the United States, it was dis-
covered that there were differences between various batches 
of these parts. The customer subsequently discovered that 
while the whole internal process of manufacture had been 
controlled, the Japanese had failed to standardize their 
gauges! It is no accident that in the United States there is a 
Bureau of Standards. Much of the success of this country's 
technical skill and productivity, which we are trying to pass 
on to other nations, rests on these and similar unstated 
patterns. 
HOW SPACE COMMUNICATES 
Spatial changes give a tone to a communication, accent it, 
and at times even override the spoken word. The flow and 
shift of distance between people as they interact with each 
.. other is part and parcel of the communication process. The 
normal conversational distance between strangers illustrates 
how important are the dynamics of space interaction. If a 
person gets too close, the reaction is instantaneous and 
automatic-the other person backs up. And if he gets too 

SPACE SPEAKS I 
205 
close again, back we go again. I have observed an American 
backing up the entire length of a long corridor while a 
foreigner whom he considers pushy tries to catch up with 
him. This scene has been enacted thousands and thou-
sands of times-one person trying to increase the distance in 
order to be at ease, while the other tries to decrease it for the 
same reason, neither one being aware of what was going on. 
We have here an example of the tremendous depth to which 
culture can condition behavior. 
One thing that does confuse us and gets in the way of 
understanding cultural differences is that there are times in 
our own culture when people are either distant or pushy in 
their use of space. We, therefore, simply associate the for-
eigner with the familiar; namely those people who have acted 
in such a way that our attention was drawn to their actions. 
The error is in jumping to the conclusion that the foreigner 
feels the same way the American does even though his 
overt acts are identical. 
This was all suddenly brought into focus one time when 
I had the good fortune to be visited by a very distinguished 
and learned man who had been for many years a top-ranking 
diplomat representing a foreign country. After meeting him 
a number of times, I had become impressed with his ex-
traordinary sensitivity to the small details of behavior that 
are so significant in the interaction process. Dr_ X. was in-
terested in some of the work several of us were doing at the 
time and asked permission to attend one of my lectures. He 
came to the front of the class at the end of the lecture to 
talk over a number of points made in the preceding hour. 
While talking he became quite involved in the implications 
of the lecture as well as what he was saying. We started out 
facing each other and as he talked I became dimly aware 
that he was standing a little too close and that I was be-
ginning to back up- Fortunately I was able to suppress my 

SPACE SPEAKS I 
207 
My ignorance of both hydroponics and florist shops made 
me feel somewhat ill at ease, so that I did not communicate 
in the manner that I use when I am speaking on a famil-
iar subject in a familiar setting. The role that distance plays 
in a communication situation was brought home to me 
when I entered a shop in which the floor was filled with 
benches spaced at about twenty-inch intervals. On the other 
side of the benches was the female proprietor of the shop. 
As I entered, she craned her neck as though to reach over the 
benches, raised her voice slightly to bring it up to the proper 
level, and said, "What was it you wanted?" I tried once. 
"What I'm looking for is a hydroponic flowerpot." "What 
kind of flowerpot?" still with the neck craned. At this point 
I found myself climbing over benches in an effort to close 
up the space. It was simply impossible for me to talk about 
such a subject in a setting of this sort at a distance of fifteen 
feet. It wasn't until I got to within three feet that I was able 
to speak with some degree of comfort. 
Another example is one that will be familiar to millions 
of civilians who served in the Army during World War II. 
The Army, in its need to get technical about matters that 
are usually handled informally, made a mistake in the regu-
lations on distance required for reporting to a superior 
officer. Everyone knows that the relationship between offi-
cers and men has certain elements which require distance 
and impersonality. This applied to officers of different ranks 
when they were in command relationship to each other. In-
structions for reporting to a superior officer were that the 
junior officer was to proceed up to a point three paces in 
front of the officer's desk, stop, salute, and state his rank, 
his name, and his business: "Lieutenant X, reporting as 
ordered, sir." Now, what cultural norms does this procedure 
violate, and what does it communicate? It violates the con-
ventions for the use of space. The distance is too great, by 

206 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
first impulse and remain stationary because there was noth-
ing to communicate aggression in his behavior except the 
conversational distance. His voice was eager, his manner in-
tent, the set of his body communicated only interest and 
eagerness to talk. It also came to me in a flash that someone 
. who had been so successful in the old school of diplomacy 
could not possibly let himself communicate something of-
fensive to the other person except outside of his highly 
trained awareness. 
By experimenting I was able to observe that as I moved 
away slightly, there was an associated shift in the pattern of 
interaction. He had more trouble expressing himself. If I 
shifted to where I felt comfortable (about twenty-one 
inches), he looked somewhat puzzled and hurt, almost as 
though he were saying: "Why is he acting that way? Here 
I am doing everything I can to talk to him in a friendly 
manner and he suddenly withdraws. Have I done anything 
wrong? Said something that I shouldn't?" Having ascertained 
that distance had a direct effect on his conversation, I 
stood my ground, letting him set the distance. 
Not only is a vocal message qualified by the handling of 
distance, but the substance of a conversation can often .de-
mand special handling of space. There are certain things 
which are difficult to talk about unless one is within the 
proper conversational zone. 
Not long ago I received a present of some· seeds and 
chemicals along with the information that if I planted the 
seeds the chemicals would make them grow. Knowing little 
about hydroponics except that the plants should be sus-
pended above the fluid in which chemicals are dissolved, I 
set out to find a suitable flowerpot. At every flower shop I 
was met with incredulity and forced to go through a routine 
involving a detailed explanation of just what it was I wanted 
and how hydroponics worked. 

208 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
at least two feet, and does not fit the situation. The normal 
speaking distance for business matters, where impersonality 
is involved at the beginning of the conversation, is five and 
a half to eight feet. The distance required by the army regula-
tions borders on the edge of what we would call "far." It 
evokes an automatic response to shout. This detracts from 
the respect which is supposed to be shown to the superior 
officer. There are, of course, many subjects which it is al-
most impossible to talk about at this distance, and individual 
army officers recognize this by putting soldiers and junior 
officers at ease, asking them to sit down or permitting them 
to come closer. However, the first impression was that the 
. ·Army was doing things the hard way. 
For Americans the following shifts in the voice are as-
sociated with specific ra~ges of distances: 
1. Very close ( 3 in. 
Soft whisper; top se-
to 6 in.) 
cret 
2. Close (8 in. to 
Audible whisper; very 
12 in.) 
confidential 
3· Near (12 in. to 
Indoors, soft voice; 
20 in.) 
outdoors, fu]l voice; 
confidential 
4· Neutral (20 m. 
Soft voice, low vol-
to 36 in.) 
ume; personal sub-
ject matter 
5· Neutral (4 Y2 ft. 
Full voice; informa-
to 5 ft.) 
tion of non-personal 
matter 

6. Public Distance 
( 5 Y2 ft. to 8 ft. ) 
7· Across the room 
( 8 ft. to 20 ft.) 
8. Stretching the 
limits of distance 
SPACE SPEAKS I 
209 
. Full voice with slight 
overloudness; pub-
lic information for 
others to hear 
Loud voice; talking to 
a group 
20 ft. to 24 ft. indoors; 
up to 100 ft. out-
doors; hailing dis-
tance, departures 
In Latin America the interaction distance is much less 
than it is in the United States. Indeed, people cannot talk 
comfortably with one another unless they are very close to 
the distance that evokes either sexual or hostile feelings in 
the North American. The result is that when they move 
close, we withdraw and back away. As a consequence, they 
think we are distant or cold, withdrawn and unfriendly. We, 
on the other hand, are constantly accusing them of breath-
ing down our necks, crowding us, and spraying our faces. 
Americans who have spent some time in Latin America 
without learning these space considerations make other 
adaptations, like barricading themselves behind their desks, 
· using chairs and typewriter tables to keep the Latin Ameri-
can at what is to us a comfortable distance. The result is 
that the Latin American may even climb over the obstacles 
until he has achieved a distance at which he can comfortably 
talk. 

chapter 
eleven 
LOOSENING 
THE 
GRIP 
The first profound scientific understanding of the nature of 
culture dates back almost a hundred years. Yet to 'this day 
the concept of culture is resisted or ignored by a world which 
has accepted many more abstract and complex notions. 
Why? Oddly enough it is not the differences between cul-
tures that breeds resistance. These are usually acceptable. 
Rather, years of experience in trying to communicate the 
basic discoveries about culture have taught me that there-
sistance one meets has a great deal in common with the 
resistance to psychoanaJysis which was so strong in its early 
days. Though the concepts of culture (like those of psy-
choanalysis) are abstract, they turn out, in fact, to be highly 
relevant to the deepest personal concerns. They touch upon 
such intimate matters that they are often brushed aside at 
the very point where people begin to comprehend their im-
plications. Full acceptance of the reality of culture would 
have revolutionary consequences. 


212 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
As a means of handling the complex data with which 
culture confronts us, I have treated culture as communica-
tion. This approach has broad implications for future study, 
but it offers no quick road to complete understanding. The 
universe does not yield its secrets easily, and culture is no 
exception. Yet this insistence on culture as communication 
has its practical aspects. Most people's difficulties with each 
other can be traced to distortions in communication. Good 
will, which is so often relied upon to solve problems, is 
often needlessly dissipated because of the failure to under-
stand what is being communicated. 
By broadening his conception of the forces that make up 
and control his life, the average person can never again be 
completely caught in the grip of patterned behavior of which 
he has no awareness. Lionel Trilling once likened culture 
to a prison. It is in fact a prison unless one knows that there 
is a key to unlock it. While it is true that culture binds 
human beings in many unknown ways, the restraint it ex-
ercises is the groove of habit and nothing more. Man did 
not evolve culture as a means of smothering himself but as a 
medium in which to move, live, breathe, and develop his 
own uniqueness. In order to exploit it he needs to know 
much more about it. 
The realization that formal culture can exert a stabilizing 
influence on our lives should not be mistaken for conserva-
tism. In fact, an appreciation of the nature and purpose of 
formal culture should eventually prevent our blind accept-
ance of the teachings of psychologists and educators who, 
in their zeal to correct past faults in the system, insist that 
we spoil our children by not setting any limits and being 
overly permissive. This permissiveness only means that 
somebody else, perhaps a policeman or a judge, has to define 
the limits in life beyond which people simply cannot be 
permitted to go. We must realize that each child must learn · 

LOOSENING THE GRIP I 
213 
the limits just as he must learn that there are certain things 
upon which he can always depend. 
A real understanding of what culture is should rekindle 
our interest in life, an interest which is often sorely lacking. 
It will help people learn where they are and who they are. 
It will prevent them from being pushed around by the more 
voracious, predatory, and opportunistic of their fellow men 
who take advantage of the fact that the public is not usually 
aware of those shared formal norms which give coherence 
to our society. These social misfits who lack the security 
of support which formal culture provides, want to destroy 
things and build power around themselves. The case of the 
late Senator McCarthy was a classic example of this type of 
opportunism. If the American public had greater realization 
that formal norms are not individual but shared, they might 
save themselves from McCarthyism in any of its future 
manifestations. 
Probably the most difficult point to make and make clearly 
is that not only is culture imposed upon man but it is man 
in a greatly expanded sense. Culture is the link between hu-
man beings and the means they have of interacting with 
others. The meaningful richness of human life is the result 
of the millions of possible combinations involved in a com-
plex culture. 
As I mentioned in the Introduction, the analogy with 
music is useful in understanding culture. A musical score is 
comparable to the technical descriptions of culture that the 
anthropologist is beginning to make. In both cases, the 
notation system, i.e., the vocabulary, enables people to talk 
about what they do. Musically, the process of making short-
hand notes does not diminish the artist in any way. It simply 
enables him to transmit to others who are not present what 
he does when he plays. In music it enables us to share and 
preserve the genius that would ordinarily only reach those 

LOOSENING THE GRIP I 
215 
not do is provide anything more than labels for the different 
types of males or females who are the models for their 
children. Modern society has complicated matters because 
of the increased number of alternatives that are provided the 
young. If one considers the Comanche of the early western 
plains, by way of contrast to present-day Americans, it is . 
possible to get some idea of how increasingly complex life 
has become. A young Comanche boy knew that he had only 
two alternatives. He could grow up to be a warrior or a 
transvestite, the term used for a man who wears women's 
clothes and does women's work. Everyone had a clear idea 
of what it meant to be a warrior and the qualities that went 
with it. If for some reason or other a boy lacked the bravado 
and bravery necessary to be a good warrior and he was afraid 
he would fail, his alternative was to put on the dress of a 
woman and take up bead work. There were in Comanche 
life only two models for adults; warriors and women. Life 
in American culture is not that simple. There is not even a 
satisfactory inventory of the categories of males and females 
for American culture, although some of the types are 
reasonably well known because of a persistent interest in 
this subject on the part of contemporary novelists. Not only 
must we know more about the alternatives that confront 
each of us in our daily lives, but we must also know the over-
all pattern of life as well. 
For the layman and scientist alike I would like to say that 
I feel very strongly that we must recognize and understand 
the cultural process. We don't need more missiles and . 
H-bombs nearly so much as we need more specific knowl-
edge of ourselves as participants in culture. 

2 1 4 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
who were in the physical presence of the artist. Bach, 
Beethoven, and Brahms would have been lost to us if they 
had n.ot had at their disposal the means for writing music. 
Like the creative composer, some people are more gifted 
at living than others. T hey do have an effect on those around 
them, but the process stops there because there is no way of 
describing in technical terms just what it is they do, most of 
which is out of awareness. Some time in the future, a long, 
long time from now when culture is more completely ex-
plored, there will be the equivalent of musical scores that 
can be learned, each for a different type of man or woman 
in different types of jobs and relationships, for time, space, 
work, and play. We see people who are successful and happy 
today, who have jobs which are rewarding and productive. 
What are the sets, isolates, and patterns that differentiate 
their lives from those of the less fortunate? We need to have 
a means for making life a little less haphazard and more 
enjoyable. Actually, we as Americans have progressed quite 
a long way on this road, compared with people of the Arab 
Midd,le East and Turkey, for example. Professor Daniel 
Lerner, a sociologist at M.I.T., discovered when he inter-
viewed villagers in Turkey that the idea of achieving happi-
ness did not mean anything to them. It had never entered 
their mind that happiness was one of the things you had a 
right to expect from life and might strive to achieve. This 
does not mean that these villagers never have happy mo-
ments. Quite to the contrary. It just means that their culture 
does not include this isolate. 
All cultures have developed values in regard to what I 
have called Primary Message Systems. For example, the 
values in bisexuality center around preferred and not-
preferred types of men and women, idealized models for the 
children of each sex to follow. Most of these models are 
formal, some are informal. However, what most cultures do 


APPENDIX I SCHEMA FOR SOCIAL SCIENTISTS 
For the social scientist, the basic contribution of this study 
lies in eight interrelated ideas: 
1. Culture is communication and communication is cul-
ture. 
2. Culture is not one thing, but many. There is no one 
basic unit or elemental particle, no single isolate for all cul-
ture. There are at least ten bases for culture, all deeply rooted 
in the biological past, that satisfy the rigid criteria imposed 
by using a linguistic model for culture. 
3· The study of institutions and their structure and the 
study of the individual and his psychological make-up are 
excluded from the specific study of culture as it is used here, 
although they are involved in it on a higher organizational 
level. 
4· Man operates on three different levels: the formal, 
informal, and technical. Each is present in any situation, 
but one will dominate at any given instant in time. The 
shifts from level to level are rapid, and the study of these 
shifts is the study of the process of change. 
5· Culture is concerned more with messages than it is 
with networks and control systems. The message has three 
components: sets, isolates, and patterns. Sets are perceived 
and constitute the point of entry into any cultural study. 
They are limited in number only by the patterned combina-
tion of isolates that go to make them up. Isolates are ab-
stracted from sets by a process of comparing sets on the 
level of differential meaning. Controlled experiments are set 
up and the subject is asked if he differentiates between event 
A and events B, C, D, X, Y, and so on, until all the dis-
tinctions he makes have been isolated. Isolates are limited 

APPENDIX I 
219 
number of infra-cultural activities. We were reasonably 
certain that we had the basic components of culture since 
all the systems we developed satisfied the necessary criteria. 
But what did the totality amount to? Given these systems, 
could you derive culture out of such a base? Remember one 
of our criteria for cultural systems had been that each system 
had to be reflected in the rest of culture as well as reflecting 
all other cultural systems. This led to the creation of a chart 
that would show in one place the various combinations of 
the Primary Message Systems with each other. We began 
by constructing a two-dimensional grid with the PMS on 
the ]eft and their adjectival counterparts across the top (see 
chart) . 
In this way it was possible to see the types of activities 
resulting from the various combinations of the PMS, with 
a chart that turned out to be a sort of cultural equivalent of 
the periodic tables of chemistry. We took two PMS like 
subsistence and interaction and asked ourselves the follow-
ing question: "What are the economic extensions of inter-
action and its reciprocal, the interactional extensions of 
subsistence?" We came up with "exchange" and "the eco-
logical community." Economic patterns of association and 
organizational patterns of subsistence gave us "economic 
roles" and "occupational groupings"; instructional results of 
subsistence and the economic results of learning gave us 
"learning from working" and "rewards for teaching and 
learning." In some cases we were puzzled at first as to what 
to indicate under a given heading. The protective patterns 
of territoriality gave us pause for quite a while until it oc-
curred to us that this was, of course, "privacy" on the 
individual level, while the territorial {Jatterns of defense have 
to do with the organization of territory as a part of a system 
of defense (natural barriers, like rivers, mountains, canyons, 
forests, etc.) . 

218 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
in number. Patterns emerge and are understood as a result 
of the mastery of sets and isolates in a meaningful context. 
Patterns are also limited in number. 
6. There is a principle of indeterminacy in culture. Iso-
lates turn into sets when they are studied in detail and are 
therefore abstractions. The more precise the observer is on 
one level, the less precise he will be on any other. Only one 
level can be studied with precision at any one time, and only 
one level can be described at one time. 
7· There is also a principle of relativity in culture, just 
as there is in physics and mathematics. Experience is some. 
thing man projects on the outside world as he gains it in its 
culturally determined form. Man alters experience by living. 
There is no experience independent of culture against which 
culture can be measured. 
8. Cultural indeterminacy and cultural relativity are not 
easy concepts for the layman to grasp. They mean more than 
what is good by one set of standards may be bad by some 
other. They mean that in every instance the formulae must 
be worked out that will enable scientists to equate event N 
in culture N with B2 in culture B1• A proper cultural analy-
sis has to begin with a microcultural analysis on the isolate 
level once the sets have been perceived. 
APPENDIX II A MAP OF CULTURE 
One of the by-products of our studies of culture as com-
munication is a chart that has proved helpful at one phase 
in our work. A good deal was learned in the course of 
developing it, and it still represents the only thing of its 
kind in existence today. I pass it on to others who may be 
interested. 
My colleague, Trager, and I operated on the assumption 
that culture was bio-basic and had its wellsprings in a 

220 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
It was discovered that in working with the grid the pattern 
of analysis imposed its own rules. Whatever we decided on 
in one part had to be consistent with everything else. For 
example, we thought for a time that the recreational exten-
sions of interaction were pleasure, but the over-all pattern 
of the chart plus certain self-checking features indicated that 
"participation in the arts and sports" was a better choice. 
Notice of the self-checking features mentioned above 
came about in the following way: By turning to the chart 
the reader will note that there is a diagOllal from the upper 
left to the lower right formed by the intersection of each 
PMS with its adjectival counterpart. \Ve observed that in 
filling in the spaces in the grid those activities above the 
diagonal were concerned with the individual, those below 
the diagonal with the group counterparts. Thus the recrea-
tional results of association are "entertainers and athletes," 
while the organizational results of ~lay are "play groups, 
teams, and troupes." 
T he chart as it now stands, along with the rules for its 
use, is actually a kind of mathematics of culture that will 
. be useful to the specialist and will also have certain other 
applications worthy of mention. It is, of course, limited by 
the fact that it has only two dimensions. A three-dimensional 
chart represents the next logical step but would be vastly 
more complex. 
By looking at the chart the reader will observe that it has 
no content or substance and is restricted entirely to head-
ings. Its present potential is as a classification system and 
·a check list for behavioral scientists, who, when working on 
large projects, can be sure that no major categories have been 
overlooked. It is also a special kind of map of the categories of 
human activities. As a map it can be useful in allocating 
and keeping track of work responsibility in group projects · 
by assigning a given area to each worker. T he mature student 

APPENDIX I 
221 
may also find it stimulating to experiment with the chart 
and what can be done with it. There is more than the one 
axis indicated by the basic systems that intersect. The vari-
ous areas of the chart are concerned with quite different 
things; the upper left portion tends toward formal activities, 
the middle toward the informal, and the whole lower right 
side toward the technical. While it is quite apparent that 
each category is discrete, activities which are related occur in 
adjacent areas. When developed in detail by the breaking 
down of each category into its formal, informal, and techni-
cal aspects, new dimensions are added. 
In recent years a constantly recurring problem is the 
classification and codification of data which is accumulating 
too rapidly for most people to handle. The system presented 
here has 100 major slots, each representing complexes of 
activities which can be broken down indefinitely. Each 
number is permanently identified with a major field-o, 
interaction; 2, subsistence; 6, learning; 8, defense, and so on. 
Each of the 100 categories can be quickly subdivided by 10 
and each of the resulting sub-categories by 10 again. Thus 
8o is community defenses, 80.2 the economic aspects of 
community def~nses, and 8o.5 the temporal aspects. The 
advantage of such a system over some others is that it has a 
theoretical base that gives it a consistency and design lack-
ing in the empirical models. 
At this point it's important to draw the reader's attention 
to the fact that the order in which the PMS are given 
appears to be highly important. Originally this order was 
chosen because, given these activities, it was closest to the 
actual philogenetic order; that is, the activities are learned 
and integrated in the life history of each organism. The same 
order can be found in that organism's evolution. Having 
established this order we also later observed that each system 
is paired in a functional way with one another; viz., time 

Territorial 
Temporal 
Ins tructlonal 
Recreatlon~l 
Protective 
£xploltatlonal 
4 
5 
6 
7 
a 
9 
Participation 
Use of 
Places of 
Times of 
Teaching and 
in the arts 
Protecting 
telephones, 
interaction 
interaction 
learning 
and sports 
and being 
signals, 
(active and 
protected . 
writing, etc. 
04 
05 
06 
passive) 
07 
08 
09 
Protectors 
Local ~roup 
Age group 
Teachers and 
Entertainers 
(doctors, 
Use of group 
roles 
roles 
learners 
and athletes 
clergy, 
property 
soldiers, 
14 
15 
16 
17 
police, etc.) 18 
19 
Where the 
When the 
Use of f oods, 
Individual 
individual 
Learning from 
Pleasure from 
Care of health, 
resources, 
eats, cooks, 
eats, cooks, 
working 
working 
protection of 
and 
etc. 
etc. 
.livelihood 
equipment 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
Areas 
Periods 
Use of sex 
assigned to 
assigned to 
Teaching and 
Participation 
Protection of 
differentiating 
Individuals by 
individuals by 
learning sex 
In recreation 
sex and 
decoration 
virtue of su 
virtue of sex 
roles 
by sex 
fertility 
and 
adornment 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
Space 
Teaching and 
Fun, playing 
Ftrmal space 
Scheduling 
learning 
games, etc., 
Privacy 
Use of fences 
Informal 
of space 
Individual 
In terms of 
and markers 
space 
space 
space 
Boundaries 
44 
assignments 
46 
48 
49 
45 
47 
Time 
Terri torially 
Sequence 
When the 
When the 
Rest. 
Use of 
determined 
Cycles 
Individual 
Individual 
vacations, 
time-telling 
cycles 
Calendar 
learns 
plays 
holidays 
devices, etc. 
!>4 
55 
56 
57 
58 
59 
Enculturatlon 
Learning self· 
Places for 
Scheduling of 
Rearing 
Making 
defense and 
Use of 
learning 
learning 
Informal 
learning fun 
to stay 
training aids 
(group) 
learning 
healthy 
Education 
67 
68 
69 
64 
65 
66 
Recreation 
Use Of 
Recreational 
Play seasons 
Instructional 
Fun 
Exercise 
recreational 
areas 
play 
Playing 
materials 
Cames 
(playthings) 
74 
75 
76 
77 
78 
79 
Scientific, 
Protection 
What places 
The When of 
religious, and 
Mass 
Formal 
Use of 
are defended 
defense 
military 
exercises and 
defenses 
materials for 
training 
mllltarygames 
Informal 
protection 
defenses 
Technical 
84 
85 
86 
87 
defenses 
88 
89 
Property-
School 
Amusement 
Fortifications, 
Material 
what Is 
What periods 
buildings, 
and sporting 
armaments, 
Systems 
enclosed, 
are measured 
training 
goods and 
medical 
Contactw/ 
counted, and 
and recorded 
aids, etc. 
their 
equipment, 
environment 
measured 
industries 
safety devlcu 
Motor habits 
Technolon 
94 
95 
96 
97 
98 
S9 

Primary Messaae 
Interactional 
Systems 
Organizational 
Economic 
Sexual 
0 
1 
2 
3 
Communication 
Vocal 
Status and 
Exchange 
How the sexes 
Interaction 
qualifiers 
Role 
interact 
Kinesics 
0 
Language 
00 
01 
02 
03 
Society 
Community 
Class 
Economic 
Sexual roles 
Association 
Caste 
roles 
Government 
1 
10 
11 
12 
13 
Work 
Ecological 
Occupational 
Formal work 
Sexual 
Subsistence 
community 
groupings 
Maintenance 
division of 
Occupations 
labor 
2 
20 
21 
22 
23 
The Sexes 
Sex community 
Marriage 
Family 
Masc. vs. Fem. 
Bisexuality 
(clans, sibs) · 
groupings 
Sex 
(biological) 
Sex 
3 
30 
31 
32 
(technical) 
33 
Community 
Group 
Economic 
Men's and 
Territoriality 
territory 
territory 
areas 
women's 
territories 
4 
40 
41 
42 
43 
Community 
Group 
Economic 
Men's and 
Temporality 
cycles 
cycles 
cycles 
women's 
cyclical 
5 
50 
51 
52 
activities 
53 
Commun i~ 
learning 
Reward for 
What the 
Learnln& 
lore-wha 
groups-
teaching and 
sexes are 
gets taught 
educational 
learning· 
taught 
and learned 
institutions 
6 
60 
61 
62 
63 
Community 
Play groups-
Professional 
Men's and 
Play 
play-the arts 
teams and 
sports and 
women's play, 
and sports 
troupes 
enterta lnment 
f un, and 
7 
70 
71 
72 
games 
731 
Community 
Defense groups 
What the 
defenses-
-armies, 
Economic 
sexes defend 
Defense 
structured 
police, public 
patterns of 
(home, honor, 
defense 
health, organ-
defense 
etc.) 
systems 
ized religion 
8 
80 
81 
82 
83 
Organizational 
Food, 
What men and 
Communica-
networks 
resources, and 
women are 
Explliltatlpn 
!ion networks 
(cities, build· 
industrial 
concerned 
ing groups, 
equipment 
with and own 
etc.) 
9 
90 
•91 
92 
93 

224 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
with space, work with play. The order is also consistent with . 
these paired relationships. An interesting sidelight on order 
is that most societies rank the systems differently from the 
order given. The ranking a society assigns to the systems 
provides a quick way of getting at a cultural profile that can 
be compared with others. For example, the United States 
informants questioned on this departed from the basic order 
as regards materials, recreation, and bisexuality. As could be 
predicted for Americans, materials were placed near the top, 
recreation and bisexuality competed for the last place. An 
Arab informant differed considerably from the Americans. 
He separated time and space, putting time last; m<).terials 
were ranked low, while defense systems were ranked with 
communication at the top. 
Laying out a map of culture is a unique way of proceed-
ing. In the past our data has not lent itself to presentations 
of this sort. The whole theory of culture as presented in this 
volum~ differs in many important respects from previous 
thought. The principal differences are: . (a) the use of a 
linguistic model; (b) the observation of the whole of cul-
ture as communication; (c) the concept of the PMS rooted 
in biology; (d) the formal, informal, and technical types 
of integrations; (e) the derivations of these integrations: 
sets, isolates, and patterns. 
The writer and his colleagues who worked with him 
developing this analysis have found it to be one that is 
rewarding to work with, enlightening, and conducive to fur-
ther research. It satisfied our demands for specificity, con-
creteness, and teacha bility. We have also discovered that, by 
sticking to one of the PMS at a time when working with an 
informant, it is possible to keep a firm footing in the known 
at the same time that one is getting into new and unknown 
areas. For example, temporal isolates of the informal variety 
as elicited from an Arab also shed new light on Arab values 

APPENDIX I 225 
in a way that would have otherwise been difficult to achieve. 
It is hoped that this brief explanation will serve two pur· 
poses: to enlighten the non-specialist interested in cross-
cultural work as to the nature of culture and to stimulate 
students to further work. Much progress needs to be made 
in the definition of cultural isolates as a means of handling 
values. It would seem that here we have a few leads as to 
how this might be done. 
APPENDIX III THREE EXAMPLES OF CHANGE 
This appendix has been added for the specialist and repre-
sents three clinical case studies of change. They illustrate 
the progression from formal to informal to technical. The 
introduction of the initial v into English from the French 
in the eleventh century is an example of diffusion from one 
culture to another. The screw thread example is picked up 
at the point where different manufacturers are in the process 
of giving up their own informal thread design and are willing 
to submit to the standardizing dictates of the technical. The 
southwest pottery case is the most technical of all and is 
reproduced here because of the interest of colleagu~s in new 
ways of testing historical reconstructions of the past. It con-
cerns the transfer of an entire technological process, so that 
it is possible to get a step-by-step picture of how the new 
technology became integrated, how it also at one moment 
was freed from the bonds of tradition, and how it later 
became fettered, but within a new frame of reference. 
In England prior to the Norman Conquest v and f were 
variants of the same sound (what the linguist calls allo-
phones of the same phoneme). F tended to be used in 
initial position in words, whereas v was more commonly· 
used in the middle. The French conquerors, on the other 

APPENDIX I 
227 
\Villiam Sellers of the Franklin Institute, standardized the 
thread designs of the Americans into one thread which was 
eventually adopted by the Society for Automotive Engineers. 
While Se11ers was working out the fate of the American nuts 
and bolts, an Englishman by the name of Whitworth was 
doing a similar job for the British. Both men's technical 
solutions to the problem of standardization were so close 
that the end products were almost but not quite identical. 
This didn't bother anyone very much until World War I, 
when the United States began producing war goods for the 
English and vice versa. When one side made a machine gun 
for the other, it either had to retool all thread-cutting 
operations or else make a product that was held together 
with nuts and bolts that wouldn't fit anything else·.the end 
user had. The retooling and stockpiling of nuts a~d bolts 
that were almost but not quite identical ran into many 
millions of dollars. Everyone realized that it would make 
more sense for both nations to decide on a common thread 
design, but the idea was strongly resisted. Engineers and 
administrators treated the problem as a technical one. 
Actually, once the technical solutions of standardization 
were separately arrived at by Sellers and Whitworth, each 
nation treated its own thread design as a formal matter. This 
meant that those who were involved would resist logic and 
technical arguments with all sorts of rationalizations, none 
of which had any technical validity. 
Two world wars, the lives of an unknown number of 
troops who died because they couldn't scavenge ordnance 
parts in the field, and millions of dollars of added expense 
all failed to bring a bout a change. 
Informa11y, different individuals tried to work out solu-
tions. But it wasn't until World War II that William L. 
Batt, an American engineer and business executive, managed 
to mobilize enough support to obtain agreement on a thread 

226 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
hand, used these two as completely separate sounds, just as 
we do today. 
Included in the cultural impedimenta which the French 
brought to England were various foods. Among these 
was veal. Englishmen who spoke French had to learn to 
make the distinction between v and f, because now, not only 
did it make a difference to the finicky French, but a ·new 
English word had to be differentiated. Undoubtedly, lower-
class Englishmen in time went on talking as though there 
were no difference. Eventually these informal adaptations of 
the English were technicalized and the v as well as the f 
as an initial consonant began appearing in print in English 
words as well as in anglicized French words. Today the 
initial v is part of our formal system, and it is unthinkable 
that anyone would ever seriously consider going back to the 
old form. The fact that we think of it as right and natural 
marks it as formal. 
THE STANDARDIZATION OF THE SCREW THREAD 
One would not expect that something as technical and 
mundane as the screw thread of nuts and bolts would 
illustrate, by its history, how changes are made at one point 
in time and deeply resisted at another. The fact that there is 
a demonstrable need for change does not necessarily mean 
that change takes place. How change occurs is a function of 
whether a given cultural item is treated formally, informally, 
or technically. 
The history of the screw thread begins in earnest with 
the industrial revolution in England and in this country. In 
the early days of manufacturing, each factory designed its 
own nuts and bolts. There was no standardization. Obviously 
this situation could not go on indefinitely. Yet it was quite 
a revolution when the American inventor and industrialist, 

228 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
design that would be used by both nations in the manufac-
ture of equipment that the other was to use. Finally, with 
the English conceding more than the Americans, com-
promise was achieved. The screw thread had been born 
technically, drifted through a long formal phase, and had at 
last returned to the technical sphere. 
In much the same way, American resistance to adoption 
of the metric system (a Napoleonic innovation) is without 
logic. There is no reason why we should hold out, except 
that weights and measures are to most people formal sys-
tems. As Americans we respond viscerally to the idea that 
we should give up the pound and take the kilo in its place, 
in spite of the fact that in science and engineering the metric 
system is gradually taking over. 
AN EARLY CASE OF TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE 
The next example comes from southwestern archaeology 
and is concerned with the transfer of pottery making from 
one group to another approximately fifteen hundred years 
ago. Pottery is a good topic for examination of change, be-
cause pottery fragments are virtually indestructible. Besides, 
clay has such qualities that it is almost impossible to manu-
facture pottery without leaving a good deal of evidence as to 
the method of manufacture. In addition, pottery provides 
a long, uninterrupted record of any culture. 
The example here begins at a time when one of the princi-
pal prehistoric cultures of the Southwest had been making 
pottery for several hundred years. These people are known 
in the literature as the Mogollon. The name is from the area 
where their remains were first discovered. The northern 
neighbors of the Mogollon, ancestors of the present day 
Pueblo Indians, were known as the Anasazi, a Navajo term 
for "the old people." 

APPENDIX I 
229 
Sometime near the beginning of the Christian Era, the 
Mogollon learned to make pottery, probably from people to 
the south of them. Later on the Anasazi borrowed pottery 
making from the Mogollon. The nature of the culture 
contact between Mogollon and Anasazi as recorded in the 
pottery made at the time tells something of the tradition of 
these two peoples and also provides some psychological in-
sights into their attitudes toward change. 
Besides making a pot on a wheel, it can be built up with a 
coil of clay or patched together or beaten out of a ball. The 
Mogollon used a very thin coil approximately ~ to Yz inch 
in diameter, starting the pot either in the base of another 
pot (or basket) or by spiraling the coil into a plaque and 
then working the edges upward into a bowl or a pitcher. Each 
coil was attached to the one below it by pinching the two 
together at very close intervals. Before the clay had dried, 
the pinch marks left as a result of the process of manufacture 
were partially but not completely obscured by being polished 
with a smooth pebble. The polished-over corrugations left 
a dimpled surface characteristic of Mogollon pottery. The 
pot was then fired in an oxidizing atmosphere, which turned 
any iron in the clay a bright red. The firing method insured 
that the pottery would be red in the majority of cases, be-
cause the clays of the southwestern part of the United States 
almost always have iron in them. These processes had been 
established and were pretty much unchanged for three or 
four hundred years by the time of the initial Anasazi contact 
at about A.D. 500- 600. 
It is possible to reconstruct a good deal about the process 
that took place when the Anasazi borrowed pottery tech-
niques from the Mogollon. The Anasazi apparently ob-
served pottery making in the process but were not technically 
instructed, possibly because of a language barrier. It may 
also have been that the men saw Mogollon women mak-

APPENDIX I 
2 31 
marks and following this up with polishing, when the pot 
was to be used as a cooking pot. Some of the early examples 
of this ware are sufficiently sloppy to give one this impression. 
It did not take them long, however, to develop the corru-
gating to an art in itself, and they even went so far as to 
vary the pinch marks so as to produce a design similar to 
those seen on baskets. This is one of the many cases whereby 
a process is freed from tradition (the formal ) as it moves 
across a cultural boundary and becomes a technical matter. 
The archaeologist can see tradition (the formal) very 
clearly at work in both the Mogollon and the Anasazi and 
can also see in the one instance how an informal adapta-
tion-the use of the red slip painted on after the pot was 
fired- continued to be used even after the Anasazi knew how 
to produce permanent red by firing. The tievelopment of 
corrugating itself was an informal adaptation which was 
later technicalized and finally became a traditional form of 
southwestern pottery. The same applies to the two firing tech-
niques, one arrived at informally but later technicalized and 
finally worked into a new formal system that persisted for 
several hundred years. 
One of the most important aspects of a study of change 
of this sort is that it can be used to test theories concerning 
the cultural history of the Southwest. For many years there 
was a big difference of opinion as to whether the Mogollon 
constituted a branch of the Anasazi or was actually a separate 
culture. On the one hand, it seemed obvious that each cul-
ture had clusters of traits common to both. On the other 
hand, each had distinctive ways of making pots, houses, and 
stone tools. If it had been possible to see the actual transfer 
of pottery making in dynamic terms as functions of a process 
of change, there could not have been much doubt about the 
fact that the two were in reality very different even though 

230 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
ing pots and reported back to their wives and sisters. The 
reason we know there couldn't have been instruction is 
because the Anasazi pottery, instead of being red, turned 
out gray, showing that it was fired in a reducing atmosphere 
without oxygen. We know the Anasazi looked on this as an 
error in their technique, because they went to the trouble of 
finding red clay which they ground to a fine powder and 
used to paint the entire surface of the gray pots. Their image 
of a proper pot was that it should be red. Even after hundreds 
of years of weathering, minute traces of this powdered clay 
can be seen clinging to the sides of small pits in the surface 
of these early pots. The red unfired clay could not be pol-
ished because it was put on an already fired surface. The 
Mogollon pots all show some polishing. 
By A.D. 800-<JOO the contact between the two peoples 
apparently was a little closer and some actual instruction 
took place, at least the Anasazi became more technical in 
their imitation of the Mogollon techniques. They learned 
to fire in an oxidizing atmosphere on a wide scale which also 
enabled them to polish red pots before they were fired. 
Interestingly enough, having learned how to fire a red pot, 
they didn't give up their original reduced-firing technique 
but maintained the two ways of firing side by side for several 
hundred years thereafter. At the same time, they learned 
to make the obscured neck-coil pottery so characteristic of 
their southern neighbors. In order to make this· type of 
pottery, the indented coil has to be left unobscured and 
smoothed over in a particular way. Unlike the Mogollon, 
the Anasazi did not have a tradition for smoothing over coils 
and indentations, and they saw the possibilities in retaining 
the earlier steps in the process. To them the pinch marks had 
decorative value. At first they may have seen no reason to go 
through the additional steps of smoothing out the pinch 

232 I 
THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
one borrowed from the other. The Mogollon had different 
traditions and were also only sporadically in contact with 
the Anasazi. In this light, it would be hard to argue com-
monness of culture. 
APPENDIX IV 
SELECT ED BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Bello, Francis 
"T he Information T heory," Fortune, 
December 1953 
Benedict, Ruth 
The Chrysanthemum and the Sword. 
Boston: Houghton MifHin, 1946 
Dobzhansky, Theodosius 
"The Genetic Basis of Evo-
lution," Scientific American, January 1950 
Du Bois, Cora 
T he People of Alar. Minneapolis: Uni-
versity of Minnesota Press, 1944 
Fortes, Meyer 
"T ime and Social Structure, An Ashanti 
Case Study," Social Structure: Studies Presented to A. R. 
Radcliffe-Brown. Oxford, 1949 
Fortune 
"Those Incompatible Screw T hreads," For-
tune, December 1948 
.Freud, Sigmund 
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-
analysis. New York: Norton, 1923 
Gillin, John 
T he Ways of Men. New York: Appleton-
Century-Crofts, 1948 
Junod, Henri Alexandre 
The Life of A South African 
Tribe. London: D. Nutt, 1912-13 
Kluckhohn, Clyde 
Mirror For Man. New York: Me-
. 
Craw-Hill, 1949 
Kroeber, A. L., and Kluckhohn, Clyde 
Culture: A Criti-
cal Review of Concepts and Definitions. Cambridge: 
Papers of the Peabody Museum, Vol. XLVII, No. 1, 
1952 
Leighton, Alexander H. 
The Governing of Men. Prince-
ton: Princeton University Press, 1945 

APPENDIX I 
2 3 3 
~inton, Ralph 
The Cultural Background of Personality. 
New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1945 
---The Study of Man. New York: Appleton-Century, 
1936. 
Lorenz, Konrad Z. 
Man Meets Dog. Cambridge: 
Houghton MifHin, 1955 
Malinowski, Bronislaw 
The Sexual Life of the Savages. 
New York: Halcyon House, 1929 
Marquand, J. P. 
The Late George Apley. Boston: 
Little, Brown, 1937 
Marriott, Alice 
Maria: The Potter of San Ildefonso. 
Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1948 
Mead, Margaret 
New Lives for Old, Cultural Trans-
formation. (Manus 19.28-1953·) New York: William 
Morrow, 1956 
Pierce, John R. 
Electrons, Waves and. Messages. Garden 
City: Hanover House, 1956 
Radcliffe-Brown, A. R. 
"On Social Structure," Journal 
of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain 
and Ireland, Vol. 70, 1940 
Riesman, David- in collaboration with Reue1 Denney and 
Nathan Glazer 
The Lonely Crowd. New Haven: 
Yale University Press, 1950 
Sapir, Edward 
. Selected Writings of Edward Sapir in 
Language, Culture and Personality. Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 1949 
Shannon, Claude 
A Mathematical Theory of Com~ 
munication. Urbana: University of Illinois, 1949 · 
Sullivan, Harry Stack 
Conceptions of Modern Psychiq.-
try, 2nd edition. Washington: The Wil1iam Alanson 
White Psychiatric Foundation, 1947 
Tannous, Afif 
"Extension Work Among the Arab Fel-
lahin," Applied Anthropology, June 1944 

INDEX 
affect, 97-101 
Afghanistan, 39, 40, 41 
Africa, 39, 108, 171 
Alor, 146 
American culture, 44-4 5, 53-54, 
58- 59, 86, 9 5, u 3-1 4, 128, 
131, 132, 133· 144· 146, 
149-50, 151, 214, 215; bar-
gaining pattern, 129, 1 c;1-53; 
concept of law, 105-7; dating, 
144-45; egalitarianism, 78, 
201; formal patterns, 9 5, 96, 
150-51; humor, 75; illness in, 
77; learning, 69-74, 92; man-
ual labor, 65; order, ll55-57, 
201-2; polarity in thinking, 
86- 87; ranking sets, 1 30-34, 
201, 224; religion, 76, 98; 
space, 188-90, 192- 9 5, 199-
209; status, 64, 149- 50, 201-
2; technical competence, 102; 
time, 23-31, 39• )4, 55• 165-
85 
American Indians, 45-46, 55, 
103, 125. See also Comanche, 
Hopi, Navajo, Pueblo, San 
Ildefonso, Sioux, Taos, Zuni 
Americans overseas, 13-14, 59-
6o, 65, 101, 107, 156, 176, 
177, 190-192, 199; need for 
selection and training, 1 3-17, 
27-28, 48-5o, 59-6o, 1o8, 
174-75; problems in: Afghani-
stan, 39, 40-41; England, 2oo; 
France, 200-1; Greece, 15-16; 
Iran, 39-40, 67; Japan, 16-17; 
Latin America, 26-28, 65, 66-
67, 199-209; Middle East, 
16, 26, 151-5 3; South Pacific, 
~§; Thailand, 74; Truk, 36-
analysis of culture, 50-52, 57-
81, 217- 25 
Anasazi, 228- 32 
anthropologists, 4 3- 50, 52, 71, 
8o, 85, 86, 125, 126, 144 
Arabs, 16, 49, 74, 76, 77, 101-
2, 107, 128-29, 132, 144-45· 
151-53· 172, 176,178,183, 
193, 214, 224-25. See also 
Middle East 
architecture, 18, 159, 177-78, 
199 
army. See U. S. Army 
art, 160-62 
association, 62- 64 
Aswan Dam, 153 
Austrians, 15o-)l 
awareness, 48, 51, 95-97, 214; 
formal, 9 5- 96; informal, 96-
97; Sullivan's concept, 84-85, 
86; technical, 97 
Aztecs, 103 
Bach, Beethoven, Brahms, 214 
bargaining patterns, 129, 151-
53 
Batt, William L., 227 
Benedict, Ruth, 49-50 
biobasic culture, 6o 
bisexuality, 62, 65-68, 214~15 
Black Mass, 1 56 
Boas, Franz, 1 32 
Bohannon, Pari!, 38 
British. See England 
Catholicism, 98 
change, examples of, 2.2.5-32; in 
the formal, 101-4; in the in-
formal, 104-7; in the techni-
cal, 108-12; introduction of, 
u8; process of, 112- 18, 225-
32; theory of, 51 
Chapman, Kenneth, 110 
Chinese, 77> 78, 98 
chunefatch, 197 

2 34 I . THE SILENT LANGUAGE 
Trager, George L. 
"Language," Encyclopaedia Britan-
nica, Vol. 13, 1956, p. 696 
---"Linguistics," Encyclopaedia Britannica, Vol. 14, 1956, 
p. 162 
Trager, George L., and Smith, Henry Lee, Jr. 
An Out-
line of English Structure. Norman: Battenburg Press,' 
1951 
Trilling, Lionel 
The Opposing Self. New York: The 
Viking Press, 1955 
Tylor, E. B. 
Primitive Culture, 7th edition. New York: 
Brentano, 1924 
Useem, John 
"Americans as Governors of Natives in 
the Pacific," Journal of Social Issues, August 1946 
Whorf, Benjamin Lee 
Language, Thought, and Reality. 
New York: The Technology Press and John Wiley & 
Sons, 1956 
---"Linguistic Factors in the Terminology of Hopi Ar-
chitecture," International Journal of American Linguis-
tics, Vol. 19, No.2, April1953 
--- "Science and Linguistics," The Technology Review, 
Vol. XLII, No.6, April 194o 

236 I 
INDEX 
color, 133 
Comanche, 215 
communication, 51-52, 119-z6; 
as culture, so-sz, 119- 26, 
212- 14, 217; information the-
ory, 119- zo; non-verbal, 14, 
57, 120-21; out of aware~ess, 
p; systems, 122; using space, 
204-9; using time, z 3-41, 
165-s5 
Communists, 78 
congruence, 15 5, 1 59-63 
cultural indeterminacy, 136, 218 
cultural relativity, 145, 218 
culture, 18, 43- 55, 211-18; anal-
ogy to music, 18-19, 213-14; 
analysis, so-p, 6o-81, 217-
zs; as communication, 5o-sz, 
55· 
119- 26, 212-14, 217; 
bmding force, 15, 48, 52, 
144- 45· 147· 158-59· 161, 
zu; biological base, 51, 6o-
61, 89, 217; building blocks, 
43· 48, so, 61, 62, 121, 125-
26; complexity, 8o-81, 217; 
concept, 4 3- 44, 67; criteria, 
61- 62; diffusion, 225; indeter-
minacy, 136, 218; language of, 
41, 55, 122; learning about, 
53-55, 61, 195-98; materials, 
79; microculture, 218; relativ-
ity, 145, 218; resistance to con-
145• 218; resistance to con-
cept, 67, 211; source of stabil-
ity for man, 212-1 3; teaching, 
48- 50, 61; theory, 41, 48, 50, 
51, 6o, 85; three levels of, 51, 
83- 118, 125, 217; two levels 
of, 85- 86 
culture change. See change 
culture shock, 199 
Darwin, Charles, 116 
Darrow, Clarence, 97-98 
defense, 62, 7 s-78 
dissociation, 84-85, 86 
Dobzhausky, Theodosius, 112, 
u 8 
Dogpatch, 193 
Doyle, Sir Arthur Conan, 57 
dress, 158, 159 
Du Bois, Cora, 146 
education, 18, 
~-74> 91-95, 
154· 1)), 212-13 
Egypt, 16, 153, 169 
Einstein, Albert, 116 
England, 96, 112, 157, zoo, 201, 
225- 28 
English language, 99, 121, 123, 
131-32, 
13<f41, 
154-)6, 
zz 5-26; Old English, 156 
Eskimo, 129-30, 1 32 
Evans, John, 102-3 
experience, 30, 143-44, 145, 218 
exploitation, 6z, 78-81 
family, 145 
Far East, 75 
first naming, 93 
Foreign Service of the U.S., 46, 
49· 176 
formal, informal, technical triad, 
51, 83-118, 125, 166-67, 217, 
225 
formal cultural systems, 87-92, 
94-96, 97-98, 101-4, 115-18, 
212, 213, 226, 227, 231 
France, 195, 200-1, 225- 26 
Freud, Sigmund, 55, 8 3-86, 11 5 
Fromm, Erich, 1 o 
Germany, 31, 150 
Gillin, John, 71 
G irard case, 17 
Greece, 1 5-16 
Haiti, 77 

Holmes, Sherlock, 57-58; 6o 
Hopi, 171, 198-99 
Hubbell, Lorenzo, 34 
humor, 75, 160 
implicit-explicit culture, 8 s-86 
Indian Service of the U. S., 45-
46, 1 33 
India, q8, 202 
Indonesians, 109 
informal cultural systems, 87-
91, 92-93· 95· 96-97· 99· 
104- 7, n 5- 18, 2 31 
information theory, 119 
infra-culture, 60-61, 219 
interaction, 62 
introduction of v into English, 
225-26 
Iran, 39- 40, 67 
isolates, 50, 89, 122, 124, 135-
41, 214, 217-18 
Japanese, 16-17, 38, 46, 49-50, 
6o,64,71,72, 74•77•99· 102• 
103-4· 130-31, 133- 34· 149-
so, 178, 203-4 
jokes. See humor 
Junod, Henri Alexandre, 39 
Kennard, Edward A., 10 
Kenya, 64 
Kinsey, Alfred, 9 3 
Kluckhohn, Clyde, 48, 85 
Korean War, 77- 78 
Kroeber, A. L., 48 
language, 51, 61, 70, 123-26, 
135-41• 
1 45~49· 
154-63, 
197-98, 225-26; learning, 61, 
72; relation to materials, 79• 
8o 
languages, Arabic, 131, 1 32; 
English, 99· 121, 123, 131-
32, 139-41, 154-57· 225-26; 
INDEX I 237 
Latin, 156; 
French, 
155; 
Hopi, 198- 99; Navajo, 123; 
Parsi, 40; Spanish, 140; Truk-
ese, 197-98 
Latin America, 26-29, 65, 66-
67, 74· 98, 105-7· 108, ll4-
15, 1 30, 199· 209 
law, 76, 97-98, 100, 105- 7 
learning, 
62, 
69-74, 91-<)5. 
154-57, 194-98, 212-13; as 
adaptive mechanism, 69, 70, 
101; cross-cultural, 128; drive, 
53; extended in time and 
space, 70; formal, 91-<)2, 94-
95; in animals, 69- 70; in chil-
dren, 72-74, 92, 100, 195-<)6, 
212-13; informal, 92-93, 95; 
technical, 91, 93• 94• 95; the-
ory, 71-72 
Leighton, Alexander, 102 
Lerner, Daniel, 214 
Lewis, Ralph Kepler, 10 
Liberia, 1 32 
Lincoln's Gettysburg Address, 
1 59 
Linton, Ralph, 9• 10, 64, 86, 
146 
Lorenz, Konrad, 63 
Malinowski, Bronislaw, 68 
Manus, 109 
map of culture, 222-2 3 
Maria, 109-11 
Marquand, J. P., 95 
Massie Case, 98 
McCarthy, Senator Joseph, 213 
Mead, Margaret, 77, 109 
medicine, 76, 77, 91 
metric system, 228 
Mexico, 110 
Middle East, 16, 26, 76, 101-2, 
128-29, 144-45· 151-53· 172• 
176, 178, 182, 183, 193· 214, 
224-25 

America, 
188-90, 
192--95, 
199-209; England, 200, 201; 
France, 1~5, 200, 201; Hopi, 
198-99; Japan, 204; Latin 
America, 199, 209; Middle 
East, 193; Poland, 201-2; 
Truk, 197, 198; distances, 
207-9; formal, 202-4; infor-
mal, 188-89, 192, 194; learn-
ing, 194-96; place, 19 3-94; 
problem in culture contact, 
190-<)2, 
199-202, 
204-6, 
209; technical, 194 
Spanish culture, 68, 103, 105'-7, 
q6, 193· See also Latin 
America 
State Department, 72. See also 
Foreign Service 
subsistence, 62, 64-6 5 
Sullivan, Harry Stack, 84-85, 
86, 160, 161 
superfix, 1 54- 55 
Switzerland, 31 
Tanala, 146 
Tannous, Afif, 101 
Taos, 102-3 
teaching. See education 
technical assistance programs, 
47· 48, 49· p, 108-9, 199 
technical cultural systems, 89, 
90, 94-95· 100, 108-12, 116, 
214, 225, 228-32 
temporality, 62, 69 
territoriality, 52, 6o, 62, 67-68, 
187-90; in birds and animals, 
68, 187-88; in man, 68, 69, 
189, 190, 199-200. See also 
space 
Thai, 74 
Thonga, 39 
time, 23-41, 52, 165--85, 214; 
activity, 177- 79, 18o; as con-
ceived in Afghanistan, 39, 40; 
INDEX I 
239 
America, 2 3- 31, 39• 54• 55· 
165-85; qermany, 31;. Greece, 
15; Hopt, 171; Indta, 178; 
Iran, 39-40; Latin America, 
26-27; Middle East, 16, 26, 
172, 176, 178, 182, 183; Mor-
mon culture, 169, 185; Nav-
ajo, 32, 35, 38, 178; Pacific 
Northwest, 169; Pueblo, 31-
32, 180; Sioux, 35-36; South 
Asia, 30, 172; Switzerland, 
31; Tiv, 38; Thonga, 39; Truk, 
36-38, 178; characteristics, 
170- 73, 
1 77- 8o; 
cyclicity, 
170; depth, 170, 172; dif-
fused-displaced points, 183-
85; formal, informal, technical 
triad, 87, 166-68; 
formal, 
165-72; importance of parts of 
day, 24-26; informal, 173-85; 
lead time, 26; monochronism, 
177, 178, 18o; order, 170; 
promptness, 31; sets, isolates, 
patterns, 173-85; synthesisity, 
170, 172; tangibility, 171; 
teaching, 166- 68; technical 
time, 166, 167; use of to re-
veal hidden attitudes, 24, 25, 
54; urgency, 177-78, 18o; vari-
ety, 177, 179, 18o; valuation, 
171 
Tiv, 38 
tone of voice, 91, 96, 105 
Toynbee, Arnold, 122 
Trager, George L., 10, 18, 50, 
55, 6o, 87, 124, 154, 155, 218 
training for work in foreign 
cultures, 1 3- 17, 27- 28, 48-
50, 59-60, 108, 175- 76 
Trilling, Lionel, 212 
Trobriand Islands, 68, 131, 133 
Truk, 36- 38, 73-74, 178, 197-
98 

238 I 
INDEX 
Missionary Moses, 37 
Mogollon, 228- 32 
Mormons, I69, I85 
Moses, Artie, 38 
Mossadegh, 67 
Murdock, George P., 115 
music, analogy to culture, I8-
I9, 213-I4 
Nasser, 15 3 
Navajo, 32-35, 38, 49, 76, 77, 
111, 123, 133, 178, 202, 228 
neurosis, 96-97 
Newton, Sir Isaac, 116 
Nigeria, 38 
Nile, I67 
numbers, I 3 3-34 
order' I s·s-57' I 70, 2 2I 1 224 
overt-covert culture, 85, 86 
patterns, 122-2 3, I24, I26, IZ8-
30· 1 p-n 134· 13 s, 137, 
139-41, 143-63, 214, 217; 
congruence, I 55, I59-6 3; defi-
nition, I43, I48-49; differ-
entiation, 1 s8; formal, 
1 so, 
ISS; informal, I80-8I; laws 
governing, 144, 155- 56; order 
in, ISS-57· 158; selection in, 
157- 59 
Pavlov, Ivan, 190 
peck order in chickens, 6 3 
Persia. See Iran 
phoneme, 125-26, 148 
play, 62, 74-75, I58, 2I4 
PMS (Primary Message Sys-
tems ), 52, 61-81, 214, 219-
25 
Point IV. See technical assist-
ance programs 
Polish culture, zoi-2 
pottery making, I09-II, 228-32 
premarital chastity, 11 3-I5 
prisoners of war, 77- 78, · I03-4 
psychiatry, I8, 83-86 
psychoanalysis, 84, 85, 86, 115-
16, 211 
psychology, 44, 63, 71, 83-86, 
115- I6, 2I2-I3 
Pueblo Indians, 3I-32, 75, 109-
11, 157> 180, 228 
ranking, 65, 130, 132-34, I57, 
201, 203, 224 
religion, 76-n; Catholic, 98; 
Christian, 76-77; 
Moslem, 
76, 202 
Riesman, David, 10 
Russia. See U.S.S.R. 
San Ildefonso, I09-II 
Sapir, Edward, 72, 85 
science, 90, u6, I47 
screw thread, 226- 28 
selection, IS 5, I 57-59 
Sellers, William, 227-28 
semantics, 1 34 
sets, 122-23, 124, I27-34, 135, 
137· 139> 143> 193, 214, 217; 
categorization, 1 p , 1 36; clas-
sification, 131- 32; definition, 
127, 134; ranking, 130, 1 32-
34 
sex, 67-68, 73, 92-93, 113-15, 
I58. See also bisexuality 
Sioux, 35, 36 
skiing, 87-89 
Smith, Henry Lee, 10 
social science, 18, 45• 50, 91, 
us, 122, 2I7-18, 220 
South America. See Latin Amer-
ica 
South Asia, 30, 172 
South Pacific, ·25, 46, 55, 109 
space, 52, 69, 187-209, 214;' 
communication 
using, 
24, 
204- 9; cultural concept of 

~40 I 
INDEX 
Turks, 78, 214 
Tylor, E. B., 44 
Uman, 37, 38 
uncertainty principle, 1 36 
unconscious, concept of, 44, 83-
87 
United States. See American 
culture 
United States Army, 72, 94, 
207-8 
Useem, John, xo, 25 
U.S.S.R., 76, 182 
Venezuela, 130 
values, 1 30, 18o, 203, 214, 224-
2 5. See also ranking 
variables, 139 
warm·bloodedness, 69-70 
Whitworth, Joseph, 227 
work, 158, 214. See also sub-
sistence 
World vVar I, 227 
World War II, 94, 207; prison-
ers of war, 77, 103-4; use of 
anthropologists, 46, 72 
Whorf, Benjamin, 145, 146-47 
Zuni, 95, 111 


