
The Artful Species

This page intentionally left blank 

The Artful Species
Aesthetics, Art, and Evolution
Stephen Davies
1

3
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, OX2 6DP,
United Kingdom
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of
Oxford University press in the UK and in certain other countries
# Stephen Davies 2012
The moral rights of the authors have been asserted
First Edition published 2012
Impression: 1
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted
by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics
rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the
address above
You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Data available
ISBN 978–0–19–965854–1
Printed in Great Britain by
MPG Books Group, Bodmin and King’s Lynn
Links to third party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and
for information only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials
contained in any third party website referenced in this work.

Dedicated to Peter Goldie and Denis Dutton

Acknowledgments
I have beneﬁted from the advice and assistance of many people, including Brian Boyd,
John Brown, Joseph Carroll, Noe¨l Carroll, Rose Cook, Mike Corballis, Tobyn
DeMarco, William Flesch, Peter Goldie, Paul Grifﬁths, Justine Kingsbury, Jonathan
McKeown-Green, Jeffrey Masson, Derek Matravers, Ani Patel, Bill Seeley, James
Shelley, Bob Stecker, and Daniel Wilson. Special thanks are due to Gillian Brock,
Helen De Cruz, Johan De Smedt, Kathy Higgins, Sherri Irvin, and to my editor, Peter
Momtchiloff, and my copy-editor, Brenda Stones.
Parts of Chapter 4 were ﬁrst published in “La Vita a Ritmo di Passacaglia,” Rivista di
Estetica 35 (2) (2007):129–46, translator Luca Angelone, also published as “Life is a
Passacaglia,” Philosophy and Literature 33 (2009):315–28. Parts of Chapter 8 were ﬁrst
published in “Ellen Dissanayake’s Evolutionary Aesthetic,” Biology and Philosophy 20
(2005):291–304. And parts of Chapter 10 ﬁrst appeared in “Music, Fire, and Evolution,”
Politics and Culture 1 http://www.politicsandculture.org/2010/04/29/music-ﬁre-and-
evolution/

Contents
Part I. Key Concepts
1. The Aesthetic
9
2. The Nature of Art
25
3. The Theory of Evolution
35
4. How Might the Aesthetic, Art, and Evolution be Related?
45
Part II. The Aesthetic
5. Humans’ Aesthetic Appreciation of Nonhuman Animals
65
6. Landscape Aesthetics
86
7. The Aesthetics of Human Beauty
102
Part III. The Arts
8. General Theories of Art as an Adaptation and the Origins of Art
121
9. Art as a Spandrel
136
10. Art as a Technology
148
11. Arts as Adaptations
158
12. Conclusion
183
Endnotes
189
Glossary
230
References
232
Web Resources
280
Index
285

This page intentionally left blank 

PART I
Key Concepts
Introduction
Four hundred thousand years ago a member of an ancestral humanoid species fashioned
a hand axe. Like other such axes, this one was produced by shaping rock through a
skillful process in which shards were struck from a stone core. The ﬁnal tool was hand-
sized and sharp-edged. It was distinguished by its exceptionally ﬁne quality and by the
dark red quartzite of which it was composed, which gave it the color of veinous blood.
Probably it was not used for cutting. We cannot be sure how it got there, but it was the
only artifact found in a pit in which the maker’s group entombed their dead. It may
have been the very ﬁrst grave offering. So impressed were the archaeologists who
unearthed this dramatically colored axe that they called it “Excalibur” after the sword
of Arthurian legend.
Excalibur was not alone. Beginning about this time there is evidence of a remarkable
development in the attitude to axe production. In some places there were far more axes
(also known as “bifaces”) than were needed on purely functional grounds. In about
1–2 percent of cases, great and unnecessary care was taken to make bilaterally symmet-
rical axes. Some of the ﬁnest and most symmetrical axes show no sign of having been
used. Some axes were outsized or otherwise unusual in a fashion that made them not
readily usable. Some axes made a feature of fossils or mineral veins in the stone. All this
suggests that the axe makers were concerned with something more than basic utility.
The philosopher Gregory Currie describes one such axe as
a piece of worked stone, shaped as an elongated tear drop, roughly symmetrical in two
dimensions, with a twist to the symmetry which has retained an embedded fossil. In size and
shape it would not have been a useful butchery implement, and is worked on to a degree out of
proportion to any likely use. While it may be too much to call it an “early work of art,” it is at
least suggestive of an aesthetic sensibility.
By “aesthetic sensibility,” Currie means a taste for the creation or appreciation of
beauty, as I will explain further in Chapter 1. Positive aesthetic responses typically
involve an emotionally heightened focus on an item’s attractiveness or awesomeness.

Many other commentators share the judgment that the makers of these axes were
seeking aesthetic effects, as do I. If they are right, a taste for the creation and apprecia-
tion of beauty was already present in our humanoid forerunners.
Who were these aestheticians and how are we related to them? Five million or more
years ago a primitive, monkey-like creature gave rise to two genealogical lines. One
line of descent extends to our nearest living primate relative, the chimpanzee, as well as
to bonobos, gorillas, and orangutans. The other line from our distant precursor
involves a branching web of species—species of Homo, and before them of Australo-
pithecines (such as the much-documented “Lucy”), Paranthropus, and Ardipithecus.
We—that is, Homo sapiens—emerged in Africa about 200 thousand years ago (hence-
forth abbreviated as “ka”). All earlier branches of that genealogical line other than the
one leading to us ended with extinctions. The most recent extinction of a Homo species
was that of the Neanderthals (Homo neanderthalensis) about 35 ka in what is now
Europe. All the species making up this second line of descent, including Homo sapiens,
are known collectively as the “Hominins”.
In our lineage, it was members of ancient Hominin species who ﬁrst used stone tools
about 2.6 million years ago (abbreviated as “ma” ). The ﬁrst hand axes appeared about
1.65 ma. Excalibur was made by a member of a more recent species, Homo heidelber-
gensis, which in turn gave rise both to the Neanderthals and, later, to modern humans.
There is other evidence supporting the hypothesis that ancestral Homo species had an
interest in aestheticizing their appearance. Ochre was collected from 300 ka. Archae-
ologists believe it was used as a personal decoration. Admittedly, we should be cautious
not to assume that ochre always held aesthetic signiﬁcance for its users. Among
proposed alternative applications are as a preservative for hides, as medicine, as a
sunblock and insect repellant, as a constituent of glues used in hafting stone tools, as
a polishing abrasive, and to simulate (and thereby mask) menstruation. Still, there is
evidence that the strongest, purest reds were favored, so the color was sometimes
important. If this was because the color then more effectively beautiﬁed or made
awesome the person it decorated, I claim the use was aesthetic.
Yet stronger evidence for an interest in beautifying themselves and their possessions
is apparent after the arrival of anatomically modern humans. Thousands of ochre
crayons found in Blombos cave, South Africa, are dated to 77 ka. And the adoption
of ornaments as personal decorations further indicates aesthetic creation if they were
made and used to enhance the wearer’s appearance. They were common by 40 ka,
though earlier examples are also known, including perforated shells at Es-Skhul shelter,
Israel, dated to 100–135 ka, and at Dar es-Soltan I cave, Morocco, dated to 128 ka.
Adornments were crafted from shells (sea, bird, and snail), teeth, antlers, bones,
ivory, amber, and stones such as steatite and jade. In addition to being attached to
clothing, they took the form of beads, belts, necklaces, pendants, and amulets. Some-
times these materials were transported far from their sources.
2
KEY CONCEPTS

In burials dated to 28 ka in Sungir, Russia, a 60-year-old man had nearly 3,000 beads
and fragments about him and 25 mammoth-ivory bracelets on his arms, while a child
had 4,900 beads and a belt decorated with 250 polar fox canine teeth.
As well as modern humans, in the later period of their existence Neanderthals
apparently had beads. The current, though contested, view is that this was not the
result of imitating their Homo sapiens neighbors.
Some commentators regard the personal ornaments created by modern humans as
works of art. As will become apparent, I am happy to endorse a generous, far-reaching
view of art that includes the decorative. Moreover, it is plausible to infer that art dates
to the time when symbolic thinking and behavior became apparent, more than 50 ka.
A few sticks of ochre carved with abstract hatchings in Blombos cave are interpreted as
evidencing symbolic behavior as early as 78 ka. Symbolic behavior is associated with
the development of what is called psychological (or behavioral) modernity. It involves
referring to or representing abstract relations, as when a pattern or marker denotes
social status or clan membership. Alternatively, it occurs when someone refers to or
represents what is not immediately present, as when a past scene is depicted in a
drawing. With the arrival of psychological modernity we are dealing with humans
with minds—perceptions, intentions, desires, emotions—as well as bodies like ours. As
such they were potential artists.
Calling bead decorations “art” will be regarded by some people as controversial, as
inappropriately diluting the notion of art. We can afford to be agnostic about the art-
status of personal decorations when arguing for the existence of humanly created
prehistoric art, though, because uncontentious examples of art were created in the
period known as the Upper Paleolithic (aka the late Pleistocene). Among these are the
paintings in the French caves of Chauvet (up to 37 ka), Cosquer (27–19 ka), Cougnac
(25–20 ka), Pech Merle (20 ka), and Lascaux (19 ka), and in Altamira cave, Spain
(12.5 ka). Admittedly these caves sometimes contain doodles and erotic grafﬁti as well
as pictures demonstrating technical weaknesses in the depictions of animals. Yet many
cave paintings display breathtaking artistic skill, power, grandeur, and eloquence in
abundance. Pablo Picasso famously acknowledged the quality of the work at Altamira
in the observation “after Altamira, all is decadence.”
A handful of writers question the art standing of these paintings, remain neutral on
the matter, or place the word “art” in scare quotes. The overwhelming majority of
experts, however, call them art without qualiﬁcation or hesitation. Though they are
conﬁdent that the paintings are art, they don’t know what role these paintings played
for their makers. A variety of theories are on offer—that they had religious signiﬁcance
and that the walls of the caves were understood as a membrane between the earthly
world and an underworld, that they resulted from the use of hallucinogens, that they
served as calendars, that they were a form of hunting magic, and that they were created
“for their own sake.” But no one knows for sure.
Peter Lamarque, a philosopher, nicely sums up the puzzle:
INTRODUCTION
3

On the one hand, the surface perceptual qualities of the paintings naturally invite description in
aesthetic or art historical terms. The techniques, pigments and materials have been studied, and
there is extensive commentary on the form and texture of the paintings, the ways that natural
features of the cave walls are exploited, the recurring motifs, the ﬁdelity of naturalistic represen-
tation (allowing for the ease with which the subjects can be identiﬁed), and the sheer power,
economy of means, and vitality of the depictions. On the other hand, the paintings remain a
complete mystery; they are uninterpretable, and the role they played in the cultural or social life
of the peoples who made them is unknown, as are the attitudes, aspirations, values, and beliefs of
those who viewed them.
Yet even if we are not certain exactly why these paintings were done, we can be
certain that they must have been very important to their makers given the difﬁculties
that attended their creation. Their painters climbed below the surface of the earth with
only candles or lamps for light. They erected scaffolds to paint high up on walls and
ceilings. Some of the pigments they used had to be prepared by being heated to a very
high temperature. And these paintings were created not when life was easy but when
the land was chilled by glacial ice and conditions were harsh.
In my view, we are compelled to regard these works as art because we identify
effortlessly with their creators. If we painted those images there could be no question
that they were art, though they might be primarily intended to serve practical, perhaps
religious, functions rather than being created for disengaged contemplation. In other
words, these paintings transparently reveal artistic instincts that we share. Robin
Dunbar, an anthropologist and evolutionary psychologist, makes the point this way:
This outpouring of craftsmanship speaks to us across the intervening millennia. Here is a people
not so very different from ourselves; what we ﬁnd beautiful, they too found beautiful.
Lamarque joins the consensus when he concludes not only that their painters had
aesthetic sensibilities and goals but also that much of what was produced should count
as art.
The same care and craftsmanship directed to the creation of beautiful depictions is
immediately apparent also in some ancient carved or ﬁred ﬁgures. These include
mammoths and a horse carved from mammoth ivory found in the Vogelherd cave,
Germany (32 ka), a lion person carved from mammoth ivory discovered in the
Hohlenstein Stadel cave, Germany (32 ka), the bone Venus ﬁgurine of Kostenki,
Russia (30 ka), and the ceramic Venus of Dolnı´ Veˇstonice, Czech Republic (26 ka).
The evocative ivory Venus of Brassempouy, France (25 ka) survives as a woman’s head
and neck. A lamp with an ibex design on its underside (from La Mouthe cave, France,
about 19 ka) shows how decoration added aesthetic value to a utilitarian item.
Yet more impressive is a spear thrower—the technical name is “atlatl”—from Le
Mas d’Azil, France (about 20 ka). The aesthetic design of this spear thrower—the
carved depiction of an ibex or chamois—is fully integrated with the item’s utilitarian
function. The animal, tail lifted, is shown peering down its back, the whole being
perfectly shaped to accommodate the shaft of the spear and to preserve the strength of
4
KEY CONCEPTS

the spear thrower. While some people think art must be non-functional, I will argue
that many ﬁne artworks not only are functional but also enlist their aesthetic features to
help realize their practical purpose.
We also have prehistoric examples of musical instruments. The oldest is a vulture-
bone ﬂute dated to more than 35 ka. Drums and rattles are also probably ancient but are
unlikely to be recognizable as such—membranes and skins stretched over wooden
frames could not survive and natural items can function as drums when struck with
sticks or stones. Note also that the hunting bow is of ancient design (64 ka) and doubles
as a musical instrument, either bowed or plucked, for people of many hunter-gatherer
communities.
For the sake of countering the Eurocentric bias of earlier generations of archaeol-
ogists, it is important to note that these ancient artistic developments were not conﬁned
to Europe. For example, the rock paintings of Australian Aborigines are of a compara-
ble antiquity and also display striking symbolic power and artistic quality.
Our subject
Consideration of the pursuit of aesthetic experience by our Hominin precursors and of
prehistoric art creation by humans prompts a host of questions.
What makes something aesthetically valuable or beautiful and does this vary with the nature of
the thing in question and its cultural location?
Do an item’s aesthetic properties belong to it or are they projected onto it by their appreciator?
Does aesthetic creation and contemplation always involve disregarding its object’s function, as
the outsize hand axes imply, or can we also take an aesthetic interest in how something performs
its function?
Is there a connection between the notions of beauty appealed to by philosophers in their
accounts of art or nature and that considered by evolutionary psychologists with respect to
human sexual attractiveness?
Are there universal or overarching standards of aesthetic value?
Aesthetic experience is valued as a source of pleasure and wonder but what is its practical
purpose or beneﬁt?
Turning to art, we might ask what makes something an artwork.
Is the value and interest of art exhausted in appreciating an artwork’s aesthetic properties or
does art also present additionally valuable artistic properties? In other words, do we value
artworks solely for their beauty or do we also take into account their style, expressiveness,
references to traditions or other works, and so on?
What is the relation between functional artworks, such as religious artworks that illustrate,
describe, or enact the group’s story of creation, and those intended to be contemplated for their
own sakes alone?
To what extent can we understand and appreciate the artworks produced in a culture in which
we are not members or in a tradition of which we are ignorant?
INTRODUCTION
5

How are humble forms of domestic and decorative art connected to esoteric Fine Art and to
highly reﬁned and sophisticated avant-garde art?
Which of these, if any, more truly represents art’s nature or serves its primary purpose?
Finally we might ask if aesthetic and artistic behaviors are universal and foundational
to human nature, as is perhaps implied by their extreme antiquity. More speciﬁcally,
are these behaviors the product of evolution, either because they directly helped our
ancestors survive and successfully reproduce or because they were a by-product of
things that did? Alternatively, are aesthetic and artistic behaviors so controlled by what
is culturally arbitrary that they have only a tenuous connection with biology?
These and similar questions provide the subject matter of this book. I investigate
possible connections between our biologically evolved, culturally situated human
natures, on the one hand, and on the other, our interest in the aesthetic generally,
whether naturally occurring or humanly created, and our propensity to make and
appreciate art.
Looking ahead
My aim here is to investigate possible connections between evolution, art, and
aesthetics. To this end, I introduce and evaluate work from a spread of academic
disciplines: psychology, neuroscience, anthropology, archaeology, ethology (that is,
the study of animal, including human, behavior), evolutionary biology, philosophy of
science, philosophy of the arts, art history, musicology, and English literature. The
result is a broad view of our understanding of the issues, which suggests the following
overall conclusions. Some, but not all, aesthetic interests and responses have biological
underpinnings. To that extent those responses reﬂect our shared human nature. But
when it comes to arguments claiming that art is an evolutionary adaptation, we should
be more cautious. Adaptationist claims about art are not ﬁrmly established. But
alternative positions—that art is a by-product of evolution or, alternatively, that it
has so little to do with evolution that it must be counted as a non-biological invention
of culture—are not more strongly supported. I recognize the tantalizing appeal and
plausibility of claiming art as a central aspect of our common biological inheritance.
But making the connection depends ultimately on a leap of faith, rather than on appeal
to incontrovertible scientiﬁc fact.
Part I will be directed to clarifying our key concepts—aesthetics, art, and evolution—
and to outlining how they might be connected. In each case I examine current theories
and descriptions of their nature. I identify the different models and systems that are
appealed to, discuss the competition between them where they are not mutually
consistent, and where a range of options remains open, indicate which I prefer.
The importance of being clear about our key notions is apparent from the fact that
the likelihood of connections between the aesthetic, art, and evolution depends to
some extent on how they are analyzed. For instance, if judgments of human beauty are
6
KEY CONCEPTS

universal, this may make it plausible to connect aesthetics with biology. If, contrary to
my earlier suggestion, art is a recent Western invention that is not found in other
cultures or earlier times, it is very unlikely to be directly related to the selective forces
that shaped the character of our distant ancestors. If broad aesthetic preferences pass
genetically from parents to their children but artistic talents don’t, this would lead us to
predict that the connection with evolution is more likely for our aesthetic dispositions
than for our art creation. My initial stance favors theories and approaches that make the
alleged connection between evolution, art, and aesthetics as plausible as is possible.
There are further reasons for looking closely at the central concepts in the debate.
None is straightforward and our “folk” intuitions about them are not always reliable.
Moreover, our topic requires an interdisciplinary approach, drawing as it does on areas
both of the sciences and humanities. For that reason it is unlikely that all readers will
have equal background knowledge. As I will illustrate later, this also comes out in
writings on our topic. Some humanists possess only a hazy idea of how evolution
operates or of what is involved, beyond noting that we can beneﬁt from art, in
connecting art to evolution. Meanwhile, evolution theorists and psychologists fre-
quently operate with such a naı¨ve notion of art and the aesthetic, or with such a
reductive approach to the explanation of the relevant behaviors, that it is not clear that
they mean what is usually understood by these terms.
As well, this is an area that attracts zealots whose arguments are sometimes steered by
strong agendas. Some biologists are keen to explain all human behavior in biological
terms, just as some neuroscientists see everything in terms of brain states. And evolu-
tionary psychologists frequently downplay the controversial or speculative character of
their methods and hypotheses. Meanwhile, some of the humanists who insist that art is
an evolved adaptation seem motivated more by the desire to justify the centrality in
human life of what interests them—that is, art—than in meeting high standards of
explanatory rigor. For such reasons I generally adopt a critical stance to the evaluation
of many of the theories that attempt to connect aesthetics and art to evolution, though
my general project is to seek that connection.
In the ﬁnal chapter of Part I, I will outline the different ways in which aesthetics and
art could be tied to evolution. I will suggest that the aesthetic sense is universal among
humans and that, in certain areas of aesthetic judgment, there is cross-cultural agreement.
Similarly, I will hold that art making is pan-cultural and that almost everyone appreciates
one or another kind of art. Indeed, we might all qualify as artists. Some aspects or kinds of
art are also cross-culturally appreciable, and even where this is not so, with a little help we
can often quickly achieve a partial understanding of another culture’s art. These facts are
at least suggestive of a link between evolution and both art and aesthetics. As well, we
will consider whether the biological origins of our aesthetic and artistic behaviors are
likely to explain their current purpose and function. I think this is likely for many of our
aesthetic interests, for instance in human attractiveness, but is less so for art.
In Parts II and III, we will put the key notions—aesthetics, art, and evolution—to
work. Part II is devoted to the aesthetic. We will ﬁrst consider our aesthetic interest in
INTRODUCTION
7

the appearances and powers of nonhuman animals. Subsequent chapters will cover our
aesthetic responses to the environment and to human physical beauty. I argue that
some but not all of our aesthetic responses are outcomes of how our species’ evolu-
tionary history has molded our thoughts and emotions.
Part III turns the spotlight on art. We will explore there whether the arts in general,
or certain speciﬁc arts in particular, could be products of evolutionary selection because
of the enabling role they played in our ancestors’ lives; or instead, whether the relevant
art behaviors and dispositions came free as a by-product of other evolutionarily
beneﬁcial behaviors such as sociability and group connectedness; or alternatively,
whether those behaviors are so distantly removed from the effects of evolution that
they are best regarded as “technologies,” as purely cultural productions. Though these
options cover the range of possibilities, I suggest that none is supported uncontestably
by the available evidence.
8
KEY CONCEPTS

1
The Aesthetic
Aesthetic theory was ﬁrst systematized by philosophers in the eighteenth century. They
identiﬁed two aesthetic qualities as primary: the beautiful and the sublime. We are
familiar with the former, of course, but talk of the sublime is now less common. The
term referred to qualities that made objects awesome or wondrous and sometimes
suggested a hint of danger or challenge. As examples of the sublime we might cite
rugged, towering mountains or the myriad number of stars in the night sky. The
beautiful and the sublime both counted as aesthetic positives. Their negative opposites
were the ugly and the bland, dull, or dreary. We are motivated to seek the beautiful
and the sublime and when we ﬁnd them our experience of them is pleasurable.
Nowadays aestheticians are inclined to talk of more speciﬁc aesthetic qualities,
especially where art is the topic. These include being witty, bouncy, lifeless, serene,
clumsy, somber, dumpy, joyful, vivid, realistic, moving, trite, sentimental, tragic,
dainty, uncanny, handsome, gloomy, elegant, and garish, for example. And represen-
tational and expressive, qualities—being realistic, being sad—are also discussed. We can
probably assimilate these features with the more general properties that interested
earlier thinkers. What is joyful and elegant is thereby likely to be beautiful. What is
uncanny, tragic, and moving is thereby likely to be sublime. The dreary is lifeless and
trite. Garishness makes for ugliness, other things being equal.
Underlying and somehow giving rise to all these aesthetic properties are other
properties that are not aesthetic or value-laden. For example, a splash of bright paint
might be responsible for a picture’s energetic character and minor harmonies might
give rise to the somber character of a song. The properties that underlie an object’s
aesthetic qualities are sometimes conﬁned within the boundaries of the object, but
often this is not the case. Whether an artwork is realistic or tragic, for instance, depends
not only on its contents but also on its relation to a wider context—how the world is,
the practices and conventions of an artistic genre, and so on.
Aesthetic experience involves awareness and appreciation of something’s aesthetic
properties. In my view almost anything can be considered for its potential as a source of
aesthetic experience. The object of aesthetic experience might be simple, such as a
single color or musical tone; or complex, such as an elaborate painting or symphony.
The approach to this object might be spontaneous and uncalculating, even visceral; or
it might be deeply informed by abstruse knowledge. An example of the ﬁrst kind is that
of a person who exclaims “Oh! How beautiful!” on seeing a baby’s smile. An example

of the second is that of a sports aﬁcionado who savors in a game every tactical nicety,
strategic ploy, and all the skills that are distinctive to the sport. His experience of the
game depends on his knowledge of the sport’s rules, traditions, conventions, history of
practice, and point. Provided he seeks and values what in the experience and its object
is beautiful or awesome, his is an aesthetic reaction, I maintain; as is also the experience
of a person who watches the same game with no interest or knowledge of sport, yet
who delights in the beauty of some of the formal patterns thrown up by the partici-
pants’ movements.
Of course, this is not to say that every perceptually based judgment, preference,
or choice is aesthetic. Many such experiences need have no aesthetic component.
The pleasure in eating taken by a person on the brink of starvation is not aesthetic.
Moral assessment (how kind! that is unjust!), gluttony (how edible!), lustful interest
(how beddable!), and all sorts of practical assessments of appropriateness (that works!
that would ﬁt better there! how impolite! how apt!) need not be aesthetic. As I’ve said,
aesthetic experience seeks the beautiful or sublime.
The origins of the aesthetic sense in humans
We don’t know exactly how or when the aesthetic sense emerged. Because it seems as
much a part of human nature as our sense of humor or the stance that assumes that our
fellow humans have minds, we can speculate that it has a long evolutionary history. As
I indicated in the Introduction to Part I, our extinct humanoid predecessors sometimes
seem to have appealed to aesthetic criteria in constructing hand axes. Can we deter-
mine why the aesthetic sense arose? Here is one story.
Evolution via selection motivates animals to pursue their genes’ interests. In some
cases it does so via inﬂexible programming. With animals capable of learning through
experience and modifying their behaviors accordingly, discomfort and pleasure serve as
prompts to action. Animals constantly face important decisions about with whom to
mate, where to live, and what to do. For instance, the male bird might build several
nests that are shown to the female, who opts to lay her eggs in only one of them. Of
course these choices are not consciously reasoned but are instinctively generated. They
are reactions to the creature’s physiological or emotional state. If there were a conscious
basis for the choice, it would amount to “that looks (feel, smells, tastes) good (nice,
comfortable, pleasant) to me” or “that looks (feel, smells, tastes) bad (unappealing,
stressful, painful) to me.” The evolutionarily successful animals would be those that
were motivated by these instinctual evaluations to make choices that led to the
successful propagation of their genes.
As will emerge shortly, with the exception of primates among living animals, I doubt
that the just described responses of animals and birds to their environment are aesthetic.
And I would certainly deny that insects and crustaceans are aesthetes. Nevertheless, it
seems reasonable to me to consider the affective states that are action-motivating for
higher animals, such as mammals, as proto-aesthetic, at least in the sense that humans’
10
KEY CONCEPTS

aesthetic responses arose from that kind of reaction. Our ancestors uncalculatingly
delighted in the beautiful appearance and presence of their mates and children. And
they were evolutionarily successful when these reactions led them to choose mates
with good genes and with whom they wanted to have children. Similarly, they would
have sought as homes places that struck them as attractive and they would have
decorated those homes to make them yet more congenial. And the evolutionarily
successful ones did thereby succeed in choosing or creating genuinely congenial
homes. Many of their other decisions would have been similarly motivated: they
opted for what they found intrinsically appealing and rejected what they found
intrinsically unappealing. Not only this, what was of purely utilitarian value would
come to look beautiful in virtue of fulﬁlling its function and, in addition, the act of
beautifying things added to their value even if it did not improve their functionality.
On this account, rather than being solely about restful, purposeless contemplation,
aesthetic emotions guide how we navigate and engage with the world at large and our
social relations. We have the ones we have because they lit the paths that were taken by
our successful ancestors.
Of course, we discriminate among goods and the pleasures they provide. For
instance, we distinguish moral goods and pleasures from aesthetic ones. Can we be
sure that what our ancestors found good they also sometimes found beautiful? Appar-
ently so. Humans have displayed aesthetic sensibilities to the limits of known history.
But did we ﬁrst adopt the aesthetic stance early in our species’ development or at a
later, though prehistoric, time? My proposal is that the aesthetic probably emerged
sooner rather than later. As some of the examples of aesthetic experience I gave earlier
indicate, aesthetic experience need not depend on cognitively sophisticated forms of
reasoning, the development of a full-blown language, or a grasp of abstract concepts
and modes of symbolism, as higher-order moral judgments and responses do. When
we consider our distant Hominin forebears, there is no reason to think that aesthetic
pleasure and displeasure would be less valuable or motivating than modes of pleasure
and displeasure they experienced as non-aesthetic. So it’s plausible that the aesthetic
sense was present in our species and its immediate predecessors from the earliest times,
rather than arriving only with the emergence of the highly developed mentality of
African humans around 80 ka.
In the following I defend my account of aesthetic experience by comparing it to two
alternatives. The ﬁrst, which is often presumed by biologists and psychologists, equates
aesthetic experience with perceptual pleasure. This strikes me as implausibly liberal. It
would extend the aesthetic sense far beyond the primates to much simpler life forms.
The second account of aesthetic experience has provided the dominant paradigm in
philosophical aesthetics for more than two hundred years. In my opinion it conceives
of aesthetic experience too narrowly by characterizing it as abstracted from practical
concerns, as unconcerned with all but the form of its object, and as always cognitively
sophisticated in its operation.
THE AESTHETIC
11

Do other animals possess an aesthetic sense?
The Scottish philosopher Thomas Reid anticipated Charles Darwin in maintaining
both that animals have an aesthetic sense and that this appropriately orients each species
to its way of life. In 1785 he wrote:
This instinctual sense of beauty, in different species of animals, may differ as much as the external
sense of taste, and in each species be adapted to its manner of life. By this perhaps the various
tribes are led to associate with their kind, to dwell among certain objects rather than others, and
to construct their habitation in a particular manner.
Darwin believed that birds, mammals, and even insects possess aesthetic taste, though
he was clear that they ﬁnd things beautiful that to humans are ugly.
When we behold a male bird elaborately displaying his graceful plumes or splendid colours
before the female, whilst other birds, not thus decorated, make no such display, it is impossible to
doubt that she admires the beauty of her male partner. As women everywhere deck themselves
with these plumes, the beauty of such ornaments cannot be disputed.
If we admit that the females of the Homoptera [that is, aphids, cicadas, leafhoppers, etc.] and
Orthoptera [that is, grasshoppers, locusts, crickets, etc.] appreciate the musical tones of their male
partners, and that the various instruments have been perfected through sexual selection, there is
little improbability in the females of other insects appreciating beauty in form or colour, and
consequently in such characters having been thus gained by the males.
Among the birds to which Darwin drew attention was the bowerbird. This is a genus
of eighteen species found in New Guinea and Australia. The males build elaborate
constructions—huts, towers, walled avenues, moss platforms with parapets—according
to species-speciﬁc patterns. They decorate these with colored items, with different
species favoring different colors. And they dance and display to the females that visit
their bowers. Some people have shared Darwin’s view that the mating choices of
female bowerbirds are made on aesthetic grounds. And it is sometimes suggested also
that birds have an aesthetic appreciation of birdsong. Charles Hartshorne, an ornithol-
ogist and aesthetician, observes:
Birds and other animals sing and thereby win and keep mates and, in many cases, also territories;
but the energetic persistence in singing may be sustained by a feeling, however primitive, for the
beauty (i.e. the “unity in contrast”) of the sounds they are making.
Yet other theorists are more cautious, as I would be too, suggesting instead that the
precursors of human aesthetic taste are found in such behaviors. And many hold, further,
that aesthetic taste is among the features that distinguish humans from all other living
creatures. The psychologist Yrjo¨ Hirn wrote in 1900:
It is hard to believe that the hen really has reached such a state of spiritual freedom that, when
looking at the ﬁnery and antics of her rival suitors, she could be able to bestow her attention upon
the aesthetic qualities of the display.
12
KEY CONCEPTS

He went on to argue that the purpose of the male’s display is the sexual stimulation of
the hen. Even animal advocates have generally been reluctant to embrace the idea that
the reactions and choices of animals have an aesthetic dimension.
The biologist’s standard story about bird display is that the female selects for “good
genes” by checking their outward exhibition in terms of health, vigor, and the capacity
to sustain the cost of elaborate plumages. Now, if beauty correlates closely with good
genes, the biologist’s story is consistent with the view that the females choose on
aesthetic grounds. In other words they could target good genes by choosing beauty.
This, at least, is the position supported by Geoffrey Miller, an evolutionary psycholo-
gist. The aesthetician Wolfgang Welsch also holds that the females choose for beauty
but he disagrees with Miller about there being a correlation between beauty and good
genes.
Welsch argues that small alterations to a creature can drastically affect its beauty
without altering its health and vigor. Then he observes that peahens do not inevitably
prefer the peacock with the most eyespots in his tail—occasionally they pick a male
with fewer but more symmetrical eyespots. This symmetry makes for beauty but not
for good health. So, that the peahen opts for symmetry indicates that her choice is a
purely aesthetic one, he maintains.
This argument is unconvincing, however. Symmetry is in fact one of the more
reliable indications of good genes and of a history of immunity from disease, as I will
outline further in Chapter 7. So even if it is true that peahens take the symmetry of
peacocks’ tail eyespots into account, this does not show that they are choosing on
aesthetic grounds as opposed to choosing for good genes. And the claim that small
changes in symmetry can have a damaging effect on beauty without indicating a
corresponding lack of good genes is also doubtful. Where the difference in symmetry
is a product of the bird’s natural history (and not of the intervention of a human
experimenter), small differences in symmetry can be signiﬁcant signs of the bird’s
underlying condition. The considerations raised by Welsch fail to show that Miller’s
position is mistaken.
Choosing for beauty could be consistent with looking for signals of good genes.
But is the peahen’s choice in fact an aesthetic one, as both Miller and Welsch agree?
Where is the argument to that conclusion? In general, theorists are very vague about
how the choice takes on its alleged aesthetic character and Miller and Welsch are not
exceptional.
Here’s one argument trying to show how the female bird’s response to the male’s
displays is aesthetic. Behaviors that are in our genes’ best interests are often self-
motivating because we experience them as intrinsically pleasurable. We act in ways
that are conducive to our biological ﬂourishing because we enjoy doing so, not because
we calculate their biological consequences. For instance, we enjoy food, drink, sex,
sleep, and exercise for their own sakes. And this is almost certainly how it must be for
many animals and birds. They are not capable of the self-conscious calculation of
biological beneﬁts and costs, so they must be guided by pleasure and pain, emotion and
THE AESTHETIC
13

instinct. The female bird selects her mate because his appearance is pleasurable to
contemplate. To experience pleasure in the contemplation of appearances is to respond
to beauty. Therefore, hers must be an aesthetic response.
I take the following quotation from Welsch to represent a version of this argument:
Aesthetic judgment is essentially a judgment based on pleasure—not on a concept or on objective
analysis. The appearance as such must be experienced as pleasurable, without any need for knowl-
edge of why this is so. When the peahen is excited by the peacock’s display of his beautiful
plumes, she takes delight in the beauty of his ornament and performance and nothing else. She
performs an aesthetic judgment.
Similarly, Alex Comfort, author of the best-selling 1972 book The Joy of Sex, suggests:
If animals show behavioural evidence of sensory preferences which do not depend on condi-
tioning to, or instinctive pursuit of, something else, such as nectar, only human exclusiveness
seems to stand in the way of calling this an aesthetic experience. At least it is difﬁcult to
distinguish it formally from an aesthetic experience.
The simple equation of an aesthetic response with perceptually founded pleasure recurs
persistently in the biological literature and is found in Darwin’s Descent of Man, where
he characterizes the sense of the beautiful as “the pleasure given by certain colours,
forms, and sounds.” Likewise, the primatologist Frans de Waal: “We are not the only
species to take pleasure in self-created visual effects, hence . . . the aesthetic sense
probably has older roots than is often assumed.” Robert Joyce claims: “Esthetics is
traceable through the animal kingdom and the vegetable kingdom down to inorganic
matter.” In sum, a widespread view, especially among biologists and psychologists, is
that a response is aesthetic if it is a perceptually based, positively or negatively charged
emotional reaction.
The problem with this approach was noted earlier: appearances can give rise to
pleasurable experiences that are not aesthetic in character. Perhaps the hen bird’s
pleasure is that of lustful anticipation. Or perhaps it amounts to “that looks good
(right) to me,” which is not exactly equivalent to “that looks beautiful to me.” And in
any case, among insects and crustaceans, females respond to male signaling but most of
us would not think of their motivation or experiences as involving aesthetic taste. So
where in animalkind does the experience take on its aesthetic hue or are we the only
aesthetes?
It’s not easy to answer these questions. Of course we can identify animals as making
choices, which is not to assume that they deliberate or are conscious of choosing, and
we can detect physiological and other signs of their arousal and pleasure. It is not clear
how to work out how those choices are experienced by them, however, and that is the
crucial matter. Do they ﬁnd what they see beautiful as well as pleasurable to look at?
Nevertheless, it seems plausible to me that we are likely to share our aesthetic sense
with our primate cousins and other higher animals, but to a limited extent. Though
he is an enthusiast and conducted hundreds of experiments on ape “art,” Desmond
14
KEY CONCEPTS

Morris, a zoologist and ethologist, carefully qualiﬁes his estimate of chimpanzee
aesthetic taste:
They show compositional control, but a minimum of it; they show calligraphic development,
but a minimum of it; they show aesthetic variation, but again at a minimal level.
In some respects aesthetic experience is like an emotion—it is an attention-focusing,
value-charged response to how we ﬁnd the world. Both aesthetic and emotional
responses can play an important role in learning by getting us to focus on what is
important for us. I am conﬁdent that higher animals share our basic emotions, such as
fear, happiness, and anger. The aesthetic sense is no less fundamental a way of engaging
with the world than those emotions are, so I would not be surprised to learn that some
of their experiences include an aesthetic dimension. Not that they will sit in entranced
contemplation, apparently without regard to utilitarian interests or consequences.
Unlike those people who assume that the aesthetic stance must be disengaged from
utility and who would then argue that animals cannot experience aesthetic states
because their activities are never decoupled from the business of life, I maintain that
aesthetic experience is consistent with practical concerns. The cat will seek the lap for
warmth and comfort but that may be compatible with its relishing the experience in an
aesthetic fashion.
What about the birds? There’s an obvious reason why they are discussed—our
primary sense is that of sight and, unlike most mammals, birds see color much as we
do. Their plumage displays attract our aesthetic admiration along with the interest of
their potential mates. Is there an aesthetic element in their responses to each other, as
Darwin proposed? I don’t know but I doubt it. By contrast with birds, the aesthetic
lives of dogs, assuming they have them, are likely to be quite different from ours by
giving prominence to smell over sight. Imagine the delight they might take when
presented with what are to them appealing odors of symphonic complexity!
The Kantian theory of the aesthetic
I’ve sketched my view of the aesthetic. I identify it with the kind of experience to
which it gives rise and with the kinds of properties on which that experience focuses,
these being in the most general classiﬁcation those of beauty, the sublime, or their
opposites. And I’ve rejected as too liberal the position that regards all pleasurable or
unpleasurable perceptual experience as aesthetic. But neither my view nor this second
one conforms to the model of the aesthetic developed in the eighteenth century,
which culminated in the theories of the philosopher Immanuel Kant. Because this
traditional view came to provide the dominant paradigm and because elements of it
percolated through to be accepted by a wider, general public, it is important that
I explain why I ﬁnd it too narrow and cognitive. As I go on to explain, it is too narrow
in conﬁning aesthetic interest to the appreciation mainly of form. And it is too
THE AESTHETIC
15

cognitive in making central to aesthetic experience a special kind of interaction
between the appreciator’s imagination and understanding.
What became the model for an understanding of aesthetic experience was provided
in Kant’s discussion of what he called free beauty. The outline of his position is as
follows: aesthetic experience is a delight taken in the beauty of the form of its
perceptual object. This beauty is apprehended via interaction between the observer’s
imagination and understanding, both directed to an object. We reﬂect on its form,
imagined in different ways and from different points of view. In particular, this
interaction is one of “free play,” which means that it is not governed by concepts
and classiﬁcations. We are supposed to put aside knowledge of what kind of thing the
object is, including what it is for, how it is produced, and so on. Aesthetic experience is
disinterested, which is to say not connected to our goals, interests, or desires.
Some later theorists extended the notion of disinterestedness, making it the hallmark
of aesthetic experience. They maintained that aesthetic experience must be appropri-
ately distanced—not too close to one’s own concerns to bias the experience nor so far
from the object as to produce indifference. To achieve this distance, it was argued, the
aesthete must put aside all knowledge of the experience’s object. However, there were
challenges in the 1960s to the supposition that aesthetic experience requires the
adoption of a distinctive psychological attitude, such as “distance,” as against ordinary
attention. These were among the ﬁrst arguments that led aestheticians to question
claims for the psychological distinctiveness of aesthetic experience.
For Kant, aesthetic experience requires a degree of complexity both in the process of
its perception and in its object. The process involves interaction between the percei-
ver’s imagination and understanding, while the object must possess sufﬁcient elements
to present a form. In these respects, Kant thinks that aesthetic experience is distin-
guished from sensuous or simply sensory pleasures, that is, from experiences of what he
called the merely agreeable. Gut reactions of pleasure to the experience of ice-cream,
sex, a vivid color, or a baby’s smile are too simple and unreﬂective to count as aesthetic,
according to Kant. They are unsophisticated, desire-based, under-distanced, overly
sentimental, unframed. In short they leave too little room for free play between the
imagination and understanding. By contrast, the disinterested perception of free beauty
always involves this free play. What is merely agreeable does not require aesthetic
discernment for its perception, Kant held, and only such discernment is capable of
evaluating objects as beautiful.
By the way it separates aesthetic experience from practical interests and restricts
the focus to the object’s formal features, and also with its emphasis on the cognitive
sophistication of the response, Kant’s theory may provide a plausible model for the
appreciation of Fine Art. It is not congenial, however, to accounts aiming to connect
aesthetic and art behaviors to the very practical evolutionary business of survival and
reproduction. Nevertheless, so inﬂuential are Kant’s views that some biologists and
psychologists have acquiesced to them in their discussions of art, even where this
hamstrings their accounts. A striking early example of this occurs in the work of the
16
KEY CONCEPTS

ethologist Ernst Grosse. Writing in 1897, he maintained that all cultures have art but his
deference to Kantian formalism forced him to argue, quite implausibly, that “primi-
tive” art is never connected with religion. He reasoned in this Kantian fashion: if the
attitude to art must be disinterested, art could never be primarily involved in practical
goals such as serving religion.
A broader account of the aesthetic
Kant’s model of the aesthetic rejects most of my earlier examples of aesthetic experi-
ence. The approach of the person whose interest in the sports game abstracts from its
nature and focuses on its form conforms to the Kantian framework. But in Kant’s view,
a striking shade of blue or a baby’s smile can provide only the pleasure of the merely
agreeable, not aesthetic enjoyment. They are not formally complex, and perceptual
experience of them does not require interaction between the imagination and under-
standing. Meanwhile the sports connoisseur’s appreciation is too conceptually
structured to qualify as a concern with free beauty. It is too concerned with classiﬁca-
tion, rules, and purposes.
Kant’s distinction between free beauty and the merely agreeable obviously has
important implications for his account of the aesthetic. To begin, it’s easy to see why
he is a formalist—there’s not much other than form left when we abstract from the
aesthetic object its agreeability, its purposes, roles, or uses, and its identifying class.
And in turn, his formalism suggests that the source of the aesthetic resides exclusively in
the perceptible contents of its perceptual object. Moreover, by rejecting aesthetic
content of the sensuous and sensual kinds, Kant privileges the distal senses of vision
and hearing over the proximal senses of touch, oral taste, smell, and kinesthetic
awareness when it comes to aesthetic experience. And to focus again on Kant’s positive
characterization of free beauty, it is striking how he brackets off all background
knowledge and conceptual classiﬁcation from aesthetic experience. His views have
been challenged on all these matters and it is to these criticisms that I turn.
A wider palette of properties and a move away from formalism
Kantian formalism holds that only qualities such as being uniﬁed, balanced, integrated,
dynamic, graceful, and delicate are responsible for the production of the higher, more
abstract properties of beauty and sublimity. As I noted at this chapter’s beginning,
modern aesthetic theorists typically expand the list of good- and bad-making proper-
ties. We could say that they have widened the notion of the aesthetic so that it includes
more than the beautiful and the sublime, or alternatively, that they have stretched the
notions of the beautiful and the sublime to include more than the formal. I prefer this
second description.
Some of these additions may be regarded as controversial. For instance, the philoso-
pher John Morreall argues that cuteness is an aesthetic property (and that our reaction to
it is an evolved response). So far as high art is concerned, cuteness lacks seriousness and
THE AESTHETIC
17

subtlety, he observes, but this shows that it’s a second-rate aesthetic property for Fine
Art, not that the reaction is not aesthetic in nature. Though not everyone would agree,
I share the view that cuteness should count as an aesthetic property.
Inclusion of the everyday
The Kantian view is generally presented as identifying nature and art as the primary
objects of valuable aesthetic experience. But as well as expanding the range of aesthetic
properties, aestheticians have also contended that they have a wider scope for applica-
tion. Writing in the 1930s the pragmatist philosopher John Dewey was among the ﬁrst
to argue that the everyday is a legitimate source of aesthetic experience. In his opinion,
any intense, uniﬁed, and complete experience qualiﬁes as aesthetic. Contemporary
aestheticians largely agree that we should not disqualify an experience from the realm
of the beautiful solely in terms of its comparative lack of magnitude or gravitas. And
we should question the idea that what is simple or crude always provides a lesser
experience. For example, it has been argued that itches can be a source of aesthetic
experience.
Proximal versus distal senses
Dewey also argued against conﬁning aesthetic experience to the distal senses of sight
and hearing. He thought that the proximal senses of touch, taste, and smell are capable
of providing aesthetic experience. (It has also been suggested that proprioception—that
is, a person’s kinesthetic awareness of her body—could be added to this list.) Most of
those who defend the aesthetic interest of the everyday agree that all the senses,
including olfactory experiences involving smell and taste, can afford aesthetic experi-
ence. One result has been recent closer attention to the aesthetic qualities of food
as well as of wine, beer, and whiskey. And Richard Shusterman, a philosopher, has
developed an account of what he calls “somaesthetics,” which emphasizes the aesthetic
character of bodily self-presentation and awareness, including sex acts.
Not all of the aestheticians who believe that the everyday can be a source of aesthetic
experience also accept that the proximal senses have aesthetic signiﬁcance, however.
Glenn Parsons and Allen Carlson defend Kant’s distinction between the aesthetic and
the merely agreeable. They claim, more particularly, that Kant’s differentiation of
aesthetic and bodily pleasure is apparent in the different experiences to which they
give rise and is respected in linguistic practice, not only in English but in Chinese and
Turkish as well. Moreover, they share Kant’s fear that any amelioration of the
distinction commits us to accepting that all aesthetic judgments and evaluations are
inescapably personal with none more appropriate or true than any other. (Many people
assert that taste is purely subjective but aestheticians tend to argue for a degree of
interpersonal validity in such judgments. And whatever they assert, most ordinary
people do expect others to share their most valued tastes and question the discernment
of those who do not.)
18
KEY CONCEPTS

It isn’t obvious that the acceptance of aesthetic experience can come via the
proximal senses commits one to accepting that aesthetic value is entirely subjective,
such that no one person’s aesthetic evaluations can be measured against another
person’s. Food, whiskey, wine, and beer are all judged competitively. This acknowl-
edges that experience of them can be informed and reﬁned through practice, through
a knowledge of traditions and of widely accepted standards, and through appreciation
of makers’ intentions. It isn’t clear that the judgment of Fine Art is more objective
than this.
And even where the search for beauty in the everyday is more personal because it is
motivated by a need for self-deﬁnition and self-development rather than for public
agreement, this need not be sufﬁcient to reduce that experience to something eccen-
tric. It may be true that, as regards much of the everyday, we value personal enjoyment
and enrichment above objectivity and interpersonal agreement, but aesthetics can
expect and tolerate a fair degree of relativism in its judgments without collapsing
into extreme subjectivity.
In general, I think that some aesthetic judgments are objective in the sense that there
can be interpersonal agreement about them on the part of observers who are suitably
skilled, knowledgeable, and practiced. But perhaps even here an element of personal
taste remains in their shared judgments. And in any case, I accept that many aesthetic
responses are idiosyncratic in being conﬁned to small subgroups or even, occasionally,
to individuals. Maybe a person has to be a teenage, heterosexual female to uncover the
wit, pathos, and charm of a certain novel. Perhaps it is necessary to have experienced
the horrors of war or the untimely death of loved ones to appreciate the full extent of
anguish, repulsion, and loss in the works of some First World War poets. Given the
diversity of any individual’s tastes and preferences and the potential usefulness to her of
others’ aesthetic judgments, what matters, I suggest, is not universal agreement over
aesthetic values and rankings but degrees of consensus.
Simple aesthetic properties
For Kant, an aesthetic object must offer sufﬁcient complexity to sustain free play
between the imagination and the understanding and sufﬁcient elements to present a
form. He tended to assume that bodily experiences involving the proximal senses must
be simple and so reducible to the merely agreeable. This is not always the case,
however. Consider the experience of ﬁne dining, which encompasses the ambience
and display of the meal’s setting, the succession of balanced courses and complementary
wines, the conversation of companions, and so on. This example shows that some
experiences relying heavily on the proximal senses can be complexly structured and
can take into account conventions and traditions.
Kantian formalism assumes that aesthetic pleasure always arises out of the cognitive
interplay between the imagination and the understanding. We can allow that this is
sometimes the case while claiming that sensuous experience can also be a source of
aesthetic pleasure or displeasure. In other words, aesthetic experience need not always
THE AESTHETIC
19

be thoughtful or cognitively complex, and its object could be a perceptual simple that
does not offer a variety of elements and relations among them. This is not to say that
the pleasure we take in ice-cream or chocolate always is aesthetic. But where we relish
and take delight in the beauty of colors, sounds, felt textures, or tastes—a monochrome
paint patch, an isolated musical note, the touch of velvet, the aroma of coffee—that
experience might be genuinely aesthetic.
Classiﬁcation and the object of aesthetic experience
We can agree that aesthetic appreciation frequently involves a concern with its object
for its own sake, rather than as a means to some end that could be speciﬁed prior to
engagement with that object. This does not entail, however, that an interest in the
thing for itself or for its own sake could and should be indifferent to the fact that the
thing is a thing of a certain kind. Its membership in a kind is inextricably mixed with its
identity and individuality. If we are to be interested in it for its own sake, we need to
know what “it” is.
It is a mistake, therefore, to suggest that conceptualization makes the response non-
aesthetic because too “interested.” Where they are relevant to its identity, apprecia-
tion of an item’s meaning or signiﬁcance is involved in appreciating it for its own sake.
In the case of art, identifying the work and noting its appreciable features usually
depends on locating it with respect to the art-historical traditions, genres, conven-
tions, and practices that it presumes as its background. We might not be able to
appreciate a play “for its own sake” if we don’t know that it is a satire, for example.
And, in the case of nature, it’s widely held that aesthetic appreciation presupposes
scientiﬁc knowledge about ecological systems and biological species as well as about
their histories. According to this idea, aesthetically appreciating a landscape might
presuppose recognizing how it was formed and the relations between the creatures
that populate it.
Functionality
If the object of appreciation is of a kind characterized in terms of its function, an
aesthetic interest should often take its functionality into account, rather than ignoring
this as the Kantian model enjoins. This applies both where the function is artifactual
and humanly designed and where it is a natural proper function, such as the heart’s
function of pumping blood. It is true that, if the item fulﬁlls secondary aesthetic
purposes independent of its functionality, its aesthetic appreciation can be indifferent
to the function that is its primary goal. For instance, if a pot is decorated with abstract
designs we might consider these for their aesthetic interest independently of judging
how well the pot holds what it is supposed to. In many cases, however, the manner in
which an item serves its primary function can itself be a crucial source of aesthetic
interest and satisfaction. For example, a mechanic might rejoice in the wonder and
beauty of a complexly constructed engine as it works perfectly to do its job.
20
KEY CONCEPTS

Accordingly, a full account of aesthetic experience should consider how this relates to
its object’s functionality. Yet that dimension is entirely absent from accounts that take
Kant’s notion of free beauty, and the separation from concept and functionality that
this requires, as their archetype of aesthetic experience.
The idea that beauty measures the adequacy of things for their nature or purpose has
an ancient pedigree alongside the more Kantian notion that beauty is a matter of formal
proportion and harmony. In the Memorabilia (of about 2370 years before the present) of
the historian Xenophon, it is related that, when asked if the same things are both
beautiful and ugly, Socrates replied:
Of course – and both good and bad. For what is good for hunger is often bad for fever, and what
is good for fever bad for hunger; what is beautiful for running is often ugly for wrestling, and
what is beautiful for wrestling ugly for running. For all things are good and beautiful in relation to
those purposes for which they are well adapted, bad and ugly in relation to those for which they
are ill adapted.
I suggest that aesthetic evaluation with respect to a utilitarian item’s functionality
involves a judgment about the input made by its aesthetic properties to its overall
functional success, or more generally an aesthetic appreciation of how it brings off this
success. An item can be functionally beautiful in two ways: either it possesses aesthetic
properties that contribute positively to its performing its intended, principal function,
or alternatively, it achieves its functionality in an aesthetically appreciable manner. In
other words, an item that is beautiful in either of these ways is beautifully functional,
not solely beautiful and functional. We should acknowledge as genuinely aesthetic a
broad class of judgments in which the beauty of objects is seen as depending at least in
part on how they meet their primary function. The beauty of a chair depends not only
on its being stylish and graceful, say, but also on its having these qualities in a manner
that makes it comfortable to sit on, stable, and supportive of the back.
The “location” of aesthetic properties
Kant thought that there is an element of projection or sentiment in our identiﬁcation
and appreciation of aesthetic properties. He holds that the aesthetic property is bound
up with our response to it, so there is a sense in which it belongs to us as much as it
belongs to the object in which we ﬁnd it. I disagree. I hold that aesthetic properties
belong to the object in which they are detected, not that they are projected onto that
object by the perceiver. Of course, only observers with the appropriate perceptual and
other sensitivities will be able to detect an item’s aesthetic features. But in the same
way, only a bird receptive to certain wavelengths of reﬂected light can discriminate the
ripe berries by their color. We should be no more inclined to posit the human
projection of aesthetic character onto its object than to maintain that the bird projects
color onto the berry.
THE AESTHETIC
21

Are there morally improper aesthetic responses?
As I indicated previously, many aestheticians and philosophers of art approve of the
liberalization of the notion of the aesthetic for which I’ve been arguing. There are
some respects in which my view departs from the mainstream, however, as I now
outline.
I noted above a tendency for traditional theories of the aesthetic to regard as
improper responses motivated by the wrong attitude—interest rather than disinterest,
for example; or directed to objects not worthy of it—such as chocolate. Along with
this, there is also a tendency to regard these improper responses as not genuinely
aesthetic, much as a false friend is not genuinely a friend at all. While the extreme form
of this attitude is now often rejected, one idea frequently retained from the traditional
account is that aesthetic experience should be directed to an object regarded as the object
it is, not in some way incidental to its identity. For example, in environmental
aesthetics it has been argued that formalist, art-based, and impressionistic approaches
to natural environments fail to respect their identity as natural environments. Much
subsequent debate has centered on what respecting them as natural environments
requires by way of background knowledge from a well-situated, aesthetically moti-
vated observer. The implication is that the analysis of aesthetic experience should
exclude inappropriate responses and perhaps also that unwarranted responses are
thereby non-aesthetic.
I agree that it is important to specify under what concepts the object of attention is
appreciated when it is appreciated aesthetically—as a home, as an investment, as a work
of architecture, as potential ﬁrewood, for example. I accept also that, among the
possibilities, those that identify it for what it is are primary. Aesthetically appreciating
a book for the story it contains is more relevant to its identity than appreciating it as a
potential doorstop. But I see no reason to suppose that less thoughtful or more
speculative, imaginative, and perverse (if you will) ways of regarding the object cannot
result in genuinely aesthetic experiences. A response that is mindlessly spontaneous can,
nevertheless, be directed to an item’s perceived beauty, sublimity, or to the opposites of
these. And one that is unsuited to its object because it thinks of that object in a way that
ignores some key aspect of its identity is not thereby deprived of its aesthetic dimen-
sion. Books can be aesthetically appreciable as potential doorstops.
These opinions lead me to disagree with the stand taken by Parsons and Carlson
when they discuss humans’ aesthetic appreciation of nonhuman animals. They deplore
approaches that appreciate animals as exotic or symbolic, that anthropomorphize them
in a kitsch way, or that consider them solely for their formal features. Such approaches
involve “relating to them in a shallow, and hence morally inappropriate, manner.” The
moral issue arises, they suggest, because, though animals are not themselves moral
agents, they can be treated immorally by humans. Animals ought to be respected for
themselves. Our aesthetic appreciation should recognize and depend on the nature of
the animal that is its object. We should consider an animal’s traits or characteristics in
22
KEY CONCEPTS

terms of their proper function of matching it to its environment, and it is the animal’s
looking adapted to its situation that should be the source of aesthetic pleasure.
I share the thought that we can take pleasure in an animal’s suitedness to its
environment and way of life, but I think alternative approaches to animal beauty are
not inappropriate or immoral in the way that is suggested. For instance, we might
consider a bird as if it is a mobile sculpture. (I will explore this and other alternatives in
Chapter 5.) Of course, these forms of appreciation are partial if they disregard the
animal’s kind, but this does not entail, as Parsons and Carlson apparently assume, that
they must therefore be superﬁcial or shallow. I might take a deep and studied delight in
the patterned intricacy of a bird’s plumage without regard to its functional beauty, that
is, to how the bird’s feathers provide camouﬂage, insulation, and the possibility of
ﬂight. The Dinka, herders of East Africa, are connoisseurs of the markings of their
cattle and have a large vocabulary of terms for describing these markings. Cow colors
are often used by them as the ﬁrst names of their children.
If we accept for the sake of the discussion that a focus on an animal’s unfamiliar,
formal, symbolic, or humanlike features is not only partial but also shallow, still there is
no warrant for the assumption that the response is thereby morally suspect. Undeniably
it would be so if we made decisions affecting the animals solely on this inappropriate
basis. For example, it would be immoral to decide to exterminate ugly-looking species
just because of the way they look. But so long as it does not lead to immoral behavior,
there need be nothing untoward in pursuing and enjoying an aesthetic response that
is shallow. And if we are liable to unconscious bias in favor of “pretty” or “cute” and
against “ugly” animals, this suggests that we should guard against the bias where it
could lead us to act or judge wrongly, not that we should condemn out of hand any
aesthetic interest in the animal that does not focus on how it ﬁts into its environment.
Finally, it is mistaken to insist that the anthropocentric standpoint is inappropriate to
the proper aesthetic appreciation of animals. After all, we are considering our responses
to and judgments about them—not one lion’s aesthetic judgments about another, if
lions make such judgments—and it is reasonable to expect our judgments to connect to
our interests as well as to theirs.
There is no doubt that animals can be and often are morally wronged by humans.
But I doubt that there’s a direct connection between that fact and the adoption of an
aesthetic attitude to an animal’s appearance that is partial or even shallow.
Artistic versus aesthetic properties
I have characterized the aesthetic in terms of its properties and the experiences directed
to them and I have suggested that all sorts of things, including human artifacts, might
possess such properties. Obviously this includes artworks, which are a special class of
humanly produced items. Artworks can possess aesthetic properties and can be appre-
ciated for doing so.
THE AESTHETIC
23

Much art has representational, expressive, or symbolic content that can be assessed in
aesthetic terms. For instance, we might judge the landscape depicted in a painting to be
beautiful or the emotion described in a novel to be painfully powerful. But in addition
to this aesthetically evaluable content, we judge the work in which it appears for its
own aesthetic character. The manner in which the landscape is depicted or the
emotion is described can be beautiful. When it comes to the assessment of art, these
latter aesthetic properties are the more relevant. We should be more concerned with
the beauty or otherwise of the portrait than with the beauty or otherwise of its sitter.
It is also important to note, however, that there is often more to the value of art than
the value of the aesthetic qualities it presents. In particular, we should distinguish artistic
from aesthetic properties and note that the former as well as the latter are relevant to
art’s assessment. Artistic properties include reference, allusion, quotation, allegory,
symbolism, irony, humor, art-historical location, genre, and style. A work of art
might be masterfully witty in ways that do not implicate its aesthetic properties. Indeed,
conceptual artworks that are about the idea of carrying out a speciﬁed performance,
whether or not it is actually enacted, might have no perceptible properties. This might
be the case with a 1970 work by Yoko Ono, speciﬁed as “Draw an imaginary
map . . . Go walking on an actual street according to the map.” It is not clear that this
work is performable at all.
Some people would expand the list of aesthetic properties to include those I have
identiﬁed as artistic. It might be reasoned that, if the notion of the aesthetic has already
grown in the ways indicated previously, there should be no objection to extending it
further. For my part, however, I would prefer to retain the connection between the
aesthetic and the perceptually sensible qualities of things. And I would add that there
are features that draw us to art, and that are relevant to its appreciative comprehension,
other than its perceptually sensible features. So I think that the distinction between
aesthetic and artistic properties performs a useful conceptual service.
Mention of artistic properties leads us to this book’s second main topic.
24
KEY CONCEPTS

2
The Nature of Art
I am not going to attempt a technical deﬁnition of what art is. I think there’s a high
degree of agreement about paradigm instances of art and that this agreement concerns
not only the products of highly reﬁned Western art traditions but, as we saw in the
discussion of prehistoric cave art, items produced in other cultures and periods.
Nevertheless, use of the word “art” sometimes is controversial and contested, so
I need to make clear what I take the term to encompass.
If we are to connect art to evolution by means of its centrality to human nature, it’s
plausible to think that we will need a humbler notion of art than one restricted to
Western Fine Art of the past three centuries. Rather, we can anticipate that art must be
pan-cultural and ubiquitous, as well as prehistoric in origin. It should be found in
hunter-gatherer cultures as well as in the court, church, and the modern state, in
tropical forests as well as contemporary cities. That this is the case is sometimes denied,
however.
The alleged eighteenth-century invention of art
Larry Shiner, a philosopher, argues that our concept of art was a product of the
European eighteenth-century Enlightenment. It was then that the arts were ﬁrst
grouped together—formerly, music was classed with mathematic and astronomy, for
example. Moreover, at this time art was distinguished from and contrasted with craft
and the artist set apart from the artisan. (Previously art was contrasted with nature and
everything humanly made was regarded as a “work of art.” ) Histories recording the
lives of artists were written, as were the ﬁrst works of art criticism. Many of the
institutions we now associate with art, such as the museum and the public concert
hall, came into being. The works presented there were treated as being for serious
contemplation, rather than as peripheral entertainments. And philosophers such as
Edmund Burke, the third Earl of Shaftesbury, Francis Hutcheson, David Hume, and
later Kant theorized about art to an unprecedented extent.
There can be no denying many of the wholesale changes to which Shiner draws
attention, but it is difﬁcult to embrace the idea that Greek tragedy and the works of
Michelangelo, da Vinci, and Shakespeare are not art. And even if Aristotle and Plato
placed art in the broad category of the humanly created, they plainly recognized the
cluster of arts as sharing related functions and status. If their concept differed somewhat

from our current one, the overlap is considerable and signiﬁcant—sufﬁciently so that
we can know that they were talking about what we refer to as art. Moreover, we can
question the claim that the philosophers of the eighteenth century successfully identi-
ﬁed the nature of art for the ﬁrst time. As we saw in Chapter 1, the aesthetic formalism
that many of those earlier aestheticians saw as central to art’s nature has been challenged
and revised.
In fact, much of what was unique in the developments of the Enlightenment was a
consequence of the economic emergence of a middle class that aspired to the values of
the ruling elites, including their appetite for Fine Art. The members of this class
demanded and created the conditions for art’s public reception. But there is no reason
to conclude that any of this amounted to the invention of a fresh concept. Perhaps
there was more of a focus on the idea that art should be non-utilitarian, but religious
and other forms of functional art continued to be created as before. Indeed, we might
suspect that being contemplated for its own sake alone is just another function that art
can serve. Besides, all forms of art, including the functional, have always invited and
rewarded contemplation in terms of what makes them the works they are. Even if
dance, music, drama, picturing, and poetry typically are servants of ritual and religion in
many foraging cultures, that is not sufﬁcient to show that they are not thereby art.
In Chapter 1 I suggested that aesthetic appreciation need not be opposed to consid-
eration of how an item achieves its utilitarian function. The same argument applies to
art and explains how the aesthetic value of functional art often enhances and facilitates
its efﬁcacy, as opposed merely to piggybacking on its function. In fact, for much of art’s
history, aesthetic quality and functionality were expected to be mutually supportive.
Art enriched ritual and helped convey religious lore, for instance. Indeed, some of art’s
most sublime achievements are displayed in pieces that reconcile the highest aesthetic
qualities of design and display with a demand for the economical and efﬁcient realiza-
tion of functions that go with signiﬁcant constraints on what is workable. Many
medieval cathedrals could serve as illustrations.
My position opposes the idea that considering art for its own sake involves viewing it
as if it is non-functional. Though much art created since the eighteenth century has
been intended for contemplation in a fashion that holds in abeyance any interest in its
practical usefulness, here Western high art departs from its history and from art as it has
existed in most other cultures. So I disagree with the aesthetician Denis Dutton who
identiﬁes as a hallmark of art that it invites “disinterested” attention that separates its
appreciation from practical concerns. (On the other hand, I applaud the broadness of
the concept of art that he defends and his interest in exploring how art might be
connected to evolution.)
What falls under the concept of art?
It might be thought that the universality of art follows straightforwardly from
the observation that all cultures have music, poetry, narrative, drama, dancing, and
26
KEY CONCEPTS

picturing. This argument would be too fast, however, if not all music, poetry, and so
on should be counted as art. “Happy Birthday” and the catchy jingle that advertises the
phone number of the local pizza parlor are music, but I’d be reluctant to count them as
art, even assuming a humble view of what art is. Similarly, I don’t think most story-
books for 4-year-olds, mnemonic rhymes, illustrations in manuals for assembling
furniture, my last waltz, and games of charades make the grade. These are among the
reasons why we cannot deﬁne art as the sum of the art forms.
Yet even if we cannot deﬁne art as the sum of the various art forms, the ubiquity of
many of these art forms and the sophisticated, energy-consuming devotion with which
they are pursued and enjoyed are almost incontrovertible evidence of art’s universality.
If we are to detect the presence of art, it will often be useful to look for familiar modes
of art making, such as singing, dancing, carving, narrating, dramatizing, and painting.
An example might be the decorated betelnut paraphernalia in the Massim cultural area
of east New Guinea and the Trobriand Islands. This is stylistically distinctive but plainly
counts as a form of carving. It is also possible, however, that an artwork is not in one of
these common artistic categories and stands outside all established artistic traditions.
Perhaps Japanese paper folding is an example. Is there another approach that will give
us a reliable indication of what falls under the concept of art?
A common strategy adopted by theorists is to characterize art as a “cluster” concept.
A list of characteristic properties is provided. None of these is essential for something
being art, but various (usually unspeciﬁed) combinations do sufﬁce for something
being art. For example, the philosopher Berys Gaut’s list is: (1) possessing positive
aesthetic properties, (2) being expressive of emotion, (3) being intellectually challeng-
ing, (4) being formally complex and coherent, (5) having a capacity to convey complex
meanings, (6) exhibiting an individual point of view, (7) being an exercise of creative
imagination, (8) being an artifact or performance that is the product of high skill,
(9) belonging to an established art form, and (10) being the product of an intention to
make a work of art. According to him, Egyptian art is art because it satisﬁes (1), (2), (4),
(5), (8), and (9) though it does not satisfy (3), (6), (7), and (10). In other words the
satisfaction of a limited set of these conditions is sufﬁcient for something’s being art.
An alternative cluster is proposed by Dutton. He holds that art typically (i) provides
immediate experiential pleasure and not utility, (ii) displays skill and virtuosity, (iii)
exhibits style, (iv) has novelty and demonstrates creativity, (v) is subject to critical
judgments and appreciation, (vi) involves representation, (vii) attracts special focus and
is bracketed off from the everyday, (viii) expresses individuality, (ix) is emotionally
saturated, (x) offers intellectual challenge, (xi) is associated with art traditions and
institutions, and (xii) evokes imaginative experience. Of these, the last is identiﬁed
by Dutton as the most signiﬁcant.
The “cluster” approach can successfully highlight characteristic features of complex,
multifaceted practices, but I do have reservations about its account of art. The ﬁrst
worry is that such lists often display an ethnocentric bias in favor of the features that
were accorded prominence in philosophers’ Enlightenment and Romantic accounts of
THE NATURE OF ART
27

European art, for instance, by listing originality and cognitive complexity, distinctness
from the everyday, and expressive individuality, while bypassing stylistic faithfulness,
deference to tradition, and uncomplicated accessibility, which are all usually more
important in traditional societies. But the most pertinent criticism in the present
context is that the cluster theory does not deliver what we are after, which is an
account that allows us to map the concept by indicating what falls under it. In other
words, cluster theories do little to help us identify art as such.
Suppose we are faced with some item of possible art and we wonder if it qualiﬁes.
We note that it has properties (2), (3), (4), (5), (7), and (9) from Gaut’s list but not (1),
(6), (8), and (10). That is no help to us unless we know whether the combination of just
these six properties is sufﬁcient for something being art and we would know that only if
some uncontroversial cases of art qualiﬁed on precisely those grounds. But if we were
uncertain about the art standing of the present piece, though we clearly recognize the
art-relevant properties it has, then all similar cases should be equally controversial. The
calculation would become yet more intractable if, as seems likely, the various features
vary in their importance from case to case. Without specifying exactly which combi-
nations of the properties are sufﬁcient for something being art and under what
circumstances, which is something cluster theorists never do, the cluster theory is of
no help to us. Though both Gaut and Dutton maintain that their theories can help us
settle the status of marginal and disputed cases of possible art, I think they are mistaken
in this.
In general, attempts by scientists to characterize art’s nature strike me as no more
helpful than philosophers’. Kathryn Coe, an anthropologist, sees three conditions that
must always be satisﬁed for something to qualify as visual art: it must be humanly made,
must use color, line, pattern and/or form, and must have no function other than to
attract attention. The natural historian R. Dale Guthrie considers as art making “a
certain class of actions that are not overtly necessary for the operational demands
immediately linked to reproductive ﬁtness.” Lawrence S. Barham, an archaeologist,
adopts a deﬁnition according to which art is “the medium conveying awareness of a
perceived reality to the sensory perception of other humans.” I have earlier challenged
the assumption adopted by Coe and Guthrie, that art must be non-functional, but here
the key problem is that in other respects all the deﬁnitions are too inclusive. Much that
we would not ordinarily count as art—crude doodlings and clumsy grafﬁti, for
instance—satisfy these inadequate proposals. Just as many scientists cheapen the notion
of the aesthetic to the point where all sense-based reactions would qualify, some of
them do the same for art, with the result that claims for connections between art and
humans’ evolved behavior become trivially true.
I believe we will do better to adopt a multi-stranded account that acknowledges the
different ways in which something can qualify as art: something is art (a) if it falls under
an established, publicly recognized category of art or within an established art tradition,
or (b) if it is intended by its maker/presenter to be art and its maker/presenter does
28
KEY CONCEPTS

what is necessary and appropriate to realizing that intention, or (c) if it shows excellence
of skill and achievement in realizing signiﬁcant aesthetic or artistic goals.
The ﬁrst two conditions acknowledge that different cultures may have distinct
artistic traditions and that different art traditions might not include all the same art
forms (though we would expect a considerable overlap). The ﬁnal condition allows the
possibility of something being art even if it falls outside all art traditions and publicly
recognized art categories and even if it has the primary function of being for some
purpose other than contemplation for its own sake. The need for this ﬁnal condition is
apparent when we consider the circumstances under which the ﬁrst artworks were
created. Such works pre-dated art traditions and publicly established categories of art.
They would have been made by people who either did not possess the concept of art or
had only a rudimentary conception of art. Here, skill and achievement take the place of
intentions, traditions, and categories.
Together these conditions are probably inadequate to art’s deﬁnition. I don’t doubt
that some works of art fail them and that some non-artworks satisfy them. But our task
was to identify our subject matter by providing a characterization that will track what
falls under the concept of art with some accuracy. The suggested conditions do that,
I believe.
Art making and the concept of art
Some people might accept that there is sufﬁcient continuity across several millennia of
Western culture to show that art has a long history there, but nevertheless balk at
allowing that non-Western cultures have art. Common assumptions are that only those
with a concept of art can create it and only those with a word for art can have the
concept. Coupling these assumptions with the observation that most cultures have no
word for art delivers the conclusion that they do not have art.
Several responses are available. As consideration of the ﬁrst art just now suggested, it
might be possible to create art even if one lacks the concept. A person without the
concept could not label what she had created as art, but that does not show that it could
not be art that was made.
Besides, the assumption that most cultures lack a word for art should be challenged.
Many cultures do have a word or a phrase that seems to correspond to “art.” Indeed,
some cultures, such as those of China, Japan, Southeast Asia, India, and the Middle
East, as well as smaller-scale African civilizations such as the Yoruba, Akan, and Igbo,
have art institutions, traditions, recorded histories, and bodies of theory and criticism
that parallel those of the Western world of Fine Art. Similar traditions of art criticism
and institutionalization also occur in some small-scale societies.
Also, other cultures may have the concept of art even where their languages do
not apparently distinguish it clearly from other things or practices. Our behavior is
a better marker of what we know and believe than the presence of an explicit,
articulable linguistic concept. No culture is without music, narrative, drama, dancing,
THE NATURE OF ART
29

and picturing. Moreover, at least some of the musical, storytelling, dramatic, dancing,
and picturing practices of other cultures are treated seriously, with appropriate critical
interest in and respect for what is thereby skillfully achieved. These facts should count
positively toward the conclusion that they have art.
Finally, we can sometimes identify in other cultures art forms not shared with the
West. Indonesian shadow puppetry, the Japanese tea ceremony, and Islamic calligraphy
are plausible candidates. Again, the skills required of practitioners and the serious
attention that goes into their appreciation speaks for their status as art forms.
When such considerations are weighed it would be churlish, ethnocentric, and
insulting to deny that art is present in all cultures. Not surprisingly, many diverse
theorists claim universality for art. In many cultures, though, art is tied to ritual or other
functions, not reserved purely for contemplation.
Consider an imaginary culture of islanders who perform elegant, difﬁcult, extended
dances in their temples as offerings to their gods. Their island attracts missionaries and
tourists. Following their religious conversion their temples stand derelict, but they now
present the same dances for the enjoyment of tourists. I would not agree with the
suggestion that the islanders have acquired art where they had none originally. Nor
would I agree with the cultural purist who holds that their indigenous art is lost.
I would say that they had art originally and that their gods were art connoisseurs. And
I would maintain also that they have preserved their art, though it now does not
contribute to their religious experience, so long as the aesthetic values and methods of
their tradition are retained so that, were they still to be watching, their former gods
would recognize and approve of what they saw.
Prehistoric art
Not only is it reasonable to regard the production and enjoyment of art as currently
pan-cultural, there is every reason to believe that the deliberate pursuit of artistic
excellence is historically as ancient as recognizable signs of culture and symbolic
thinking. As I noted in the Introduction to Part I, the paintings and carved objects
associated with caves and dating back as far as 35 ka are conﬁdently deemed to be art by
those who examine them.
Australian rock art may be of similar antiquity. Because Australian Aboriginal culture
survives, we can also take note of its artistic richness, which includes elaborate sand
drawings, song cycles, narratives, and dance rituals, none of which leave a physical
trace. Presumably these artistic behaviors, along with those of other present-day
foraging cultures, have the same venerable age as early cave art. That these art practices
frequently are linked to religious ceremonies, rites of passage, and moments of social
celebration counts for, not against, their claim to art status, I think. As I argued earlier,
art can be utilitarian and the fact that it can immeasurably elevate the experience of
socially or personally signiﬁcant occasions testiﬁes to its importance for humans.
30
KEY CONCEPTS

Is art made by other animals?
Among the deﬁnitions offered of Homo sapiens was the suggestion that we are the tool-
using animal. That view is now rejected. Many creatures have been found to make and
use tools. In addition, many of our other seemingly distinctive capacities, such as
emotionality and self-consciousness, are apparently present to some degree in other
animals. So it would not be completely surprising if the idea that we are the art-making
animal is also challenged and eventually displaced.
For other animals to make art, they would have to have an aesthetic sense. Given
their cognitive limitations they are unlikely to be makers of subtle forms of conceptual
art, so we should expect their artworks mainly to highlight the appeal of perceptually
accessible aesthetic properties. As a corollary, we can also anticipate that their art should
be apparent to us as such, provided our sensory world overlaps with theirs.
In Chapter 1, I considered whether some nonhuman animals have an aesthetic sense
and the conclusion reached was equivocal. So the suggestion that some nonhuman
animals make art rests on shaky ground. Nevertheless, just as there are people who are
convinced that animals display aesthetic taste, there are those who think that those
same animals make art. It is said that the bowers of male bowerbirds are works of art.
Others take more qualiﬁed positions: for example, that the bowers are art but might
better be viewed as ritualized display; or that they are precursors of humans’ aesthetic
products and of art; yet weaker, that we recognize something artistic in the birds’
bowers; or, damning by faint praise, that they would show artistry were they made by
humans.
It has also been suggested that paintings by chimpanzees and elephants are artworks,
that percussive bimanual drumming by African great apes on resonant objects, includ-
ing themselves, is equivalent to human drumming and is a precursor of human
instrumental music, and that elephants and humpback whales make music.
The philosopher George Dickie speaks for the negative with respect to chimpanzee
art. He deﬁnes arthood as a status conferred by someone acting on behalf of an
artworld—an abstract social entity generated out of artistic practices, works, genres,
theories, and traditions. It follows that chimpanzees can’t create art because they
couldn’t conceive of themselves as members of an artworld. Their paintings could be
turned into art, however, if someone with the appropriate institutional credentials
displayed them as such. This argument is not convincing if we allow, as I would, that
art can be made outside of an established art tradition by someone who does not possess
the concept of art.
Dutton also denies that chimpanzees are art makers. He complains that they paint
over their own work and, when they stop, they show no further interest in what they
have painted. But the cave painters of the late Paleolithic often drew their pictures over
existing ones, and artworks created for ritual use in tribal societies are often discarded as
soon as they have played their role.
THE NATURE OF ART
31

Thierry Lenain, an art theorist, offers a more compelling argument for the negative.
The patterns that chimpanzees paint are rigidly stereotyped. They show no autonomy
with respect to the pictorial ﬁeld, which is presented to rather than selected or
constructed by the chimpanzee. In other words, there’s nothing to suggest that the
world of the chimpanzee painting could extend beyond the boundaries of the ﬁxed
frame. Whereas humanly painted patterns take on an aesthetic life independent from
the action of producing them, this is plainly not so for the chimpanzees. Lenain
maintains that the ape’s aim is not aesthetic but is rather to disrupt and destroy the
blank space in front of it. Alternatively, it has been suggested that chimpanzees draw to
replicate familiar shapes, such as the fan shape of the hand, but again without artistic
purpose. And perhaps it is signiﬁcant that painting behaviors do not normally occur in
wild chimpanzees, being humanly induced.
Let us return to the bowerbird. In suggesting that the bowers are artworks, the
geographer Jared Diamond notes that their construction and decoration are not rigidly
programmed. There is a “cultural” element involved, which allows some scope for
artistic creativity. Young birds must learn local styles by observing the constructions of
older males.
Yet this is not decisive. Most songbird males inherit their species’ basic song pattern
but learn the local dialect and detail from other birds. Birds raised in isolation sing the
unelaborated basic song, which is crude by comparison. In the wild, the song changes
over time, but slowly and subtly. British bird species introduced to New Zealand more
than one hundred years ago sing species-speciﬁc songs that are immediately recogniz-
able by today’s European tourists.
Moreover, the kind of change to which their songs have been subject—some
syllables elaborated but others lost—is indicative of random alteration. There is no
evidence that the males attempt to make the songs more elaborate and thereby more
appealing to females. So it is a mistake to compare change in birdsong with the
generativity of language and music—that is, with the capacity of human speakers and
singers to produce novel utterances and songs. In addition, birdsongs are not hier-
archically structured as human music is. Human music is very clearly ordered into
phrases, melodies, chorus, verse, etc., whereas birdsong is not.
Darwin calls birdsong music. Others regards it as art and even compare the structure
of some birds’ songs with sonata form in classical music, claiming that the parallel arises
because, like us, birds desire to break the monotony of repetition without losing sight
of the unifying theme in their compositions. I do not wish to underrate the beauty of
birdsong, but this kind of comparison strikes me as fanciful. At the other extreme are
Josh McDermott, a neuroscientist, and Marc D. Hauser, an evolutionary biologist. In
their review of the scientiﬁc literature, they conclude that human and animal songs are
neither similar in form nor evolved to serve corresponding functions, “and thus have
little to do with each other.” Others acknowledge the differences between human
music and animal song but argue that, for the study of evolution, the search for
commonalities may be important.
32
KEY CONCEPTS

I would certainly deny that birds’ songs are literally artworks or that they overlap
signiﬁcantly with art music in form or function. Nor do I agree that Diamond’s appeal
to the role of avian “culture” in the bowerbirds’ behavior shows them to be artists.
Diamond also notes that the bowerbirds will sort poker chips by color and display them
alongside the similarly colored items they favor. This demonstrates that the birds are
fussy about color but very undiscriminating in other respects, which shows how
inﬂexible are the biological programs that govern the construction and decoration of
their elaborate bowers.
We do not think of the peacock as an artist because he grew his tail. And we do not
think of birds as artists for the nests they build, though many of these are “works of art”
in the sense of being works of extraordinary skill. I suspect we should view the
bowerbirds’ bower as equivalent. In other words, the bowers are part of what is
known as the extended phenotype—organism-deﬁning products of the creature’s
genes that fall beyond its body—not artifacts it makes. The bower is remarkable,
certainly, and it may be pretty, but the male’s repertoire of behaviors is severely
circumscribed and comparatively inﬂexible. For instance, he would carry on the
same even if there were no females or rivals to inspect his efforts. We should think
of the bower standing to him as the elaborate courting plumage and displays of male
birds of paradise stand to them. (Indeed, there is evidence that bowers evolved to
replace courtship plumage that put the males at risk of predation.) If he is no artist, what
he creates is not an artwork.
Why have bowerbirds attracted so much attention? I allow that their bowers and
behaviors are fascinating, but I also suspect that they are advantaged by certain of our
biases. Darwin paid them heed and that gives them a degree of esteem. Also relevant,
I suspect, is a presumption that artworks are artifacts and that in seeking animal artists
we should therefore focus on ones that build or mark the environment in a striking
fashion. Beavers, for instance, would be of interest if only their dams and lakes were
made to be more pleasing to our aesthetic senses. But this prejudices the case of more
plausible candidates: many animals are singers or dancers.
Bees “dance,” but not to make art. Some birds have gorgeous songs—the nightin-
gale deserves the accolades it has received; and some are charming dancers—cranes, for
instance; but most lack the potential even for minimal creativity and on this score
cannot count as artists. A few kinds of birds—some parrots and corvids (ravens and
crows)—display a considerable (but very alien) intelligence, but none of these are
noted as singers. (Some parrots dance to human music, however.) The same applies,
I believe, to our monkey relatives. A number of monkeys vocalize and gibbons are
noted as singers of stereotyped, species-speciﬁc songs, but we should not be tempted to
think of them as composers of music.
Perhaps the most plausible candidate for artist here is the humpback whale. Male
humpback whales sing long, complex songs. The elements of these songs seem to be
hierarchically ordered, which is a distinctive feature of human music. Members of the
same population sing the same song, but this continuously and rapidly evolves and
THE NATURE OF ART
33

changes. This is suggestive of the musical generativity that I claim is absent from
birdsong. The bioacoustics researcher Katharine Payne notes:
Such changes, which affect the song at all levels, seem to arise through improvisation and
imitation rather than through accident or as conveyors of information.
She speculates that sexual selection (which will be outlined and discussed in Chapter 3)
is the “driving evolutionary force behind song change.”
As we will learn in following chapters, it is regularly suggested that art arose in
humans as an instrument of sexual selection, which is all about attracting mates via
competitive display. Of course, it is not solely the element of sexual display that makes
the result art—bowerbird males also make bowers to attract mates, but that does not
make them artists, I have said. It is humans’ imaginative creativity and freedom (within
stylistic constraints and art-making traditions) that mark them as artists. And something
similar can be said of the whales: that they reveal creative ﬂexibility in the production
and development of their songs.
Are male humpback whales artists and their songs artworks? I don’t know, nor am
I sure what kinds of tests could deﬁnitively settle the issue. But it seems to me that they
are the most likely contender among our fellow creatures.
34
KEY CONCEPTS

3
The Theory of Evolution
The theory of evolution is associated most famously with Charles Darwin and Alfred
Russel Wallace. The basic principles of the theory of evolution by natural selection are
as follows. Individuals of a species differ. These differential features are a result of
random mutations or of unique combinations of inherited genes. Some of these
differences make the individuals possessing them relatively better adapted to their
environment. As a result, those individuals are comparatively more able to ﬂourish
and out-compete than other members of their species. If these adaptive characteristics
are heritable, this comparative advantage can be passed to the successful individuals’
descendants. Other things being equal, heritable adaptive features spread throughout
the population over time because those who have them survive and reproduce more
successfully. A variant that produces 1 percent more offspring would increase in
frequency from 0.1 percent to 99.9 percent of the population in just 4,000 generations.
This simple account invites closer consideration. Neither Darwin nor Wallace
understood how adaptive traits are transmitted from one generation to the next. It
was Gregor Mendel, a scientist and Augustinian friar, who provided the ﬁrst account of
genetic transmission. According to what then became the classical version of the theory
of evolution, the unit of selection is the individual creature, not the group or the
species, and the mechanism of inheritance is solely genetic. More accurately, the
creature’s genes might be identiﬁed as the items on which natural selection operates.
But genes come packaged in individuals and, in sexual species, are propagated via the
matings of those individuals.
These tenets of the classical theory have been queried. Multilevel selection theory
suggests that, under certain conditions, natural selection can operate on groups, not
just on individuals. In other words, differences in the comparative ﬁtness of groups can
be a factor in determining which groups survive. Developmental systems theory identiﬁes
the unit of selection as the life cycle and argues that what matters is that the necessary
developmental resources are available to each generation, not that those resources are
passed down biologically. For instance, as was mentioned in Chapter 2, songbirds
inherit the outline of their song but the song reaches its species-typical form only
through exposure to other singing birds. Developmental systems theory rejects any
sharp distinction between what is genetically inherited and what is supplied by the
environment. Rather, these two unite to form the systems under which individuals
develop as members of their species.

In addition to these new theories, the explanatory model central to the theory of
evolution has been applied more broadly to explain change through competition in
other spheres. For instance, it has been argued that cultural ideas and inventions, or
“memes” as they are called in this context, survive or not according to evolutionary
principles of selection. And just as branching trees of descent are used to map the
evolutionary relationships between species, similar trees are used to chart relations
between languages.
Among the humanists who argue that art is an evolutionary adaptation, it is not
popular to adopt meme theory, which draws an (arguably very strained) analogy
between cultural and biological processes of transmission, rather than connecting art
to biology. Nor do they acknowledge developmental systems theory. These humanists
are keen to inherit the respectability and persuasiveness of classical Darwinian theory
when seeking a scientiﬁc basis for the importance of the arts. As we will see, it is
common, however, for them to argue that art is adaptive in virtue of the beneﬁts it
bestows on groups, not solely on individuals. I suspect this is because it is easier to
support a connection between our penchant for art and our evolved human nature by
this route. For instance, whereas adaptationist hypotheses about individuals should
consider the genetic heritability of the characteristic in question, this need is less
obvious where the group occupies the explanatory spotlight because groups persist
and ﬂourish as the result of social rather than biological transmission.
Unless indicated otherwise, I will assume as the default position the classical theory
of evolution via natural selection, but there is a modern reﬁnement to that theory
which I should make explicit. Along with many present-day evolutionary theorists,
I assume the truth of gene-culture coevolution (aka dual inheritance theory). In other words,
I reject what has been called the “avocado” model, according to which biology
provides the individual with a primitive core of one kind and culture surrounds this
substrate while being of a very different kind. The theory of gene-culture coevolution
emphasizes that humans are a joint product of biology and culture and that culture
modiﬁes biology just as biology affects culture. Here are some examples of culture
affecting biology: humans’ dentition, jaw size, and gut have reduced in response to our
comparatively recent diet of soft foods; the peoples who domesticated cattle became
more lactose tolerant; and increased resistance to malaria followed the move to
agriculture.
I also would question the common assumption that, after a glacially slow process,
evolution completed its work millennia ago and everything that distinguishes modern
people from the earliest humans is a product solely of culture. For one, our immune
systems are pitted in a constant race against pathogens and we are immune to viruses
and illnesses that would have killed the earliest modern humans. And there is evidence
of changes in brain size over the past 5,400 years. The reality of gene-culture evolution
makes clear that human evolution is ongoing and potentially rapid, especially under
conditions of environmental instability.
36
KEY CONCEPTS

Sexual selection
In The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex (ﬁrst published in 1871), Darwin
introduced a second evolutionary process, that of sexual selection. Just as humans can
selectively breed plants and animals to accentuate features they desire, so preferences
within a species for mates with certain characteristics convey those favored features to
the resulting offspring. More speciﬁcally, because of their higher investment in the egg
and its development (and in subsequent offspring care, if this occurs), it is the females
who are choosy about the males with whom they will breed. And because males
beneﬁt more than females from multiple matings, it is the males who compete for
females. The peacock’s tail is the most often cited example of the outcome of this
process. Peahens choose to mate with the male with the highest number of tail “eyes.”
Whether they know it or not, they select for good genes because that tail is a reliable
signal that its possessor can obtain the food needed to grow and maintain it and that he
is able to ﬂourish despite the handicap the tail imposes on his capacities for ﬂight and
predator avoidance.
Sexual selection is not always driven by female choice. Instead of competing for the
attention of females, males in some species simply ﬁght, or threaten to ﬁght, with
control of breeding females going to the winner. Deer and elephant seals are examples.
This strategy also leads to sexual dimorphism—marked physical differences between
males and females—by favoring increased male bulk or larger weaponry. But
I concentrate on sexual selection via female (and male) choice because, if human
evolution depends on sexual selection, that is the form it takes.
There are several respects in which sexual selection is unlike natural selection as it
was characterized earlier. Whereas natural selection operates on random mutations,
sexual selection is powered by the choices of members of the affected species. One
consequence of this is that it can produce rapid change, as in the case of what is known
as runaway selection. Suppose the females of a bird species prefer males with bigger head
plumes, then the size of males’ head plumes will keep increasing under the pressure of
the females’ choices until some limit is reached. The process might continue, for
example, to the point where the cost of producing a larger head plume is unsustainable.
Meanwhile, the preference for bigger head plumes will spread through the female
population.
In addition, sexual selection and natural selection seem to invoke different notions of
ﬁtness. Fitness under natural selection involves the match between an individual and its
environment, whereas under sexual selection it is a matter of the individual’s attrac-
tiveness to a mate, which often means the capacity to sustain heavy costs that make
their bearer otherwise less well suited to his environment. As already noted, the
peacock’s tail is costly and makes its owner more vulnerable to predation.
Despite these differences, theorists now tend to depart from Darwin’s view of the
separateness of these processes and subsume sexual selection under the broader remit of
natural selection. Doing so involves two steps: a new account of ﬁtness in terms of
THE THEORY OF EVOLUTION
37

potential reproductive success and the assumption that the process of sexual selection
tracks this kind of ﬁtness. On this view, we might measure ﬁtness in terms of the
number of a person’s genes that will survive into the future; and ﬁtness is inclusive if
we include in the count genes which the person shares with his relatives and which are
passed on by them. The peacock’s tail exhibits this ﬁtness—that is, his reproductive
quality—though the tail is costly and potentially dangerous, and in these ways does not
ideally match him to his environment. If we also assume that females choose mates for
features that display or correlate with the quality of their genes, sexual and natural
selection come into line. As the paleontologist George Simpson observed:
By this broader but not anti-Darwinian deﬁnition [of ﬁtness], sexual selection, to the extent that
it does occur, is not an alternative to natural selection but a special case of it.
Darwin’s account of sexual selection made a direct connection with aesthetics. He
thought the mate choices made by females were aesthetically motivated. The idea here
is that the peahen chooses her peacock not because she makes a calculation of his
comparative ﬁtness and not because she consciously tallies the number of “eyes” in his
tail but because he strikes her, or his tail does, as beautiful. If Darwin is right about this
(which I queried in Chapter 1) and if sexual selection has played a signiﬁcant role in the
evolution of Homo sapiens as well as of peafowl, then interdependence between two of
our topics—aesthetics and evolution—is already secured. Men and women select their
mates at least in part for their beauty.
But the theory of sexual selection was challenged from the outset and neglected until
well into the twentieth century. This was in part because of skepticism about Darwin’s
claim that the mate choices made by female animals, birds, and insects are aesthetically
motivated. That aspect of the theory implies that humans’ aesthetic sensibilities do not
separate us from lower animals, and many people found this implication unpalatable.
Exaggerated male signaling to females is common in many crustaceans and insects that
we don’t think of as possessors of aesthetic taste.
Though the theory of sexual selection is now rehabilitated, its contemporary ver-
sions tend not to give it the aesthetic slant that Darwin favored. On the modern
account, it is maintained that, while females are instinctively drawn to what serves their
biological interests in producing healthy offspring, this need not involve deliberation,
whether aesthetic or not. And even where there might be something like decision-
making in the selections of high-order nonhuman creatures, we can allow that they
pick what they like or what seems right to them without holding that choice to be
aesthetic in character. In general, the favored view now is that male adornments attract
females not because they are experienced as beautiful but because they signal health
and fertility. Such signals are honest because they are too costly to be forged by
comparatively unhealthy, infertile males. The use of expensive markers of ﬁtness is
known as the “handicap principle” or costly signaling theory.
There were other reasons why Darwin’s account of sexual selection did not appeal
to biologists of the time. For one thing, it made the nature of maleness hostage to the
38
KEY CONCEPTS

capricious whims of females. Wallace preferred to explain the gaudy colors of male
birds and the horns and ornaments of masculinity as a by-product of the energy that
males possess in more abundance than females. In favoring these features, females
choose not for beauty but directly for quality, he held. Another view is that these
markings serve primarily in species recognition. In some cases, extreme male traits can
develop simply as a consequence of females’ need to recognize their own species, not
to discriminate among its males. In addition, sexual selection was initially regarded as
suspect because it did not bear out the early assumption—an assumption that is now
rejected—that evolution works for the good of the species.
A further problem was that it was not clear how aesthetic preferences, if they did not
track good genes, could predict evolutionary success. This issue was addressed by
R. A. Fisher, a population geneticist, who explained how the female beneﬁted
evolutionarily by selecting for beauty, even where it does not signal ﬁtness. By
producing sons who are attractive to females, a mother improves her chances of having
grandchildren. Female preference for a certain male feature results in reproductive
success, provided more females share that preference than any alternative. Males whose
beauty caters to the dominant female preference are more reproductively successful as a
result. In other words, rather than tracking ﬁtness, beauty can create it. Fisher vindicated
Darwin’s view that sexual selection may be distinct from natural selection because it
need not be about the detection of good genes.
It certainly is true that females do not always prefer markers of good genes. One case
is too charming not to mention. When colored bands were assigned to wild zebra
ﬁnches (for the purpose of identifying individuals), it turned out that the females
preferred males with green or red rather than orange bands and males preferred females
with black rather than blue or orange bands. Plainly the band’s color did not improve
its wearer’s genes, so the choice did not track ﬁtness. Was the choice aesthetic, then?
More likely it is the result of biases built into the birds’ perceptual systems. Such a
choice might lower reproductive success or leave it unaffected. In this case, however,
the most attractive (black-ringed) females bred more successfully. It is not easy to
explain why. Perhaps birds that gained mates that were attractive to them put more
effort into raising offspring.
Whatever applies to other creatures, for humans (and perhaps also our Hominin
predecessors) mate selection often involves an aesthetic component. As I will explain
further in Chapter 7, evolutionary psychologists attempt to show that what we ﬁnd
beautiful correlates with health and fecundity. Human beauty then is a reliable signal of
ﬁtness provided that it is sufﬁciently demanding to produce and cannot be faked.
There are further respects in which mate choice, and thereby sexual selection, does
not apply to humans as it does to other animals. For example, in our species males and
females are fairly similar in form and size; competition between women for male
partners is as active as it is among men for female partners; and heterosexuals of both
sexes are involved in signaling their potential ﬁtness as partners. But these facts can be
explained by reference to the mating strategy that in humans optimizes the chances of
THE THEORY OF EVOLUTION
39

reproductive success. Children are most effectively raised in long-term partnerships in
which the male invests considerable effort and receives in return a fairly reliable
guarantee that the offspring of the partnership are his own. By contrast, in those species
where sexual selection produces gaudy males and striking sexual dimorphism, it is
commonly the case that only one or a few males are chosen by all the available females
for mating and the males contribute only their sperm to the next generation. Further,
when humans come to selecting a breeding partner, both sexes aim for the highest
quality spouse they can attract (aka assortative mating) and both place a high value on
ﬁdelity (as I will discuss and document in Chapter 7). It follows that all members of
both sexes are in competition for mates—that is, for long-term partners—and all are
keen to signal their quality as potential breeders and parents. In other words, sexual
selection is bound to operate much more even-handedly among humans than among
many other species.
We will return to the place of sexual selection in Chapter 8. The theory provides
one plausible way of tying art to evolution. If artists are displaying skills and talents that
indirectly but honestly indicate that they have better genes, then art might stand to
human reproduction as the peacock’s tail stands to peafowl reproduction. Their art
would signal their health and fertility and make them attractive to potential mates.
Tales of the amorous successes of chart-topping pop musicians, famous artists, success-
ful ﬁlm stars, and sports heroes are sufﬁciently common and reliable to make this
hypothesis initially credible. In this vein, Geoffrey Miller, an evolutionary psychologist,
regards our minds as overpowered multi-channel entertainment devices with which
we attempt to interest and attract each other. The arts are among the most highly
functional elements within these amusement systems, he holds.
Evolutionary psychology
With the dominance of behaviorism for much of the twentieth century, psychology
forgot about the mind. So when attention was focused on human evolution, it was
from the direction of human behavioral ecology. The result, sociobiology, was subject
to withering criticism for its gene-centrism and the social conservatism of some views it
presented. In the 1980s, Evolutionary Psychology emerged as a new approach to
human evolution that shifted attention from behavior to the mind. In particular, it
argued that many cognitive mechanisms operate as automated programs, each directed
to solving speciﬁc problems faced by our distant ancestors. (This is sometimes referred
to as the thesis that our minds are massively modularized.) These problems concerned,
for example, facial recognition, emotion detection, acquisition of knowledge of natural
science, mate selection, cheater detection, ﬁdelity monitoring, and the facilitation of
cooperation under the threat of defecting free riders. It is held that these former
adaptations leave their mark on present-day human psychology, and that by matching
them to the past circumstances to which they were successful responses we can
understand the origins and direction of humans’ evolved psychology.
40
KEY CONCEPTS

Anatomically modern humans (Homo sapiens) emerged by 160 ka or earlier. Those
people may have been psychologically “modern” also. They had the same neural
systems for perception, emotion, motor action, and thought as we have. This is
doubted, however, by those who date the emergence of the modern mind to the
later European “cultural explosion” of about 45–35 ka, when, among other things, the
ﬁrst European cave art was created. But it is now widely accepted that the cultural
innovations and advances documented for Europe were widely anticipated in Africa
and the Middle East by many thousands of years.
Whatever date we settle on for the appearance of psychologically modern humans, it
is posited by evolutionary psychologists that many of our emotions and ways of
thinking, imagining, and reasoning are likely to have been evolutionary adaptations
geared to deal with the challenges our distant forebears faced as group foragers on the
savannas of the Pleistocene—that is, in the period 2.5 ma to 12 ka—which is some-
times referred to as the environment of evolutionary adaptedness. The new sub-
discipline of Evolutionary Psychology set itself to infer what those challenges were
and how they shaped our minds. Among the most famous practitioners of Evolution-
ary Psychology are David Buss, Leda Cosmides, Stephen Pinker, Donald Symons, and
John Tooby.
Central assumptions and doctrines of Evolutionary Psychology have been criticized.
Among them is the idea that human evolution ceased 20 ka and that the mind is like a
Swiss army knife in being comprised mainly of specialized routines (aka modules) many
of which operate unconsciously. Also in doubt is the supposition that many human
behaviors are developmentally ﬁxed, inﬂexible, and highly structured responses
to ﬁxed conditions and environments. Similarly, the suggestion that human sexual
behaviors and preferences are also highly stereotyped can be questioned. By contrast
with these views, contemporary evolutionary psychologists are now more likely to
stress humans’ neural and behavioral plasticity in response to contingency, variety, and
change. They emphasize how highly developed we are socially and culturally. They
stress our cognitive differences as well as commonalities. And they are more liable to
hold that evolution works in tandem with culture rather than in opposition to it.
The methods of Evolutionary Psychology have also been challenged. Central
among these methods is “reverse engineering,” that is, reasoning backward from our
current behaviors and ways of thinking to work out how those were adaptations to
conditions of our ancestral past. It has been suggested that this approach results in
imaginative ﬁctions that cannot be tested or substantiated. These are said to have no
more credibility than Rudyard Kipling’s “Just So” fables in which, for example, the
leopard was given its spots by an Ethiopian who transferred black from his skin on the
tips of his ﬁngers to the spotless leopard, and the elephant gained its trunk when a
crocodile grabbed the elephant child’s short nose and pulled.
Undoubtedly, evolutionary psychologists sometimes make unwarranted inferences
about how our ancestors were and how they came to be as they were. And it is
unsettling to come across half a dozen or more different, apparently unrelated accounts
THE THEORY OF EVOLUTION
41

of how some bit of behavior was supposedly adaptive for our predecessors. There is also
the difﬁculty that the “problems” to which adaptive behaviors were the solution often
were moving targets, involving ongoing inter- or intra-species adjustments and com-
plex feedback loops. For instance, changes in a prey species’ defenses could provoke
responses in its predators that affected the environment of our ancestors, and so on.
Allowing this, it can be difﬁcult (or impossible), starting from the present, to track the
layers of change. Another issue is that, for humans, the social environment more than
the physical one is crucial to our behavior. Whereas we can know about the physical
environments our ancestors lived in, we must speculate about such matters as their
group size, birth spacing, dominance hierarchies, breeding relationships, and the like.
Yet, as a method, reverse engineering is in principle no more unreliable than other
forms of abductive reasoning—that is, reasoning from some state of affairs to the best
explanation of how it came about—which is regarded as an acceptable scientiﬁc
method within the philosophy of science. And even if we should be cautious in
applying reverse engineering, we should be equally wary of assuming that most of
the things we see in nature are non-adaptive by-products of now untraceable adapta-
tions. There are as likely to be as many by-product Just So stories as there are
adaptationist ones.
The hopeful, positive outlook maintains that the more we learn about the history of
our species, other Hominins, and the environments in which they survived, the more
scope there may be for reﬁning the explanatory hypotheses generated via reverse
engineering. The skeptical and pessimistic alternative holds that, if those environments
were sufﬁciently diverse and complex, it might be difﬁcult to establish any hypotheses
as credible, especially if there is doubt about when or where the behaviors in question
originated.
In addition to reverse engineering, Evolutionary Psychology can and sometimes
does support its conclusions with other methods, such as study of nonhuman primates,
of present-day hunter-gatherers, of child development, of how the brain works, and of
how brain deﬁcits and damage affect those who have them. In addition, sometimes
evolutionary psychologists have predicted unexpected but conﬁrmable results about
aspects of contemporary behavior. For example, Cosmides and Tooby showed that
people perform better on a standard test of conditional reasoning when the topics are
about human interactions. Though the form of the arguments are the same, people
follow them better when they are about social relationships and norms than when they
are about descriptive or causal rules. This result supports the idea that there is a domain-
speciﬁc module that deals with social relations.
The central premise of Evolutionary Psychology—that we have inherited (some)
ways of thinking and perceiving, emotions, personalities, and values because those
behaviors and attributes promoted the survival and reproduction of our distant fore-
bears—can hardly be denied. And Evolutionary Psychology is bound to play an
important role in understanding our minds and what makes us distinctively human.
But evolutionary psychologists now are inclined to drop the capital “E” and “P.” In
42
KEY CONCEPTS

other words, they reject many of the assumptions and models on which earlier versions
of Evolutionary Psychology were based, such as the idea that our minds mainly operate
in an automatic, modularized fashion. New style evolutionary psychology accepts that
our psychology to some extent reﬂects the minds of our human predecessors and draws
on previous research, but is more open to the variety of ways and the ﬂexibility with
which our minds work.
In any case, given the subject of this book it is inevitable that we must explore and
assess ideas propounded within evolutionary psychology of both the early (capitalized)
and later (lower-case) forms.
The standard of proof
We are now in a position to be clear about what is to be expected from a successful
theory tying evolution to aesthetics or art and the standard of proof to which it can
reasonably be held.
Many of the theories connecting aesthetic or artistic practices to evolution take this
form: they claim that we are heirs to the relevant universal traits or behaviors because
they were adaptive for our prehistoric predecessors under their conditions for exis-
tence. If it stopped here the theory would be weak in two ways. It does not explain
how the behaviors were adaptive or what they were adaptations for. Nor does it tell us
anything about the current state of the relevant practices. It does not explain their
ongoing importance for modern humans. Not surprisingly then, most theorists attempt
to say how the behavior improved the evolutionary success of our ancestors and why,
or why not, we are also affected. Almost inevitably, this extension of the theory
involves conjecture. We are too ignorant about the lives of our forebears to avoid
this. Of course we should avail ourselves of the latest scientiﬁc information on the
matter, but this generally leaves answers to crucial questions under-determined.
I am sympathetic to this difﬁculty. I don’t mean to fault theories for being specula-
tive in part, especially if they acknowledge the extent to which they go beyond the
evidence. But where a range of very different proposals about the evolutionary
signiﬁcance of some behavior are in competition, with none clearly established as
superior to all others, which is often the case where aesthetics and art are the topic, it
will be more appropriate to reserve judgment than to opt for what we might like to be
true.
Another common feature of the theories we will encounter deserves to be noted.
Many claim that aesthetic or art practices are evolutionarily adaptive beyond the ways they
affect its members. That is, these theories adopt a commitment to multilevel selection
theory and depart from the classical Darwinian model of evolutionary explanation that
focuses on individuals or their genes. This has two consequences. First, the account is
thereby weakened in explanatory power. This is because genetic inheritance provides a
strong explanation of the faithful replication of beneﬁcial traits over the long term,
assuming the environment is stable; whereas the preservation of group beneﬁts relies on
THE THEORY OF EVOLUTION
43

cultural transmission, which is less accurate and reliable. Second, there is a change in what
counts as relevant evidence. The spotlight falls on competition between groups rather
than between individuals. And it is necessary to show in addition that the force of this
competition is more signiﬁcant for group survival and success than the effects of competi-
tion within the groups between their members.
I have no objection to theories that appeal to multilevel selection theory as against
classical Darwinian models. But I am suspicious when this occurs without acknowl-
edgment, without apparent awareness of the weakening of explanatory power, and
with no attempt to consider the change in what evidence is relevant.
44
KEY CONCEPTS

4
How Might the Aesthetic, Art,
and Evolution be Related?
If there are connections between aesthetics and evolution and between art and
evolution, what evolutionary roles could aesthetics or art play? There are three
candidates. First, they might be adaptations, that is, transmissible capacities that
increased the ﬁtness of those who displayed them so that their possessors parented
more extensive and far-reaching lineages. Examples of adaptations are the oxygen-
ﬁxing qualities of blood and development of feathers in birds. Second, they might
be by-products or spandrels, that is, adventitious side-effects of adaptations without
adaptive signiﬁcance in themselves. Examples of spandrels are the navel and the redness
of blood. Or third, they might be vestiges, that is, currently non-functional features
that were functional either in the species’ earlier development or for a precursor
species from whom they were inherited. Examples of vestiges in humans are the
appendix, which played a role in digestion for a distant herbivore ancestor, and the
coccyx, which is the remnant of a tail.
A fourth possibility is provided by the negative hypothesis—that there is no signiﬁ-
cant connection between art and evolution. The relation between evolved adaptations
and art behaviors might be so distant and thin that it would be misleading to claim an
interesting or explanatorily fruitful link between them. On this view, such behaviors
are facilitated by and presuppose our biological nature, certainly, but they are not
thereby either adaptations or spandrels. Rather, they express the aspects of our nature
that lead us to be inventors and users of technology and to be appreciators both of
what technology does for us and of the achievement that goes into its creation. Many
behaviors—the making of ﬁre and the wearing of clothing, for example—are wide-
spread because they are culturally passed down for their usefulness, not because we are
genetically programmed to express them.
At this stage, I wish to put the third possibility—that art and the aesthetic are
vestiges—to one side. We are not indifferent to beauty and other aesthetic properties,
and the experience of these properties can be deeply moving and emotionally arousing.
The beautiful and wondrous light up our lives. Meanwhile, provided we take the
broad view of art that I recommended earlier, one including domestic, decorative, folk,
mass, and popular art, it is apparent that art is created, valued, and enjoyed with a vigor

that suggests it has not lost its human signiﬁcance. These observations strongly suggest
that our aesthetic sense and our propensity to make and appreciate art are not vestiges.
For different reasons I also intend here to discount the negative fourth option—that
there is no explanatory relation between art, the aesthetic, and evolution. As I indicated
in Chapter 3, I am reluctant to endorse views that treat biology and culture as separate
domains with very little causal interaction between them, and some such separation is
presumed in this view. Besides, it is the possibility that aesthetic and art behaviors are
evolutionary adaptations or by-products that is most relevant to our project, so we will
want to explore them in depth before considering the negative alternative. Neverthe-
less, this possibility deserves consideration and will receive this in Chapter 10.
In Part II, I will argue that there is a strong case for the claim that the aesthetic sense
has a biological origin. That sense leads us variously to judge things to be beautiful or
sublime (or their opposites), to make things or seek out things that have these qualities,
and to value and take pleasure in them. In some cases our aesthetic sense may be
adaptive, though in others it plainly is not. In other words, sometimes the exercise of
our aesthetic sense apparently serves our biological agenda by drawing us to more
successful, fertile lifestyles, yet at other times we indulge our tastes to no obvious effect.
The attempt to connect art to evolution is more difﬁcult and complex, as I will
outline in Part III. Though art behaviors are rewarding in many ways, it is far from easy
to show that they were selected for the sake of the advantages they confer. However,
there are reasons that will be explored in Chapter 9 to think that art could not persist as
a biologically meaningless spandrel, even if it ﬁrst arose in that fashion.
What counts as evidence for the connection?
If aesthetics and art behaviors are aspects of our evolved human nature, what evidence
would we expect to ﬁnd of this? For one, we would anticipate that the relevant
interests, behaviors, emotions, and values would be present in the lives of at least some
of our early modern human ancestors, that is, from perhaps 40 ka or even earlier.
Already in the Introduction to Part I, I drew attention to artifacts, such as hand axes,
that are much older than this and that are suggestive of aesthetic sensibilities in their
humanoid makers. Also, many of these artifacts, such as a signiﬁcant number of the cave
paintings of 35–15 ka, are almost unanimously classed as works of art. So astonishingly
sophisticated, skillful, and stylish are they that they stand direct comparison to what we
unequivocally count as art now. It is not as if they are merely rudimentary approxima-
tions of what we think of as art.
Another indication that aesthetic sentiments and art behaviors are intimately
connected to our evolved human natures would be that they emerge as spontaneously
in the development of each individual as does language acquisition and use. Innate
propensities with this feature are often adaptations. Yet stronger evidence again
would be that what emerges is much the same from time to time and place to place
and thereby is mutually intelligible across historical and cultural boundaries. These
46
KEY CONCEPTS

possibilities are important, so I explore them in some detail. For both aesthetics and art,
I think it is possible to make a plausible positive case for their connections with our
evolved nature, though qualiﬁcations and caveats are inevitable.
Is the aesthetic universal and is there universal
agreement on what it is?
It will be more plausible to posit a connection between aesthetic experience and
evolution if everyone has aesthetic responses. And who could doubt that they do?
Who among us has never taken aesthetic delight, given how I characterized that in
Chapter 1, in a sunset, a rainbow, a kitten’s playfulness, a story, a song? And this kind of
pleasurable response seems to be characteristic of humans generally across historical
periods and cultures.
Nevertheless, the claim has been challenged. A common debating strategy here is to
focus on the concept rather than the experience and to suggest that the discourse
expressing this concept is peculiarly Western in provenance and is shaped by exclu-
sively cultural factors. We encountered similar views about the nature of art in
Chapter 2. I will not revisit the responses I mentioned there, nor will I review argu-
ments rejecting the notion that the aesthetic is a modernist Western category. Nor,
indeed, will I discuss empirical studies revealing underlying cross-cultural commonal-
ities of aesthetic judgment. I think I can undermine skepticism about the universality of
aesthetic responses without needing to consider these further options.
What does the claim that our discourse about the aesthetic is culturally shaped come
to? The suggestion might be that aesthetic discourse—how we talk and reason about
the aesthetic—is conditioned by aesthetic theories that are distinctive to our culture.
But this seems unlikely. We have seen that theorists in Western culture disagree about
the nature of the aesthetic and have always done so. In addition, I have suggested that
leading models of the aesthetic, such as the Kantian one, can misrepresent our aesthetic
practices and experiences. Those practices and experiences are not subservient to
theory. Comparatively few people are exposed to the views of Kant or other eigh-
teenth-century philosophers, but everyone has robust opinions about what is beautiful
or awesome. Recall also that the aesthetic is not reserved to a small class of non-
functional items accessed and appreciated by only an elite few. Rather, it is part of
everyday experience and is available to all. Given this, the suggestion that the discourse
controls the experience in ways that make it arbitrarily cultural should seem uncon-
vincing. In fact, the aesthetic is a stance that humans take to the world at large, so the
making of aesthetic judgments is part of our ordinary discourse rather than some highly
technical language.
At this point the argument might shift ground. Even if the peoples of all cultures
seem to have aesthetic experiences, it may be that there are no cross-cultural standards
by reference to which we could establish the permanence and objectivity of aesthetic
HOW MIGHT THE AESTHETIC, ART, AND EVOLUTION BE RELATED?
47

valuations. For that matter, within any given culture there might be no basis for
agreement about aesthetic standards. We say “beauty is in the eye of the beholder”
and “there is no disputing matters of taste.” Undeniably there is variation at both the
individual and cultural levels about what counts as aesthetically interesting or valuable.
A ﬁrst response might take this form: our capacity to learn and speak a language is
surely an adaptation, but that does not mean that we all speak a single language or that
different languages are cross-culturally comprehensible. Among other things, however,
it does mean that there is sufﬁcient public agreement about the meanings of words to
establish a language in the ﬁrst place, and that it is possible to learn foreign languages
through appropriate training and immersion. Perhaps it is conditions like these, rather
than universal agreement and transparency, that we should expect to ﬁnd in aesthetics.
That is, perhaps we should be looking for widespread consensus over at least some
aesthetic assessments within a culture and the possibility of coming to understand the
different aesthetic preferences of other groups.
I do not mean to downplay or ignore the differences in aesthetic sensibilities
between individuals and from culture to culture, but in fact we can do much better
than the replies so far offered in establishing the universal character of at least some
aesthetic experiences and judgments.
One frequently discussed case is that of the surveys commissioned by the Russian
e´migre´ artists Vitaly Komar and Alexander Melamid. They asked people in many
countries what they wanted to see and did not want to see in a painting, and the results
were very similar between countries. People did not like hard-edged abstract paintings
in the modernist style. Instead, they wanted paintings of natural settings including
vegetation, blue sky and water, animals, healthy people, and nationally famous people.
So consistent were the results, it seems reasonable to conclude that the questionnaires
were exposing landscape preferences deeply rooted in our shared ancestral past.
The philosopher Arthur C. Danto resists this conclusion. He suggests that the results
are explained by the wide distribution of Western landscape calendars. Denis Dutton
responds that, even if this unlikely account were correct, it would remain necessary to
explain the universal popularity of such calendars, which would lead us back to its
primeval basis.
Meanwhile, Ellen Dissanayake, an ethologist, disputes the idea that what was
exposed was Pleistocene aesthetic taste, on the grounds that nothing in the responses
would allow one to discriminate between a great landscape painting and a poor one.
She surely is correct that the surveys explain next to nothing about the appeal of art,
and this is borne out in the humorous caricatures created by Komar and Melamid as
illustrating the surveys’ results. The aesthetic interest of art typically depends more on
the treatment of the subject in the given medium and tradition than on the aesthetic
qualities of the subject itself. But Dissanayake’s reaction misses what is at issue here: that
what were revealed are shared preferences not peculiarly for art but rather for habitats
with certain qualities, and that the aesthetic appeal of these environments connects to
48
KEY CONCEPTS

features that would have made them survivable by, and thereby supportive of, our
foraging ancestors in the late Pleistocene.
The topic of humans’ landscape aesthetic preferences will be considered further in
Part II, which also includes discussion of human beauty and humans’ aesthetic reactions
to nonhuman animals. As regards these further topics, here it is sufﬁcient to note that
studies of facial attractiveness show that cross-cultural agreement on the criteria
for female facial beauty is the norm, as is a male preference for a waist-to-hip ratio of
0.7 in females. Meanwhile, humans made pets of birds, monkeys, cats, dogs, and other
creatures thousands of years ago, and pets are found in all cultures. Animals are also
perennially fascinating to all children. So in these areas as well as in landscape prefer-
ences, some aesthetic fundamentals cross the boundaries of cultures.
Another consideration is this: neuroscientists identify perceptual processes and biases
in perception that can be exploited by artists to attract interest to their work and to
heighten the impact of its features. Because these processes and biases belong to our
evolved perceptual systems, their inﬂuence on our responses is cross-cultural. I will
mention these views as they pertain to art later, but the relevant point here is that,
either intentionally or accidentally, human makers of non-art items might produce
stimuli triggering the same responses. And of course nature can do the same. After all,
our perceptual systems evolved in response to our needs with respect to the natural
world, which is to say that they are as they are because they allow us to detect and
attend to what is relevant to our survival. Nature, with all its variety and complexity, is
bound to present stimuli that can affect us via the previously mentioned neural
processes to the same effect of stimulation and heightened awareness that is identiﬁed
by these neuroscientists as the root of the aesthetic response to art.
Is art universal?
We can ask of art what we just asked of the aesthetic: is it universal in occurrence? In
addressing this question we need to focus on the relevant behaviors rather than the
artifacts they generate, on art-creative and art-appreciative acts, not on paintings,
novels, symphonies, and statues. Before I get to the issue of universality, however,
I will ﬁrst consider the possibility that art behaviors might be adaptive without
becoming universal.
In Chapter 3, I observed that a tiny, heritable advantage would spread to 99 percent
of the population over 4,000 generations; but I added the qualiﬁcation “other things
being equal,” which they often are not. The success of the advantageous feature could
be swamped by genetic drift, that is, by ﬂuctuations in the distribution of genes in the
population caused not by selection but by random combinatorial factors. Or it could be
wiped out by changes in the environment. Despite their long-term prior adaptive
success, the dinosaurs were extinguished by climatic and other changes consequent on
increased volcanic activity and a major meteor strike. Or the basis of the trait might be
so genetically complex that it is only weakly heritable. It might involve so many genes
HOW MIGHT THE AESTHETIC, ART, AND EVOLUTION BE RELATED?
49

that, in the combination within the child of the parents’ genetic matter, all the relevant
ones do not often get passed on. Or it could be out-competed, so to speak, by some
change in another species or in other members of the home species, to the point where
it becomes a liability. Or the feature might remain advantageous only on condition that
it does not spread through the population, so that it stays in balance with some other
trait that others possess. Perhaps having a hawkish personality is ﬁtness-enhancing only
if most people have dovish temperaments, for example.
With these qualiﬁcations in mind, it could be that art behaviors are adaptive but only
for a minority of virtuosos. It would be necessary to argue that artistic talents are
heritable—otherwise they would not be transmissible; but that they are only weakly
heritable—otherwise they would have become universal. This would be consistent
with what is known of the family lineages parented by acknowledged artistic geniuses:
heritability of creativity is modest and lower than that for general intelligence.
How could high-level art behaviors result in improving the ﬁtness of those who
have them? Sexual selection provides one possibility. Expertise as an artist or performer
typically depends on long training, relentless practice, skill, creativity, imagination, and
single-minded dedication. In other words, art-creative behaviors are costly and those
who perfect them forego many opportunities for an easier life. If artists ﬂourish despite
their self-imposed handicap, they thereby display their biological ﬁtness; and this
display must be an honest one because it cannot easily be forged. As a result, they are
more attractive to potential mates than are less well-equipped competitors.
This possibility—that art behaviors could be evolutionarily adaptive but only for a
minority—is rarely considered by those who argue that art is a product of evolution.
Most adaptationists regarding art prefer the view that art is now universal because those
who displayed the appropriate behaviors in the past were thereby able to out-parent
their lackluster competitors. Art behaviors became universal because of the compara-
tive advantages they conferred. Because these are the dominant theories, I will focus on
the claim about universality.
Does every person engage in art behaviors?
In Chapter 2, I suggested that art is pan-cultural and historically ancient. We know of
no people who are without dancing, drawing, storytelling, acting, or music, for
example, and these are all practiced at a skillful and sophisticated level by at least
some people in every culture. Is art also universal in the sense of being something that
every individual participates in?
How we answer depends crucially on two things: how high we set the bar for
something qualifying as art; and whether we count art’s appreciators or only its makers
in the story. If we were to assume as art only the sophisticated high art of Western
societies (perhaps also including the court and religious art of India, China, Japan,
Southeast Asia, and the Middle East)—which is art made by a handful of artists and
appreciated by a comparatively small minority of the community’s members—art
plainly would not be universal. But I have already suggested that we should consider
50
KEY CONCEPTS

art in a broader perspective, just as we did with the aesthetic. Accordingly, I would see
this small “a” notion of art as encompassing domestic, folk, decorative, popular, and
mass art. It is such art that is likely to be historically oldest and that is engaged with most
widely. Small “a” art is rarely simple or crude, but it frequently has wide appeal and
easy accessibility. Of course, art often becomes arcane and specialized over time. Such
art targets an audience of cognoscenti who can appreciate its self-referential nature and
obscure allusions. But high art emerges from and builds on traditions of small “a” arts
and rarely replaces them. So it is appropriate here to privilege the modest, popular
forms of art over the more esoteric versions that led in the West to modernism and
postmodernism.
In this regard, consider the discussion of literature as adaptive. Those who apply
evolutionary psychology to the interpretation of literary works have often discussed
works now regarded as high art: The Iliad, The Odyssey, Shakespeare’s plays, the novels
of Leo Tolstoy, Jane Austen, Charles Dickens, and the like. They have been chided for
this. But most of these theorists are keenly aware of the need also to consider non-
Western literatures, prehistoric theater, folk tales, oral narratives, myths, epics, legends,
popular ﬁction, and children’s stories. Nonsense rhymes, popular song lyrics, TV
scripts, and comics all may provide material for analysis.
What does the claim that art behaviors are near-universal amount to? Must more or
less every individual be ﬂuent or at least minimally competent in all her culture’s art
forms? Or is it sufﬁcient that she have the required degree of competence in at least one
of her culture’s art forms? And are we considering abilities she actually has attained or
ones she merely has the potential to acquire?
Given how time-consuming and demanding in other ways engagement with art can
be, it seems reasonable to interpret the universality doctrine as satisﬁed if the person is
competent in at least one of her culture’s art forms, especially if we are talking about
attained rather than potential competence. And when it comes to art activities that
require extremely hard-won skills, such as carving marble, it might be reasonable to
focus on potential capacities rather than actual abilities. In fact, though, it is very
common for people to have a working competence with many of their culture’s art
forms, even where they have their particular favorites. Most literate people read the
occasional novel or poem, dancing is a common pastime, almost everyone enjoys some
kind of music, few people are indifferent to popular dramas, and the vast majority are
drawn to some pictorial or sculpted depictions.
It might be objected that most people are passive recipients of art, rather than
creators or performers, but this would not be fair. As members of the art audience
we are not passive. We are liable to sing or dance along with the music. We try to
puzzle out the mystery or solve the crime before the private eye does. We are caught
up in the love story and feel for the protagonists. We study how the painter has
captured the textures and lighting of the various materials and items shown in the still
life. In short, art calls for appreciation and this demands of the audience that it
comprehend what is going on in terms of the message, the medium, and how they
HOW MIGHT THE AESTHETIC, ART, AND EVOLUTION BE RELATED?
51

interact. When we see the production of art not as a self-focused act of creativity but as
a social transaction, the suggestion that everyone regularly engages in some art beha-
viors is credible.
Besides, if the level of art-creative competence is not set too high, many people will
be capable of realizing it, at least in one or another art form. The world is full of hobby
painters, whittlers and sewers, people who sing in the shower, dancers, and spinners of
stories. This invites the question: does everyone qualify as an artist? If they do then
clearly a strong version of the thesis concerning art’s universality would be established.
And again this leads us to consider what level of art-behavioral competence makes for
artistry. I do so by ﬁrst considering the case of music.
Art-behavioral competence
Music making comprises a range of different activities, such as composing, improvising,
or performing. Each of these might take a variety of forms. Performing, for example,
might take the form of instancing a composition, creating an improvisation, rehearsing,
musical doodling, singing along with someone else’s recording or performance. It
could involve such actions as whistling, humming, singing, slapping one’s body,
playing a musical instrument, or using some other item as if it were a musical
instrument. Music responding behaviors include acts of listening to music with under-
standing, pleasure, and appreciation. They also include dancing, moving to music,
coordinating to a beat (aka entrainment), and so on.
In evaluating possible connections between evolution and music behaviors, it is
necessary to consider issues of scope and of level. The question of scope asks how many
kinds of music behaviors individuals must be capable of engaging in if they are to count
as musically ﬂuent. In practice, it looks as if almost all adults (without hearing defects or
relevant neural deﬁcits) are music responders, whereas, at the other end of the
spectrum, composers make up a small minority. But there could be many explanations
for this and the issue probably should be about capacities rather than the frequency of
their actualization. We can reasonably expect that the kind of musical ﬂuency that
would connect music behaviors to evolution requires that many people can produce
novel musical ideas, not only understand them when they encounter them. And it is
probably true that they are capable of this, so long as we accept that the ideas in
question are, for example, structured rhythmic patterns or simple 4-measure melodies
without accompaniment.
With the suggestion that musically competent adults are likely to be capable of
composing at least simple melodies, we move to the question about the level at which
the relevant behaviors are exercised if the connection with evolution is to be minimally
plausible. There are many music behaviors and each of them could be practiced at
different levels, ranging from a stumbling, incomplete grasp of the relevant behavior
through full competence to virtuosic mastery. I take full competence in listening
behaviors to involve something like the following: the listener has appropriate ex-
pectations from moment to moment about what will come next in the music,
52
KEY CONCEPTS

recognizes most performers’ errors as such, and sometimes knows what would have
been correct instead. He also experiences the ﬂux of tension, release, and closure in the
music’s progress, so that he knows, for instance, if a piece was completed or, instead,
interrupted. He will be familiar with the appropriate genres and conventions—with
the stylistic and other differences that separate jazz from rock or rock from country and
western, for instance. He will also know relevant traditions of works. For instance, he
will know that Elvis Presley came before Dire Straits and he will have listened to many
of the recordings that took audiences from the one to the other and beyond. And he
will appreciate how the song that is his present focus draws on, refers to, or repudiates
these conventions and traditions.
Although I don’t specify them here, I assume it is also possible similarly to spell out
criteria for what counts as full competence in composition and performance.
Plainly an individual may engage at different levels in different music behaviors. She
is a good dancer and listener but a poor singer and composer. Other individuals will
display different ranges of competence in their various music behaviors. Nevertheless
and overall, it seems reasonable to regard music making as a universal behavior.
The ancient Greek Aristides Quintilianus wrote:
There is certainly no action among men that is carried out without music. Sacred hymns and
offerings are adorned with music, speciﬁc feats and the festal assemblies of cities exult in it, wars
and marches are both aroused and composed through music. It makes sailing and rowing and the
most difﬁcult of the handicrafts not burdensome by providing an encouragement for the work. It
has even been employed by some of the barbarians in their funeral rites to break off the extreme
of passion by means of melody.
And Darwin observed that the enjoyment of music and the capacity to produce music
“are present, though in a very rude condition,” in people of all races. Many authors
suggest that music is universal among adults. In addition, non-participatory, motionless
listening is surely a comparatively recent development in the human experience of
music.
We should be able to produce a similar inventory for the art behaviors appropriate to
competence in other art forms. In all cases, familiarity with genres, traditions, conven-
tions, and other works will be essential, but this knowledge usually is acquired via
exposure and osmosis, by a person’s immersion in her culture, and need not require
formal study.
The ﬂuent consumer of literature will be able both to read with a high level of
comprehension and to write. She will appreciate some of the techniques of the
storyteller’s craft and difﬁculties posed to the author by his materials. She will have
the imaginative skill to project into minds and worlds with which she is not familiar, to
ﬁll out implied details of those worlds that are not made explicit by the author, and to
engage intellectually and emotionally with the characters. She anticipates the story’s
trajectory and reevaluates this constantly as the tale unfolds.
HOW MIGHT THE AESTHETIC, ART, AND EVOLUTION BE RELATED?
53

Similarly, someone who regards a painting with understanding will be sensitive to
the treatment of composition, light, color, and perspective, to the way in which the
manner of representation projects a certain way of viewing or thinking about the
depicted subject, to the connection between how the surface is marked and what it
depicts, and so on.
The person who views dance is sensitive to the bodily control the dancers show, to
their subjection to gravity, and to the difﬁculty of achieving what comes across as
effortless. She notes the energy and dynamism or grace and ﬂuidity of the movement.
She follows the drama and emotion that is projected. She tracks form and arrangement.
If relevant, she looks for coordination and synchrony between the dancers and
between the dancers and the music.
Art’s universality
If the human interest in art is to count as universal, we might require only that
everyone attain competence in one of their culture’s art forms. The majority of people
go so far beyond this level, however, that we could easily make the standard more
demanding. Most people are expert in sub-forms of art—think how knowledgeable
many people are about movies or popular music—and most people plainly reach a
medium level of competence in many of their culture’s art forms. Moreover, so
extensive is the active participation of amateurs in art-creative behaviors that many
achieve executive low-level competence in their favored art form and can be counted
as artists to that extent. The claim that art behaviors are (virtually) universal is met,
I believe.
Is the content of art cross-culturally meaningful
and similar?
The second question asked of the aesthetic—is it cross-culturally comprehensible?—
also raises interesting issues when directed to art.
One reason to doubt that art can be understood and appreciated by someone who is
foreign to the culture in which it is created was given at the close of Chapter 1: the
fullest appreciation of an artwork includes consideration of its artistic properties, and
these are accessible only to someone who recognizes its style, the history of related
works, allusions, references, and symbols that it contains, and so on. Artworks take their
signiﬁcance from their location in art traditions. The larger part of art can be concerned
with complex symbolic and semantic content as well as riddled with cross-textual
allusions, references, and repudiations to which the cultural outsider is blind. For
instance, one work may contain elements satirizing another, or a third will presume
familiarity with the conventions of spy novels. Knowledge of such matters cannot be
read simply from the artwork’s outward appearance and will not be apparent to
someone situated outside the artwork’s home culture.
54
KEY CONCEPTS

Even so, partial forms of artistic understanding and appreciation are likely between
cultures. As humans, we share the same perceptual systems; and how the arts are created
and presented is at least in part a function of how those shared systems operate. This is
apparent in structural universals in music and the stimulation in the visual arts of
perceptual processes concerned with recognition, attention, ﬁeld organization, and
the like.
As humans we share much more than this, however. The lifeways of culturally
diverse peoples, along with the concerns and emotions to which these give rise, run on
parallel tracks. Inevitably, people from all cultures tend to be fascinated by depiction,
dramatization, or narration of archetypal themes: romance and sex, inter-generational
conﬂict, self-sacriﬁcing altruism, destructive ambition. They are also fascinated by
certain familiar dualities: birth–death, peace–war, love–lust, love–hate, love–jealousy,
health–illness,
selﬂessness–selﬁshness,
family–self,
individual–group,
crime–
punishment, health–disease. And there is even evidence that music’s emotional ex-
pressiveness sometimes remains recognizable to cultural outsiders.
Because the recalcitrant qualities of the physical media that artists use are apparent to
anyone, those foreign to a culture are often in a position to appreciate the virtuosic skill
in artworks from otherwise unfamiliar traditions. And much art involves the body as
among its media (as in drama, music, and dance) or depicts the body. Some art,
especially dance, features the body. Inevitably the beauty of the body and its operation
is cross-culturally available in the appreciation of such art, to the extent that human
physical beauty and the outward show of intelligence, emotion, and personality are the
same.
What all this suggests is that we are likely to have partial perceptual access to the
aesthetic qualities and some of the artistic properties of artworks in foreign cultures,
despite our ignorance of their artistic traditions, conventions, and practices. Indeed,
I have already proposed that we can identify prehistoric and tribal art as such by the
salience of the aesthetic properties they present to perception. It is to be expected that
cultures begin with art that is appealing in part because of its universally accessible
aesthetic features, even if symbolic and other more culturally encoded meanings are
also present at the outset and become dominant later.
Nevertheless, we should be mindful of the way in which the signiﬁcance of aesthetic
and artistic universals can be inﬂected by their cultural setting, so that their meaning can
no longer be read straightforwardly. According to the surveys of Komar and Melamid,
people universally favor green and blue among the colors. But think how colors can
often take on arbitrary cultural associations. In some societies white represents purity,
and in others it represents death. In some societies red stands for passion, and in others
for success. Though widely favored, green and blue could come to have quite different,
though positive, meanings in different cultures.
If a person could learn the art-relevant conventions and histories of another culture
only by steeping herself in it, much as those who are born to it are immersed in it, its art
will be opaque to outsiders. But if it is easy to recognize many of the relevant
HOW MIGHT THE AESTHETIC, ART, AND EVOLUTION BE RELATED?
55

conventions and if this can be done from the outside, as it were, or by dipping only a
few toes into the topic culture, the outsider’s grasp of what is universal may take her
quickly to an appropriate though partial understanding of the nature of artworks that
are foreign to her. She may need to acknowledge the atmosphere of tradition in which
they are enveloped, but perhaps she is positioned to do this merely as an interested
cultural tourist.
How long does it take to become as habituated to a foreign culture as its natives are?
Years at least, possibly decades. And surely it would take as long to become a
connoisseur of their most sophisticated arts. Consider poetry. For the fullest apprecia-
tion a person would have to have a complete mastery of the language so that he could
follow its most subtle and arcane uses—its novel jokes, word plays, metaphors, and so
forth. As well he would need a profound knowledge of its canonic poems, poetic
forms, the goals of its poets, and the functions of poetry within the society. He would
also need intimate familiarity with all that its poetic works might mention or allude to,
such as the other arts and the society’s history, religions, ideals, institutions, paradigms,
class or caste structure, mores, and so on. And the relevant skills and knowledge must
be so deeply ingrained that they come unbidden to inform his experience of the poem
as it is directly encountered, not wielded self-consciously in an attempt to deduce after
the fact what appreciating the poem most likely is like for those with the deepest
enjoyment of its art.
Recall, though, that our question is one about whether a foreigner can recognize
and minimally appreciate the art of another society, not what it takes to be an expert.
Cultural outsiders clearly lack the background and experience that is necessary for
connoisseurship, but perhaps they can get by with much less when it comes to
identifying at least some foreign artworks and recognizing their most artistically
important features. Indeed, perhaps the kind of cultural grounding that can be achieved
in weeks rather than years may sufﬁce.
The art audience in the West has had to come to terms with quite radical stylistic
revolutions in its own history—for instance, in the shifts to Impressionism and Cubism
in painting or in the move to atonality in classical music. Though some people claimed
to ﬁnd these departures incomprehensible (and even offensive), that was surely an
exaggerated reaction and more often indicated a failure to see the artistic point of what
was done than a failure to see what was done as such.
Take Cubism after its early “analytic” phase. Despite the departure both from a ﬁxed
viewpoint and from vanishing-point perspective, it is not so difﬁcult, after all, to see
what is represented within a cubistically fragmented perspective. It seems to me that the
split-image perspectivalism used in paintings and carvings of the Amerindians of north-
west America is similar in being easily mastered by those not familiar with it. The same
applies to the vertically distorted perspectives in Chinese paintings, the frequent
departure from perspectivally “correct” spatial relations in medieval art, and “plan”
perspectives in ancient Egyptian art. Their depictive import is soon laid bare. Likewise
it is fairly obvious that the iconography and proportion of much ﬁgurative Southeast
56
KEY CONCEPTS

Asian art derive more directly from the puppets of the shadow puppet play than from
“life.”
In a fascinating experiment, Balinese and American musicians were compared in
their ability to predict the continuations of Balinese melodies that were unknown to
them. As expected, the Balinese were much more certain and accurate predictors than
the Americans, but the latter, who were near the theoretical limit of cluelessness at the
beginning of the melody, adapted rapidly over its course. Though the most successful
American musician was worse than the least successful Balinese musician, on average
the American musicians performed much better than chance. Indirect evidence of
the operation of underlying universals in the musical reactions of the two groups is
indicated by the fact that, although the Americans did worse than the Balinese, they
were more certain of what happens next at the same points where the Balinese were
more certain of what happens next.
This suggests that exposure to a musical style based on a very different scale and tonal
system can lead to a working understanding of its melodic syntax within a surprisingly
short period. In this case, exposure plus simple feedback apparently can lead musicians
from one social background to bootstrap their way into alien-sounding music without
immersing themselves for years in the culture from which the music derives. In other
words, even if musical universals are tweaked by culture with the result that all
elements must be appropriately contextualized if their signiﬁcance is to be appreciated,
that process of tweaking might be decoded with comparatively little effort.
We cannot communicate with the cave painters of the ancient past, but in other
cases the process of learning the basics of another culture’s art can be facilitated and
accelerated by asking the locals or by reading about it. Tourist guidebooks usually
contain essays that are extremely helpful and enlightening on the features, principles,
and aesthetic ideals of indigenous art forms, and local artists are frequently happy to talk
about what they do and why. Again, my point is about how accessible these sources are
and about how far we can get by using them. The road of the would-be connoisseur is
a long and arduous one, but the path of the aspiring dilettante is mercifully very much
shorter and easier.
My claim is not that all art can be recognized for what it is by foreigners. In the
rariﬁed world of avant-garde Western art, much of what is offered could not be
experienced under the appropriate art-characterizing descriptions by people lacking
prior experience of recent Western Fine Art. The same is true, I suspect, in other
traditions that have become extremely symbolic, stylized, or self-referential. An exam-
ple is that of Australian Aboriginals’ “dot” paintings of the western deserts or bark
paintings of north-eastern Arnhem Land. It would be very unlikely that a foreign
viewer could infer in these paintings their mapping of ancestral lands and mythical
histories, even through prolonged inspection, without resort to the commentary of
cultural insiders.
My conclusion is not that foreigners can fully understand another culture’s art
merely by peeking over the border fence. The best artists in all cultures produce
HOW MIGHT THE AESTHETIC, ART, AND EVOLUTION BE RELATED?
57

complex works richly layered with meanings to which only those who share their art
traditions, forms of life, and ways of thinking are positioned to appreciate deeply. My
contention is this more modest one: because of what is universal in human nature and
art, and because of how comparatively easy it can be to learn what is necessary to
penetrate the veil that culture lays over these, foreigners can often acknowledge art that
is alien to them by achieving a crude and partial, but nonetheless genuine and
informed, understanding of it.
Art and human nature
I have offered the view that art behaviors are universal and that this is at least suggestive
of their connection with our evolved human nature. Ellen Dissanayake holds that,
when we also recognize that they are ancient in origin and a source of intrinsic
pleasure, a strong case is thereby made for considering them as centrally connected
to the way of life pursued by our ancestors and as an aspect of our shared human nature.
A similar view was defended in 1897 by Ernst Grosse. He noted that art behaviors are
costly in time, energy, and resources, yet they are pursued for their own sake. On this
basis he concluded that art is adaptive and, like many who later reached the same
conclusion, he thought the beneﬁts it provides accrue to the social group.
We have therefore been convinced from the ﬁrst that primitive art, besides its immediate
aesthetic signiﬁcance, possesses also a practical importance to the hunting peoples . . . The most
efﬁcient and most beneﬁcent effect which art exercises over the life of peoples consists in the
strengthening and extension of the social bonds to which it contributes.
The issue is far from settled, however. Even if art is universal in the way suggested, it
remains to be seen if this can be attributed to evolution rather than to culture alone.
And if there is a connection with evolution, we need to consider whether art is an
accidental by-product or is adaptive in its own right. To discriminate between these
two possibilities, it will be important to understand what, if anything, art is selected for.
It is not sufﬁcient in making the case that art behaviors are adaptive to show merely that
art pleases us or has positive effects. Reading, writing, and mathematics have those but
are not adaptations. They are not inherited propensities that emerge spontaneously in
the course of natural development. Rather, they have to be taught and transmitted
culturally. Producing the relevant demonstrations for art is far from easy, as I now
suggest and as I will illustrate further in Part III.
A cautionary tale about feathers and feet
The ﬁrst feathers evolved for thermoregulation. The descendants of some ancient bird
types, such as emus and penguins, have no feathers suitable for ﬂight. Yet most people
would regard ﬂight as an adaptation in its own right, not as a by-product (aka spandrel)
of avian thermoregulation. And they are surely right to do so. Flight comes at a cost.
58
KEY CONCEPTS

This is why some species on predator-free islands revert to ﬂightlessness. Under most
conditions, ﬂight outweighs these costs with greater beneﬁts toward avian survival and
reproduction. But if it is an adaptation, where do we locate that? We do so not in the
origins of feathers but in certain structural modiﬁcations to speciﬁc feathers—along
with other ﬂight-facilitating alterations in bone structure, musculature, and the like—
all of which changes made avian ﬂight possible.
I draw two morals from this story. The ﬁrst is the general point that judgment is
needed about whether something should count as a spandrel or as an adaptation. We
must consider not whether it is a by-product of some earlier adaptation but its current
role in the organism’s lifeway. Evolution always builds on what already exists. This
helps to make clear why so little of the possible “design space” is exploited by
evolution. For example, it explains why so many living creatures display four- or six-
limbed basic body plans. This is why, even if the outcome is adaptive, it sometimes
exhibits an improvisatory, jury-rigged character. Bipedalism was adaptive for our
ancestors but we are also heir to the back problems and pains that go with it.
Great caution is necessary in arriving at the judgment that some bit of behavior is
adaptive though. It is not sufﬁcient merely to note that the behavior is important and
useful to the creature. The philosopher of biology Daniel C. Dennett claims that
the claw of Archaeopteryx, the ﬁrst known bird, was perfectly adapted to perching
on branches. Another philosopher of science, Robert C. Richardson, points out,
however, that the accepted view is that Archaeopteryx descended from theropods—
dinosaurs—with the same foot structure, which was used to grasp prey. Moreover, the
claws of Archaeopteryx were not modiﬁed to make them more suitable for perching. He
concludes:
Even if Archaeopteryx chose to sit in trees, as it might have, the foot is still a derived structure and
an adaptation for a terrestrial rather than an arboreal form of life.
The second moral to draw is that stories of a trait’s or behavior’s evolutionary origin
can be irrelevant to its current function, whether that function is adaptive or not. With
this in mind, we might question the interest of demonstrating that some forms of
aesthetic reaction or art making were ancestral responses to ancient environments or
circumstances. We are physically removed from the environments in which our
forebears lived and culturally removed from their ways of thinking. By studying the
past, we might learn about the origins of some of our modern behaviors, but it might
be doubted that this is relevant to explaining their current relevance or justiﬁcation.
In this vein, Ronald Moore, an aesthetician, writes about accounts of landscape
aesthetics as founded in the reactions of primordial foragers to habitats that were
friendly or antithetical to their way of life:
At most, it would explain how we came to think of some things as beautiful and others not,
leaving untouched the question of why we persist in thinking this way and why we defend our
judgments with reasons that have little or nothing to do with our prehistoric past.
HOW MIGHT THE AESTHETIC, ART, AND EVOLUTION BE RELATED?
59

Despite the second moral that I have just drawn, I think Moore is mistaken in this
particular case. Working out why this is so is useful in clarifying some important issues.
Even where an adaptation is transcended in its signiﬁcance by future changes and
circumstances, so that it departs from its earlier functions, it might not thereby be
eradicated. The desire for fat and sugar clearly is not adaptive for modern Westerners as
it was for our Pleistocene ancestors, but it is no less present; and acknowledging as
much might be relevant to considering what is involved in countering it. It is not only
the origins of these preferences but also their persistence that the biological account is
intended to explain.
And sometimes their persistence suggests that they are deeply embedded in the
human psyche. Some aesthetic tastes are plainly mutable and culturally arbitrary, but
not all are like that. In Part II, we will review our present-day aesthetic reactions to
nonhuman animals, to landscapes, and to our fellow humans. At least in part, these are
all plausibly rooted in the evolved nature of our distant forebears. Of course, our
modern circumstances can affect the role now played by these preferences and how we
express them, but that does not show that they have become irrelevant. The aesthetic
appeal of a landscape might not motivate a modern-day urbanite to grab a spear and go
hunting, but it is likely to inﬂuence where she would like to live, what pictures she
hangs on the wall of her ofﬁce, where she would choose to holiday.
In making a similar point, the geographer Jay Appleton notes that the use of
contraception, rather than making sexual intercourse pointless, enables people “to
gratify their inborn inclinations in isolation from any ulterior functional process.” He
continues:
In much the same way those other mechanisms, which seem to prompt forms of behaviour
conducive to the achievement of other biological requirements through the encouragement of
favourable environmental relationships, do not peter out simply because what we infer to be the
“end-process” is no longer attainable solely through their agency. We do not say that because
our survival does not depend on our catching a rabbit or eluding a cannibal, therefore there is no
point in attempting to see without being seen. We say rather that release from the obligation to
use these mechanisms for self-preservation enables us to gratify these biological inclinations in
isolation from the exposure to real, uncontrollable hazards, such as was probably experienced by
our ancestors and is still experienced by most animals and some humans today.
Yet this appeal to the consequences of the fact that some aesthetic tastes come to us
as part of the shared human nature we have inherited from the past—still assuming that
connection is demonstrated, of course—can be subject to further questioning. The
nature and instincts we are considering are those of our genes, all in the service of
reproduction and genetic transmission, this being how evolutionary success is
measured. But as organisms we have goals that we do not share with our genes. For
example, many people choose to limit the number of their children, though they are
capable of successfully raising more to adulthood. So it always remains to ask of some
instinctual pressure to do this or that: this is what my genes would have me do, but is it
60
KEY CONCEPTS

what I should do? Does my agenda coincide with that of my genes? Demonstrating that
some tendency resides in our nature does not entail that we should follow it.
I accept that there is no one-step argument from my nature and instincts push me in this
direction to this is the route I must take. But the connection need not be as tight as this to be
important. If our life-plans more often than not line up with what our genes naturally
incline us to do, there is a prima facie reason for assuming we should follow our
instincts. By “line up” I do not mean that we should follow our instincts just in case our
plan is to maximize our reproductive potential. I assume, rather, that part of our plan is
to achieve well-being and abiding pleasure. Such states are often consequent on
following our instincts, because this is the common way in which nature motivates
creatures to pursue their genes’ interests. Grant Hildebrand, an historian of art and
architecture, makes the point this way:
In reﬂecting on the various settings and experiences of our lives, we should be able to ﬁnd some
fairly close matches between characteristics we like and characteristics that would have improved
our chances of survival.
So, we should follow our instincts for the satisfaction this usually produces, provided
there is no reason to think that the pleasure will be outweighed or that some higher-
order goal should take priority. With aesthetics it will often be the case that the rewards
it yields do not subvert our biological agendas. To the extent that our desire to engage
with the aesthetic is instinctive, there often is no reason to see this as being at odds with
our organism-level interests.
Here, then, is the answer to Moore’s ﬁnal complaint: that the reasons we give for our
judgments and preferences “have little or nothing to do with our prehistoric past.” The
reasons that evolutionary psychologists give for the aesthetic habitat preferences of our
distant predecessors are ones connecting such preferences to the biological agenda of
reproductive success. Those need not be the reasons that our forebears appealed to in
making their choices, however. They need not have calculated in such terms, or at all.
More likely they chose what looked beautiful and attractive, what felt less threatening
and stressful, without looking ahead to the vigor of the lineages they would parent.
We, their heirs, share with them the aesthetic preferences that in fact contributed to
their successful legacy, but when we exercise those preferences we do not thereby look
back to their ancient past, just as they did not look forward to our distant future.
On the origins of art
I cautioned that an account of some behavior’s evolutionary origin and function might
be irrelevant to understanding its current uses and value, which may have transcended
and lost contact with their past. But I also argued against Ronald Moore that elements
of human nature can persist and, though they perhaps ﬁnd new uses and modes of
expression in present-day circumstances, accounts of their origins can have explanatory
relevance to appreciating their current roles. In making this argument, I was careful to
HOW MIGHT THE AESTHETIC, ART, AND EVOLUTION BE RELATED?
61

follow the example which Moore introduced—landscape preferences. Had the subject
been hairstyles, my argument would not have stood for long. Those tastes seem to be
ephemeral and arbitrary compared to our aesthetic reactions to landscape.
Nor am I conﬁdent that my argument would work for the arts. It might be very
difﬁcult to discern their origins and the evolutionary signiﬁcance of the functions they
ﬁrst served. But in any case that might be largely irrelevant to assessing whether they are
adaptive in their current functions, which may be very different from their original
ones. Consider this example: it is highly unlikely that those who painted the walls of
the caves at Chauvet and Lascaux did so in order to impress potential mates with their
skill and ﬂare. If that was the plan, why were the paintings made so difﬁcult to access
and inspect? But this observation cannot be made to count against the theory that art
now primarily serves the agenda of sexual selection.
As will become apparent in Part III, many adaptationists about art direct their
attention to speculation about art’s origins. Such matters have considerable intrinsic
interest, I allow. But I suspect that it is widely but erroneously assumed that the tale
about the origin of this or that art form also must be relevant to appreciating its present,
possibly adaptive, function. This is controversial. If music originated in infant-directed
speech, with its distinctive sing-song character, that would help us not one jot in
assessing the signiﬁcance and function of Beethoven’s late string quartets. We must be
cautious, then, in assuming that art has always served the same human interests in the
same way and in focusing on its ancient as against its modern attributes. More generally,
we should be wary of moving too hastily from evidence for the universality of art
behaviors and for their abiding value and interest to the conclusion that they were
adaptive for our distant ancestors. They might have once been spandrels but took on
adaptive functions later. Or they might have become universal because they are
pleasurable without thereby being adaptive at all.
62
KEY CONCEPTS

PART II
The Aesthetic
Introduction
In Part II, we will focus on connections between humans’ aesthetic sensibilities and
evolution. We begin with humans’ aesthetic appreciation of nonhuman animals, a
topic that is widely neglected. This gap provides me with an opportunity to develop
novel applications of the account of aesthetic experience offered in Chapter 1. And it
allows me to demonstrate the diversity of aesthetic interests and judgments. While
evolutionarily-based aesthetic experiences have a place in our response to nonhuman
animals, they can be accompanied by aesthetic reactions with quite different drivers.
These further aesthetic responses are sometimes complementary and sometimes
opposed to the ones with an evolutionary basis. The aesthetic is many-faceted. Even
if there is a connection between our aesthetic experiences and evolution, the com-
plexity and variety of our aesthetic reactions to animals shows that this is at best only
part of the story.
Chapter 6 turns to the aesthetics of landscape and environment, a subject that has
received attention from evolutionary psychologists. They argue that we are aestheti-
cally attracted to aspects of our environment that in the past contributed to the
ﬂourishing of our humanoid forebears. This idea is interesting and highly plausible.
Nevertheless, I think evolutionary psychologists overstate their case in advocating the
“savanna hypothesis,” according to which we have a marked preference for savanna
landscapes, these being the African home of the ﬁrst anatomically modern humans and
their immediate predecessors. It is more appropriate to concede our ready adaptability
to an extraordinarily wide variety of habitats and to acknowledge the ﬂexibility of our
landscape preferences.
In Chapter 7, I will consider the subject of human beauty. I do so with some
trepidation. Indeed, when planning this book I hoped I might avoid the topic
altogether, so politically fraught is it. It is so because when evolutionary psychologists
discuss human beauty they focus mainly on female sexual attractiveness in the context
of mate selection. Not only is that approach infuriatingly reductive, it makes it difﬁcult
to draw a connection between human beauty and beauty in nonhuman objects.

Rather than countering by emphasizing the many non-sexual forms that human
beauty can take or by shifting attention from sex to the more culturally malleable
notion of gender, I take on the evolutionary psychologists directly by considering
female beauty and arguing that this requires a broader account than is usually provided.
Human beauty is much more about social self-presentation and self-deﬁnition than
about mate selection. As well as establishing a balanced context for reﬂection on
human beauty, this approach makes it plausible to acknowledge the aesthetic dimen-
sion in judgments about, and responses to, beauty of this kind.
64
THE AESTHETIC

5
Humans’ Aesthetic Appreciation
of Nonhuman Animals
While the ethics of our relationships with nonhuman animals has received attention
from philosophers, our aesthetic attitudes to animals—henceforth I drop the qualiﬁer
“nonhuman”—have been largely and surprisingly ignored by aestheticians. Similarly,
evolutionary psychologists have shown little interest in the topic, except to suggest that
the presence of dangerous predators is an aesthetic negative for an environment,
whereas undisturbed, peacefully feeding animals that humans can hunt create an
aesthetic positive. As Randy Thornhill puts it:
beauty is hypothesized to be the perception of ancestral cues to available animal food and safety
from predators as revealed in the behavior of nonhuman animals in one’s environment.
A second point that is regularly noted is that humans have a natural aversion to spiders
and snakes and, accordingly, ﬁnd them ugly or repulsive. But given what a signiﬁcant
part of the environment animals, birds, and insects are, the power animals had over our
cave-painting ancestors, their ongoing charm and fascination for contemporary humans,
and the history of our dependence on them for food, tools, clothing, fuel, labor, sport,
and companionship—given all this, the comparative silence of evolutionary psycholo-
gists and others on the aesthetic dimension of this relation is quite astonishing.
In this chapter we will consider the kinds of biological imperatives that might
underlie our aesthetic reactions to animals. We will also examine aesthetic approaches
to animals that may be biologically rooted but are not adaptive, and we will go on to
consider yet other aesthetic reactions that are plainly cultural. Indeed, I will set out no
fewer than nine distinct bases for aesthetic responses to animals along a continuum
from the biologically conditioned to the purely fanciful.
Apart from outlining an account of humans’ aesthetic appreciation of animals,
including its possible biological underpinnings, this chapter serves two agendas. It
will draw attention to the wider, non-biological remit of the aesthetic. Even if aesthetic
experience ﬁrst arose to give impetus to behaviors with adaptive or other evolutionary
signiﬁcance, the aesthetic focus readily ranges over all contexts. So it is worth remind-
ing ourselves of its ubiquity and cultural shaping. Second, this chapter will apply many
of the general principles of aesthetic experience that were defended in Chapter 1.
There I argued for the legitimacy of aesthetic reactions based on partial, possibly

morally questionable, approaches that do not treat the animal that is their focus solely in
terms of its identity or interests. That issue resurfaces here. I will also defend the
aesthetic character of responses to animals that would be dismissed by Kantian aesthetic
formalists as non-aesthetic on the grounds that they are too cognitive and conceptually
loaded, or, alternatively, because they are too simple and straightforward.
A history of humans’ relations with animals
In order to motivate the arguments that follow, it is vital that I establish the long-
standing importance of humans’ relationship with animals, the intimacy of that rela-
tionship, and recognition of our biological, emotional, and psychological continuity
with animals.
To start with the obvious, we have a close biological connection to animals because
we too are animals. We share with them common ancestors. Primates are our nearest
allies but humans share more than 50 percent of their DNA with ﬁsh.
What is more important for the purposes of this chapter, humans have always
interacted with animals. Our ancestors depended on animals for food and clothing.
Some of the animals they faced were dangerous or competed with them for food and
shelter. In order to survive, our species needed to develop a subtle understanding of
animals—of their natural histories, habits, needs, and vulnerabilities. For this reason, an
observation by the philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein—if a lion could talk we would
not understand him—is puzzling. His idea seems to be that our form of life is so
different from theirs that we could ﬁnd no common vocabulary with which to
communicate across the void. This is hard to credit. Lions and humans are mammals.
Like us, lions need to eat, breathe, drink, and sleep. They mate, give birth, and suckle
their young. If it spoke, the lion might say: “Don’t you hate it when the ﬂies crawl up
your nose!” or “Have you seen the gazelles yet today?” In fact, animals do have ways of
communicating with us, if not by words. Picture the dog that fetches its lead and sits
before its master with unconcealed impatient eagerness. Or the cat that, having strolled
to the closed door, turns to ﬁx its human servant with an imperious gaze. As well, we
can often correctly interpret the signs with which animals betray their moods and
feelings—pricked ears, swishing tail, bared teeth, hissing, and the like.
Dogs became camp followers long ago. They joined the ﬁreside about 15–12 ka,
becoming work animals and pets. They remain our closest animal companions. In the
case of the Australian Aborigines, dingo pups were raised without being much used in
hunting or as work animals, and perhaps this pattern was repeated elsewhere. Dogs are
among the few animals to look where the ﬁnger points instead of at the pointing ﬁnger,
and they are probably unique in ﬁnding humans’ yawning contagious. These are signs
of how their selective breeding by humans has shaped them to attend to and interact
with people.
Animal parts were buried with Homo species from 100 ka. The ﬁrst example of
a domesticated dog buried with (and embraced by) a human is from 12–10 ka.
66
THE AESTHETIC

Cemeteries in southern Scandinavia dating to around 7 ka include dogs that received
ritual burial, and horses and dogs were sometimes buried with people.
Cats are not easily trained but they discovered that humans are malleable and can be
made to respond to their charms. The ﬁrst record of a cat buried close beside a human is
from Cyprus 9.5 ka, and their domestication is dated from this time.
The religious-cum-ritual-cum-symbolic power of animals cannot be overestimated.
In prehistoric times, humans apparently identiﬁed directly with animals and took them
as gods or as fellow members of the community. They believed themselves to be
descended from animal ancestors. Indeed, animals feature in the creation myths of
almost all human societies. For instance, Australian Aborigines tell of the exploits of
kangaroos, emus, and other creatures from which they take themselves to be des-
cended. The site of C¸ atal Hüyük in Turkey provides clear evidence of the ritual
treatment of bulls’ horns about 8.2 ka. Evidence of totemism is apparent at the
7,800-year-old cemetery at Oleneostrovski Mogilnik in Karelia. There are two clusters
of graves, one associated with efﬁgies of an elk and the other with efﬁgies of a snake.
Later, animals were powerful symbols to the Egyptians—at different times, the ram,
cow, ibis, cat, ape, and falcon were sacred.
No less ubiquitous than tales and depictions of ancestral animals are stories of talking
animals, changelings (people who become animals and vice versa), and therianthropes
(beings that are part person and part animal). One of the earliest and most powerful
therianthrope representations is the ﬁgurine from Hohlenstein-Stadel cave, a lion-
headed person carved from mammoth ivory and standing more than 1 foot (28 centi-
meters) tall that dates from 32 ka. European cave art also shows therianthropes. And
marsupial-headed humans are pictured in the Dynamic rock art of Arnhem Land,
northern Australia, which dates from 10 ka.
As just indicated, representations of animals clearly had the utmost power and
importance for our ancient predecessors. When Homo sapiens descended with candles
and lamps into the subterranean depths of underground caves to paint on their walls in
the period 35–12 ka, it was not ﬂowers and trees they drew. Indeed, and this is surely
remarkable, neither was it mainly people. Rather, they depicted cave bears, horses,
bison, mammoths, deer, and bulls (aurochsen). The “hall of bulls” in Lascaux cave has
bull-pictures up to 17 feet (5 meters) in length and above head height. These cave
pictures of animals are realistic and closely observed, whereas pictures of humans are
both few in number and schematic. In fact, the animal depictions are so accurate that
we can learn things about extinct species from them that we can’t get from the bone
record alone. As I contended in the Introduction to Part I, these countless animal
depictions are among the ﬁrst artifacts with a compelling claim to the title of art,
though they presumably also had religious or spiritual signiﬁcance. As I also noted, rock
art in Australia is of a similar antiquity and the same may apply in Africa. Meanwhile,
the oldest buildings apparently connected with human worship, which are at Go¨bekli
Tepe (Kurdish: Gireˆ Navokeˆ ) in Turkey and date to 11.5 ka, contain T-shaped
monoliths decorated with ﬁne reliefs of lions, bulls, boars, foxes, gazelles, asses, snakes
HUMANS’ AESTHETIC APPRECIATION OF NONHUMAN ANIMALS
67

and other reptiles, insects, spiders, and birds. Similar carvings have been found at Nevali
C¸ ori in eastern Turkey, a site of the same age.
About 10 ka, with the move from hunting and foraging to village life, our forebears
began to domesticate and farm animals, especially sheep, goats, pigs, cattle, horses, and
fowl. By 9 ka, domesticated sheep and goats were the principal source of meat in the
Near and Middle East. Dairy cattle were kept in Egypt and Mesopotamia from 6 ka.
Some domesticated animals—horses, donkeys, water buffalo, elephants, and camels,
for instance—were put to work. Animals were also used for sport and in ritual
sacriﬁces. By comparison, the people of the Americas domesticated few animal species,
however.
Companion animals also were common. In a famous passage in The Odyssey, after
twenty years’ separation, the decrepit and mangy dog Argus recognizes his disguised
master and wags a greeting, which brings a tear to Odysseus’ eye. By 2 ka, Roman dogs
of a variety of breeds, including large ﬁghting dogs and small lap dogs, were as highly
domesticated as they are now. At the same time, dogs resembling present-day Pekinese
were probably already being bred in China. Medieval lords and knights slept with dogs
at their feet and were depicted in tombs as buried that way. The possession of
“decorative” pets was sometimes a badge of high status, including in Greek times
and the Middle Ages, though such pets were not always well regarded before the
nineteenth century. Cat-keeping spread round the Mediterranean by 2.5 ka and to the
rest of Europe by 2 ka. Meanwhile, affectionate pet-keeping not motivated by
utilitarian considerations was widespread among indigenous peoples of the Americas
when they were ﬁrst encountered by Europeans. Pets have been recorded in virtually
all traditional societies. By the European Enlightenment, thinkers such as Jean-Jacques
Rousseau and Jeremy Bentham argued that people who caused unnecessary suffering
to animals thereby acted immorally.
Nor did the domestication of some species mitigate the symbolic potency of animals.
The description of battles in The Iliad invoked the imagery of lions, boars, and bulls.
The Greek god Zeus was symbolized by the eagle, as was his Roman equivalent,
Jupiter. The change of ethos that went with the Christian era saw lions, bulls, horses,
eagles, and falcons—all of which were popular with the Greeks and Assyrians—give
way to a symbolism that featured ﬁsh, sheep, and doves. Yet within a few centuries
evangelists were associated with the long-time favorite animal icons: the winged lion
for Mark, the bull for Luke, and the eagle for John. Lions, unicorns, white harts, and
the like were featured in heraldry. In Central America, the god Huitzilopochtli was
represented as a hummingbird.
About 2.55 ka, Aesop collected or created hundreds of fables concerning animals
and the moral lessons that could be learned from, or illustrated by, them. Some
astrological signs are of animals and the Chinese years are named for them. People
born under these signs or in a given year are supposed to display some of the
characteristics of the animal they token.
68
THE AESTHETIC

Meanwhile, therianthropes remained evocative and popular. Anubis, an Egyptian
god, was a jackal-headed man, and other gods were crocodile-, hawk-, and ram-
headed. Greek mythology included centaurs, satyrs, gorgons, the hydra, and the
Minotaur. Hindus worship the elephant-headed god, Ganesha. Inhabitants of Easter
Island adopted a birdman cult.
Animals have always been prominent in art. Egyptian and Greek buildings, artifacts,
sculptures, and paintings showed animals. In the Christian era, the engravers of
breviaries and psalters decorated the text and margins with animals and birds. By the
Middle Ages some books, known as bestiaries, were devoted to depictions of animals,
though they often contained fantastic creatures. By the late ﬁfteenth and early sixteenth
centuries, serious attention was often paid to the accuracy of depiction. This is
apparent, for instance, in the horses of da Vinci and Michelangelo. Hieronymus
Bosch’s Temptation of St Anthony of about 1500 provides a striking case. It shows all
manner of bizarre animal and bird concoctions, but includes accurate representations of
the goldﬁnch (Carduelis carduelis) and barn owl (Tyto alba). Raffaello’s Vatican fresco of
1518–19 shows God’s creation of the animals. As well as fairly accurate depictions of a
lion, tiger, elephant, pig, dog, rabbit, ox, bull, donkey, horse, deer, and various species
of birds, the painting includes a misshapen rhinoceros, a unicorn, and a camel-like
creature with a small single horn protruding from its forehead! Other examples of
graphic animal representations were provided by Albert Dürer, not only in his won-
derful studies of the hare but also in a walrus (1521) and, from a description, a
surprisingly convincing rhinoceros (1515). Later times saw the genre of animalier—
still lifes featuring dead animals and vivid depictions of animals hunted or at bay. The
rise of animal iconography in seventeenth-century Dutch and Flemish painting played
an important role in shaping the attitude to animals at that time. Diego Velazquez,
George Stubbs, and Edgar Degas were masters of animal portraiture, and the golden
age of scientiﬁc animal depiction included artists such as Thomas Bewick and John
James Audubon.
What is remarkable, I think, is that none of this has changed for us. Millions of
animals, ﬁsh, and birds are treasured as pets. The number of dogs that are kept as home
pets in the United States is put at 52 million. The worldwide number of cats living with
humans is estimated at 600 million. In addition, animals retain their emblematic status.
The American eagle and British lion contend against the Russian bear. States’ coats of
arms display animals. For example, the Australian one features the emu and the
kangaroo. We may no longer worship animals, but as an aspect of our secular religions
we name our sports teams and cars after them. And it is not as if contemporary humans
have outgrown stories in which animals show human characteristics or vice versa.
Cartoons and ﬁlms are full of talking mice, ducks, dogs, cats, birds, lions, pigs, skunks,
coyotes, horses, roadrunners, zebras, giraffes, rabbits, and so on. Popular ﬁction
regularly invokes therianthropes, changelings, hybrids, and the botched experiment
that leaves its unfortunate subject with supernatural powers and animal parts. Enter-
tainments feature mermaids, vampires, werewolves, and frogs that become princes
HUMANS’ AESTHETIC APPRECIATION OF NONHUMAN ANIMALS
69

when kissed by princesses. Indeed, a few people have subjected themselves to plastic
surgery to turn themselves into living therianthropes. And returning to art, Goya and
Picasso were obsessed with the bull, David Hockney, William Wegman, and Lucian
Freud have celebrated dogs, and Jill Greenberg and Robin Schwartz portray monkeys
and nonhuman primates.
This is all the more impressive when we recall that many contemporary humans live
in fabricated city environments and are insulated and alienated from the natural
environment. Unlike our ancestors who hunted, killed, carried, skinned, gutted,
butchered, and cooked the animals they ate, most of us buy antiseptically packaged
cuts of meat or pre-cooked meals that look nothing like the animals whose ﬂesh is
among their ingredients. I suspect that, as a result of this separation, we are both more
sentimental and more barbaric in our treatment of animals than our ancestors were.
On the one hand, we have battery farms and factory ﬁshing. We kill huge numbers
of animals for food in purpose-made slaughterhouses. We experiment on caged
animals and test all manner of products on them. We hunt animals not because our
survival depends on doing so but for sport. We pit animals against other animals. And
organizations with the goal of preventing human cruelty to animals seem never to run
short of work. Moreover, most people are profoundly ignorant about animals. Atti-
tudes of indifference, fear, and economic exploitation are often predominant. Ambiv-
alence to animals—that we are their custodians versus that they are here solely for our
use and beneﬁt—is expressed, for instance, in the Christian Bible.
On the other hand, however, we have organizations for the prevention of cruelty to
animals, most of which were founded in the nineteenth century. More generally,
beginning around 1500 there was a gradual change in the attitude to animals. Rather
than being regarded as machines that could be used and disposed of to suit our ends,
they were more often acknowledged as capable of suffering and as deserving care and
respect. Nowadays, we treat our pets as if they are fully-ﬂedged members of the family
and we feed them royally. Many people no longer regard it as politically acceptable to
wear fur. We attempt to rehabilitate oiled seabirds and injured birds of prey. We have
banned many blood sports. TV channels are devoted to natural history shows featuring
animals. Many of us care passionately about endangered species, especially if they are of
the aesthetically attractive kind, and we are sometimes prepared to take action on a
global scale to protect them. We desire not only that they survive but also that they live
in the manner and places for which they are suited. Children are inevitably fascinated
by and naturally drawn to animals. Our cities are ﬁlled with millions of companion
animals, and cohabitation with them has important therapeutic beneﬁts for their
owners. (Pets are responsive to contact, sometimes devoted, sometimes affectionate,
and non-judgmental. Proximity to them provides physical and emotional beneﬁts,
such as companionship, a sense of security or comfort, and reduced blood pressure.
Their care also provides structure and ritual. And they are comparatively undemanding
and uncomplicated.) So, even if our relationship to animals is not the one our distant
ancestors had, our attraction to them runs very deep indeed.
70
THE AESTHETIC

Many will agree with the following analogy drawn by the philosopher and environ-
mentalist Holmes Rolston III, likening animals to groups of humans who are not in
positions of social control:
What a culture does with its wildlife reveals the character of that culture, as surely as what it does
to its blacks, poor, women, handicapped, and powerless.
His view echoes an observation widely attributed to Mahatma Gandhi:
The greatness of a nation and its moral progress can be judged by the ways its animals are treated.
And the sociobiologist E. O. Wilson deliberately understates the case when he suggests:
The phylogenetic continuity of life with humanity seems an adequate reason by itself to tolerate
the continued existence of apes and other organisms. This does not diminish humanity—it raises
the status of nonhuman creatures.
Aesthetic response
Our interest in animals is not exclusively gustatory, sartorial, scientiﬁc, religious,
sporting, artistic, or therapeutic. We respond aesthetically to them. In other words,
we ﬁnd their appearances and other properties that animals display to be intrinsically
appealing, beautiful, awesome, repulsive, or pathetic. And some of our aesthetic
responses connect to their role in our forerunners’ evolution.
Our aesthetic response to animals is consistent with a larger pattern. This is one in
which we create and seek aesthetic value, as well as other kinds of value, in the world at
large—in natural environments, human appearances and qualities of character, and in
human artifacts, not only artworks but also in ordinary practical items. But why,
exactly, do we ﬁnd animals aesthetically compelling? And is this a decadent response
available only to modern-day humans who are less enmeshed with and dependent on
nature in the raw?
The importance of animals to humans, our identiﬁcation with them as other living
creatures with drives, experiences, and emotions, and the closeness of many of our
relationships with them, all these are apparent from our prehistory to the present. But
our ancestors’ appreciation of the importance in their lives of animals did not require
that their interest in animals took on an aesthetic hue. Nevertheless, there are reasons to
think that it most likely did so. The aesthetic runs as deep as any other of the frame-
works and values that humans share, so I suspect that our ancient ancestors would not
have conﬁned their aesthetic interest only to landscapes, environments, and the
appearance and character of their fellow humans. In fact, some aesthetic responses to
animals appear to be automatic and universal. We ﬁnd many baby mammals as cute and
appealing as human babies, and we are awed by vast aggregations of animals on
migration. What is more, our ancestors depended for their survival on their under-
standing of animals. One way of ingraining and vivifying such wisdom would be by
HUMANS’ AESTHETIC APPRECIATION OF NONHUMAN ANIMALS
71

marking it with prominent aesthetic values or disvalues and the heightened emotions
that go with these. With this in mind, the ﬁrst place to look when considering
the aesthetic appeal of animals is to factors that shaped our species’ evolutionary
psychology.
Biological groundings for our aesthetic
interests in animals
It is plausible that we are genetically disposed to respond aesthetically to animals, either
positively or negatively, because in the distant past such responses were adaptive in that
they guided the judgments of our successful ancestors. That is, such responses promot-
ed their survival or avoided their harm. And in addition, the disposition to respond in
this fashion was genetically transmissible from parents to their offspring. As the
evolutionary psychologists Harold Herzog and Gordon Burghardt recommend:
Let us entertain the idea that cultural variation dances upon a deep, genetically shaped reservoir
of universal predilections and emotions. Perhaps behind the apparent diversity of attitudes [to
animals] are some underlying biological processes that are the result of natural selection.
Cross-overs from human to animal aesthetics
There are some obvious cross-overs between human and animal aesthetics. Beauty
frequently serves as a marker of ﬁtness, as I will emphasize further in Chapter 7. Among
the human ﬁtness indicators that we esteem are grace, strength, balance, dexterity,
agility, and athleticism. Animals also display such qualities, often to a superhuman
degree, and we not only admire their doing so but can also ﬁnd this attractive or
sublime. Because such features are almost inevitably relevant to the animals’ own ﬁtness
and it is apparent to us, the response need not involve an inappropriate projection of
human standards onto the animal world. Rather, these aesthetic evaluations are directly
relevant to understanding the nature of the animal, to appreciating its strengths and
weaknesses, its threats and defenses.
In other cases the application of our human preferences to animals falsiﬁes their
nature by anthropomorphizing them. The examples I have in mind are ones in which
we ﬁnd them aesthetically appealing because we inappropriately attribute to them
human personality, agency, life-plans, self-consciousness, or unduly high levels of
cognition and calculation. Or we credit them with sophisticated emotions such as
empathy, sympathy, hope, and regret. For instance, we might consider ants to be
virtuously diligent, a stallion to be noble, the hippopotamus to be obese, and the owl to
be wise. If such ways of thinking lead us to ﬁnd beauty, sublimity, or their opposites,
they are aesthetic, even if they misrepresent the animal, as I argued in Chapter 1.
Among the aesthetic responses generated by an anthropomorphizing attitude to-
ward animals two kinds deserve special mention because we are impelled so strongly to
adopt them. We are programmed to ﬁnd human babies attractive, and animals that
72
THE AESTHETIC

happen to share some of the markers of babyishness—large eyes, soft features, large
heads, recessive chins—are also often appealing on this score. The attractive and
pleasing appearance of the koala, some owls, and some cows probably depends on
this effect. Over the years, Disney’s animators made Mickey Mouse less like a rodent
and more like a human child, presumably to make his appearance more pleasing. As
well, the young of many mammalian species share with human babies the neotenous
(youthful) facial characteristics that we ﬁnd irresistibly cute. They also often move with
the doddery awkwardness that in human toddlers triggers in us feelings of aesthetic
enchantment along with care and tenderness. And we can be charmed by other babyish
signs of dependence, such as a lamb’s eager suckling or dozy kittens snuggling close to
their mother’s body.
In the case of some domestic animals, rather than adopting an anthropomorphic
attitude to some of their natural features, we modify their appearance to make them
more elegant and beautiful. As well as breeding them to be more useful and compliant,
we sometimes “improve” them to increase their aesthetic appeal (to humans). Out-
standing examples are the koi (carp) of Japan, the cattle of the East African Dinka,
tusked pigs bred in Papua New Guinea, and many ornamental breeds of cats and dogs.
Darwin frequently referred to pigeon fanciers and the aesthetic effects they cultivated
in their birds.
One of the most remarkable features in our domesticated races is that we see in them adaptation,
not indeed to the animal’s or plant’s own good, but to man’s use or fancy.
Indeed, animal husbandry provided an insightful model for the workings of sexual
selection:
If man can in a short time give elegant carriage and beauty to his bantams according to his
standards of beauty, I can see no good reason to doubt that female birds, by selecting, during
thousands of generations, the most melodious or beautiful males, according to their standard of
beauty, might produce a marked effect.
There are further respects in which animals are subject to human aesthetic pre-
ferences and biases. We generally like animals that are more rather than less like us as
regards development, size, cognition, emotionality, sociality, breeding, parenting,
manner of locomotion, and texture. Herzog and Burghardt make the point by claim-
ing that we are
biased toward species with which we can at least have the illusion we are communicating or at
least recognize their signals for what they are.
I would put a different spin on our partiality to species situated near to us on the tree of
life. As a highly social species we are mind-readers dedicated to working out what
others think and feel. We extend this interest, where we can, to animals. But of course
this is possible only where their lifeways, primary needs, and perceptual, cognitive, and
affective systems approximate to our own. While the outcome of this process may be
HUMANS’ AESTHETIC APPRECIATION OF NONHUMAN ANIMALS
73

the projection of anthropomorphic illusions that falsify the animals they are directed to,
on other occasions the result might be a closer appreciation of what we have in
common. It is precisely this kind of identiﬁcation and sensitivity that would make
for a successful human hunter—one who can predict where animals will be, how they
will interact, how they will move as they feed, how they will guard against predators,
and so on. And this sense of fellow feeling with animals undoubtedly can lay the basis
for an aesthetic response to them.
One way in which it can do so is by leading us to admire and take pleasure in their
adaptedness. In this case, we focus on ﬁtness indicators that are directly relevant to the
animals themselves, rather than being drawn only to those that we value for also
marking ﬁtness in humans. Consider, for example, the exquisite camouﬂage of a
nesting woodcock or delight in the complex relation exhibited among all the creatures
that live on a coral reef.
The experience of seeing a Bar-tailed Godwit (Limosa lapponica) feeding languidly on
the shoreline can be transﬁgured by awareness that it is among the world’s most
dynamic long-distance migrants, with a range and navigational precision that matches
those of our most sophisticated planes. Ornithologists came to suspect, though they
could hardly credit it, that Bar-tailed Godwits ﬂy directly from the coast of Alaska to
their wintering grounds in New Zealand, a distance of 6,000 miles (11,500 kilometers).
A satellite-tracked female in September 2007 proved them right. She ﬂew non-stop for
eight days and hardly deviated from the shortest possible route.
Of course, one might gaze indifferently at the bird despite one’s knowledge of its
prowess. Aesthetic responses are rarely required, even when they can be appropriate.
But to the person awed by the wonder of its feat, the bird’s slender, one-pound (half-
kilogram) frame seems sublimely charged with latent energy.
As is apparent from these examples, the appreciation of animals in terms of their own
biological agendas, rather than ours alone, is liable to require a background of relevant
information concerning natural history and the species in question. Admiration of this
kind is cognitive and self-conscious. The further our empathies and sensibilities are
from the species in question, the more deliberate must be our adoption of an attitude
that regards the creature in terms of the life form that nature has mapped for it.
Another human bias that is a source of aesthetic experience is largely unreﬂective
and automatic: we are attracted to (or repelled by) various sensory arrays that are
conspicuously exhibited in the animal world. Many animals display to attract their
mates. They develop antlers, beards, colored wattles, strange excrescences, and the like.
We too can ﬁnd the display beautiful or awesome. This occurs, I assume, because our
senses chime with theirs. That is, they present perceptual arrays that are signiﬁcant for
members of their own species, but those same arrays trigger and stimulate our percep-
tual systems in ways that are aesthetically pleasing, presumably because we share related
perceptual systems and some of their perceptual preferences and prejudices. In this case,
the most obvious examples are unlike us. They are colorful birds, such as the toucan, or
highly and variably patterned animals, such as cuttleﬁsh. Insects, especially butterﬂies,
74
THE AESTHETIC

moths, and dragonﬂies, often also appeal aesthetically in a similar fashion. And, in
addition, ﬂowering plants display to attract their pollinators and we take aesthetic
pleasure in their appearance.
It is not only the formal combination of colors or patterns that strikes our senses as
attractive. The jaunty antlers of a mature stag, the constructions of bowerbirds, and the
mating dances, ﬂights, and songs of many animals and birds can all strike us as naturally
beautiful. Having once seen it, who could forget the charm and grace of the courtship
dance of cranes on snow-covered ﬁelds in the fading light of evening? In other words,
we can ﬁnd the social displays and interactions of animals intrinsically enthralling and
beguiling. The rippling call of a curlew over the moor, the getaway of a startled hare, a
glimpse of a secretive and elusive creature, the howl of a wolf at the moon, the sight of
a breaching whale, the spectacle of a predator in the act of killing, the haunting wail of
a loon across a mountain lake, these and countless other animal behaviors can be
powerfully evocative, either in themselves or by being emblematic of particular land-
scapes, seasons, and life patterns. (In the second movement of his 6th Symphony
Beethoven combines the calls of a quail and cuckoo with the song of a nightingale.
The distinctive habitat preferences of these bird species precisely locate the listener at a
border where coppice woodland meets arable land.) Such experiences, with their rich
associations, can arouse strong aesthetic feelings of wonder and delight, terror and awe.
As was initially predicted, while the line of argument pursued so far draws attention
to a variety of ways in which our natures and predilections can dispose us to respond
aesthetically to animals, it does not bear out the thesis that these aesthetic responses to
animals are adaptive. We started with the generalization to animals of established
human aesthetic preferences—for signs of ﬁtness, of babyishness, and for various
perceptual patterns and associations. We also considered how, by extending our
drive to understand the cognitive and affective lives of other humans to animals, we
can come to identify and empathize with them. And as part of this project, we can
consider their lives in relation to their own biological agendas. These also are matters to
which we can adopt an aesthetic stance.
Some of the resulting aesthetic experiences may be maladaptive. Those that involve
inappropriate attributions to animals of human characteristics are likely to be so. They
lead us to misunderstand the animals’ behaviors. Genuine natural history knowledge is
likely to be more evolutionarily useful.
And where the generalization of human preferences for babyish qualities and for
colorful patterns seems unforced and unavoidable, it is hard to discern any evolutionary
advantage that our choices could generate. Rather, these aesthetic responses seem to be
by-products of adaptations that lie elsewhere—to care for our own babies, to make ﬁne
color discriminations, and to seek order in the world as it presents to our senses. The
importance of ﬁne color discrimination, for instance, is likely to lie in detecting
ripeness, health, and other qualities of fruits, seeds, and plants, in locating useful salts
and minerals, and in identifying states of health and emotion in humans, rather than in
providing aesthetic rapture at a butterﬂy’s palette of colors.
HUMANS’ AESTHETIC APPRECIATION OF NONHUMAN ANIMALS
75

Meanwhile, of the behaviors I’ve discussed, the one that strikes me as most likely to
be adaptive for our ancestors—that is, attaining an intimate practical knowledge of the
animals and ecological systems around them, both in relation to humans and on their
own terms—is not plainly driven by the aesthetic response to which it may give rise.
Here the aesthetic response appears to give expression to the knowledge, but it is the
practical wisdom rather than this form of its expression that makes it important for
survival. I did allow that such knowledge might be more readily attained and acquired
if it comes tinged with aesthetic pleasure or negativity. But I expect that it is the non-
aesthetic pleasure that goes with ﬁnding the food one needs, or the non-aesthetic fear
of ﬁnding oneself too near a major predator, that plays the primary role here.
Animals as part of an ecological aesthetic
As I will explain further in Chapter 6, evolutionary psychologists have argued not only
that our ancestors sought habitats that enhanced their survival but also that, over time,
their valuing of such habitats developed as an aesthetic preference. Without calculating
or even understanding why, humans came to regard such habitats not only as desirable
but also as beautiful or pleasing. In that case, the presence of most animals and birds will
already make a contribution to that aesthetic value. Not only do they count positively
as food or as usefully signaling approaching weather or the presence of predators, their
occurrence testiﬁes generally to the environment’s health and fecundity. So, most
animals provide an aesthetic plus for the surroundings in which they appear.
We might speculate more particularly that animal kinds took on an aesthetic
character that was shaped by their roles in the environment of our ancestors. Those
that were harmless and good to eat or useful in other ways would take on an appealing
appearance. Think of deer. Those that caused disease would come to be despised, not
only as vermin but also as dirty and ugly. Consider mosquitoes, cockroaches, or bloated
ticks or leeches. And those that were feared as dangerous would be experienced as scary
and ugly, as spiders are. Or they would take on the awesome quality of the sublime,
provided our predecessors were at a safe distance. Think of satiated big cats. Or again,
the sheer number of some creature would be experienced as sublime.
Developing the theme, John D. Barrow, a physicist and mathematician, observes:
Large animals were once both a danger and a ready source of abundant food. Our instinctive
attraction to them, tempered by fear and respect, looks like a remnant of a reaction that increased
the likelihood of survival, as compared with a response of total fear and isolation, or one of
reckless familiarity. Animals were the key to our ancestors’ survival. It is not surprising that
instinctive reactions to them evolved and spread.
This idea seems highly plausible when we focus on creatures that elicit a negative
response. Among the most disliked creatures are those that are thought of as dangerous
or that bite or sting—cockroach, mosquito, wasp, rat, snake, and (unfairly) bat are at
the top of the list—and many of these strike us as ugly. And we can see readily enough
how an aversion to these species could have adaptive value, since many of them are
76
THE AESTHETIC

vectors of disease or are more directly dangerous to humans. Admittedly, we ﬁnd big
cats sublime rather than ugly, but that acknowledges their ﬁerce grandeur and pre-
supposes that we are safe from them.
The case for the likelihood of the positive aesthetic response to animals that were
useful as food and the like is less clear, I think. We might be more likely to develop a
positive aesthetic response to the prepared food than to the living animal, to the roast
joint rather than to the warthog it came from. And the most liked animal types
(nowadays in the US, excluding pets) are apparently the swan, robin, and butterﬂy,
which suggests that non-adaptive aesthetic preferences are more to the fore than ones
with the potential to contribute to human biological ﬁtness.
But if true, perhaps this reﬂects the extent to which our aesthetic preferences have
departed from those of our foraging forebears, who lived so much more intimately
with the animals they ate than we do. And not only did they hunt those animals, they
used the animals’ bones, ivory, and antlers for tools, their hides for clothes, their teeth
for ornaments, and probably used their blood and fat in rituals as present-day hunter-
gatherers do. The intensity of their obsession with animals is there to be read in ancient
cave and rock art, though it is true that they did not always depict the most common
local food species. Given the fascination that game species and mega-fauna undoubt-
edly held for them, it would be surprising if the central role of these animals in their
hunting lifeways did not invest encounters with those animals with responses of
elevated emotion that could easily take on an aesthetic character.
Are there other human attitudes or behaviors toward animals that could be adaptive?
Herzog and Burghardt propose two. Individuals who could exploit, tame, and effec-
tively care for domestic stock would have an advantage, they propose, as would those
who favor rare animals.
I am skeptical about whether the complex and varied skills of wrangling and animal
husbandry, however useful to those who acquire them, could qualify as adaptations,
especially if we hold the traditional view that adaptations must be genetically transmit-
ted. But in any case, there is nothing here beyond what has been argued earlier to
suggest that there is an aesthetic dimension to such talents; and it is not part of the brief
that Herzog and Burghardt set themselves to take on that issue.
Meanwhile, the idea that we often have an aesthetic reaction to what is rare is
plausible, but how is that reaction adaptive? Herzog and Burghardt argue that our
interest in rare animals
may be derived from the value put upon rare animals in early human history. Rare animals or
their body parts played important roles in rituals, costumes, medicine, and social status.
This speculation strikes me as implausible. It is simply not true that the most humanly
useful animals were always the least common. And while the human display of things
that are rare, whether animal or not, can signify wealth and status (because of the cost in
time or resources involved in acquiring such items), it is the status, not the manner of
marking it, that is adaptive. And where we value what is rare without wanting to
HUMANS’ AESTHETIC APPRECIATION OF NONHUMAN ANIMALS
77

possess it, probably the source adaptation for the response is curiosity. Though curiosity
is exercised everywhere, in an environment to which we are habituated it is naturally
excited and rewarded more by what is unfamiliar.
Whether or not the response is adaptive, it is true that we frequently value
encounters with what is rare or unusual and such encounters can take on an aesthetic
tinge. Lilly-Marlene Russow, a philosopher, makes this central in describing the
aesthetic appeal of animals. Though she mentions their beauty, awesomeness, and
adaptedness as sources of our aesthetic response to them, in defending the aesthetic
worth of species she stresses the value of our rare meetings with individuals of
endangered species.
It is true, I think, that a creature’s rarity can sometimes add to the attractiveness of its
appearance. Even a dowdy bird can look beautiful to a birdwatcher if it is rare in a given
area. But I doubt that rarity alone can confer aesthetic credit. Plague-bearing ﬂeas
would be unlikely to increase in beauty were we to be successful in drastically lowering
their number. It is likely that rarity adds value only by piggybacking on some other
aesthetic merit, such as the initial attractiveness of the species’ members.
As well as a species’ low membership, other forms of rarity might feature in our
aesthetic experience of animals. For instance, an individual may be markedly unusual
or aberrant within its species. It is not common, however, that what makes an
individual aberrant as a member of its species is also aesthetically improving. No
doubt this is because typicality and formal integrity are expected in biological kinds,
not merely matters of statistical regularity. So, in the animal kingdom, only certain
types of individual rarity are likely to be found valuable by human aesthetes, as against
being considered abominations. Among these are conditions that affect bodily color or
markings, such as albinism, leucism, erythrism, and melanism.
Yet another kind of rarity is that in which a species displays features that are
uncommon in its genus or for animals more generally. The length of the giraffe’s
neck and the zebra’s complex black and white striping are examples. The rarity of such
features can be a factor in the aesthetic experience to which their contemplation might
give rise. But in this variety of rarity, as in the two discussed above, it is likely that the
apprehension of rarity does not alone initiate aesthetic pleasure, but rather that it
augments aesthetic inclinations stimulated by some other aspect of the animal.
Non-biological groundings for aesthetic responses
to animals
Where the aesthetic response to an animal depends on or is supplemented by awareness
of its rarity, the connection with biology is at best indirect and distant. Some other
aesthetic approaches to animals have no biological basis at all.
We might regard animals as works of art and appreciate their aesthetic properties as
we would do for artworks. Some people have done so quite literally. Probably one
78
THE AESTHETIC

such was Archdeacon William Paley in his Natural Theology; or, Evidences of the Existence
and Attributes of the Deity, Collected from the Appearances of Nature of 1802. Paley regarded
beauty of form as a general property of all animal species and as the product of God’s art
and skill. His view echoes a medieval theological tradition that afﬁrms God as the
source of all the world’s beauty.
Non-creationists can adopt the same attitude to nature imaginatively. They can
entertain the thought that animals are living artworks and appreciate them accordingly.
They listen to the songs of the nightingale or of the humpback whale as if these are
musical compositions, just as they might regard foggy beachscapes in terms of
J. M. W. Turner’s paintings, or sun-dappled meadows and haystacks as Impressionist
creations.
Instead of relating nature imaginatively to art, as was just described, an alternative is
the self-conscious adoption of an aesthetic attitude that abstracts and distances what is
viewed, both from its natural realm and from its living, organic existence, so that it can
be appreciated purely as a formal, expressive, or sensory arrangement. For instance,
birds of paradise could be viewed as kinetic, kaleidoscopic sculptures. Nick Zangwill, a
defender of Kantian formalism in aesthetics, writes:
Consider the elegant and somewhat dainty beauty of a polar bear swimming underwater . . .
Need one consider the underwater-swimming polar bear as a beautiful living thing or a beautiful
natural thing or just as a beautiful thing? I think this last will do . . . [As a spectacle] it has a free,
formal beauty.
Overview
So far I have discussed a number of bases for humans’ aesthetic interest in animals.
Indeed, the goal was to display the multiplicity of aesthetic approaches to animals and
the extent to which some of them are distanced from evolutionary considerations. To
recapitulate, they are:
1. We aesthetically admire features in them that are similarly appealing in humans.
Among these are human ﬁtness indicators, such as grace. Such an interest
sometimes tracks features that are incidentally relevant to the animal’s ﬁtness,
but in other cases involves inappropriate anthropomorphism, including the
attribution to animals of human personalities. One strong response that seems
to be automatically triggered is a positive reaction to animals with features like
those of human babies. Another is to nonhuman baby mammals.
2. As part of our constant project of reading the minds and characters of others,
including other animals where this is possible, we favor and ﬁnd appealing
animals that are like us.
3. We also reﬂect on their nonhuman natures and appreciate their adaptedness to
their ways of life.
HUMANS’ AESTHETIC APPRECIATION OF NONHUMAN ANIMALS
79

4. The animal’s color, form, or movement automatically triggers our sensory biases
in a positive fashion.
5. We resonate to animals’ mutual displays, social interactions, or environmental
locatedness. This response may contribute to understanding animals in terms of
their life paths and it can bring in wider ecological perspectives.
6. Animals are included in our environmental aesthetic tastes, either as indicators of
the state of the environment as this is relevant to humans or by virtue of their
direct roles—for example, as food, vermin, predators—in our ancestors’ lives.
7. Rarity can add aesthetic value to an animal’s initial aesthetic interest. An animal
can be rare or unusual because the species has few members, in virtue of its
individual characteristics, or because its species displays features that are unusual
for its genus or class.
8. We admire animals’ aesthetic character as a result of viewing them literally as
God’s artworks or imaginatively as pseudo-artworks.
9. We abstract their appearances from their natural context in order to engage
aesthetically with these as formal, expressive, or sensory arrays.
Some of these sources of aesthetic experience appear to have a biological grounding
(1–6) but only 6 is likely to be directly adaptive, while 2, 3, and 5 may be indirectly so
by enhancing the understanding and instincts that make for success in human hunters
of animals. Regarding animals in terms of human ﬁtness characteristics and reacting to
their triggering of our perceptual biases are likely to be non-adaptive by-products of
behaviors that are adaptive elsewhere. Others (8, 9, and probably 7) are the product of
cultural learning.
The rich variety possible in aesthetic reactions is illustrated by the way in which these
various kinds of response can interact. Sometimes they can be mutually reinforcing.
Where what is adaptive for us is also adaptive to the animal that is the aesthetic
reaction’s focus, 1, 3, and 5 may be involved. More generally, our aesthetic engage-
ment with animals can be stimulated simultaneously via multiple routes. For instance,
with deer we might respond to their elegance (1), to the large-eyed, baby-like faces of
the does (1), because they signify the health of the environment (6), because they had a
positive status as a game animal for our ancestors (6) and remain iconic in this respect
for us (5), because of the skill with which they move so silently and dexterously
through woods and thickets (3), because we empathize with the solicitude they
show to their young (2), and because they are uncommon in the local environment (7).
In other cases, however, different bases for an aesthetic response might work against
each other. For instance, we might admire the snake as beautiful, but only by self-
consciously putting to one side the tendency to view it as a poisonous threat that as
such is ugly, repulsive, forbidding, or threateningly sublime (6). In admiring the snake
we might adopt the aesthetic attitude that abstracts away from the living creature to
formal, expressive, and sensory features its appearance presents (9). Or instead, perhaps
we become so interested in the lives of snakes that the primitive fear response is
80
THE AESTHETIC

inhibited and we marvel to see the exquisiteness with which each species meshes with
and enriches its environment (3).
In yet further cases, one kind of aesthetic response might be facilitated by another on
the list, as when the aesthetic interest stimulated by peacocks is augmented on
encountering an albino one (7).
Sometimes the response is likely to be direct and unreﬂective (1, 2, 4, and 6), while
at others it is more often deliberately adopted (3, 5, 8, and 9). The rarity of an animal
might affect us in either mode, I suspect. Where it is reﬂective (in 3, 5, 8 but not 9), the
response is usually of a kind that might be educated and reﬁned, both by practice and
by acquiring further relevant information. In most responses, the fact that the target is a
living animal is important, while in others (4 and 8) this might be only indirectly
pertinent or (9) even irrelevant. Among those approaches that focus on the living
animal, some (3, sometimes 1 and 5) provide knowledge of its nature as such, though
only 3 speciﬁcally targets this knowledge. With the exception of 3, all the responses are
motivated and guided by our human biases and interests.
Of the various routes to aesthetic experience outlined here, the Kantian formalist is
likely to focus on 9—that in which we abstract from the animal’s appearance a formal
array and respond to that. He will regard 4—where the animal triggers human sensory
biases in a pleasing fashion—as engendering responses that are non-aesthetic, being too
simple and unreﬂective. The kind of experiences that go with 3, 5, 7, and 8—
appreciating animals’ adaptedness to their way of life, resonating with their mutual
displays or environmental locatedness, appreciating their rarity, or considering them as
works of art—is too conceptualized to count as aesthetic for the Kantian. While that
elicited by 1, 2, and 6—admiring in animals indicators of human ﬁtness, favoring
animals that are like us, and responding to animals according to their roles in our
ancestors’ lives—is too close to human interests and purposes.
By contrast, the theorist who insists that animals must be appreciated for their own sake
as animals emphasizes 3—how they are matched to their lifeways—and those examples
of 1 and 4 that succeed in tracking what is relevant to the animals’ capacities and
survival. But this theorist will class the other routes as leading to improper responses,
either because they involve deliberately ignoring the animal’s intrinsic nature or
because our perception of this is distorted by the intrusion of human interests and
values.
Those who regard aesthetic experience primarily as a natural, often unreﬂective
response emerging out of our normal engagement with the everyday might highlight
1, 2, 4, and 6. Whereas those who take our engagement with art as the paradigm would
emphasize 8—considering animals as works of art; and perhaps also 7 and 9—appre-
ciating their rarity or ignoring their animality to treat them formally as sensory arrays.
In Chapter 1, I defended a broad account of the aesthetic that encompasses all the
kinds of experience described in this chapter, and I outlined my objections to narrower
conceptions: aesthetic experience can be both simple and cognitively complex, it can
be “interested” in functionality and motivated by human purposes. It can be partial,
HUMANS’ AESTHETIC APPRECIATION OF NONHUMAN ANIMALS
81

even shallow. It can be directed to the everyday and nature. And it can engage all the
senses.
Objections
I will not re-litigate those earlier arguments, but in this section I will offer replies to
further objections that might be proposed against my account of the range of aesthetic
responses that might be directed to animals.
The ﬁrst complains that I present humans’ aesthetic experience of animals as
sometimes functionally valuable—that is, as valued for the sake of evolutionary
beneﬁts; when I should describe it as intrinsically important—that is, as valued for its
own sake. If we ﬁnd animals beautiful or awesome, this is because we react positively to
their aesthetic characteristics without regard to the roles they played in the lives of our
distant ancestors, say, or of how they resemble humans in some of their attributes, or of
how they are rare.
I argued in Chapter 1 that a concern with functionality need not be opposed to
aesthetic judgment—indeed, the judgment of functional beauty links the two—so we
need not accept the posited opposition between them. But for this particular objection
a different reply is in order: although I have offered a functional (evolutionary) account
of the bases of some types of aesthetic interest we take in animals, I have not suggested
that considerations of utility always feature in the experience. When a modern-day
tourist is moved by the beauty of some pristine landscape, of course it is not the
case that she calculates that it provides good hunting, caves for shelter, drinking water,
and the like. Rather, she ﬁnds the beauty of the scene in the way it beckons to and
charms her. That is, she experiences the beauty as intrinsic to the scene. Similarly, we
contemporary humans are prepared to pay more for houses that catch the sun, are
elevated, and provide prospects of water and woods because we ﬁnd them attractive
and pleasant, not because these preferences mimic those of our ancestors. All this is
consistent, however, with the view that adaptive pressures shaped the preferences we
inherited from our forebears.
Indeed, it is common for evolution to make adaptively useful behaviors self-
motivating—in other words pleasurable in themselves, so that they are pursued for
their own sakes—rather than relying on the agent consciously to make the evolution-
arily relevant calculations for herself. When we recall that adaptive success is scored in
terms of the fecund descendants a person breeds, and that success measured that way is
not always conducive to the person’s ﬂourishing as an individual, we can see that
calculations in terms of self-interest could be maladaptive. It is a good thing that we
ﬁnd sex pleasurable, babies irresistible, and our own children fascinating and fulﬁlling,
given how costly they are in terms of time and resources to produce and raise!
A second objection observes that, when we consciously consider the adaptedness of
animals, we ﬁnd that all thriving creatures are well adapted to their environments and
manners of existence, but we do not ﬁnd all of them aesthetically appealing. Hyenas
82
THE AESTHETIC

and vultures, for instance, have unattractive appearances, and learning about the life for
which they are so perfectly adapted is liable to decrease their appeal yet further, not to
enhance it. The same is true when we focus on parts or aspects of animals. The pig’s
snout might be ideal for snufﬂing out food and the bat’s facial appendages might be
superbly designed for echo-location, but learning of this takes nothing from the
aesthetic ugliness they display.
I allow that a person could consider the functional adaptedness of animals or of their
parts without thereby looking to ﬁnd aesthetic properties in this and without having a
positive aesthetic reaction. It may be that his experience disregards the item’s aesthetic
features and is not found intrinsically appreciable in an aesthetic manner, with only the
information thereby extracted being valued. Alternatively, it could be that the attempt
to consider that experience from an aesthetic point of view is blocked or counter-
balanced by other aesthetic reactions of a negative kind. For instance, we might ﬁnd
hyenas and vultures unappealing because of their roles as dangers, competitors, and as
scavengers in our ancestors’ lives, or see the small-eyed, long-nosed faces of pigs as
unattractive, or equate the bat’s facial excrescences with disﬁguring mutations.
Some people may not be able to move beyond such negative reactions. Others can,
however. Provided such a person perceives and delights in the exquisite ﬁne-tuning of
the animal or its features to its environment and mode of life, I see no reason to deny
that her experience is aesthetic. She is like the ornithologist who sees the Bar-tailed
Godwit as an awesome traveler, and I see no reason to withhold the term aesthetic
from her response. In other words, we are likely to ﬁnd “ugly” animals aesthetically
appealing, I think, provided we can focus on their way of life and their adaptedness
to it.
The ﬁnal objection maintains that my account, with its evolutionary tilt, under-
estimates the important role played by culture in directing our aesthetic taste toward
animals.
My primary goal is to describe the roots of our aesthetic preferences with respect to
animals, and because these often appear to run deep, indeed to reﬂect a human nature
we share in common, I have placed the emphasis accordingly. It is not my purpose to
downplay culture, however, or to deny the intimacy of the relation between nature
and nurture. Many of our desires, preferences, and behaviors may be biologically
grounded, even where the manner of their expression is inﬂuenced by our cultural
locations. The deep-seated tendency to display manual dexterity and other skills might
be demonstrated in one case by hitting a stone with a stick and in another by ﬁne
control of the computer’s ﬂight simulator. Similarly, even if the propensity to create
and enjoy art has a biological foundation, what can count as art at any given time
depends on what has been art up to that time and who presents it, both of which in
turn are contingent on the historical path of the art tradition in question.
When it comes to the aesthetics of animals, I think there is less room for cross-
cultural variation than there is within art. Nevertheless, there can be no denying the
signiﬁcance of cultural factors in directing our approach to animals. For instance, which
HUMANS’ AESTHETIC APPRECIATION OF NONHUMAN ANIMALS
83

animals count as rare will depend on where we happen to be, not only in terms of
habitat but also with respect to the history of the human use of animals in the area and
the human modiﬁcation of the environment. It is also relevant that humans control the
breeding of some species or populations of animals and that they sometimes appeal to
aesthetic criteria in deciding what features to breed for. (Sometimes this is to the
animal’s detriment. For instance, the ﬂat noses of Persian and Himalayan cats make
their breathing difﬁcult and cause health problems.) Meanwhile, a person’s knowledge
of natural history, both practical and theoretical, depends on his cultural circumstances
and opportunities, and this in turn affects how his experience of animals can be
cognitively informed. Similarly, if a person approaches nature through the prism of
art, the shape of that prism will be dictated by his knowledge of his culture’s art.
Some of our aesthetic responses to animals, such as the reaction to cockroaches, seem
basic and reﬂex-like. Yet even these can be subject to cultural correction or alteration,
as is apparent from the fact that the people of some cultures are repelled by insects that
in other cultures are relished as culinary delicacies. Dogs are eaten in some societies and
kept as pets in others. As well, there is room for a range of individual differences
concerning such matters. Tarantulas, snakes, rats, and ferrets are kept as pets by some
people, who appreciate them aesthetically. Many animal lovers are also meat-eaters.
And some people favor bloodsports, such as cockﬁghting, and see the birds’ mortal
combat in positive aesthetic terms.
As regards food, there is no doubt that humans can be very ﬂexible in what they eat.
Of course, this creates scope for the exclusion of potentially nourishing creatures from
the menu for purely social reasons. Note the many and various religious prohibitions
on eating this or that creature at this or that time. And children are taught to swallow
their culture’s food values and norms along with the meal, with the result that
distinctive cultural food preferences are readily transmitted. Moreover, we might
ﬁnd it impossible to bring ourselves to eat (or keep down) some exotic foodstuff that
otherwise would be nourishing. Most of us would react that way to cooked human
ﬂesh, I guess. So differences in cuisine are to be expected from culture to culture. We
can also anticipate, however, that extreme conditions of starvation might lead people
to be willing to try foods they would not otherwise countenance. It is not difﬁcult to
imagine circumstances under which a rat might be viewed as a mouth-watering morsel.
As for individual differences, they are consistent with an account that assumes an
underlying human nature. And it is often the case that those who adopt unusual pets
that might generally be viewed in negative aesthetic terms have the aim of proving
their unconventional, independent, or rebellious natures, even if they also have
genuine aesthetic preferences for the animals they choose. It has been observed that
pet owners like animals that resemble their appearance, or that they use their pets in
other ways as emblematic of their wider tastes and self-image.
So it is not my goal to undersell the importance of culture or individual taste in the
aesthetic approach we take to animals. Indeed, I have been concerned to illustrate the
wide variety of sources for aesthetic experiences of animals, including the purely
84
THE AESTHETIC

cultural. But I do not interpret the diversity of our attitudes and responses to animals
as showing that we are entirely free of biologically rooted aesthetic inclinations.
Rather, I see them as pointing to the ﬂexibility of a human nature that emerges from
the complex interaction of the genotype—the totality of the individual’s genetic
inheritance—with its environment.
HUMANS’ AESTHETIC APPRECIATION OF NONHUMAN ANIMALS
85

6
Landscape Aesthetics
In Chapter 4, I made reference to the national surveys conducted by Vitaly Komar and
Alexander Melamid. They asked people what they would prefer to see in paintings, but
I interpreted the responses to the questions as revealing people’s preferences about
landscapes.
The ﬁrst survey was of 1,001 adults in the US. The result was at about a 95 percent
conﬁdence level—that is, there was only a 1 in 20 likelihood that the results were
thrown up by chance. There were follow-up focus groups and town hall meetings.
Further surveys were conducted in China, Denmark, Finland, France, Iceland, Kenya,
Russia, Turkey, and Ukraine. Together, these ten countries are said to represent
32 percent of the world’s population. There are apparently some minor differences
between the surveys, though none of these appear to bias the results of the questions
concerning animals, habitats, and human subjects.
Melamid summed up the results this way:
In every country the favorite color is blue, and almost everywhere green is second . . . Every-
where [the] people want outdoor scenes, with wild animals, water, trees, and some people . . .
Except for China, of course, which is a really special case . . . where [the] majority is not sure
about almost everything . . . [Those Chinese who are sure] want a blue landscape . . . with
domestic animals. This is the breakthrough: Chinese alone clearly prefer the domestic animals.
They [also] are [the] only people we have polled who want portraits [that is, studio pictures of
animals rather than showing them in a natural setting].
Melamid is right to insist on the clear preference for showing animals in natural
rather than in posed studio settings (66 percent vs 7 percent aggregated; in US alone, 89
percent vs 4 percent); and, in general, for outdoor scenes over interiors (66 percent vs 6
percent; in US alone, 88 percent vs 5 percent). But many of the other results are more
equivocal than his account indicates. In the aggregated result, domesticated animals
come out ahead of wild ones (30 percent vs 26 percent; in US alone, 27 percent vs 51
percent) and many wanted both (23 percent; in US alone, 7 percent). While the
inclusion of people was favored, there was division over whether they should be
historical, ordinary, or both (respectively 25 percent, 25 percent, 28 percent; in US
alone, 6 percent, 41 percent, 50 percent) and over whether there should be one person
or a group (30 percent vs 26 percent; in US alone, 34 percent vs 48 percent). Of those
who liked outdoor scenes better in the US survey, 49 percent opted for lakes/rivers/

oceans, 19 percent for forests, and 18 percent for ﬁelds/rural, with only 5 percent for
houses/buildings and 3 percent for cities. (The aggregated results for the same question
are not provided.) It may be true, as Melamid says, that many people wanted to see
trees, but only “forests” in the previously mentioned question refers to them explicitly.
Moreover, a signiﬁcant minority have a predilection for farmed over wild landscape.
It is tempting to read the results this way: that there is a universal preference for
natural landscapes showing (potable) water, (open) vegetation, (game) animals, and
people (relatives and members of our group), all of which were essential for the survival
of our ancient predecessors. For generation after generation before the Holocene
(about 10 ka), our Pleistocene forerunners sought such habitats in order to promote
their survival. Our liking for such landscapes is aesthetic in character. We have those
tastes because our distant ancestors also experienced similar aesthetic preferences and
passed them down to us: either they are genetic or we have a genetic disposition to
learn and remember responses of this kind more readily than others. And now to tie the
knot with evolution more closely: the landscape aesthetic of our foraging forebears of
the late Pleistocene and earlier was adaptive for them. They were guided by their
aesthetic predilections to choose habitats that happened to be ones in which they could
raise comparatively more offspring. Other people lacking an aesthetic sense, or with
different habitat tastes, had comparatively fewer offspring and are not among our
ancestors. Denis Dutton sums up:
This fundamental attraction to certain types of landscape is not socially constructed but is present
in human nature as an inheritance from the Pleistocene, the 1.6 million years during which
human beings evolved.
The biophilia hypothesis
The sociobiologist E. O. Wilson writes:
Our relationship to Nature is primal. The emotions it evokes arose during the forgotten
prehistory of mankind, and hence are deep and shadowed . . . [I]t would be quite extraordinary
to ﬁnd that all the rules of learning bias related to the ancestral world have been erased during the
past several thousand years.
He introduced the term “biophilia”—“the innate tendency to focus on life and lifelike
processes”—as a label for the attraction nature holds for the human mind and
sensibility. Roger Ulrich, a behavioral scientist, glosses the biophilia thesis as follows:
Regarding biophilia, the basic proposition is that certain advantages associated with natural
settings during evolution were so critical for survival as to favor selection of individuals with a
disposition to acquire, and then retain, various adaptive positive/approach responses to unthreat-
ening natural conﬁgurations and elements. From this it follows as a remnant of evolution,
modern humans might have a biologically prepared readiness to learn and persistently retain
certain positive responses to nature but reveal no such preparedness for urban or modern
elements and conﬁgurations.
LANDSCAPE AESTHETICS
87

The thesis is widely supported by evolutionary psychologists and others.
The sufﬁx “philia”—that is, love of—indicates the emotionally charged character of
the response, which is typically construed as an aesthetic one. It is not as if we
impersonally arrive at some intellectual judgment of the positive (or negative) value
of some habitat; rather, the reaction is deep and visceral.
It is sometimes suggested that the judgment had to be rapid—spontaneous and
uncalculating—because natural selection favored speed as well as accuracy. I am not
sure that this claim is convincing. It is to be expected that people might reﬂect deeply
and take their time when considering where to live. Provided the risk of exploring an
environment in depth is low, given our lengthy breeding season it would pay not to be
too hasty in assessing a potential home. The evolutionary psychologist Judith Heerwa-
gen and ecologist Gordon Orians provide a more plausible model: there is a fast,
“emotional” assessment as to whether to stay or move on. This takes account of direct
or indirect signs of edible species, water, and the like. If the initial decision is to stay, a
much slower and more cognitive evaluation is undertaken, probably over days or
weeks. This considers signs of the long-term productivity and safety of the environ-
ment and leads to a decision to remain longer or to search elsewhere.
When we consider the behavior of our pre-human Hominin ancestors though, it is
relevant to acknowledge their limited cognitive and communicative capacities. If they
were to survive and reproduce successfully, they had to distinguish desirable from
undesirable habitats. For them, this could not be a matter of deep ratiocination or
elaborate discussion; rather, it would involve being drawn to one but not to another
tract of land.
Does this get us to the conclusion that our ancestors relied on an aesthetic sense in
choosing where to live? Not exactly. Finding a habitat desirable is not the same as
ﬁnding it beautiful. Unfortunately, most of those who write on landscape aesthetics
equate the two without argument. That is, they make the error I identiﬁed as common
among scientists in Chapter 1: that of regarding as aesthetic any perceptually based
evaluation.
Here are some examples. Stephen Kaplan, an environmental psychologist, maintains
that a response is aesthetic provided it is a positive or negative affective reaction not
based on conscious cognition and, of course, suggests that the environment elicits such
reactions. Paul Trout, an English literature academic, writes:
Our humanoid ancestors found physically pleasurable (one might say “beautiful”) those geo-
graphical areas and those natural and human events that promoted their survival.
Jay Appleton holds:
The satisfaction which we derive from the contemplation of an environment, and which we call
“aesthetic,” arises from a spontaneous reaction to that environment as a habitat, that is to say as a
place which affords the opportunity for achieving our simple biological needs.
88
THE AESTHETIC

As I noted in Chapter 1, what is attractive is not always beautiful. We can be drawn to
things for other reasons. Nevertheless, this is not the place to dig in our heels, I think.
Given the broad account of the aesthetic I defended in Chapter 1, the reactions to
landscape discussed by evolutionary psychologists and others almost certainly do
qualify as aesthetic. Aesthetic reactions vivify the attractiveness or otherwise of their
objects, thereby bringing their objects into salience. That is how the reaction takes on
its functional role in the ecology of the individual, how it more strongly comes to
guide their behavior. That, I assume, is what ﬁnally justiﬁes the equation by evolu-
tionary psychologists of the positive (or negative) reaction to landscapes with an
aesthetic response. And this equation is made more plausible by the aesthetic character
of the equivalent response among present-day humans.
The environment of evolutionary adaptedness
In Chapter 3, I introduced the notion of the environment of evolutionary adaptedness.
The idea is that many of the human behaviors we see today are inherited from our
Pleistocene ancestors for whom they were adaptive in addressing the challenges they
faced in the environment of the time. On this view, the environment consisted of a
stable set of speciﬁc elements or posed a uniform set of problems that constrained the
lives of our predecessors. Features that allowed our ancestors to reproduce compara-
tively more successfully under the given constraints and that could be passed to their
offspring were adaptive. For instance, it is commonly suggested that full bipedalism
went with a change from foraging in an arboreal, forest habitat to hunting and
gathering in open grassland, where the ability to scan the distance and to carry tools
and bags were advantageous. We are the heirs and possessors of those prior adaptations.
Accordingly, with knowledge of human nature and of the environment of our
ancestors, we should be able to work out what is adaptive and how this served to
promote human evolution.
Evolutionary psychologists have approached the issue of the environment of evolu-
tionary adaptation as it applies to humans in several ways. They consider what humans
would need in order to ﬂourish under the conditions of the late Paleolithic. Alterna-
tively they attempt more precisely to identify the actual environment in which modern
humans evolved. In the following I consider both approaches.
The Garden of Eden
What would be the optimal environment in which small groups of hunter-gatherers
could ﬂourish? Their ﬁrst necessity was potable water. This might be collected as rain,
or melted from snow or ice, but the most convenient sources would be springs, rivers,
or lakes. Next was food. Because we are omnivores there are many possibilities: plant
matter (including leaves, roots, berries, fruit, and nuts), honey, insects, meat (derived
from birds, reptiles, ﬁsh, shellﬁsh, other sea foods, and mammals, and including muscle,
organs, fat, and marrow from bones), perhaps along with some mineral salts. An
LANDSCAPE AESTHETICS
89

abundance of food would be desirable, either in the form of plentiful quantities of a few
favored species or because the habitat sustains a high variety of ﬂora and fauna. Ideally,
seasonal variations would not be too extreme or, alternatively, different foods would
become available on a seasonal basis.
Another environmental consideration was the provision of a base where the group
could keep safe. Caves, for example, provided shelter from the weather and were
defensible against predators. Also important for safety was the possibility of over-
viewing the area and navigating within it while minimizing the risks of ambush by
predators or of injury. With this in mind, the base camp could be located in an elevated
position and there should be open areas of traversable ground at the camp and at places
where food would be gathered or where hunting would occur. Multiple sites offering
prospect and refuge would be valuable in the group’s home range.
Stephen Kaplan characterizes the features we would seek in a landscape at a higher
level of abstraction. They are complexity (the number and kinds of elements in the
scene), coherence (the ease with which one can understand the scene’s organization),
and legibility (the navigability of the scene).
The presence of signs of human habitation
Some authors suppose that signs of human presence in an area—the smoke of cooking
ﬁres, for example—offered an aesthetic positive. Obviously such signs were indicative
in general of the habitability of the area, but I am skeptical that they would cause the
unthinking aesthetic responses discussed so far. Among our distant ancestors, the sight
of home and hearth surely would have a heart-warming effect, as would recognition of
their allies and group members. But a hostile response to strangers is too common for
people not to be wary in humanly occupied settings that are unfamiliar to them.
Between small bands of foraging peoples, the course of social relationships was likely to
involve careful plotting. How our ancient ancestors were affected by evidence of the
presence of people they did not know is likely to depend on the history and conditions
of their social experience. The resulting feelings would not have been instinctual and
were as likely to be negative as positive.
The situation for present-day people living in peaceful communities is different. We
are likely to respond positively to signs of human habitation in the landscape, even
where we are in unfamiliar territory. In general, such signs indicate the accessibility of
the environment and the availability of assistance, should it be needed. But matters
were unlikely to have been so predictable for our distant predecessors, so it is unlikely
that they shared our attitude to such signs.
The winding road and mystery
I am doubtful also about another claim: that we appreciate the sense of mystery in an
environment that hints at possibilities beyond its boundary, for instance, with a path
that disappears round the edge of a mountain. Waxing lyrical, Dutton describes the
90
THE AESTHETIC

view of a winding road that is sometimes lost in a forest and that is ﬁnally glimpsed far
up the valley.
Such scenes can cause people to stop in their tracks, transﬁxed by the intense sense of longing and
beauty, determined to explore that valley, to see where the road leads. We are where we are
today because our primordial ancestors followed paths and riverbanks over the horizon.
Yet talk of roads and paths is fanciful or metaphoric. Small groups of hunter-gatherers
travelling on foot and without domestic animals were very unlikely to mark the land by
their passage in a fashion that could be seen at a far distance.
The presupposition here appears to be that we are dynamic explorers, excited to
push beyond the next ridge or to pass through the surrounding forest in order to
discover the hidden, preferably greener grasses that lie in our future. The backstory,
I suspect, is the fact that commentators are impressed by the apparently rapid spread of
Homo sapiens following their emergence from north-eastern Africa about 70 ka. Those
who eventually turned west reached Britain by 30 ka. Others arrived in Australia
as early as 50 ka. They crossed by land into north-west America by 15 ka and settled
the north of South America by 12 ka. Robin Dunbar, an evolutionary psychologist,
describes these migrations variously as “racing,” “surging,” and “explosive expansion.”
When we compare the distances to the timespans involved, however, the rate
of movement can look leisurely. Admittedly, the routes taken no doubt were
indirect, but even allowing for that, the rate of progress is modest. Given the dates
mentioned earlier, people could get from Alaska to Peru at a rate of 2 miles (or less than
3 kilometers) per year by the direct route. From Turkey to Britain, Turkey to Australia,
and Turkey to eastern Siberia the rate is considerably less than 1 mile per year. Joseph
S. Weiner, an evolution theorist and physiologist, says:
The expansion of the sapiens species went on slowly and inexorably . . . So slow was the
expansion of pre-agricultural populations . . .
I do not mean to deny that we are a curious and exploratory species or that foragers
would not be nomadic or migratory, but it would be a mistake to underestimate the
comfort of familiar territory and the terror posed by the unknown. After all, if one has
reached maturity in a habitat, that fact is prima facie evidence of its suitability and
explains why adults tend to prefer the environments with which they are most familiar.
If we really are more inclined to be home bodies than global sprinters, it is not plausible
to suggest that the mystery of distant landscapes has a magnetic fascination for us. The
inclination toward mystery in landscape recorded in present-day surveys may be real
enough, but I doubt that the same reaction was present in our ancient ancestors.
Empirical evidence for the hypothesis
Evidence in favor of the biological foundation of our universal and ancient aesthetic
reactions to nature comes from a variety of sources. Preference studies have shown that
people favor urban environments that include plants over ones that do not, and gardens
LANDSCAPE AESTHETICS
91

and parkland over predominantly urban environments. By contrast, thick forest and
desert are assessed negatively as places to live. Moreover, our life choices bear out these
predilections. People garden and decorate their houses and ofﬁces with plants and
pictures of natural scenes. The most highly priced real estate inevitably provides an
elevated outlook over parkland with water or sea. As E. O. Wilson puts it:
The favored living place of most peoples is a prominence near water from which parkland can be
viewed. On such heights are found the abodes of the powerful and rich . . . In ancient, more
practical times the topography provided a place to retreat and a sweeping prospect from which to
spot the distant approach of storms and enemy forces . . .
Other studies show the psychological, health, and recovery beneﬁts of natural
landscapes. Leisure activities in such habitats reduce stress and create broadly positive
emotional shifts. Views of urban landscapes with vegetation produce less anxiety than
those of urban settings without vegetation. Hospital rooms and prison cells without
outlooks or pictures of nature have a long-term detrimental effect on health and
recovery from stress. It has been suggested that the reduction of stress can improve
performance on higher cognitive tasks and that exposure to natural settings may
improve long-term memory, language skills, and creative thinking.
Consideration of landscape paintings further supports central tenets of the theory. As
compared to paintings of sunrise, paintings of sunset (when people should most wish to
be under shelter) are higher in refuge symbols, such as lighted buildings with smoke
coming from their chimneys, and the people in the paintings are closer to the refuges
shown. Meanwhile, paintings by women have a higher degree of refuge symbolism
than men’s, which emphasize prospects more. When John Constable’s sketches are
compared with his ﬁnished paintings, it is apparent that he supplemented the scenes
with refuges, water, animals, and people, and where necessary opened the view to the
horizon. Both Constable and J. M. W. Turner paid more attention than their pre-
decessors to clouds as harbingers of the weather and used this to color the emotional
tone of their works.
Where landscape is the subject of photography, ﬁlm, cartoon, and literary or poetic
description, the work’s form and expressive character often depend on the emphasis
given to features indicative of prospect, refuge, and hazard—the latter being environ-
mental features that threaten risk, injury, or confusion.
It is also observed that landscape design, urban planning, and interior architecture all
create their own versions of positive landscape features of prospect and refuge and are
assessed aesthetically on this basis. Appleton proposes:
Golf is a parody of primitive environmental experience in which the basic relationship of man to
habitat is expressed in a system of stylized equivalents whose identity is very thinly disguised.
The inhabitants of a housing project designed by Le Corbusier in 1920–21 modiﬁed
the stark buildings to incorporate more refuge characteristics and plants.
92
THE AESTHETIC

Most of this evidence is inconclusive, however. As was noted earlier, while land-
scapes are favored, a signiﬁcant percentage of people prefer landscapes that show clear
marks of human alteration over wilderness. Moreover, most people are profoundly
insensitive to the history of landscape and take environments tailored by human
intervention over centuries to be “natural.” If you ask someone to name her favorite
natural environment she is liable to choose the Tuscan countryside, the English Lake
District, Greek olive groves, or similar sites that have been extensively modiﬁed by
tree-felling, grazing, and cultivation. For us, insulated as we usually are from nature’s
dangers and extremes, the essence of “nature” is calming rather than threatening. As a
result our forays into nature readily warm our feelings. But our primordial precursors
were constantly immersed in a more hostile, less tamed environment. Even
E. O. Wilson acknowledges the point:
For millions of years human beings simply went at nature with everything they had, scrounging
food and ﬁghting off predators across a known world of a few square miles.
So we should be wary of assuming that the studies just discussed speak to our ancient
predecessors’ response to the environment in which they lived.
Poison oak, mosquitoes, and saber-toothed tigers
The picture so far is too idealized—too much for which “philia” is an appropriate
response and not enough that calls forth fear and loathing. We need also to consider
how the environment can conspire against human ﬂourishing and how our forebears
responded to such factors. That is, we need to take account of what hazards or perils
they faced. After all, negative responses to dangerous or otherwise unfavorable envir-
onments would be no less adaptive than positive reactions to favorable environments.
If there is the connection posited between human landscape preferences and our
evolved natures, we should expect the negative to be no less obvious than the positive.
Waterless areas, oceans, and saline lakes would be unattractive. The same would
apply to places with extreme temperature or altitude. Unnavigable swamps, trackless
deserts, and thick tropical forest would be uncomfortable.
Tundra, ice sheets, and open grassland plains without trees offer neither prospect nor
refuge. In literary works, closed forests go with depression and fear and open plains
without trees are described as desolate. Land that can support only meager vegetation or
few animals would be viewed negatively, as would be habitats with large numbers of
dead or dying plants and animals. Excessive numbers of dangerous predators count
against an environment, as does the presence of mortally threatening poisonous crea-
tures, such as snakes and spiders, and poisonous or stinging plants. Habitats with many
biting insects, or in which humans ﬁnd themselves carrying internal or external parasites,
would be shunned, as would areas in which disease and illness are common. (In listing
the features of the optimal environment, we should have included medicinal plants!)
Of course, our Paleolithic forerunners could not entirely avoid environmental
negatives. For instance, land that sustains large numbers of grazing animals is bound
LANDSCAPE AESTHETICS
93

also to attract predators that not only compete with human hunters but also pose a
danger to them. And lice, ticks, ﬂeas, intestinal worms, and the like have had a long and
intimate association with their human hosts. In practice, our ancestors would have had
to make the best of where they were or could move to. But the negatives, although not
always avoidable, would not have been welcomed. According to the aesthetic theory
of the human environment, these blemishes would have been seen as ugly or repellant,
as undermining the beauty of otherwise attractive sites.
The savanna hypothesis
It is one thing to reason from human needs and vulnerabilities to what would be
desirable or undesirable in the habitat of our foraging predecessors. It is another thing to
determine the concrete environmental challenges they faced and how they adapted to
meet them. In considering this latter issue, evolutionary psychologists have developed
the “savanna hypothesis.” The central claim here is that our Hominin and Homo sapiens
ancestors all evolved in Africa and that the habitat crucial for the selection of their
adaptations was the savannas that appeared at the time.
As a habitat, savanna features open grassland interspersed with stands of trees or
clumps of bushes. It became the home of large herds of grazing animals. (It produces
more harvestable food than equatorial forest and both wetter and drier habitats.) These
animals would have been a vital source of food, whether hunted or scavenged. For our
ancestors, wide-canopied, low-branching acacia trees on the plains and wooded areas
offered refuge from ground predators and views over the grassland.
It has been claimed that evidence for the ongoing attraction to present-day people of
savanna habitats is indicated by their favoring (pictures of ) low-branching broad-
topped trees over alternatives, and by their ability to discriminate in favor of high-
over low-quality savanna tree shapes. More generally, it is thought that we model our
parklands, with their scattered stands of trees in grassland, open vistas to the horizon,
water features, and grazing animals, on the savanna. E. O. Wilson again:
For most of deep history, human beings lived in tropical and subtropical savanna in East
Africa . . . In similar topography modern people choose their residence and design their parks
and gardens . . . In their gardens they plant trees that resemble the acacias, sterculias, and other
native trees of the African savannas.
One study, widely cited as revealing a vestigial, genetic bias toward savanna habitats,
was conducted by John D. Balling, a psychologist, and John H. Falk, an education
researcher. They tested US citizens of a spread of ages with photographs of habitats:
unlike older age groups, children of 8 and 11 years of age signiﬁcantly preferred
savanna over deciduous and coniferous forests as places they would like to live.
(A respect in which this result is startling is that few such children would have had
ﬁrst-hand experience of the pictured habitat—African savanna.) Balling and Falk hold
that “younger children, with overall less experience, are more likely to reveal some
innate predisposition,” which is overridden in later years by fondness for more familiar
94
THE AESTHETIC

environments. They were cautious in interpreting their ﬁndings as giving “limited
support for the hypothesis that people have some innate preference for savanna-like
environments.”
In a later experiment, conducted by the sociologist Elizabeth Lyons, similar out-
comes were obtained; but she argues that these are a function of cultural, gender, and
age factors. In particular, she questions whether the youthful preference for “savanna”
connects with the African savanna as against savanna-like parks and backyards in which
American children spend much of their time. A further experiment, by the human
behavior researchers Erich Synek and Karl Grammer, shows a partial replication of
the original results. They interpret these results not as showing a genetically disposed
preference for savanna but as an incidental consequence of a perceptual processing bias
present in younger children. Young children prefer pictures of low structural com-
plexity; the taste for pictorial complexity increases with age. Pictures of savanna are low
in complexity as regards the density of trees and jaggedness and height of the horizon
compared to pictures of more mountainous woodland habitats.
If the interpretations of Lyons or of Synek and Grammer are correct, young children
are not responding to the African habitat pictured, in which case the savanna hypothe-
sis is not vindicated by their choices. A recent, more multi-dimensional study of US
college students perhaps also counts against the savanna hypothesis. Of the six major
environment types—desert, tundra, grassland, coniferous forest, deciduous forest, and
tropical forest—tundra and coniferous forest were the most favored (judged in terms of
scenic beauty, interest, etc.). Grassland, the environment nearest to savanna, was the
least favored.
The main case against there being an environment
of evolutionary adaptedness
The coherence of the story about the environment of evolutionary adaptedness is open
to doubt. The thesis assumes that strong selection and adaptation in our species’ distant
past was followed by stabilization of traits. These traits then were apparently unaffected
by signiﬁcant changes in the physical environments we occupied in our global dispersal.
And they were unaffected also by dramatic alteration to our social and cultural environ-
ment. These scenarios seem implausible. In addition, some aspects of brain chemistry
suggest that modern humans could not have evolved on the savanna because a marine
diet was essential for the neural changes that went with their emergence as a species.
However, the most compelling arguments against the claim that humans are adapted
to an ancestral environment reject the claimed existence of such a habitat. Environ-
mental variability and instability call into question the idea that there was some speciﬁc
physical habitat in response to which Hominins developed their distinctive features,
such as bipedalism and increasing brain size. And further, our knowledge of the social
environment of our primordial ancestors is insufﬁcient for us to be conﬁdent about
LANDSCAPE AESTHETICS
95

their way of life and about the circumstances to which they had to adapt. These
objections can be applied speciﬁcally to the savanna hypothesis but they have implica-
tions more broadly for the enterprise of identifying connections between ancient
environments and our evolved human nature.
Dramatic changes in climate and habitat in the period show there was no stable
environment of evolutionary adaptation
There is now considerable evidence that our Hominin ancestors, rather than thriving
mainly in a savanna habitat, lived in a variety of habitats, including forest, and that the
spread of grassland (and the savanna) came later in their development than was
previously thought. Bipedalism, increased brain size, and complex sociality are asso-
ciated more with environmental variability than stability.
Studies have revealed that the period leading up to Homo sapiens was one of
considerable environmental and climatic change, so much so that nothing counts as
the Pleistocene environment. For example, fossil plant and pollen evidence shows that
there were dramatic and frequent ﬂuctuations in climate and vegetation when our
predecessors were evolving—for instance, 1.8–1.7 ma at Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania,
where Homo habilis was ﬁrst found and described—and more generally over the past
5 million years. And at the time when psychologically modern humans emerged, the
environment and climate were similarly volatile. In the period spanning the last Ice Age
(75–15 ka), there were 21 events in the northern hemisphere in which an initial
warming by 18F (10C) or more within a few decades was followed by a gradual
cooling over about 1,000 years. Rapid changes in climate and vegetation that went
with such patterns are apparent in a cave used by Neanderthals between 57 and 37 ka.
Evan Hadingham, an archaeologist, concludes:
Just as it is hard to imagine the passing of thousands and thousands of years in the archaeological
layers, so, too, it is difﬁcult to visualize the innumerable swings between open and forested
landscapes, between arid and humid climates.
Similarly, the archaeologist Paul Mellars records signiﬁcant environmental and cultural
changes, including the cessation of cave art, which coincided with the end of the last
glacial period about 12 ka.
Having reviewed the literature on marine oxygen isotope data, ocean dust records,
analysis of wind-blown sand and soil, fossil pollen sequences, soil isotopes, and
estimates of rainfall, temperature, and abundance of fauna as indicators of the habitat
in which Hominin evolution took place (5 ma to 50 ka), the paleoanthropologist
Richard Potts sums up the situation as follows:
Our analysis reveals that habitats of this period underwent large revisions and that populations
were subject to strong inconsistencies in selective environment. Considering the actual evidence,
the view often propounded by evolutionary psychologists, who have made a large impact on the
study of human cognitive evolution, needs to be reassessed. It is patently incorrect to characterize
96
THE AESTHETIC

the human ancestral environment as a set of speciﬁc repetitive elements, statistical regularities, or
uniform problems which the cognitive mechanisms unique to humans are designed to solve.
This portrait of the Pleistocene environment should be discarded and with it the view that the
human mind is composed mainly of innate special-purpose devices or algorithms tied to a
particular array of past adaptive possibilities.
The social environment was more important
I have just suggested that it is not clear that there was a stable, single, physical
environment to which our primordial ancestors adapted. But even if there were, our
ignorance of the social environment that our predecessors shaped for themselves, and
of how this affected their relative ﬁtness, makes it impossible in most cases to determine
what was adaptive and what not. The crucial point here is that, for our species, the
social environment is even more crucial to our survival and success than the physical
one. (In listing the features of the optimal environment, we should have included
belonging to a cooperative and loving group that has peaceful neighbors!) In general,
evolutionary psychologists who discuss the environment of evolutionary adaptation
pay surprisingly little attention to the relevance of the fact that it was made up of other
humans.
We do not know the size of the groups in which our late Pleistocene predecessors
lived—estimates range from 25 to several thousand. We are largely ignorant of the
number of children they tended to have (as a function of birth spacing, infanticide,
and mortality), of their mating practices (serial monogamy, polyandry, polygamy,
mixed), of their group structure (whether they had family units of some kind or,
instead, a core of children and females with satellite males), of their group hierarchy
(matrilineal, patrilineal, shared or divided power), of their religious beliefs and how
these were expressed in ritual practices, of the pattern and procedures of resource
distribution within the group, of their attitudes to the sick and injured, of their adult
life expectancy, or of their home range and seasonal or general mobility. We are
uncertain about their practices of inter- and intra-group trade, about their attitudes
to inter- and intra-group conﬂict, about their approaches to group territoriality,
about the incidence of inter-group ﬁghting, and about the mobility of personnel
between groups.
Meanwhile, though we can study present-day hunter-gatherers, not only do they
differ signiﬁcantly from each other, but also we cannot be sure how accurately they
recapitulate the circumstances of our ancient relatives. As the evolutionary biologist
Robert Foley observes:
Human populations were diversifying and dispersing during the period of evolving anatomical
modernity, and there was subsequently at least partial genetic isolation of many populations . . .
The EEA [environment of evolutionary adaptedness] is a concept that stresses the universal
nature of the human evolutionary heritage, but the fact that geographical diversiﬁcation occurred
LANDSCAPE AESTHETICS
97

during the period when the modern hunter-gatherer way of life evolved means that any
association between hunter-gathering and the EEA will be relatively weak.
I don‘t deny that we can make shrewd guesses about our ancestors’ social circum-
stances, but there are simply too many uncertainties and too many ﬁtness-relevant
variables to take into consideration for us to be conﬁdent about the plausibility of any
account of the overall picture.
People live in all habitats and express aesthetic preferences for those in which they are raised
I noted earlier that certain habitats—shifting sands, swamps, arctic wastes, featureless
ﬂat plains, barren tundra, and dense tropical forest—should produce aesthetically
negative responses because they are not readily conducive to human survival. But
the fact is that humans have colonized all such habitats and have successfully occupied
them for millennia. And it was not as if this occurred only because people were forced
into suboptimal habitats by massive overpopulation in better ones. Moreover, the
aesthetic landscape preferences of adults incline to the natural habitats with which they
are most familiar, rather than to exotic ones. So instead of being seen as ugly (or at best
sublime), such apparently negative habitats can be a source of aesthetic pleasure. It is far
from clear how this is consistent with the thesis of an environment of evolutionary
adaptedness or the landscape aesthetic that is most widely espoused by evolutionary
psychologists.
As their successful settlement makes clear, all such habitats are ones in which humans
can survive. Sometimes there is a degree of adaptation of the body and physiology to
the local conditions. Those who live at altitude become more efﬁcient at extracting
oxygen from the atmosphere. Those who live in polar temperatures tend to become
shorter in stature and with shorter limbs to conserve the area through which heat can
be lost from the body. But by far the most important factors in making such habitats
survivable are cooperation, the shared wisdom of a profound knowledge of how the
environment can be exploited for food and other resources, and a repertoire of
appropriate skills and accompanying technologies.
Of course, it takes a signiﬁcant degree of knowledge for anyone to survive in the
wild over a sustained period. Even I could probably keep myself alive for a time in
temperate woodland toward the end of summer, but I would die within days in these
more extreme environments. That is why they are so forbidding to me. But the arid
wastes of northern Australia might strike an Aborigine very differently, not only
because she is in her ancestral lands but also because she can see the food and water
that are invisible to me, because she can navigate to the resources she needs, because she
knows how and when to conserve her energy, and so on. There is a relativity here of
aesthetic inclination to knowledge and experience that does not directly conform to
the landscape aesthetic as advocated above.
98
THE AESTHETIC

Alternatives to the evolutionary psychologists’
account of landscape aesthetic taste
In this section, I will outline three alternative stories about our taste in landscape: that
its basis is purely cultural, that we have adapted at different times to multiple habitats,
and that, rather than being adapted to one or more habitats, we are adapted to respond
ﬂexibly to the affordances that a variety of habitats offer. I reject the ﬁrst two in favor of
the third.
The role of culture in habitat preference
I have emphasized how the successful negotiation of all environments requires a
considerable degree of social cooperation and taught knowledge, skills, and technol-
ogies. This must have been so for at least several million years in our Hominin past. So
we cannot deny the centrality of culture, construing that term broadly, in our interac-
tion with the environment. And this point is dramatized further by the success with
which humans have settled extreme environments.
In addition, we should be sensitive to changing fashion in human attitudes to
landscape. Whereas earlier untamed nature was regularly perceived as ugly and fearful,
in the eighteenth century the British were drawn to the picturesque in nature; and
European and American Romantics in the nineteenth century found rugged, wild land
sublime. In the late twentieth century, what was suddenly seen as the negative impact
of human actions on the wider environment played a major role in the rise of
conservation movements and Green politics. Obviously there was a cultural impetus
to these alterations in prevailing sensibilities.
Yet the evidence suggests that, whatever the role of culture in channeling and
directing our preferences, there is a strong undercurrent of widely shared responses
to natural environments. By far the majority of the world’s human population live in
sub-tropical and temperate maritime environments that, if they were not already of the
parkland or farmland variety, have been extensively modiﬁed to conform to that type.
I doubt that this is an accidental result of cultural bias. Most people want to feel the
warmth of the sun on their back, to hear gently ﬂowing water, to see trees and grass, to
have open vistas that show the horizon, even if those who are born in deserts,
equatorial forest, or on the arctic ice can accommodate themselves to their different
environmental circumstances. Although they are variable and malleable, I do not think
that everyone’s landscape preferences are entirely and arbitrarily cultural in origin.
Have we adapted to different kinds of habitats?
Consider the deer mouse. Deer mice occupy different kinds of habitats: those raised in
ﬁelds prefer ﬁelds, whereas those raised in woods prefer woods, though ﬁelds are a
more favorable habitat other things being equal. If young born in ﬁelds are moved to
pens in woods, they retain a strong preference for ﬁelds. Indeed, the preference persists
through twenty generations of their descendants, so the basis for the preference must be
LANDSCAPE AESTHETICS
99

partly genetic. Despite this genetic bias, some individuals are sometimes able to
override its force, given that the species occupies diverse habitats. If what is otherwise
the most desirable habitat becomes overpopulated, it will be in the interests of
individuals to exploit other habitats if they can, and if the population later drops, it
will be in the interests of individuals in marginal habitats to ﬁlter back to the most
optimal one.
John Tyler Bonner, an evolutionary biologist, sums up the situation this way:
A character, such as habitat selection, can be simultaneously genetically ﬁxed and environmen-
tally triggered because of a historical accident. Each method of determination of the character
may be the result of selection, but selection at different times in the evolutionary history of the
animal. The fact that they both exist at one time is assumed to be because the ﬁrst to appear was
not erased by the appearance of the second.
In effect, different populations or races of the deer mouse have adapted to different
habitats.
Are humans like the deer mouse? Are different groups genetically programmed to be
adapted to different habitats, but with individuals genetically inclined to favor their
ancestral environment (whichever one that was), yet also capable on occasion of
migrating to a different habitat where that might provide a selective advantage?
There is some plausibility to the suggestion, given that humans do show signs of
compensatory adaptation to suboptimal altitude and temperature extremes, and
given also that we are often strongly attached to the look, smell, and sound of our
home countryside; and despite this, ﬁnally, that we also frequently opt to migrate to
habitats perceived as easier or friendlier. But on the other hand, as a species we have
occupied every kind of habitat—even, for months at a time, the open ocean on ships,
oil rigs, and lighthouses—without this leading to biological modiﬁcation suggestive of
adaptation. And when we have domesticated new environments, this has not been
because a narrow range of desired habitats had become degraded through overpopula-
tion or overexploitation.
It is unlikely that different human populations are adapted to the different habitats
they occupy, except rarely and then only in rather small ways.
The relevant adaptation is our environmental plasticity
Rather than having adapted at different times to many different habitats, it is more
plausible to suggest that we are not adapted to any in particular, but rather that we have
evolved to have the ﬂexibility to make ourselves at home pretty much wherever we
ﬁnd ourselves. This would be an appropriate response to the environmental variety and
inconstancy that our human and Hominin predecessors encountered.
This is the thesis of variability selection defended by Potts. He writes:
Hominid evolution has produced morphological and geographic specialists committed to certain
dietary and climatic conditions. It has also yielded species that excel in behavioral novelty,
100
THE AESTHETIC

diversity, and highly sophisticated use of environmental data. With its metabolically expensive
brain and sophisticated social networks, Homo sapiens is an extreme example of the latter type of
species. Its evolution and singular persistence are, according to the variability-selection hypothe-
sis, intimately linked to the environmental instability that has characterized the Hominid era.
Overview
In this chapter, I have criticized the savanna hypothesis and the assumption that there
was a particular environment to which our ancestors were adapted, one that governed
their landscape tastes, these being tastes we have acquired from them. But my view is
not completely negative. The fact is that we need food, water, and shelter wherever we
ﬁnd ourselves and whatever form our social life takes. This alone may establish a
baseline landscape aesthetic that is applied to varying local conditions. So the simple
story with which we started strikes me as entirely plausible.
Suitably qualiﬁed it goes like this: some physical habitats are obviously more
congenial than others to human ﬂourishing, even if it is true that we often have
shown the cognitive resourcefulness and drive to survive successfully under much
more demanding climatic and environmental conditions. The congenial habitats are
so because they provide more of what we need and make it less costly in terms of time,
resources, and energy to obtain, they pose fewer dangers, and they are more predict-
able and reliable. They were like the Garden of Eden described earlier, but also with
some big cats and bears, snakes and spiders, mosquitoes, body lice, and tapeworms.
People who were naturally drawn to such habitats, who found them appealing and
pleasing, would have had an edge in reproductive success over those who were not.
They would also have been less stressed and more content with their surroundings than
those who lived in more demanding circumstances. Similarly, those who recognized
the threats and challenges of adverse habitats and turned away from those habitats
toward congenial ones were thereby advantaged, other things being equal.
The appeal of friendly habitats and the repulsion of unfriendly ones would inevitably
take on an aesthetic color, I think. The one would come to strike the perceiver as
beautiful, the other as ugly or perhaps as sublime though forbidding. And to the extent
that such preferences are heritable, or the capacities easily to acquire and retain them
are heritable, and given also that the environmental conditions for human ﬂourishing
and well-being remain available, modern-day humans tend to share the same aesthetic
preferences. In these respects there is a natural environmental aesthetic.
Congenial physical habitats are not sufﬁcient to guarantee human ﬂourishing,
however. People in them can be destroyed by natural disasters, such as epidemics,
earthquakes, tsunamis, and volcanic eruptions. But more to the point, their attractive-
ness counts for little if they are shared with other groups that resort often to violent
conﬂict, or if our team members are uncooperative, unreliable, and argumentative. In
the next chapter, I will consider human beauty and link it to the social conditions that
make for peaceful cooperation.
LANDSCAPE AESTHETICS
101

7
The Aesthetics of Human Beauty
Human beauty comes in a great variety of forms. There is beauty in virtuous charac-
ter—in acts of courage, justice, and compassion, for instance. There is beauty of
intellect—in displays of wisdom, knowledge, and precise reasoning, for example.
And in spirituality—in attitudes such as those showing love, devotion, acquiescence,
and aestheticism. Also, human physical beauty appears in many guises. There is the
beauty of a baby’s smile, of foal-like youthful awkwardness, of aged dignity. We can
ﬁnd beauty in the strength and athleticism of a sportsperson, in the grace of a dancer,
and in the manual dexterity of an artisan. But when evolutionary psychologists turn to
human beauty, they focus almost exclusively on youthful female sexual attractiveness
and consider it mostly in the context of mate selection.
Why female beauty? The generalized answer is because heterosexual men value
beauty in women, whereas women value status, control of resources, intelligence,
and kindness in men. Why youthful beauty? Again the generalized answer is because
heterosexual—hereafter I drop this qualiﬁer, though it applies throughout—men aged
above 25 favor mates who are younger than they are and women prefer men who are
older.
While these generalizations do seem to be clearly supported by intra- and cross-
cultural evidence, some qualiﬁcations are immediately in order. It is possible that the
data underestimate the extent to which women value physical male characteristics.
There is plenty of evidence to suggest that women prefer men who are tall, have
prominent jaws, display upper body strength, and have ﬂat stomachs. And these
qualities might rank for women above those mentioned earlier when they are selecting
not the intended father of their children but the candidate for a temporary liaison. (It is
under similar circumstances that men give pre-eminence to physical attractiveness in
women.) Meanwhile, when men are choosing the potential mothers of their children,
they become as fussy as women are about status, kindness, and intelligence in their
partners. In selecting long-term mates, both sexes aim to get the highest quality partner
and future co-parent that they can, given what they have to offer, and much more than
outward appearance is relevant to this judgment of quality.
The analysis of human beauty in terms of female sexual attractiveness has two
consequences. First, it reduces women’s value to their bodies’ appearance. And it sets
the highest value on bodies they will possess for perhaps no more than twenty years, or
that they might never attain. It thereby stereotypes them and characterizes their social

positions and roles as biologically determined. Such views insult women and demean
us all. Because evolutionary psychologists are not always sensitive in how they present
their theories, it is not surprising that many women ﬁnd their views offensive.
Nevertheless, I do not think that evolutionary psychology is inevitably committed to
reduction, stereotyping, and determinism, so I believe it can provide a more credible
and complex account of human sexuality than its critics suppose.
The second consequence of the equation of human beauty with physical sexual
attractiveness is that it makes the notion of human beauty appear to have nothing in
common with the kind of beauty that is aesthetic. Whatever the ordinary concept of
aesthetic beauty comes to, it is not about lust and sex. Prettiness is distinct from the
beauty of art, as we know from many harrowing but beautiful works of art, such as
Shakespeare’s King Lear or Picasso’s Guernica. We might have expected our interest in
human beauty to provide the foremost and most obvious example of a connection
between the aesthetic and evolution, but the account of human beauty that dominates
the writings of evolutionary psychologists does not invite that interpretation.
I will argue that we need a broader account of human beauty—not only by
including the varieties of non-sexual human non-physical beauty that I listed previ-
ously, but also by expanding our understanding of the kind of physical beauty that
interests the evolutionary psychologist. That account will allow us to see that physical
beauty typically presents a genuinely aesthetic character to the human world. It will
also show, incidentally, why we should resist reduction, stereotyping, and determinacy
in the discussion of human physical beauty. But before I get to that part of the agenda,
I brieﬂy review the literature on youthful female beauty.
Human physical beauty
According to evolutionary psychologists, we ﬁnd beautiful and are attracted to features
that are honest signals of ﬁtness. When it comes to mate selection, the relevant signs of
ﬁtness are indicators of health and immunity, fertility, and the viability of future
offspring. Hence the title of a paper on the subject by the evolutionary psychologist
Donald Symons: “Beauty is in the adaptations of the beholder.”
Bodily symmetry and proportion testify to a history of health. The face, in particular,
is a strong indicator, and what makes the face beautiful is symmetry and hypernormalcy
(averageness). Long, glossy hair, a clear complexion, white teeth, and clear eyewhites
and pupils are also indicative of the absence of disease or malnutrition. These same
markers are described as characteristic of female beauty in medieval texts.
Interestingly, we are also drawn to and ﬁnd beautiful unusual faces, provided they
fall within the extremes of the normal range. This is probably an example of what is
called the “peak-shift effect,” in which the exaggeration of a desirable feature makes it
more beautiful. Darwin observed:
THE AESTHETICS OF HUMAN BEAUTY
103

If all our women were to become as beautiful as the Venus de’ Medici, we should for a time be
charmed; but we should soon wish for variety; and as soon as we had obtained variety, we should
wish to see certain characters a little exaggerated beyond the then existing common standard.
Fertility in men is indicated by an adult but youthful and muscled body, vigor, and
good health generally. But because he donates so little at the time of fertilization and his
major contribution is providing security and resources for future children and their
mother, the relevant indicators of male worthiness are more social than physical. In a
woman, fertility is indicated by age—again the face offers the best clues—breasts,
suitable fat depositions, and body shape. Bodily markers that distinguish human
women from the mature females of other primate species, and that therefore indicate
the operation of selection on the basis of male preferences, include round, plump
breasts and buttocks, skin smoothness and depilation, and a low waist-to-hip ratio.
Studies suggest that a waist-to-hip ratio of about 0.7 correlates with men’s judgments
of the beauty of women’s bodies. (The lower the number, the more wasp-like the
build. Men and post-menopausal women of “normal” weight are about 0.9.) This, plus
an appropriate body weight, show a woman to be sexually mature, probably not
pregnant, and endowed with the energy resources to sustain pregnancy.
Concern for the viability of future offspring is apparent ﬁrstly in the incest-blocking
“Westermarck effect,” according to which people raised together from a very young
age do not ﬁnd each other sexually attractive. As a result, the risks of damaging the
genetic stock of offspring through inbreeding are avoided. It emerges also in behaviors
that are likely to promote the child’s genetic diversity and immunity from disease. At
the fertile time of the month, women are attracted to men according to their odor
(among other things no doubt), with the result that they favor men with immune
systems that are different and complementary to their own. And both sexes can ﬁnd
strangers and newcomers to their group—in other words, potential sources of higher
genetic diversity—alluring.
Because we are in competition for mates of quality, it is not surprising that we
enhance our best physical features and try to minimize our worst ones when we can.
Here is an obvious but signiﬁcant point: people go to huge lengths to improve or
accentuate the beauty of their appearance. They use make-up, decoration, and orna-
ment. They adopt various styles of grooming and hairdressing. Their clothing is often
designed to present their body one way or another—as well as to cover it, to show
status, to suit a social situation, and to display personality. They alter their bodies in
ways ranging from exercising for the sake of bigger muscles or dieting to lose weight, to
piercing, tattooing, scariﬁcation, and more extreme effects that are deemed culturally
to signify status or to accentuate beauty.
If attractiveness is to track ﬁtness, it must be a reliable and honest signal, but we fake
it where we can. If men are seeking a mate, they might lie about their wealth and
resources and pretend to be more sharing and caring than they actually are. Corre-
spondingly, women might lie about their age and conceal their sexual histories. When
104
THE AESTHETIC

it comes to physical appearance, men might wear lifts, pad their shoulders, have their
teeth whitened, and don a toupee. Women might wear corsets and uplifting padded
bras, and they might pluck, shave, and dye their hair, or wear wigs or hair extensions.
As a comparatively recent innovation there is the option of cosmetic surgery—facelifts,
the remodeling of facial features, tummy tucks, liposuction, breast implants, and hair
transplants.
But notice that most of these alterations to physical appearance are more about
improving one’s social look and position than about fooling a potential long-term
partner. They are most common as attempts to hold age at bay; the young have far less
need of them. And in any case, courtship is usually sufﬁciently extended that one can
gain a shrewd idea of the package under the wrapping.
Our beautiful ancestors
Evolutionary psychologists claim to have shown that the markers of human physical
beauty are cross-cultural and shaped by evolution. Either these markers signal health
and fecundity generally; or, in the case of secondary sexual characteristics, they are
molded by sexual selection to please the other sex, in which case they might answer to
initially arbitrary preferences but might also signal ﬁtness. Given their model of human
evolution, these psychologists must maintain that our ancient ancestors were attracted
to and found beautiful the physical characteristics we also like. As regards the physical
features discussed above, I assume they are correct, though some explaining remains to
be done.
Given the high infant mortality that was likely in the late Paleolithic, would it not be
more strategic to prefer as mates older, already successful breeders, rather than the
young? Among male chimpanzees, already successful mothers are the most desirable
sexual partners.
In the case of a woman in the Pleistocene choosing a partner, there is a lot to be said
for this plan. It provides the opportunity to see what resources he has accumulated,
how faithful he is, and how supportive he is of his children and their mother. But on
the other hand a portion of his resources are already committed, and if he is such
a good mate and father he should not be prepared to risk what he has in order to take
up with someone new. He would have to be so well-endowed that he could afford
to keep multiple wives and all their children equally well. A better bet overall would be
a younger, childless mate with strong potential for future resources and status. Most
likely, the best male mate would be old enough to display credible potential and a
commitment to ﬁdelity, but not so old as to be already committed elsewhere.
In the case of a man choosing a long-term partner, the strategy of targeting a
successful breeder has one beneﬁt: women who have already borne children are less
likely to die in childbirth. Nevertheless, there would be strong reasons for preferring a
youthful, childless partner. A new wife at 20 has triple the reproductive potential of a
new wife at 30, measured as the average potential offspring a female could produce for
THE AESTHETICS OF HUMAN BEAUTY
105

the remainder of her life. Given that they will nurse their children for several years,
thereby suppressing fertility, and given also the risks of miscarriage and stillbirth, the
mothers of the late Paleolithic might be expected to bear a comparatively small number
of children. If there were regular food shortages, it could take them some time after
weaning to become ﬁt again for pregnancy. Also, the value of having small numbers of
high quality children would make women desire to limit the chances of conception
rather than to seek pregnancy. So we can surmise that large families would have been
abnormal.
If it is true that men of the late Paleolithic favored as mates young women with a
waist-to-hip ratio of 0.7, how can we explain fat Venus ﬁgurines from the period?
While all the men shown in Paleolithic drawings are lean, only 10 percent of the far
greater number of women would be described as slim and many are obese. Few
women of the time would have possessed such ﬁgures. For that matter, neither
would they have gone naked and been without pubic hair, which is how they are
often depicted.
R. Dale Guthrie, a natural historian, argues against different interpretations of these
fat Venuses: that they are goddesses in matriarchal societies, are pregnant rather than fat,
are magic aids to pregnancy, and are self-portraits. In Guthrie’s view, these representa-
tions are, instead, typical of erotica produced by adolescent males: the heads, arms, and
feet are de-emphasized to the point of disappearing, the erogenous hot zones are overt
and enlarged, yet the waist-to-hip ratio is appealing to men, coming in at 0.655.
(Note that ancient footprints of adolescents have been found in caves marked with
what are widely interpreted as erotic drawings.) Guthrie also suggests that, because of
the comparative scarcity of food, men attracted to voluptuous women were likely to
leave more descendants, and, in addition, that women would typically be at their
chubbiest when fertile.
These claims are plausible. We know that at different times and places a high body
mass index may be regarded as beautiful in a woman provided she retains her curviness,
whereas very extreme bonyness is regarded as unattractive everywhere. I suspect
that few men ﬁnd very thin women attractive on account of their thinness. The vast
majority of cultures have bodily ideals that tend toward fatness, especially for women,
and Moor and Tuareg societies have ideals of female obesity. Peter J. Brown, an
anthropologist, records that nine out of ten societies in Human Relations Area Files
show a preference for women with fat hips and legs. It is common for people of both
sexes in many societies to associate plumpness with health and happiness. Also, many
societies ritually fatten girls and young women for marriage, and chubbiness in a wife
can signal her husband’s success as a provider. In some societies (Zulu, highland New
Guinea, Polynesia), fatness is associated not so much with sexiness as with high status,
however.
Nevertheless, there is a degree of cultural relativity in these judgments, as Western
ideals of female thinness make clear. Overweight women were identiﬁed as healthy but
not as attractive by men in Barbados and Pakistan. Men in Barbados, Pakistan, Poland,
106
THE AESTHETIC

and Austria rated normal weight female ﬁgures as the most attractive, whereas men in
Britain, China, Cyprus, and Ukraine rated underweight ﬁgures as more attractive. It
has been proposed that a low waist-to-hip ratio is favored only where resources are
abundant. Otherwise, males prefer a higher waist-to-hip ratio and higher body mass
index.
In some contexts, rather than being driven by male preferences, the social norms
might depend more on competition between women, whose ideals for female body
shape might differ from men’s. It is not difﬁcult to see how this could occur. If being
thin is good, being thinner than other women might always seem better. And this
competition may be for comparative status within the group of a woman’s female
peers, rather than in order to be sexually attractive to men. Striving to maintain an
anorexic body type may be more about status and self-control than sexual attractive-
ness. Female thinness is associated with status in industrialized societies that have a
reliable and effectively distributed food supply.
Let us try to connect the dots. Plump people must have access to ample food. Food
can be a scarce and valuable resource. Moreover, menstruation ceases if a woman’s
body fat falls too low, so fertility depends on regular access to foods that can be stored as
fat. For our ancient foraging ancestors and for much of human history since, the food
supply was irregular and the technology of food preservation was limited. Short seasons
of plenty were probably set against longer periods of shortage. Under such conditions
people would gorge when they had the chance. No wonder if a ripe, womanly ﬁgure
would be considered sexy and that, generally, corpulence went with happiness or high
status.
The psychologist Paul C. Rosenblatt observes:
In a world where food is often scarce and nutritional and digestive-tract illness often epidemic,
plumpness is an indication of wealth and health.
And David Perrett, a psychologist, puts the cultural relativity of weight preferences in
perspective:
Weight is an indicator of health for people the world over, but what counts as a healthy weight
will vary as to whether in your circumstances a coronary or starvation is more likely to get you.
In many other respects, however, Paleolithic sexual preferences and notions of erotic
beauty would now be all too familiar. Compared to modern Westerners, signs of
damage, disease, and ill health would have been more common, standards of personal
grooming and hygiene would have been lower, and the number of potential mates
would have been signiﬁcantly more limited. Our Paleolithic precursors would not
have been as beautiful as we are, their beauty faded earlier, and for them death regularly
came before old age. There is evidence that only a small percentage of our pre-human
European ancestors (Homo heidelbergensis) lived to be more than 30 years of age, with
about two-thirds dead before the age of 20, and less than half of extinct and modern
hunter-gatherers reached 40 years of age, with less than a quarter surviving to 50.
THE AESTHETICS OF HUMAN BEAUTY
107

Beauty and culture
We do not have to believe that human sexuality is about gender and that gender is
completely constructed by arbitrary cultural conditions to be irritated by the implica-
tion that women’s biological destiny is to primp and pluck themselves and to squeeze
into corsets that make their waist-to-hip ratio lower, all for the sake of men’s delecta-
tion. It is no consolation to be assured that we are all in a stiff market of competition for
mates, the outcome of which is that most of us will not measure up to our partner’s
ideal and that most of us will settle for something far short of our ideal in the opposite
sex. And there is not much solace in being reminded that we like what is average and
call it beauty.
A more relevant response might take this form: evolution thrives on individual
difference, not sameness. Not all men respond to exactly the same female physical
features or types. Not all women desire the same attributes in men. Moreover, people
also often like what is statistically unusual so long as it is not too deviant. When it comes
to sexual attraction and relations, there is as much individuality and creative diversity as
in other areas of life in which personal taste plays a role.
The same applies when we shift to the level of culture. Even if there are universal
biological underpinnings, the cultural expression of these is creative and ﬂexible.
Consider the various norms for make-up and hair styling in different historical epochs
and in different cultures, both for men and women. As well, recall the introduction of
arbitrary preferences that soon can distinguish one culture’s ideas of beauty from
another’s. Perhaps men in one group admire women with long necks and in another
the women esteem men for how high they can jump from a standing start. If such
preferences are just a little more common than their opposites and other alternatives,
the workings of sexual selection through time can create unusually long-necked
women in the ﬁrst culture and higher jumping men in the other.
Evolutionary psychologists tend to overlook cultural or individual differences
through their preoccupation with cross-cultural universals. In consequence, though a
place for culture is allowed in their story, they tend to present culture as a veneer laid
over the biological base. The river of culture might always meander, so it might be
thought, but the gravity of biology constrains that river’s ultimate direction. So, to take
an example, there can be many cultural factors, such as ones of race, class, caste, or
religion, that limit a person’s selection of a mate by prohibiting certain cross-boundary
partnerships. And particular cultures can arbitrarily favor this thing or that—nose
bones, powdered wigs, distended earlobes—as contributing to beauty. But even if
cultural factors set constraints on when and where the biological drivers of mate
selection apply, those constraints could not prevent those drivers from playing their
role.
Someone who regards the inﬂuence of culture both as more arbitrary and as more
important than this when it comes to mate choice has three replies. In many cultures
people do not get to select their partners at all. Someone else, usually their parents,
108
THE AESTHETIC

makes the selection for them. Second, such is the fear of the power of female sexuality
and so strong is the desire of men to guarantee their wives’ ﬁdelity and their control
over them that in some cultures women are expected to dress in public in ways that
hide their beauty entirely from sight. Finally, those arbitrary cultural practices, rather
than complementing the search for a biologically ﬁt partner, can work directly against
it. Footbinding can be crippling. Genital mutilation does not seem a good way to set
someone up for a happy marriage.
So why did footbinding persist for a thousand years and why are clitoridectomy and
inﬁbulation still widely practiced in Africa? Such customs are justiﬁed by false beliefs—
for instance that footbinding promotes health and fertility or that contact with the
clitoris is fatal to a man or a newborn. And they are usually accompanied by social
conventions making sure that, if they are not enacted, the woman is unmarriageable
and treated as a social pariah. The sad result is that these procedures are often arranged
or performed by mothers on their daughters.
These practices typically serve as forms of male-initiated control over women’s
sexuality. For instance, the Chinese historical record regarding footbinding contains
several explicit statements that the intention was to hobble women to promote their
seclusion and ﬁdelity.
The evolutionary psychologist might respond by trying to show that such cultural
practices are not as opposed to the relevant biological considerations as ﬁrst appears.
Matchmakers who are interested in the quality of the progeny of the people they pair
are bound to seek many of the qualities that mark beauty—that is, signs of ﬁtness,
status, fertility, health, and so on. (In fact, though, arranged marriages that do not take
account of the desires of the principals have a high failure rate.) Even in societies with
strict dress codes for women, it is common for women to maximize their beauty as they
can. If they must wear a headscarf in public, they may compete in their choice of
scarves and in how they are worn. And in most such cultures, the dress codes are less
restrictive of single women. Of 138 societies studied, 99 distinguished single from
married women by ornament or garment and 49 showed women’s family wealth in
this manner. By contrast, ornaments showed men’s wealth or status in 87 of the
societies and only 4 indicated men’s marital status this way.
As for footbinding, in the extreme form in which it is crippling it has to be a
minority practice because it is a very costly sign of wealth and status. It advertises that
the person in question does not have the ambulatory capacity necessary for most kinds
of work. In the nineteenth century, those forms of footbinding that became wide-
spread were much less crippling. Happily, the practice was ended in one generation at
the onset of the twentieth century as a result of education and the formation of societies
whose members pledged that they would not bind their daughters’ feet and would not
let their sons marry women with bound feet.
As an alternative method of reply, the evolutionary psychologist might allow that
cultural practices sometimes work against our genes’ agendas. The matchmaker might
be looking to maximize the dowry, not the quality of the potential offspring. Clothing
THE AESTHETICS OF HUMAN BEAUTY
109

conventions might inhibit the efﬁcacy of mate selection. Genital mutilation could have
adverse consequences on the lives and reproductivity of those who are subject to it.
After all, some religious communities devote themselves to celibacy. And whole
societies can adopt courses of action that lead to their self-destruction. Look at the
history of the inhabitants of Rapa Nui (Easter Island). And on a grander scale consider
the possibility that the members of a species might act so as to destroy the environment
on which their survival depends.
Or it could be argued that the relevant social conventions and institutions serve male
evolutionary interests in ways other than by guiding men’s mate selections. They might
have become, instead, about the exercise and maintenance of power. Much that
happens in society is not to the beneﬁt of all of its members but serves the interests
of those in control, who are typically men.
The evolutionary psychologist can adopt any or all of these argumentative strategies
while allowing that, where mate selection gets a dance on the program, it will be
guided at least in part by the processes, signals, and mechanisms he describes.
I am not in sympathy with those who think that biology and human nature have
been rendered irrelevant to our lives by the social construction of the cultural worlds
we now inhabit. I do not agree with the idea that there is nothing but culture and that
we are free to invent ourselves as we choose. I do not accept, for instance, that sex is not
a factor in gender. But neither am I content with the modes of reply I have sketched on
behalf of the evolutionary psychologist. They place culture and biology in opposition.
As I indicated in Chapter 3, I am not attracted to views advocating a strict separation of
the roles of biology and culture in our lives.
More particularly I am uncomfortable with the idea that we are naturally selﬁsh or
immoral, with this preferably counteracted at a cultural level by higher moral values.
Many social institutions and conventions are violent and oppressive toward women as a
function of men’s desire to guarantee the paternity of their offspring, but such male
concerns need not be expressed in these forms. Altruism, a sense of justice, the desire to
cooperate with others, yearning for loving relationships—these are no less aspects of
human nature than is an inclination to pursue self-interest.
I do not wish to continue the debate between evolutionary psychology and cultural
relativists along lines implying that biology and culture are not intimately related and
connected. Rather, I prefer to explore some of the synergies between them. Doing so
is a crucial step toward my ultimate goal of linking sexual attractiveness in appearance
to modes of beauty that are more plainly aesthetic. I am in sympathy with this
observation by Frederick Turner:
One of the most powerful metaphors is indeed sex and reproduction. The most beautiful
expressions of plants and animals are their ﬂowers, their mating plumage, their mating rituals.
But for those who have experienced beauty most deeply, sexual attraction . . . is only a metaphor
for beauty, a precursor of it.
110
THE AESTHETIC

A natural history of love
I speculate that, at some point in the past, creatures from which our species descended
experienced lust but were incapable of love. This is not to deny that they were deeply
attached and devoted to their partners and offspring. Birds certainly are, but I doubt
that they experience anything quite like the mutual identiﬁcation and emotional
satisfaction of love. Later, in a different species, love emerged, not only in the form
of parental solicitude but also of romantic attraction between mates. In this species, care
of children and their parents’ long-term bonding was often motivated and sustained by
feelings of love. (For those who think the word “love” is too culturally loaded,
substitute infatuation, unusual absorption in, and identiﬁcation with the interests of
another, or intimacy, commitment, and passion.)
It could be that we were the ﬁrst species to experience romantic love, but I doubt it.
It would not be surprising if our Hominin predecessors were also capable of the same
feelings. In any case, I suspect mate selection among the ﬁrst Homo sapiens often
involved love, though, as now, this was probably only one among many considera-
tions. Given the high degree of close cooperation needed between the band’s members
if they were to survive, mutual trust and care would have been crucial. Cavemen who
clubbed women and dragged them by their hair would not have made desirable mates
and would have left few surviving offspring in the late Paleolithic.
Studies have found evidence of romantic love in 147 of 166 cultures, with insufﬁ-
cient evidence either way in 18 of the remaining 19. And romantic love has been
identiﬁed as a literary universal because of its prominence in a sample of 75 folk tales
from various cultures.
Love, I take it, is a complex emotion with far-reaching social conditions, conse-
quences, rules, conventions, and expressions. And if it reaches back at least to the
earliest Homo sapiens, then in favorable circumstances mate selection in our species was
never a purely biological matter. For thousands of years in the foraging past of our
human forebears it was a socially complex, culturally inﬂuenced business. Given this,
the story of mate selection told by evolutionary psychologists should not be thought of
as true for most of our distant past, being complicated only in comparatively recent
times by the dynamics of our complex, large-scale societies and the cultural practices
that mark them. Rather, that story must be considered to be an incomplete, crude
sketch of what for our species has always been a socially multifaceted business.
The social side of beauty
Consider the man whose interest is not in casual sex but in choosing the mother of his
offspring. As previously indicated, he pays attention to more than physical beauty.
Indeed, he rates status and intelligence more highly. But this common way of putting
the point does not register the extent to which physical beauty interacts with these
other properties.
THE AESTHETICS OF HUMAN BEAUTY
111

Picture an outwardly beautiful woman who, when she speaks, reveals that she is
embittered, nasty, and vicious. Not only does she become less desirable, she comes to
look less beautiful. Or, to get further away from appearances, a better way to make the
point is to say that the interest in her beauty, which unreﬂectively seemed to be
conﬁned to her physical attributes, is revealed by the negative response as having a
wider scope all along. It carried assumptions about how she would perform as a person
more broadly. When those assumptions are challenged by her behavior, she is revealed
as less beautiful than was supposed.
In “Personal Beauty” of 1854, the evolutionist and philosopher Herbert Spencer
wrote:
It is a common opinion that beauty of character and beauty of aspect are unrelated. I have never
been able to reconcile myself to this opinion. Indeed, even those who hold it do so in an
incomplete sense; for notwithstanding their theory they continue to manifest surprise when they
ﬁnd a mean deed committed by one of noble countenance—a fact implying that underneath
their professed induction lies a still living conviction at variance with it.
Many studies have shown Spencer to be right. We tend to take for granted that
excellence in outward appearance predicts excellence in other qualities. We are
inclined to assume that good-looking people are intelligent, capable, and nice. For
example, women pictured with low waist-to-hip ratios were predicted by males to
have many desirable personality characteristics solely on the basis of their appearance.
This is known as the “halo effect.” Conversely, we are liable to be untrusting and
negative toward people whose outward appearance strikes us as ugly, shifty, or too
unusual.
Unless we are sensitive to the halo effect, we are often unduly biased in favor of
people we perceive as attractive. As a result, we are liable to treat them better, at least
initially, than other people we do not know well. Attractive looking people receive
higher salaries, are rewarded more often, elicit cooperation more often, and have more
positive interactions. When accused of serious crimes, they are less likely to be
convicted and, if convicted, receive lighter sentences.
We are wrong to make the presumption in their favor, of course. Perhaps they are
intelligent, capable, and nice, but a pretty face and winning smile are not reliable
indicators of this. Nevertheless, the tendency to bias bears out my point: the judgment
of the beauty of appearance is by no means solely about outward qualities. It is laced
with presumptions about the presence of other desirable attributes. If those presump-
tions are put to the test and roundly defeated, it is rare, I think, that we would revise
everything but the judgment of beauty. Though we might now reﬂect that the
person’s beauty is no more than skin deep, it is not as if that “no more than” was
present in the original assessment.
The same point can be made in a different fashion by considering the notion of
health and normalcy invoked for their importance to beauty earlier. As ﬁrst pre-
sented—and in the focus of evolutionary psychology—the concern was with bodily
112
THE AESTHETIC

signs of physical health and immunity to disease. But of course we do not stop there.
We want in a partner someone who will raise children to be successful and desirable as
adults. That means that we include in the judgment of beauty consideration of the
qualities of character and the far-reaching social skills that childrearing calls for.
Normalcy includes relating to people in ways appropriate to the situation and to our
places and roles in a wider community. A friendly smile, ease of manner, a concern for
the self that is properly balanced with care for others and group goods, appropriate
contributions to cooperative tasks, honesty, reliability, and much more count toward
social normalcy. And the judgment of beauty that reﬂects our concern with normalcy
takes in these considerations, going beyond mere appearances.
So how does the newly balanced story about mate selection look? In choosing a
long-term partner, a person considers ﬁtness markers for health and potential fecundity
that have been highlighted by evolution as possessing adaptive value under most social
circumstances. While the lure of physical attractiveness might trigger interest in a
potential long-term partner, many other considerations regarding the capacities and
behaviors of the other person will be factored into the decision. These include
assessments of social aptitude and status, insofar as these are relevant to predicting
reproductive success.
This process of mate selection is mutual, with each not only choosing but also having
to be chosen by the other. In consequence, each has to be aware not only of what he or
she ﬁnds desirable, but also of what is fancied by his or her potential partner; and each
aims, as far as he or she can, to satisfy the other’s preference, not only as regards the
outward show of beauty but in terms of personality, character, and all the broader
behaviors relevant to playing our roles within the community.
This is not to say that we always get things exactly right. A man might mistakenly
believe that women like a bodybuilder’s physique and that they will take an expensive
sports car as a sign of status. A woman might mistakenly believe that men notice fashion
details in clothing and that they have a preference for catwalk thinness. Nevertheless, a
realistic assessment of one’s own appeal is important. Those who were constantly
rebuffed were not our ancestors.
Physical beauty, considered strictly on its own, is only one element in the package of
characteristics that makes someone attractive. In the judgment of beauty, all these
various qualities interact with each other, so there is no clear borderline between
physical attractiveness and social attractiveness.
That is the ﬁrst step: seeing that physical beauty cannot really be separated from
character and performance, because they mesh together and interact when it comes to
mate selection. The second step is more radical and takes us further from the orienta-
tion to beauty common in the writings of evolutionary psychologists. It is the
argument that “physical beauty” is never solely or even mainly about sexual attraction
or mate selection. As regards ourselves, it is much more about personal identity and the
face that each of us presents to our community, about our daily manner of going about
life. In this regard, notice how earlier I stressed not only the ways in which we try to
THE AESTHETICS OF HUMAN BEAUTY
113

amplify our beauty, but how this is typically directed more to establishing our social
proﬁles than to attracting mates. As regards our view of others, it is about how we assess
their performance more generally as fellow participants in our culture, as potential
friends or enemies.
I have mentioned that we incline to an unreﬂective partiality toward those whom
we judge to be beautiful. It is now instructive to notice that this is present in all kinds of
social situations, not only when we are looking for short- or long-term sexual partners.
Of course we should guard against the errors of judgment to which this bias can lead.
And if we do not do so, closer or longer contact provides grounds for seeing how the
outwardly beautiful person measures up more widely and for revising our evaluation to
eliminate its initial bias. But my main point is this: from both the ﬁrst- and third-person
points of view, the judgment of beauty goes beyond appearances to a wider assessment,
and this assessment concerns the target person’s social performance generally and often
not at all their desirability as a mate.
The point was made, surprisingly, in one of the most inﬂuential papers on sexual
selection, R. A. Fisher’s “The Evolution of Sexual Preference” of 1915. He wrote:
In the struggle between ethical and aesthetic valuations a curious phenomenon is observable. To
the ordinary man the distinction is clear. Beauty is superﬁcial, moral worth fundamental. Beauty
interests and pleases the senses, morality governs our motives and guides our actions. And so it
comes about that Ephemeral Beauty weighs less than Eternal Right. But in the deepest minds the
idea of beauty links itself with one of altogether higher signiﬁcance; in fact, with nothing less than
the mystical appreciation of human personality.
Because so much of our self-esteem and social standing is bound up with how we are
evaluated by others, we wish to be admired by members of both sexes. In consequence,
when we enter the public sphere, as part of putting our best selves forward we conform
to the community’s expectations about how we should present ourselves. There are
norms about what is appropriate in self-presentation for both men and women. In
some societies women are expected to mask or downplay their physical attractiveness
and act accordingly. But in modern Western society and many others, the norm is that
both sexes are well groomed and make the best of themselves physically. In the social
interactions which this facilitates, others are expected to respond positively to that
effort; and their doing so enhances the self-conﬁdence and self-esteem of those so
acknowledged.
The more positive feedback a person receives, the more he or she grows in
conﬁdence and the better he or she plays his or her role or executes his or her tasks.
In this respect the earlier mentioned prejudice in favor of beauty might not be the
stupid error it at ﬁrst appears to be: treating people as beautiful can facilitate from them
a better performance across a range of social behaviors than otherwise they might be
capable of or inclined to deliver. And coming to know that someone is helpful and
cooperative can even make that person appear more physically attractive.
114
THE AESTHETIC

The outcome is that any person assesses the desirability and overall attractiveness of
both males and females in a wide variety of social circumstances as one among many
judgments relevant to predicting and understanding the social behavior and relation-
ships of the members of his or her community. More than that, in subtle and socially
appropriate ways, we acknowledge the beauty we ﬁnd in others of both sexes. It is not
only when we consciously calculate a situation that we make such judgments or show
such admiration. They are how we are acculturated to view human sociality, and they
automatically direct our engagement with others.
Even in those cultures that speciﬁcally regulate women’s dress in order to mask or
de-emphasize attractiveness—among conservative Muslim, Jewish, and Christian sects,
for instance—I suspect the plot is similar even if the details are different.
A Muslim woman who dresses in full hijab might in some societies empower herself
by wearing jewelry, make-up, and whatever else leads her to feel attractive and self-
conﬁdent underneath her prescribed garment. What matters from her point of view is
that she be recognized and respected at the value that she would like, not that the
means she adopts for achieving this are publicly viewable. And even if her options for
physical self-presentation are limited in the male world of public commerce, she will
spend a portion of her time in contexts where appearance is interpersonally important
and the dress restrictions do not apply—for example, in dealing with other women or
family members in a domestic context. (Recall that the assessment of beauty which is
now our focus, one that is unharnessed from the business of mate selection, is directed
as keenly to one’s own sex as the other.) And ﬁnally note also the importance of the
earlier observation that the judgment of physical beauty comes intertwined with
aspects of social attractiveness. Even if clothed in full hijab, a woman can present
herself as attractive just by being pleasant, appropriately friendly, cooperative, and
so on.
Indeed, she may be the beneﬁciary of a reversed version of the prejudice that
beneﬁts the beautiful: if her voice sounds harmonious, her personality comes across
as lively and agreeable, and she is well spoken and good mannered, it is not unlikely
that those she deals with amplify their impression of her unseen physical attractiveness
more than they perhaps ought, and she receives the further admiration and respect that
go with that projection.
Human beauty and aesthetics
I have tried to decouple our judgments of human beauty from both the merely physical
and the business of mate selection. There is no separating our sense of human beauty
from wider considerations of social functioning, and while reﬂection on those can be
relevant to mate selection, in the typical case they are not so because considerations of
social functioning are perennially important, while mate selection is not.
It is not my intention to demote the importance of physical beauty, however.
Though an interest in physical beauty is often divorced from issues of sexual attraction
and mate selection, this gives more scope for beauty’s inﬂuence to pervade and add
THE AESTHETICS OF HUMAN BEAUTY
115

signiﬁcance to other, more permanent aspects of our lives. In Bali, for example, where
the gods value attractiveness in appearance and women dress to display it in making
daily ritual offerings, the concern with physical beauty is integral to ways of behaving
that give expression to the culture’s deepest religious values.
Nor do I mean to anaesthetize the notion of physical beauty by separating it
completely from sexual attraction. That is to say, I am not convinced by the suggestion
that we are now discussing a de-sexed kind of attractiveness. No one fails to notice the
sex of the person with whom he or she is talking. And when they beautify themselves
in ways that are socially accepted, people often want to be thought of or recognized as
sexually attractive, which is of course quite different from wanting to elicit an overtly
sexual response.
Rather, it is a matter of appropriating the culturally and biologically sanctioned
symbols of sexuality to put them to work in the tasks of self-deﬁnition, self-projection,
and self-empowerment. It is a matter of showing oneself as worthy of value by
presenting oneself forcefully in ways that are socially valued. Physical beauty provides
one dimension along which we assess ourselves and others, and it ﬁgures in our bodily
self-awareness and identity.
Evolutionary psychologists might be correct to think that our judgment of human
beauty derives historically from our concern in assessing the appearance of others for
honest signals of their ﬁtness, and right also that we assess others for ﬁtness because we
are interested in them as potential mates or sexual rivals. Yet the importance of beauty
in appearance plainly is not simply utilitarian in the way their explanation implies. The
judgment of and attraction to human beauty rarely is narrowly sexual, nor does it come
into play only where mate selection is at issue. To make a point that is compatible with
the explanatory agenda of evolutionary psychology but is frequently ignored in the
discussions of human beauty: as with food, sleep, exercise, and the attractiveness of
babies, nature wisely leads us to attach intrinsic value to what is evolutionarily useful for
us, including human beauty.
The pleasure we take in the beauty of human appearances can now be seen, I hope,
as much closer to the usual aesthetic response to nonhuman beauty than is implicit in
the account that centralizes the place of appearance in mate selection. Because our
concern with overall human attractiveness, including the attractiveness of physical
appearance, is abstracted from the process of mate selection and persists as a frame
through which we view the human social realm as a whole, human attractiveness not
surprisingly came to be experienced aesthetically. We ﬁnd beauty in people, just as we
ﬁnd beauty in the world more generally. And just as we can ﬁnd beauty in ancestral
landscapes though we have no desire to hunt and live there, so we can ﬁnd beauty in
people independently of any desire to mate with them. Only when human beauty is
rightly understood in such terms can we see that it reaches beyond the appearance of
fertile availability to embrace beauties of appearance at all ages and stages of life. And
beyond that again to encompass the more abstract forms of human beauty I mentioned
at the outset of this chapter: aspects of character, intellect, and spirituality.
116
THE AESTHETIC

PART III
The Arts
Introduction
In Part III, we will consider possible connections between evolution and art behaviors.
By “art behaviors” I mean the practices of creation, presentation, reception, and
appreciation of art. Compared to Part II, this section of the book covers many more
complex and diverse theories. Because those who write on the topic are often so
heavily invested in their ideas, debates in this area are passionate and hotly contested.
The literature is messy and complicated. Sometimes the issues are difﬁcult and techni-
cal, but equally often it is as if we are dealing with science ﬁction and utopian fantasy.
In Chapter 8, I will critically review a number of theories proposing that the arts are
an adaptation—in other words, that the individual arts all implement the same, single
function that is art’s evolutionary purpose. The views considered all have fairly obvious
defects. These often seem to stem from the search for a common underlying function
for art, which leads to simpliﬁcation and to ignoring many of the diverse functions that
art can serve. In general, I am skeptical of the likely success of theories that attempt to
bind the various, disparate arts to a single, biologically adaptive drive.
Some of the general theories that will be discussed approach the topic by seeking the
common origin of the arts. This leads to further consideration of matters ﬁrst broached
in Chapter 4. Even if we can identify the origins of some of the arts, it is far from clear
that this tells us anything of interest about the developed form of that art. If music
originated in calls that served to demarcate group territory, for example, that would tell
us nothing about what music went on to become, nor would it tell us about the
multitude of functions it typically now serves.
The point is important because most evolutionary psychologists adopt the method-
ological assumption that our species evolved to its present psychology in the late
Pleistocene as a result of responding to challenges presented by the environment of
evolutionary adaptedness (see Chapter 6). So if they are adaptationists about art, they
tend to be committed to the idea that an explanation of the origins of art behaviors will
also account for their adaptive signiﬁcance. They tend also to assume that art cannot
have taken on a new evolutionary role. But if there need be no connection between

the mature art form and the behaviors from which it ﬁrst emerged, it looks as if the
evolutionary story tells us little about art as we know it, what its function ought to be,
and whether it could acquire an evolutionary signiﬁcance that transcends its origins.
In Chapter 9, we will consider the option that art is an evolutionary by-product, a
spandrel. Music provides a well-rehearsed example. There are many different stories
about the adaptation of which it is an alleged by-product and of how it derived from
that adaptation. I suggest that this proﬂigacy is as much a problem for the by-product
thesis as it is for adaptationist accounts of a given trait where these are various and
conﬂicting.
The view of the evolutionary psychologist Steven Pinker is next to come under the
spotlight. He ties music to multiple, diverse adaptations, but that might be a reason to
regard music as drawing from them in order to do its own thing, rather than to identify
music as their by-product. The chapter closes with a more general argument to the
effect that, even if art came to us as a by-product, it would not remain evolutionarily
unimportant. As it becomes universal, it sets a standard not only for what is common
among people but also for what is normal. Most people are capable of engaging in at
least some art behaviors to the appropriate level, as I argued in Chapter 4, but
individuals who fail this test inevitably will be perceived as lower in ﬁtness as a result.
And while most people attain a satisfactory level of art competence, this does not mean
that their doing so comes cheap. Their attainments involve considerable investments of
time, knowledge, and, in some cases, practical skills. As a result, there are many ways in
which art behaviors can come to signal aspects of ﬁtness.
In Chapter 10, we will explore the proposal that art is a technology. The argument
here is that art behaviors draw on very broadly useful adaptations—general intelli-
gence, curiosity, inventiveness, imagination, ﬁne motor control—but are so far
removed from them that art behaviors count as products of culture rather than as
biological by-products. A proponent of this view is the neuroscientist Aniruddh Patel,
who develops his case with respect to music, comparing it to ﬁre. I argue that he does
not succeed in showing that music is more likely to be a transformational technology
than to be a by-product or adaptation.
Chapter 11 is about individual arts and the different evolutionary adaptations they
are alleged to represent. We will begin with a discussion of which arts are most usefully
considered. Though there is a signiﬁcant literature on the psychology and neuroscience
of the visual arts, the best examples of adaptationist accounts of art belong to literature
and music. Narrative ﬁctions plainly can be a cheap and safe source of valuable
knowledge, especially about people’s psychologies and personalities and about the
wide variety of situations in which they can ﬁnd themselves. Given the central role of
narrative in our lives and given also how much we are attracted to stories, even
knowing them to be false, it is not surprising that ﬁctional literature has been proposed
as adaptive. Music, by contrast, is not a source of valuable knowledge about the
external world, but we are so intensely drawn to it that many people regard our
musical predilections as having biological origins, with the result that a wide variety of
118
THE ARTS

theories about music’s adaptive potential have been proposed. I will argue, however,
that few of these theories are convincing as they stand.
Much as I would like to pull a rabbit from the hat at the end, I fear this will not
happen! But I do hope to have some positive conclusions to draw. In Chapter 12,
I review the main themes of Part III. Because I reject the account of art as a purely
cultural technology, I do think there is a connection between art and biology. I am
not convinced, though, that we can be sure whether art behaviors are adaptative or are
by-products of adaptations that lie elsewhere. We do not need to settle that issue,
however, before we can conclude that art behaviors serve as informationally rich
indicators of many dimensions of human ﬁtness. As such, they are relevant to the
biological imperatives and interests that affect us as a species.
INTRODUCTION
119

This page intentionally left blank 

8
General Theories of Art as an
Adaptation and the Origins of Art
In this chapter, we will look at theories suggesting that art behaviors are adaptive. The
focus falls on general theories applied to all the arts, in other words, on theories that
regard all the arts as implementing the same evolutionary purpose. We will also
consider if the task is to explain the origin of the practice as revealing its connection
with our evolutionary past, or if we should be concerned with art’s current functions
and uses. But let us start by asking why people care whether art is a biological
adaptation.
Why do people care?
What motivates the desire to show that art is an adaptation? Steven Pinker, an
evolutionary psychologist, thinks that the goal is to validate or ennoble the arts. He
considers this enterprise to be misconceived and maintains that the arts are not
adaptations, that there is no good evidence that they are adaptations, and that the
function of art is not to bring the community together, which is the most frequently
voiced view.
As if attempting to conﬁrm Steven Pinker’s diagnosis, Brian Boyd, an English
literature academic, maintains that art enables science through the way that it
develops our imagination and creativity. He eulogizes the arts in a fashion that is
not uncommon:
Without the art of storytelling, without the human impulse to catch and hold the attention of
others through narratives that include agents with expectation-violating, larger-than-life powers,
religion could not have arisen; without costume, architecture, and design, without dance and
music, without verse and story, ritual could not pass beyond the penitential and sacriﬁcial and
engage the community in such awesome afﬁrmations of its identity, values, and connection with
forces beyond . . . Art has played a central function in human lives not only in itself but also in
giving rise to religion and then reinforcing, through augmenting the impact of ritual, religion’s
power to cement group cohesion.
As the science writer Philip Ball puts it in his discussion of music:

One can’t help feeling that an evolutionary role for music is often seen as the only way it can be
afforded its true dignity.
Indeed, some authors are explicit about the point. For instance Koen DePryck, an
educationist, claims that the value and future of art depends on its being tied to
evolution.
But of course this is not the case. Some of the most valuable human behaviors are not
the direct outcome of evolution. Writing, reading, and mathematics are not evolu-
tionary adaptations, as I noted in Chapter 4, but that does not diminish their obvious
importance. Moreover, there appears to be no direct correlation between the extent to
which an artwork reﬂects evolved dispositions and the artistic value of that work. Our
attraction to babies has a biological foundation, but a painting of a smiling baby is as
likely to be deplorable kitsch as it is to be artistically admirable.
Those who defend the idea that literature is an adaptation often have similar but
more modest aspirations. For the most part they are professors of English literature, not
psychologists, and their goal is to rescue their discipline from the dominant paradigm of
the past thirty years, which regards all knowledge as self-referentially circular, the
human mind as a blank slate, and all concepts as culturally constructed. Literary
Darwinists do not suppose that literature and criticism are sciences, but they are out
to redeem their subject from what they view as embarrassingly nonsensical commit-
ments and approaches. They aim to show that there is an objective basis for literary
behaviors that is rooted in our biological nature. Their exchanges with critics are often
highly polemical and rebarbative.
The topic of art and evolution can excite high passion. Remarks like Pinker’s “music
is cheesecake for the mind” have been greeted with howls of indignation and scorn.
Though Pinker did not intend the observation to be dismissive, many commentators
have felt that he demeans music and needs to be answered. Plainly, many people invest
a great deal in the importance of tying the arts positively to our evolutionary survival.
A cynic might suppose that what lies in the background is the idea that, if the arts are
part of our evolved human nature, then the study of them has to be acknowledged as
the equal of the sciences. So what is at stake is the standing that should be accorded to
the humanities among academic disciplines. But much as we believe in the importance
of respect and support for the humanities, that alone does not license us to assume there
must be a link with evolution. And even if there were a connection, it would remain
necessary to make the argument for the value of the arts. Not all aspects of human
nature are admirable on account of their biological origins and long history—consider
rape, racism, deceit, and free riding, for instance—and nor is the academic study of
these behaviors made more distinguished by their connection with biologically rooted
predispositions.
My point is that we should be sensitive to the political dimension of the debate and
to the tendency to rationalize deeply felt but untested intuitions.
122
THE ARTS

General versus art-form-speciﬁc theories
An important theoretical issue concerns the scope of the theory proposing a connec-
tion between art and evolution. The theory might be speciﬁc to an art form or it might
be general, applying across the board to all art forms.
Why might we think art-speciﬁc theories are needed? The arts are various.
Some, such as literature, have semantic content. Others, such as purely instrumental
music, seemingly do not. And those with content have it in quite different ways, for
instance, in terms of pictorial depiction, bodily action, or linguistic utterance. Also, the
media of the arts differ: sound, rock, pigment, language, the human body, and so on. It
would not be unexpected if the various arts did their things in distinctive ways,
producing different evolution-relevant outcomes.
Why might we think an overarching general theory is appropriate? It could be that
the arts share a common function and that the contrasts between them are differences
merely in the way that function can be implemented—namely, in sound, paint, stories,
etc. Ellen Dissanayake’s account of art as a form of “making special” and Geoffrey
Miller’s theory that art is powered by sexual selection are examples of general theories.
I concentrate on their views in this chapter. The shortcomings of these particular
theories are typical of problems encountered in many discussions attempting to show
that art behaviors are evolutionary adaptations. So the lines of criticisms raised against
them are relevant for the ways in which they may be generalized. For instance, they
can apply also to theories that take individual art forms to be distinctive in their
adaptedness, as I illustrate in Chapter 11.
Ideally, to establish a strong, art-speciﬁc connection with evolution, art-general
theories should identify an evolutionarily signiﬁcant function performed not only by all
the arts but also by only the arts. If, instead, the relevant function can also be
implemented by non-art behaviors, then the underlying connection with evolution
is not art-speciﬁc. Art behaviors then manifest evolutionary forces, but it is what art
shares with non-art practices, not what is distinctive to it as art, that makes the
connection.
Besides, it then looks as if the adaptation lies in the underlying common factor rather
than in what distinguishes its various manifestations. This is the point Pinker makes
when he argues that
art is a by-product of three other adaptations: the hunger for status, the aesthetic pleasure of
experiencing adaptive objects and environments, and the ability to design artifacts to achieve
desired ends. On this view art is a pleasure technology, like drugs, erotica, or ﬁne cuisine – a way
to purify and concentrate pleasurable stimuli and deliver them to our senses.
Later Pinker reformulated his view, this time suggesting that the arts are by-products of
two adaptive traits: motivational systems that give us pleasure when we experience
signals that correlate with our evolutionary interests, plus the technological know-how
to create puriﬁed and concentrated doses of these signals.
GENERAL THEORIES OF ART AS AN ADAPTATION
123

In fact, the danger that the search for underlying commonalities reveals art to be a
by-product of some more basic adaptation is a problem for both Dissanayake’s and
Miller’s theories. Dissanayake writes that art is closely related to both play and ritual
(including ceremony and religion). For her, art, ritual, and play all fall under the
umbrella of “making special.” But this suggests that what is adaptive is the tendency
to make things special, with art only one among many ways of giving effect to the
tendency. Similarly, art is only one among many possible forms of sexual display, so
Miller’s sexual selection theory is also not art-speciﬁc. He applies his theory not only to
the arts but also to gossip, humor, moral sentiments (such as sympathy, kindness,
charity), the fecundity and complexity of language, fashion, ritual, sport, and even
self-consciousness. If anything is adaptive here it is the human mind and its cognitive
resources when used to advertise evolutionary ﬁtness to potential mates. And art is only
one among many possible behaviors that can broadcast that message.
One way of ameliorating this concern and of returning attention to art is by
suggesting that art behaviors are specially suited to giving expression to the adaptive
trait. Perhaps they magnify its effect more than non-art behaviors that can also
implement the adaptation. Both Dissanayake and Miller make such claims. The high
level of skill that art involves can make it particularly apt for showing off, which suits
Miller’s theory. Meanwhile, the care and resources lavished on art suit it to serving as
one of the more dramatic forms of making special. Let us attend more closely to the
details of these accounts.
Miller: art and sexual selection
Miller argues that the human mind evolved as a courtship machine to attract and
entertain candidate sexual partners. The arts, at least at their origins, were adaptations
for sexual display. They catered to human interests in creativity and novelty. They are
ideal props for showcasing intelligence, insight, inventiveness, dexterity, and other
honest signals of ﬁtness that make us attractive as sexual partners. Though women can
and do make art, the vast majority of artworks are made by men, Miller claims. He
maintains that this is consistent with the greater effort men put into sexual competition
and display, despite the lack of marked sexual dimorphism in our species.
Notice there are (at least) two options here as regards the possible reproductive
success of artists. First, they produced more children than the average via multiple
sexual liaisons, so weight of numbers gave them a disproportionate inﬂuence on the
gene pool of later generations. Or second, artists attracted higher quality mates.
Though they might not have had more children, those they did have inherited their
quality and attractiveness. And over the longer term, higher quality wins out.
As it happens, artistic talent of the highest order is only modestly heritable. So it is
not surprising that most of the people who advocate sexual selection as the manner in
which art behaviors are adaptive are more interested in claiming that artists parent
more, rather than better quality, children.
124
THE ARTS

This favors males twice over. In the ﬁrst instance, it is males who are active in
competing for females because the latter are choosy, given their higher investment in
producing a child and, for humans, given the huge commitment required to raise a
child. And in the second instance, promiscuous males can impregnate more women
and thereby father more children than any single woman can give birth to.
Critical discussion of Miller’s theory
Miller rightly observes that, even if art’s evolutionary function is to attract sexual
partners and mates, this need not be what motivates the activity. The creation of art
might be pursued because it is self-fulﬁlling, for example. So his account is not
vulnerable to the objection that art behaviors can have motivations other than that
of sexual advertisement. But his theory is susceptible if art is not publicly available to
potential mates. The anthropologist Kathryn Coe objects on these grounds that Miller
cannot account for the cave art of the Upper Paleolithic, much of which was not
accessible for public viewing. Similarly, having conceded that art can be used for
competitive sexual display, Dissanayake argues that this does not show that the activity
originated in order to enable such competition.
Now, as I pointed out in Chapter 4, a theory along the lines of Miller’s need not set
itself to explain the origins of art. It could be that, once established, art was comman-
deered in the service of sexual selection, which subsequently drove its historical
progress. Nevertheless, Miller’s account is open to such objections because he repeat-
edly makes clear that he is more concerned to offer an account of art’s origins than of its
current evolutionary function. And in any case, we might doubt that sexual advertise-
ment has become the driver for art, even if it is an ancillary use to which art can be put.
On the standard theory of sexual selection, it is sexually mature males who over-
whelmingly display to females in courtship contexts. If we adopt the broad view of art
that I have recommended, however, a great deal of it is domestic—weaving and
needlework, for instance—and not for general show. It is created within the kin
group for use by members of that group, rather than being made by professional
specialists catering for a wider public. Moreover, a great deal of domestic art is made or
performed by women, who are often avid dancers and almost inevitably sing to their
babies as well as being the creators of clothing and bodily adornments. In addition,
children dance and sing without this appearing to be mock rehearsal for adult ﬂirtation.
Celibate religious groups often make music central to their rituals, and Giuseppe Verdi
composed Falstaff at the age of 80 years, so music does not always serve reproductive
ends.
Miller acknowledges this mode of objection and seeks evidence to support the claim
that males create by far the majority of artworks and performances. But it is noteworthy
that his examples come from the public arena of recent professional art: rock bands, jazz
artists, and the like. And it is problematic that the examples are all Western. He also
makes the mistake of equating evolutionary sexual success with the number of a man’s
copulations or partners, rather than with the extensiveness of the lineage he leaves. In
GENERAL THEORIES OF ART AS AN ADAPTATION 125

fact, there is an absence of hard evidence that many musicians leave more children.
A study of 207 European male composers from between the fourteenth and twentieth
centuries showed that they produced signiﬁcantly fewer children than the general
European population. An experimental test of Miller’s thesis—that is, that men’s
artworks serve as ﬁtness indicators in female mate choice—was weakly positive,
however.
To my mind the strongest objection to Miller’s account is that it comes too cheap.
A vast array of behaviors can be harnessed for the purposes of sexual display and
competition, even where this is not their primary use. And no doubt this happens
with art too. So it is easy to posit a connection between art and sexual display. But to be
convincing, Miller’s thesis has to be that this was always the central, crucial purpose for
art; or, if we drop his claim to account for art’s origins, that some time after its origins
this became and long has been art’s central, crucial purpose. In addition, to give an
appropriate art-focus to the account, he probably also should maintain that art is a more
effective form of sexual advertisement than most non-art behaviors, including displays
of social competence, intelligence, charm, sporting prowess, wealth, prestige, and
status, along with overt bodily signs of beauty, fertility, and health. But that is highly
doubtful. On the one hand, rich men and sports stars are apparently very attractive to
some women. On the other, art serves many purposes other than sexual advertisement,
and art behaviors occur naturally in a wide variety of human contexts. As Brian Boyd
puts it:
the very ﬂexibility of human behaviour suggests that sexual selection has been an extra gear for
art, not the engine itself.
Joseph Carroll, an English literature academic and editor of an edition of Darwin’s
On the Origin of Species, goes so far as to describe Miller’s thesis as “provocative and
ultimately frivolous.” Ball calls the sexual selection thesis for music “facile.” The
archaeologist Steven Mithen, also writing about music, describes Miller’s supporting
arguments as “weak” and his evidence as “fragile.”
Four more examples, brieﬂy
Before turning to Dissanayake’s theory, I quickly review four more theories about how
the arts in general are evolutionarily adaptive. The point here is not to get into details
but to note the widely discrepant nature of these accounts.
Brian Boyd maintains that
the ability to share and shape the attention of others by appeals to common cognitive preferences
led to the development of art: to behaviors that focus not on the immediate needs of the here and
now, but on directing attention and engaging emotion for its own sake, even toward distant
realities and new possibilities.
126
THE ARTS

He suggests that art is an adaptation that serves to draw attention to the art-creator and
that promotes positive social interaction. This accounts both for art’s origins and for its
current function. Captivating the interest of others is important to us because we are an
ultra-social species and therefore crave to command their attention. We are also keen
to share attention. The person who controls the attention of others attains status and
thereby acquires a selective advantage, but we also share attention, which fosters group
cohesion and mutual attunement. So art is bifunctional. It provides the advantage of
getting along (improved cooperation, and therefore participation in more successful groups) and
getting ahead (improved status within one’s own group).
Now, there are many ways of attracting attention to oneself and promoting social
interaction. One way is by approaching strangers, introducing oneself, and offering a
hand as a preliminary to a conversational exchange. As a method for achieving the
same, art creation is outlandish and exaggerated. And, as Pinker asks,
what’s so adaptive about sharing attention, particularly [in the case of ﬁctional literature]
attention to events that never happened, other than that people like to do it?
In many contexts, reciting Shakespearian sonnets, painting pictures, or singing the
latest hit song would attract attention only because of their social inappropriateness.
And where the setting is appropriate, art often serves as a facilitator of joint participation
rather than as a lens for focusing attention on its maker or performer. Anyway, art that
builds community often is communal rather than individual; or alternatively, those
who are united are the members of the audience rather than the artist and audience.
For much of our history, art creation was relatively anonymous and the emphasis was
more on faithfulness to the tradition than on creativity. Art can be used to acquire
status, but this is only one among countless functions it can be put to.
A problem highlighted earlier also applies to this account: if anything here is
adaptive, it looks as if it is social status and ultra-sociability. There are very many
ways of pursuing and enacting these—including countless non-art behaviors as well as
some, but by no means all, art behaviors. So it is quite misleading to characterize art
dispositions themselves as the adaptation.
Elizabeth Ralevski, a psychiatrist, also thinks that art is an evolutionary adaptation.
According to her, its main purpose is to promote more effectively the individual’s self-
identity in order to designate more clearly his place in the collective culture. In other
words, we use art to differentiate ourselves from the collective in a unique manner and
to project the image of our preferred self.
Of course, there is a trivial sense in which a person’s art behaviors, along with
everything else she does, make up her identity. (I am the one who washed the dishes
last night, so that action contributed in part to my being the person I am.) And
similarly, a person’s art preferences contribute to the larger set of values she holds.
But if art is to serve as a badge of identity in the way that Ralevski suggests, this must be
a result of its deliberate use to that end. As it were, the person marks himself as someone
GENERAL THEORIES OF ART AS AN ADAPTATION
127

who likes a certain, distinctive kind of music, prefers such-and-such particular style in
ﬁlms, chooses to wear a certain type of clothing, and so on.
Art could be used to this end, undoubtedly, but among the many functions it can
fulﬁll, this does not seem to be its primary purpose. Indeed, much art is for private
enjoyment rather than public display. Moreover, when it is employed to establish
identity, art more often labels the subgroup than the individual. It unites the person
with her peers at the same time as it distinguishes the subgroup from the wider
community. In particular, their ﬂaunted musical tastes and clothing fashions frequently
brand adolescents as separate from older generations. As well, racial or religious
minorities often adopt various public displays and aesthetic commitments as a means
of contrasting their close-knit kinship with their wider social afﬁliations.
Walter A. Koch, a semiotician, argues that art is a
safety valve necessary for the realizations of social (and other) aggression within viable constraints
of non-aggressiveness.
Elsewhere he observes:
“Art” seems to me to be the human adaptation of displacement behavior: taboo as “ﬁght” and
noa (the non-censured counterpart of taboo) as “ﬂight” combine in an amalgam—called
“art”—which . . . may permit otherwise censured sexuality to be represented under the cloak
of self-contained beauty or sacred functionality.
In other words, art ritually channels aggressive or sexual impulses into socially accept-
able behavior. Koch offers this as accounting for art’s origins and evolutionary function.
By now the reader may be able anticipate the response: some art sometimes can be
used this way or has the suggested effect, but why think this is art’s evolutionary
purpose and reason for being? Where is the evidence that our ancient forerunners
produced comparatively more great-great-grandchildren because they adopted artistic
behaviors to this effect?
A fourth rather widespread theory also strikes me as unconvincing. It is the view that
art is adaptive, at least in part, for rehearsing and sharpening perceptual skills. For
example, Robin Allott, a theorist of evolution and language, maintains that the arts and
mathematics constitute a pattern-perceiving or pattern-producing activity prompted
by an impulse to explore the world, both outer and inner, and to understand it,
resulting in our improved ability to act in it.
This view seems doubtful given how hard-wired our perceptual systems are. At the
most basic level, they do not need to be taught how to do their job. But perhaps our
perceptual discriminations can be reﬁned by practice. Whether this or that ﬁne-tuning
makes one evolutionarily ﬁtter depends, however, on the task at hand. For instance,
attention to detail sometimes can amount to failing to see the wood for the trees. And
in any case, the kinds of tests of perceptual acuity or pattern processing used by
psychologists and others surely would provide a better starting point for perceptual
training than a painting by Pieter Bruegel the elder, a poem by Samuel Taylor
128
THE ARTS

Coleridge, or a concerto by Antonio Vivaldi. An interest in the novels of Jane Austen
might help us to develop a larger vocabulary, but it need not make us better at seeing
the page or at reading. Similarly, an interest in the plays of Shakespeare is unlikely to
make us better at observing what occurs on stage or hearing the sounds the actors
make. Where are the studies showing that artists are any ﬁtter as perceivers in ordinary
settings than the rest of us, due to their artistic attainments? And where are the studies
showing that those who much prefer listening to music to contemplating sculpture are
less skilled in detecting, say, three-dimensional patterns?
It is more plausible, I think, to argue that literature, drama, and poetry can provide a
moral education, along with enhancing our insight into human character and psychol-
ogy; or that exposure to music might unify and coordinate our group and polish our
emotional sensitivities. Such ideas belong to theories about speciﬁc arts rather than the
arts in general. They will be considered in Chapter 11.
The list of theories could go on. I am not selecting the lamest. Typically, adapta-
tionist theories of art involve no consideration of whether the traits in question are
heritable and provide no hard evidence to suggest that they made our ancestors ﬁtter.
They point to beneﬁts that art sometimes yields, but do not establish that the relevant
behaviors were evolutionarily selected for the sake of those beneﬁts.
The origins of art
In earlier chapters, I pointed out that evolutionary psychologists argue that our species’
psychology and behavior were shaped by the conditions under which our Hominin
ancestors lived from 5 ma, and were adjusted later with our emergence, 180 ka or
earlier, as hunter-gatherers in Africa. Over millennia, natural selection favored those
who were comparatively more ﬁt for those ancestral ways of life. Tracking the path of
evolutionary adaptation followed by our species involves working out which of our
heritable, persistent behaviors and traits suited our predecessors to the challenges of
those ancient circumstances. Inevitably, this means that the discussion in evolutionary
psychology of the status of this or that behavior as an adaptation or spandrel becomes a
story about its origins. The default assumption is that the behavior continues to exercise
its original adaptive function, but it may be allowed that, under the very different
conditions of contemporary urban life, the behavior has become maladaptive or neutral
in its impact on comparative ﬁtness.
An example: Dissanayake’s account of art as “making special”
Many theorists approach the issue of art’s connection with evolution in the manner just
described, that is, they attempt to discern how art might be adaptive by considering its
role in the lives of our ancient forebears. By way of illustration consider the theory
presented by Ellen Dissanayake. Though I am a critic, it is important to record that hers
is among the most developed and nuanced theories arguing that art is an adaptation.
And she is to be congratulated for explicitly naming and avoiding some of the more
GENERAL THEORIES OF ART AS AN ADAPTATION
129

common faults in accounts of art by evolutionary psychologists. For instance, she
appreciates that not all sensory pleasures or preferences are aesthetic. She also questions
the aesthetic relevance of recording how visual art plays to our perceptual biases, which is
a common theme in neuroscientiﬁc approaches to painting. As a result of her sensitivity
to this issue, Dissanayake is among the few theorists who attempt to analyze what makes
for artistic quality. She also explicitly avoids the loose way of discussing biological ﬁtness
that I earlier attributed to Miller, which equates evolutionary success with acts of sexual
intercourse rather than with rearing children who go on to be parents in their turn.
Dissanayake is interested in human behavioral predispositions that became universal
and innate because they became selected for at the genetic level, having proved to
enhance reproductive success. Such behaviors must date back at least to the late
Pleistocene, 40–20 ka, since it is then, she thinks, that human biological evolution
reached its present condition. Subsequent modiﬁcations involved cultural change, a
predisposition that is itself based on evolutionary characteristics of the human species.
Dissanayake holds that art behaviors, which she characterizes ﬁrst as patterns or
syndromes of creation and response and later as rhythms and modes of mutuality,
display the hallmarks of a biological adaptation: art is universal, innate, old, and is a
source of intrinsic pleasure. Indeed, she claims that art is essential to the fullest
realization of our human nature.
Art is not something added to us . . . but in large measure is the way we are, Homo aestheticus,
stained through and through.
Dissanayake maintains that art is a form of making special, also known as “elabora-
tion.” The human tendency to make things special was ﬁrst manifested about 100 ka,
when functional items were selected in part for their attractiveness or unusualness. At a
similar time, decorations or patterns were added to artifacts. The propensity to make
things special had adaptive value. Consequently, the art-making practices that fol-
lowed, appearing along with religion 60–40 ka, inherited a similar functionality. In the
case of art, making special or elaboration takes the form of intentionally decorating
ourselves and our environment in order to provide aesthetic enjoyment, which
sometimes can attain the level of ecstatic states. Typically, art is made for life’s sake,
not its own. It is often conjoined with ceremony to amplify features already made
salient by their ritual selection and function. Art is adaptive because, along with ritual
and play, it promotes community beneﬁts that in turn improve the well-being and
reproductive potential of society’s members. It highlights and afﬁrms what is important
to their lives: control over nature, manual competence, group lore, genealogy, wis-
dom, and values. In addition, it plays a vital role in promoting cooperation, mutual
identiﬁcation, and social cohesiveness.
Dissanayake regards the past with a deep nostalgia born of her sensitivity to the cost
imposed on us by the elevation of technology, individualism, hedonism, and an
artiﬁcial environment that shields us from awareness of the psychological, physical,
and social realities of existence.
130
THE ARTS

Not only is advanced man no longer ﬁtted for human life; modern life is no longer ﬁtted for
human nature.
Post-eighteenth-century Western art, as well as modern life, has lost its grip on the
evolutionary thread that should give it signiﬁcance, Dissanayake observes. With its
detachment from real life, its increasingly esoteric and self-referential embellishment,
and its trivialization in postmodern times, recent Western Fine Art has become a
private predilection consecrated for the unengaged, overly cognitive apprehension of
an elite few.
Critical discussion of Dissanayake’s theory
A problem with broad theories focused on art’s origin is that they must reduce art to
the lowest common denominators apparent at the outset. This comes out in several
aspects of Dissanayake’s theory. For instance, she argues that there are four criteria of
aesthetic quality: tangible relevance, evocative resonance, accessibility coupled with
strikingness, and satisfying fullness. The ﬁrst three are necessary for aesthetic worth, and
the last is necessary for the highest levels of aesthetic value. “Super stimuli,” such as
video games and advertisements, cannot qualify as aesthetically good, she maintains,
because they do not provide the deep rewards that go with engaging and meeting
concerns motivated by our biological nature.
Dissanayake’s criteria of aesthetic and artistic value should be rejected as too broad,
however. They are too easily satisﬁed by items we would not think of in aesthetic
terms, such as a video of our child’s university graduation or of a horse we’ve heavily
backed winning a major race. Indeed, Dissanayake’s criteria are likely to pick out
everything that humans ﬁnd interesting, rather than only things that are distinctively
aesthetic or art-connected.
Also too broad is the notion of “making special.” As noted earlier, it does not
identify an art-speciﬁc adaptation because it includes play and ritual as well. Mean-
while, Dissanayake attends to art’s form and to matters appreciated intuitively, emo-
tionally, or pre-verbally at the expense of giving due weight to art’s content along with
its cognitive, symbolic, referential, allusive, or representational nature. Those matters,
which surely are central to much great modern art, do not feature in her accounts of
art’s origins or of the source of its highest aesthetic values. She writes:
My own ethological viewpoint does not treat content—the actual thoughts, wishes, or images
inherent in the actions or objects that are being made special (shaped and embellished) . . . I am
not particularly concerned with the symbolic character of art: I ﬁnd its presymbolic sources much
more crucial to understanding its nature as a biological endowment.
Here Dissanayake ditches the greater part of art’s artiness and intellectual value. And she
becomes vulnerable to the charge she makes against other anthropologists and evolu-
tionary psychologists: that they deal with proto-aesthetic behaviors and judgments rather
than aesthetic ones, that is, with precursors or ingredients of art and the aesthetic
GENERAL THEORIES OF ART AS AN ADAPTATION 131

rather than with the developed behavior. Of course, the latter might emerge only
gradually from the former and they might retain much in common, but that does not
mean that they can be treated as indistinguishable.
Art and play
Dissanayake argues that art and play are closely related, and she is not alone in doing so.
Many authors have suggested that art originated in play. Some bird species and the
young of most mammal species play. They usually simulate hunting or combative skills
that they will need as adults. But play is especially important in our species. It continues
into adulthood. And if we allow that it includes pretense, sport, imagining, and
fantasizing, its pervasiveness is undeniable.
Because play develops and trains the young in skills that are important in adulthood,
it is widely regarded as an adaptation. Such an account, even if true for other mammals,
does not explain the extensive role of imaginative play in human adult life. And
whatever we are to say about adult play in our species, a new story will be needed to
account for the distinctive ways in which art differs from play if art behaviors are to be
characterized as adaptive in their own right. If, as I suspect, the connection between
adult play and art is that both accord important roles to creativity, imagination, and
intelligence, it might be more proﬁtable to regard them as scaffolded by these general
capacities rather than as adaptations in their own right.
The origins of music: a case study
The origin of music has attracted considerable attention from evolutionary psycholo-
gists and those working in the psychology of music, and provides an interesting case
study. The main theories are that music originated
in pre-linguistic emotional vocalizations, as a by-product that came as a bonus out of the
evolution of language, in infant-directed speech (aka motherese), in mate attraction by males,
in bringing about individual cognitive development, in evoking affectively charged memories, in
emotionally appreciating the value of sound-making resources or situations in the lives of our
ancestors, in effecting the social differentiation of individuals, and as a means to creating group
identity and cohesion such as by inciting group effort, by ensuring bonding, synchrony, and
coordination, by promoting conﬂict resolution, by serving as a form of mutual grooming, and by
providing group defense of territory.
Other beneﬁts of early music behaviors listed as evolutionarily relevant are perceptual
development, motor skill development, and transgenerational communication.
Now, this is a disconcertingly diverse array of proposals! Of course music might have
been multifunctional from the outset, but it cannot be the case that all these accounts
are true, because some of them are opposed. The same music cannot serve to
differentiate the individual from all others in the group and work also to unify the
group’s members. Music cannot operate through competition to attract attention to
individuals and simultaneously cement group solidarity. More generally, theories
132
THE ARTS

tracing music’s origins to effects on the individual or the mother-infant dyad—that is,
to effects not achieved in a wider public setting—are at odds with group-directed
explanations.
Moreover, as hypotheses about how music was originally adaptive, which is the
spirit in which these views are generally offered, they are not all plausible, as I will argue
in Chapter 11. For the present, the point to note is that some of these proposals refer to
proto-musical behaviors—non-linguistic vocal emoting, infant-directed speech, terri-
torial defense calls—that only roughly resemble music proper. Accounts like these do
not provide much of an idea as to what functions music proper might be capable of
performing. The remaining theories identify functions that music might continue to
meet after its originary phase is complete, but it is striking how uninformative they are
about the music in question.
After all, music comes in many types and degrees of complexity. What kind of music
aids cognitive development? Is all music equally matched for this task? Is music that is
suited to social grooming more adaptive than music that incites the war party? To
synchronize a group, I suppose the music must have a regular pulse and be accessible,
but what else is involved? Is vocal music better than instrumental music for this
purpose? And even if music originated in the speciﬁed function, has it acquired other
functions, and what is their signiﬁcance in relation to the original one?
My conclusion is that these theories about the origin of music tell us very little about
what music is and how it plays its speciﬁed role. Consider how varied the current
practice of music is, with its many genres, styles, and the like—reggae and symphonies,
computer-synthesized techno and concertos for the harmonica, a cappella choirs and
marching bands. Note also its many functions—paciﬁer, arouser, mnemonic, mood
regulator, dance accompaniment, background wallpaper, cult badge, focus of silent
attention, marching enabler, block to social engagement, facilitator for social engage-
ment, and on and on. Because of this complex diversity in the practices of music, it is
difﬁcult to match those practices to the vague and very general theories about how
music making arose, which were listed earlier. As Ball puts it:
it no longer makes much sense to reduce this instinct [to make and enjoy music] to some
primitive urging on the savannah [ . . . because] cultures elaborate basic instincts out of all
recognition or proportion.
In a later Postscript to his “On the Origin and Function of Music” of 1857, Herbert
Spencer defended his essay with a clearer understanding than many evolutionary
psychologists show today:
An endeavour to explain the origin of music has been dealt with as though it were a theory of
music in its entirety. An hypothesis concerning the rudiments has been rejected because it did not
account for everything contained in the developed product.
In addition, there is no reason to think that the story about the origins of any of the
other arts will be any more illuminating of their current functions, of how in detail
GENERAL THEORIES OF ART AS AN ADAPTATION 133

those functions are realized, of what is inevitable and what accidental in the practice,
and of whether what has persisted did so by happy ﬂuke or out of evolutionary
usefulness.
It might be observed in response that the original adaptive function of art deserves
study even if later artistic behavior transcends this, both through creative invention
and elaboration of the tradition. But unless “modern” art has set itself self-conscious-
ly against its prior adaptive function, as Dissanayake alleges, it is hard to defend the
relevance of the story about art’s origins to our understanding and appreciation of
contemporary art, especially in its more sophisticated variants. Meanwhile, it be-
comes more pressing to consider whether art now serves different evolutionary
agendas.
Feathers and the cochlea
In Chapter 4, I told the parable of the feather as a cautionary tale, teaching the lesson
that something’s current adaptive function might differ from its original one. For many
bird species now, certain features of feathers are adaptations for ﬂight, but that was not
the adaptive function originally served by feathers. As a reminder, consider this new
example. The cochlea of the human inner ear allows us to experience differences in the
pitches of sounds. It developed from the lagena, an organ with which ﬁsh detect
aquatic vibration and thereby locate the presence of other ﬁsh. But this does not mean
that humans’ pitch detection, which is important for auditory scene analysis and for the
appreciation of meaning and mood in speech, is merely a spandrel of an ancient Piscean
adaptation. In accounting for the adaptedness of the human cochlea, we should
look not to the origins of the relevant organ but either to changes in it or to new
ways of employing its features that made it useful for—that is, that enhanced the ﬁtness
of—terrestrial creatures, especially humans.
This shows that focusing on the Pleistocene origins of some human trait might fail to
uncover an adaptive function it serves currently. Admittedly, this presupposes that
Homo sapiens has continued to evolve over, say, the past 20,000 years. I noted some
evidence of this in Chapter 3: there have been changes in dentition, as well as in adult
lactose tolerance of human herders, for instance. More particularly, if we recognize not
only that culture is affected by biology but also how cultural change can bring about
genetic change—that is, if we accept some version of gene-culture coevolution—it is
quite plausible to suppose that some behaviors may have outstripped their origins to
take on new adaptive functions.
I think this has at least three important consequences. First, we may be able to appeal
to evolution to explain the form that modern art takes. For instance, the novel has a
history of only a few hundred years. Reading and writing were invented within the
past 5,000 years, but modern printing was not known until about 550 years ago, and
literacy became widespread yet more recently. Nevertheless, there is the possibility
(mentioned in Chapter 11) that written literature displays evolutionarily relevant
traits that are not demonstrable in oral traditions of drama or narrative. The second
134
THE ARTS

consequence is that we should no longer feel compelled to overplay the alleged
connections between originary and modern art behaviors. And the third is that, rather
than reducing art to the often simpler behaviors and functions it ﬁrst served, we can
take account of the more complex features it later took on and of the role of tradition
in the historical development of the arts and their styles.
GENERAL THEORIES OF ART AS AN ADAPTATION 135

9
Art as a Spandrel
The evolutionary biologists Stephen Jay Gould and Richard Lewontin introduced the
term “spandrel” for evolutionary by-products with no functional signiﬁcance of their
own. They borrowed the term from architecture, taking it to refer to the tapering
triangular spaces formed by the intersection of two rounded arches at right angles. In
human terms, the best equivalent probably is the armpit, a structure inevitably formed
where a movable limb joins the body’s trunk. Applications of the term are not conﬁned
solely to structural features, however. Both the redness of blood and the whiteness of
bone are regarded as spandrels. They are non-functional by-products of the chemical
constitutions respectively of blood and bone. And the notion can be extended to refer
to aspects of culture and society.
The arts as spandrels
A common view—some think it should be the default assumption—holds that art is a
spandrel. Art plainly relies on and exploits perceptual, emotional, and motivational
systems that had their evolutionary origins in a much broader context of human and
pre-human existence and survival. For example, facial recognition is a crucial human
adaptation supported by dedicated neural circuitry, and painted portraiture obviously
taps into this system for at least some of its effects and interest. The theory that art is an
evolutionary by-product is consistent with its pan-cultural occurrence and universal
features, assuming that the adaptation it relates to also is universal. At the same time, the
theory that art is a non-adaptive by-product is also consistent with art’s cultural
malleability and elaboration. If we add to this the observation that, in evolutionary
terms, art is good for nothing, despite how much we are drawn to it, the non-
adaptationist line on art can seem to be the most attractive option.
Of course, the universality of art is also consistent with its being an adaptation and
much shaped by culture. And the claim that art is not useful in evolutionarily relevant
ways is contestable. I argued in Chapter 2 that art can be instrumentally valuable and
that adaptationists about art claim to locate many ﬁtness-enhancing consequences of art
behaviors. But on the one hand, the theories of adaptationists often look to be highly
questionable; and on the other, neuroscientists often see the question as settled in favor
of the by-product hypothesis by the apparent absence of art-speciﬁc brain circuits. In a
recent review, the philosophers Johan De Smedt and Helen De Cruz conclude that

the by-product account of art is preferable to the adaptationist view, because the former is more
in line with cognitive neuroscience. The cognitive neuroscientiﬁc evidence reviewed here
provides strong empirical support for the claim that various forms of art, including visual art
and music, are attention-grabbing because of their correspondence with evolved propensities of
the human neural system.
The issue of how to interpret the neuroscientiﬁc evidence is complex and technical,
but it will come up in several places so I am going to pause to deal with it here. As just
indicated, the presence of art-speciﬁc neural circuits would provide good evidence that the
behaviors they facilitate are adaptive. Some scientists think that there are such circuits, or
that brain pathways originally evolved for other purposes have been modiﬁed subse-
quently via our interest in art. Other scientists think that art-specialized brain networks
are absent and that art behaviors co-opt neural systems primarily evolved for other tasks.
The neural evidence is apparently difﬁcult to interpret. The brain is structurally respon-
sive to learning and training, so it is not straightforward to determine whether neural
networks are a consequence of innate inheritance, or alternatively the products of
experience. Not surprisingly, then, a third view is that the evidence for art-specialized
neural circuits is simply indecisive and that we should be agnostic on the matter.
But now suppose that the issue is resolved and it is revealed that art-speciﬁc brain
networks do not exist. How is that absence to be interpreted? Some would interpret it as
indicating that art behaviors are by-products, not adaptations, and this is the view
endorsed by De Smedt and De Cruz. Yet others suggest, to the contrary, that old
neural propensities might be enlisted without modiﬁcation for new adaptive ends, so
that, while task-dedicated neural structures provide evidence of adaptation, their
absence does not count against it. (Though they often talk of modularized behavioral
programs in the mind, evolutionary psychologists have been wary of equating behav-
ioral modularity with neural localization and speciﬁcity.) So here is a further issue on
which there is disagreement and toward which we might prefer to be agnostic.
The inconclusiveness of the neuroscientiﬁc data does not improve the case for
regarding art as an adaptation, however. Given how speculative are the positive
arguments offered for adaptationist theories of art, many think it remains more
reasonable to see art as a spandrel.
Music as a spandrel
Not surprisingly, the position that art is a spandrel has many advocates. Others make the
claim not about art in general but about particular art forms. For instance, the neurosci-
entist Semir Zeki holds that the function of visual art is an extension of the brain’s wider
purpose, which is the acquisition of knowledge about the world, and he reduces
aesthetic experience to a non-cognitive, automated response to the brain’s activation.
Instrumental music, with its lack of semantic or representational meaning, is partic-
ularly susceptible to the suggestion that it lacks adaptive signiﬁcance. (It is easier to
ART AS A SPANDREL
137

come up with survival-enhancing characteristics associated with the enjoyment of
literary, dramatic, and visual arts.) Though he went on to suggest that music plays a
role in sexual selection, Darwin noted the issue:
As neither the enjoyment nor the capacity of producing musical notes are faculties of the least use
to man in reference to his daily habits of life, they must be ranked amongst the most mysterious
with which he is endowed.
Darwin’s contemporary and fellow evolutionist Alfred Russel Wallace held that music
and dancing are by-products of our brainpower and excessive vitality.
As with the mathematical, so with the musical faculty, it is impossible to trace any connection
between its possession and survival in the struggle for existence. It seems to have arisen as a result
of social and intellectual advancement, not as a cause.
In what was to become probably the most quoted and discussed passage of Steven
Pinker’s How the Mind Works of 1999, the evolutionary psychologist wrote that, of the
arts, music shows the clearest signs of not being an adaptation. Having compared music
in its effects to recreational drugs, he coined a striking metaphor:
I suspect that music is auditory cheesecake, an exquisite confection crafted to tickle the sensitive
spots of at least six of our mental faculties . . .
these being language (when the music has lyrics), auditory scene analysis, emotional
calls, habitat selection (as expressed in musical tone “picturing” of the sea, weather,
etc.), motor control (when music leads to dancing), and “something else that makes the
whole more than the sum of the parts.” In other words, senses and capacities evolved
for nonmusical purposes are stimulated by music in a fashion that we ﬁnd enjoyable,
though not to any evolutionary purpose. As we noted in Chapter 8, Pinker subse-
quently generalized his account to the other arts: they are by-products of perceptual
and cognitive mechanisms that tap into our pleasure systems, and they are so effective
because they are among the purest, most concentrated stimulants of those systems.
Music psychologists and others leapt to music’s defense, with many arguing that
music is an adaptation. We will review adaptationist accounts of music in Chapter 11
and criticisms of Pinker’s argument shortly. But before we get to that, I consider
variants on the theme that music is a spandrel.
More theories of music as a spandrel
Just as there are many competing theories of music’s origins, there are a variety of
stories about how it is a by-product. And just as adaptationist explanations of a trait can
look less convincing when there are many different, competing ones, this is equally
true of by-product explanations.
One theory is that language was the target of evolution, and music came along for
the ride. In presenting this view, John D. Barrow, a cosmologist and mathematician,
says that music “could be an entirely useless elaboration of an ability meant for
138
THE ARTS

something else.” Pinker also regards language as the prior adaptation, and the view goes
back to Herbert Spencer’s “The Origin and Function of Music” of 1857, in which he
argued that music is an outgrowth of emotionally heightened speech. The cognitive
scientist Dan Sperber is another who sees music as free riding on neural circuitry
designed to detect and take pleasure in vocal communication, except that he thinks all
this was pre-linguistic.
The idea, then, is that humans have created a cultural domain, music, which is parasitic on a
cognitive module the proper domain of which pre-existed music and had nothing to do with it.
He speculates that this mind module might have been superseded by language proces-
sing ones or it might run in parallel with the language modules and be involved in
comprehending tone languages, like Mandarin, in which the pitch of otherwise similar
syllables affects their meaning.
Others see music as an offshoot of systems dedicated to affective reactions, given that
it activates evolutionarily ancient socio-emotional brain circuitry. Or it is maintained
that music serves the primary purpose of emotional engagement by building on the
human capacity to understand other people as intentional agents and thereby to
understand what they desire, intend, feel, and so forth. This capacity is known as
“Theory of Mind.” Notice that both Pinker, with his reference to emotional calls,
and Spencer, with his talk of impassioned speech, also place side bets on a musical
connection with emotions.
As this short review shows, the range of suggestions for how music comes to be a
spandrel is disconcertingly large. It is a by-product of language, or it is a by-product of
the expression or detection of affective states. It is a by-product of a pre-linguistic
adaptation or of our capacity to understand other people as conscious agents. As I noted
earlier, where many different adaptationist explanations are offered of some bit of
behavior, it becomes obvious that theorizing has outstripped the evidence and it is easy
to lose faith in the adaptationist project. But it seems to me that non-adaptationist
accounts face the same predicament. To be convincing they need to identify the
original adaptation and how it gives rise to the spandrel in question. The more disparate
the tales told about such matters, the less convincing the overall approach.
Matters are not improved by Pinker’s tactic of listing multiple “sensitive spots” that
music “tickles” and by adding the weak and pathetic “something else that makes the
whole more than the sum of the parts.” If music draws on diverse, largely unconnected
adaptations, that surely suggests it is taking advantage of them to create a new effect that
could have adaptive signiﬁcance, not that it is a parasite on them all.
What Pinker meant
Commentators have been rightly puzzled by Pinker’s cheesecake metaphor and his
comparison of music with recreational drugs. The desire of Homo sapiens for sweet, fatty
foods was presumably adaptive in the Upper Paleolithic when such nourishing foods
would be hard to come by. As for now, when the nearest patisserie, McDonald’s, or
ART AS A SPANDREL
139

Starbucks is only a few minutes’ drive away, that taste may have become maladaptive.
But in neither environment does a desire for sweet, fatty food—for cheesecake—
function as a spandrel, so the point of the metaphor is obscure. Nevertheless, it is fairly
clear that Pinker did intend to identify music as a non-adaptive by-product.
How should we interpret Pinker’s metaphor? He appears to be saying that music
operates as a super-stimulus of sensory appetites. The satisfaction of these appetites is
intrinsically pleasurable because they are (or were) adaptive. Pinker’s claim is that music
is designed to act as a hyper-stimulant of our pleasure centers, which is why we value it.
It is a spandrel because, despite the pleasure it yields, it provides none of the evolution-
ary pay-offs that the activation of these systems ordinarily ensures. It co-opts or free
rides on the relevant systems without contributing to ﬁtness.
Criticisms of Pinker on music
There are two ways in which we might interpret the claim that music stimulates
pleasure to no evolutionary effect. According to the ﬁrst, which I suspect is the one
Pinker has in mind, music stimulates our senses, and thereby is experienced as
pleasurable, yet does not provide information about the world, nor provide informa-
tion we could obtain as efﬁciently without it. The assumptions here are both that the
evolutionary purpose of our senses is to provide knowledge about our environment,
including our own bodies, and that the exercise of those senses is a source of pleasure.
Music is a rich, attention-grabbing stimulus and its captivation of our senses produces
pleasure; but this is all show, without informational substance. It is as useful as a slice of
cheesecake at the close of what is already a hearty meal.
I do not ﬁnd this view very convincing. It is doubtful that the ordinary exercise of
our senses is a source of intrinsic pleasure in the way that food, sex, and exercise are.
And in addition, the claim that music is useless because lacking in informational
content, though widely made, is surely unsatisfactory. Against it, it can be argued
that the arts are a special source of cognitive value in that they allow us to explore
various scenarios, such as that of the star-crossed lovers in Romeo and Juliet, “off-line”—
that is, via imaginative engagement. And some theorists extend this account even to
purely instrumental music. The ideas here are that such music presents us with and
leads us through a virtual environment, or that we experience it imaginatively as a
“narrative” about the actions and feelings of a persona we hypothesize. As well, music
often plays a crucial role in identity formation and mood regulation. An education in
the arts, including music, has been widely held to have a range of carry-over beneﬁts
for intelligence, character, emotional and moral sensitivity, and the like. Music lessons
raise IQ—that is, general intelligence—and improve certain nonmusical cognitive skills
and emotional sensitivities (to a modest extent, as I will document in Chapter 11).
But in any case, we might challenge the idea that the communication of real-world
informational content is the sole measure of usefulness. It may be that music is of value
precisely because it offers welcome and sometimes needed respite from dealing with
the real world. And even behaviors that arise because they help us negotiate the world
140
THE ARTS

are not exclusively used to that end. Most discourse is rather thin in informational
content, involving much small talk, chatter, and genuinely idle gossip, not to mention a
great deal of grunting and hand-waving, but this would not lead us to regard language
as spandrel-like. Admittedly, it is one thing to argue that the arts serve genuinely as
sources of information or of other forms of value and quite another to suggest that they
improved the comparative evolutionary ﬁtness of our ancestors. But surely it is not
implausible to posit connections between what we value in art and qualities relevant to
the comparative success of our forebears.
There is a second way in which music’s stimulation of pleasure might be spandrel-
like. I am not sure that it is what Pinker has in mind, but the idea is invited by his
comparison of music with drugs and erotica, and it provokes some intriguing questions,
I think. Here is the idea: it may be possible to stimulate the brain’s pleasure centers not
in the usual way but directly or via deviant causal routes. Examples of the ﬁrst kind
would be the use of narcotics or the pleasure brain-probe of science ﬁction fame that
goes directly to the neural pleasure centers and excites them. The use of the pleasure
probe or of narcotics is spandrel-like in that neural pleasure systems which evolved
to enhance ﬁtness are co-opted in ways that subvert their role as adaptations. A similar
claim might be made for music or the other arts, except that, because these gain
admittance via the usual sensory interface, the suggestion will be that they access the
pleasure centers via deviant neural routes. The idea, then, is that music or the arts in
general take advantage of the evolved pleasure response in a fashion that circumvents
the response’s adaptive relevance by bypassing the neural routes and structures licensed
by evolution.
One kind of evidence that would count strongly for the view that music stimulates
pleasure in a causally deviant fashion would be the discovery that musical sounds are
processed by non-adaptive, music-speciﬁc neural networks rather than by the circuits
involved in other kinds of sound and language processing. Brain-imaging evidence
counts against this, however. There is considerable overlap between the brain regions
used in processing environmental sound and speech, on the one hand, and music, on
the other hand, which suggests that musical inputs do not activate the brain differently
from other auditory inputs. Meanwhile, views about the existence of music-speciﬁc
neural pathways and structures are no less contested and various than those mentioned
earlier with regard to art-speciﬁc brain circuits. From what is known so far, it looks as if
the enjoyment of music builds and elaborates on familiar auditory processes, as opposed
to short-circuiting them. So, music is not spandrel-like by plugging into our pleasure
centers via routes that are unique or strange.
Pinker’s critics have offered further grounds for rejecting the comparison between
music and recreational drugs. Music behaviors are costly in that they consume time and
energy that might be used to evolutionary advantage elsewhere. If they are also non-
adaptive, it has been argued, then they should have been selected against. Rather than
being ancient and widespread, we should expect them to be recent and marginal, but
of course this is the reverse of what we ﬁnd.
ART AS A SPANDREL
141

I doubt that this argument is decisive, however. It wrongly suggests that no by-
product can be costly. The issue is not simply whether the by-product is costly, but also
involves asking whether it lowers the comparative ﬁtness of those who enjoy it. If
music is universal, there may be no comparative disadvantage in sustaining its cost. Or if
those who commit less effort to music substitute for it engagement with another costly
art spandrel, again there need be no comparative disadvantage.
A more promising objection queries Pinker’s focus on pleasure as the primary
reward that music yields. By no means is all music pleasurable to listen to, and there
are many reasons other than the production of pleasure for which music is made and
attended to. Also, regarding music mainly as a stimulant trivializes it and disregards its
power to transform the brains and lives of those who engage with it. And ﬁnally,
Pinker’s approach indicates an ethnocentric bias: in most cultures, people sing and
dance, whereas his model seems to assume that music is the focus of passive, private
listening, such as became common in the West only a few centuries ago.
Literature as a spandrel
Of all the arts, it is most widely claimed that literary behaviors are adaptive on account
of the information we can learn from them. Even those who take it as the default
assumption that the arts are by-products are inclined to treat literature as an exception.
Pinker ultimately decides against its being an adaptation, while the evolutionary
psychologists John Tooby and Leda Cosmides rule in its favor. I will discuss these
adaptationist positions on literature in Chapter 11.
Jerome H. Barkow, an anthropologist, presents a version of the literature-as-
spandrel position, though his focus is on TV soaps rather than high literature. He
holds that soaps feed off our evolved interest in gossip, which serves as a form of social
control.
One of the most developed arguments to the effect that literature is a by-product is
presented by William Flesch, an English literature professor. Drawing on the ﬁndings
of evolutionary psychologists, he argues that we admire people who can bear the cost
of being altruistic, which signals their ﬁtness. People who, at their own expense, punish
wrongdoers are especially admired, whereas we withdraw cooperation from those who
fail to punish wrongdoers.
We have explicitly evolved the ability and desire to track others and to learn their stories precisely in
order to punish the guilty.
Fictions tap into this capacity and reward us by telling interesting and satisfying stories,
both about social interactions involving altruism and punishment and about the multi-
dimensional monitoring and score-keeping on which the rightness or wrongness of
social judgments about altruism and punishment depend. We want those deserving of
censure to get their comeuppance and we are pleased when they do.
142
THE ARTS

We are ﬁtted to track one another and to track as well how others monitor one another and what
they do when they monitor one another. What we wish to track is past behavior in order to
respond in the present to that behavior. Fiction recruits this central capacity in human social
cognition for taking pleasure in responding to the nonactual.
Flesch does not argue that literature reﬁnes our sense of social justice or that it
extends our capacity to keep track of social relations. So literature should be seen on his
account as a by-product of these evolved social competencies. He does allow that the
creation of literature is a costly and thereby an honest signal that literary authors are
skillful monitors of social relations and clever interweavers of plots and characters. But
the beneﬁts in status that accrue to storytellers from others’ acknowledgment of their
literary talents are ancillary in his view. In other words, he does not suggest that the
authoring of literature is adaptive.
As a theory of literature, the account does seem one-sided. Even if we accept the
social importance of detecting and punishing defectors and other free riders—and also
acknowledge that Flesch tries to account for love, courage, and much else as involving
forms of altruism or its opposite—it seems implausible to think that all good literature
centrally displays or illustrates themes concerning social coordination and management.
Many stories place the emphasis elsewhere. Consider tales about war and conﬂict,
whimsical fantasy, struggles against or mastery of nature, private guilt, madness,
foolishness, myth, communion with spirits, farces, quests, voyages, and so on.
More generally, Flesch’s view should be evaluated by comparison with accounts to
be offered in Chapter 11 claiming that literature is adaptive. These tend to rely on
claims like those which Flesch allows—that authors gain status on account of their
talents, or that literature tracks the sincerity and deceptiveness of social relations. But
they argue that literature is adaptive on this score, not a by-product. Some adaptationist
theories of literature argue not only that it depends on our ability to monitor social
relations and on their intrinsic interest for us, but also that it augments our knowledge
of such matters and reﬁnes the relevant skills in ways that are distinctive to it. They hold
that it thereby makes us ﬁtter as participants in the real world; and, ﬁnally, claim also
that it is a behavior evolved to serve these ends.
Spandrels versus adaptations
Rather than continuing to criticize particular examples of the art-as-spandrel hypoth-
esis, I now adopt a general approach to the issue. I begin by highlighting a point made
earlier: non-adaptationist accounts of art need to meet the same standards of argument
that adaptationist theories are held to.
At ﬁrst glance, the view that art is a non-adaptive by-product of evolution is
attractive in that it connects art to our evolved human nature, yet apparently avoids
the demands of demonstrating how art behaviors enhanced the ﬁtness of our fore-
runners. But we have already seen from the discussion of feathers in Chapters 4 why
ART AS A SPANDREL
143

matters are not so simple. Demonstrating that something is a spandrel involves far more
than identifying it as a by-product of some prior adaptation from which it operates very
differently, because adaptations can be and often are built upon prior adaptations. So,
even if it is true that art originally was a by-product of other adaptive behaviors, this
does not show that art behaviors have not subsequently taken on adaptive functions in
their own right. In consequence, the art-as-spandrel approach does not require less
supporting argument than the art-as-adaptation model. Spandrels can be conﬁdently
identiﬁed as such only after the possibility that they are adaptations is tested and
defeated. When the investigation is closed, art may turn out to be a by-product after
all, but before we get to that conclusion we have to go down the same hard road as that
taken by the person who hopes to show that art is an adaptation.
A second outcome is this: if arguments for the adaptiveness of art are properly
regarded as questionable and speculative, arguments for the art-as-spandrel model will
inherit these same qualities because they must follow the same path. As I observed
earlier in this chapter, non-adaptationists are not immune to the accusation that they
are telling Just So stories. They can be as susceptible to this charge as adaptationists are.
Why art is not a meaningless spandrel
Despite having allowed that some theorists treat the non-adaptationist hypothesis as the
default assumption, I now argue that art could not remain a mere spandrel, even if it
originated as a by-product of some other adaptation. This is because of the signiﬁcant
role it plays in human life. This objection to the art-as-spandrel hypothesis can be
summarized in the slogan: form becomes norm.
Structural integrity—symmetry, proportion, balance, and a normal disposition of
elements—is an indicator of ﬁtness. It signals a history of health and immunity from
disease. And for this reason structural integrity is appreciated as an aspect of human
attractiveness. For instance, the degree of symmetry of human faces correlates with
judgments of their beauty, as was discussed in Chapter 7.
In writings on evolution, navels and male nipples, along with the redness of blood
and the whiteness of bone, are sometimes offered as examples of non-adaptive by-
products of adaptations. Nevertheless, navels and male nipples count along with eyes,
noses, ears, chins, and the like toward structural integrity. They have to be present in
the usual number, proportion, and places if a person is to display at least an average
amount of ﬁtness. Perhaps that is one reason why young women wear short tops and
low-slung jeans and young men go shirtless, why they decorate their navels with studs
or jewelry. These behaviors advertise health and attractiveness.
Recall the argument in Chapter 7 to the effect that human beauty encompasses not
only physical appearance but also self-presentation and social competence. The same
point applies here. “Form” is not restricted solely to bodily features, but covers all aspects
of development. For instance, we expect others to acquire and master language use, so
dysfunctionality in these will be perceived as signaling neural or other problems. The same
144
THE ARTS

goes for social behavior that made life in the late Paleolithic possible. For instance, we
expect people to acquire a sense of reciprocity and a commitment to cooperation. And if
the creation and appreciation of art was prehistorically as widespread as I have claimed, a
person who showed no interest in any form of art would be as unappealing as someone
who is without intelligence, humor, social grace, care for others, and a navel. The general
point is this: any transmissible human form or behavior that was recognized as signifying
well-formedness and developmental normalcy would not only become statistically
average as it successfully spread through the population; it would become normative in
the evaluative sense, whether it ﬁrst emerged as an adaptation or as a spandrel.
In the case of navels and the other bodily features I have mentioned, the signals are
near-universal but provide only cheap signals of ﬁtness. Their occurrence in the usual
manner is so prevalent that they have only minor value. This is not to say that they are
worthless, however. Departures from the norm may be taken as anomalies. If these
departures are comparatively minor, they should be overlooked in favor of the person’s
intelligence, sensitivity, creativity, and loving nature. This is because personality and
social competence should be valued more highly than bodily integrity. But signiﬁcant
deﬁcits on either count are liable to be interpreted as counting against ﬁtness to the
extent that they impinge on a person’s capacity to contribute to the community or on
their appeal as a potential mate.
If art behaviors came to us as ancillary evolutionary by-products, they would not
remain merely incidental. Their occurrence in the usual manner would become
normative because they provide honest, because costly, signals of ﬁtness. As a result,
not only the absence of art behaviors but also the degrees to which they are represented
can be informationally signiﬁcant in assessing someone’s ﬁtness.
The cost of our art behaviors can be overlooked, so it is worth reminding ourselves
of it. Expertise and knowledge in the arts is hard earned. The relevant talents and skills
can be developed and displayed to different degrees and in different areas. In general,
we place a high value on creativity and we expect it to be specialized. And we place
similar worth on connoisseurship in appreciation. A person who enjoys only commer-
cial mainstream music and makes no discriminatory judgments within the category, or,
worse, enjoys no music at all, might cultivate an expert’s interest elsewhere, say in post-
Impressionist painting.
As I argued in Chapter 4, this emphasis on expertise and connoisseurship should not
be equated with aesthetic elitism. It applies across the full range of the arts. Some music
aﬁcionados distinguish many different types of techno; and every pop fanatic I have
ever met has claimed to have a special interest in a kind of music with specialist appeal
and could point to crucial differences between their favored variety of pop and others,
these being differences that my ears were initially inclined to miss. Expertise, both on
the part of creator and appreciator, rarely depends on raw talent alone. It comes hard
won, being developed and reﬁned through practice, experience, exposure, and study.
Here is the point: even if the possession of a normal navel is cheap and is therefore not
a positive sign of ﬁtness, the same does not apply to the arts. These allow many and costly
ART AS A SPANDREL 145

ways to achieve creativity and subtle proﬁciency in appreciation, which can therefore
act as reliable, positive signs of ﬁtness. Moreover, though interest in the arts broadly
construed might be universal, individuals specialize where their talents, interests, and
knowledge lie, and this differentiates us in complex ways. A person can afford to
become a narrow specialist at great personal cost in energy, cognitive investment, and
expense provided enough others are like-minded, and what counts as “enough” might
be only a small portion of a large population. Relevant art behaviors can serve as reliable
signiﬁers of many kinds or aspects of ﬁtness, then, though there may be high variability
and competition between the types and expressions of art expertise that are possible.
A possible objection to my view that form becomes norm detects an unacceptable
kind of Social Darwinism as implied here. It looks as if some standard could become
evolutionarily normative if it were imposed sufﬁciently widely. This seems to open the
door to the possibility that an evolutionary sanction might be claimed, say, for racial
and sexual discrimination, homophobia, and enslavement of ethnic minorities.
Admittedly, the position I have defended holds that what become normative are
only those transmissible human forms or behaviors that are recognized as signifying
well-formedness and developmental normalcy, but now the worry can be articulated as one
about how vulnerable and corruptible are these notions. Most societies tolerate many
individual differences as normal—differences in hair and eye color, hair distribution or
curliness or straightness, skin pigmentation, height, and intelligence. But suppose the
government of a populous society enforced a decree against left-handedness to the
point where its citizens regarded left-handedness as an abnormality. Rather than
accepting that their belief changes the standard for normalcy in their own society,
should we not regard their belief as mistaken?
A ﬁrst reply to this concern notes that at least some of the aesthetic and other
preferences under discussion are ones that shaped the lives of our distant ancestors.
They are an aspect of the human nature we inherited from our forebears. As such they
will not easily be changed by government edicts, though such edicts might succeed in
suppressing or distorting their expression. Here we might draw an analogy with
humans’ selective breeding of nonhuman animals. We breed them for traits we choose,
sometimes to the detriment of the animals’ normal functioning, but this external
control does not necessarily change their underlying nature or the preferences that
are indigenous to their species. For instance, Labradors are not sexually attracted solely
to other Labradors, but rather to dogs of all breeds. In the human case, we know that
locally arbitrary conditions can conspire with human preferences that go on to affect
what counts as statistically normal at a given place and time with respect to such factors
as neck length, height, weight, tooth whiteness, and the like. But as was recorded in
Chapter 4, many aesthetic features, human forms, and themes of social life are universal
and cross-culturally appreciable. In general, the basic character of the preferences we
are discussing runs deep.
Moreover, it is worth recalling that, even if human nature includes a common core,
it is also a crucial aspect of human nature that individuals differ. As described in
146
THE ARTS

Chapter 7, we are drawn to what is unusual as well as to what is average. This works
to preserve diversity. In fact, evolution is driven by individual difference. There is
not uniformity, but a varied distribution of traits across the species’ population and
an equally varied distribution of preferences for particular traits. The point here is
that developmental normalcy does not and could not correspond to developmental
sameness.
Although I have suggested that the creation and appreciation of art is universal,
I have also indicated the variety of ways in which artistic creation and appreciation can
ﬁnd expression. Not only are there differences in the art practices of distinct cultures;
there is as well a signiﬁcant diversity of art practices within each culture. And for any
given art practice, there is likely to be a spread of levels that accommodates many
degrees of competence among the participants. All this means that there are many ways
in which individuals can seek the artistic development of their distinctive talents as
creators or appreciators. Nothing in the form-becomes-norm idea requires or predicts
uniformity or regimentation when it comes to a social practice like art, with its long
historical development, advanced sophistication, and scope for virtuosic originality.
Indeed, it is precisely the multiplicity of art’s possibilities that makes it such an
informationally nuanced signal of ﬁtness.
The factors that dictate our preferences can develop and alter over time, of course,
and this may shift what counts as well-formedness and developmental normalcy. To
return to dogs, their association with humans has altered their previously wolﬁsh
nature, but this is not a result that could have been achieved by a regime of training
alone. It also required the prior evolution of canine neural structures that might make
such training effective. I allow that humans are highly unusual in the cognitive and
social plasticity of their desires and norms, which is relevant to their capacity to adjust to
an extraordinary range of environments and circumstances. But I do not share the view
that all our values and predispositions are or could be the product of arbitrary cultural
conditioning. We can hold that our evolved biology sets constraints on what we may
become, without also subscribing to the kind of crude theories that mischievously
appealed to biological determinism in the misinformed attempt to defend inequitable
social hierarchies and the status quo.
ART AS A SPANDREL 147

10
Art as a Technology
In this chapter, we will consider the possibility that art is a technology—that is, an
invention of culture. Of course, culture is not independent of biology. There are choirs
only because people can sing, and they can sing only because they have biologically
evolved body parts adapted to vocal production and control, minds adapted to coordi-
nated action, and so forth. But that granted, the idea featured here is that art relies on
biology only in a rather general and indirect fashion and without the evolution of art-
speciﬁc capacities.
Technologies versus spandrels
If most human behaviors depend at some point on our evolved cognitive, perceptual,
affective, and motor systems, should those behaviors be viewed as spandrels? Some
theorists would ﬁnd that idea congenial. The evolution theorist Stephen Jay Gould
suggested that, with only 5,000 years of history behind them, both writing and reading
are spandrels. Indeed, he regarded language, human culture, and technology generally
as by-products of the oversized human brain that evolved to address now unknown
problems faced by our ancestors.
I think that this use of the notion of a biological by-product or spandrel is too
proﬂigate. The connection between the behaviors in question and the evolved capacities
on which they depend is too stretched for spandrel-talk to have explanatory power. To
regard all of culture as a spandrel generated by an ancient, general adaptation—the
acquisition of language, for instance—empties the term of signiﬁcance. We should
reserve the term “spandrel” for non-adaptive, ancillary behaviors closely connected to
the adaptations that bring them about. In other words, it seems reasonable to view some
behaviors neither as adaptations nor as spandrels. They are better described as technol-
ogies. Technologies are enabled by, rather than produced by, our biological natures. They
are learned via culture and are achieved by us, rather than being genetically transmitted.
Gould is not alone in regarding most human culture as resting on broad-based
cognitive resources provided by evolution. Michael Tomasello, a developmental
psychologist, describes a limited suite of cognitive skills—recognition of other people
as intentional beings, imitation, and teaching—as providing the biological scaffolding
that made cumulative cultural change possible in humans. Once underway, culture was
self-driven, as it were. Similarly, Steven Mithen, an archaeologist, argues that modern

human behavior is the consequence of the development of general intelligence and
that this emerged as a result of a breaking down of boundaries between isolated mental
domains specializing in natural history, social relations, technology, and language. The
subtitle of his 1996 book—A Search for the Origins of Art, Religion, and Science—makes
clear that he traces the origins of art, religion, and science—that is, the origins of culture
generally—to this change. In all these cases, I suggest that it is appropriate to regard the
general claim about culture and the arts as one identifying them not as spandrels but as
technologies.
Culture as technology versus gene-culture coevolution
As I noted in Chapter 3, the thesis of gene-culture coevolution opposes the ideas that
culture runs independently of evolution and that human evolution came to a halt long
ago. Environmental factors, including aspects of culture, can affect how genes are
expressed. But more than this, feedback loops allow culture to alter our evolved
biology. For example, the move from hunting and gathering to herding was followed
by increased lactose tolerance. Strong advocates of the gene-culture coevolution
hypothesis, for example the environmental scientist Peter Richerson and the anthro-
pologist Robert Boyd, argue that the relationship between biology and culture is
symbiotic. They maintain that aspects of our sociality have selectively altered our
ﬁtness and affected our biology as a species. Their view, which I share, is that evolution
is ongoing and not necessarily separable from cultural process and change.
The possibility of gene-culture coevolution should make us wary of regarding culture
generally, including art, as a technology. And the pervasiveness and importance of art are
at least suggestive of its close connection with biological evolution. But the hypothesis
that art is a technology cannot be dismissed out of hand and deserves consideration.
Music as a technology
The most sophisticated and extended defense of the idea that an art form is a
technology is made for music by the neuroscientist Aniruddh D. Patel. He maintains
that music is a cultural invention with no evolutionarily specialized biological founda-
tions. It is what he calls a transformational technology. It is transformational to the extent
that it can have lasting effects on the brains and minds of those who are exposed to it.
Patel reviews accounts of music as an adaptation and ﬁnds them wanting. He offers
two main counter-arguments. First, language is an adaptation and there are key respects
in which the acquisition of music is not analogous to that of language. In particular,
music behaviors emerge more slowly and less robustly as part of normal human
development than do linguistic behaviors. Second, there is no evidence of genes giving
rise to music-speciﬁc brain networks. For instance, two core components of music
cognition—tonality processing and synchrony to a musical beat—co-opt neural struc-
tures that primarily serve linguistic and complex vocal learning functions.
ART AS A TECHNOLOGY
149

Patel also criticizes theories of music that view it as an evolutionary by-product to
the extent that they imply that music is a free rider or frill with no value from
a biological point of view. It can have signiﬁcant value to many individuals without
contributing to heritable ﬁtness and species-level change. He notes that regular
engagement with music can affect nonmusical brain functions in ways that produce
enduring beneﬁcial consequences with respect to language processing, language dis-
orders, and recovery from stroke. These are examples of positive results of our
involvement with music but are not the cause of that involvement. According to
Patel, we are motivated to pursue music and value it for its aesthetic rewards, emotional
power, enhancement of ritual, mnemonic efﬁcacy, and its role in identity formation.
These widely recognized beneﬁts together account for music’s universality and ancient
origins.
Patel develops an analogy between music and ﬁre, which is also a transformational
technology. The ability to control ﬁre is very likely to be a trait that does not rely on
evolutionarily specialized “ﬁre making” cognitive mechanisms in the brain. Rather,
the ability to control ﬁre is almost certainly an invention that spread culturally and
became universal because of its utility for humans.
The notion of music as a transformational technology helps us to explain why music is universal
in human culture. Music is universal because what it does for humans is universally valued. Music
is like the making and control of ﬁre in this respect. The control of ﬁre is universal in human
culture because it transforms our lives in ways we value deeply, for example, allowing us to cook
food, keep warm, and see in dark places. Once a culture learns ﬁre making, there is no going
back, even though we might be able to live without this ability. Similarly, music is universal because it
transforms our lives in ways we value deeply, for example, in terms of emotional and aesthetic
experience and identity formation.
On this view, the cognitive ﬂexibility that leads us to invent, elaborate, and develop
what comes our way—to make ﬁre or music for instance—is an adaptation, but the
results of those acts of invention, development, and elaboration are not thereby merely
by-products or spandrels. They are designed applications, not adventitious by-
products. We put the relevant capacities to work with the intention of bringing
about desired outcomes; and, when we are successful, those outcomes are achieved,
not accidentally thrown up. Moreover, such technologies are transmitted via teaching,
not via genetic inheritance, though our evolved natures contribute some of the
dispositions and capacities on which this process of teaching relies. So it is that reading
and music are passed to children.
Although Patel does not broaden his view to other art forms, it is possible that this
could be done. We might speculate that art had its genesis in our inclination to create,
design, and elaborate whatever comes to hand; and that this also explains why it
continues to renew and transform itself. It is an expression of our biological nature,
certainly, but it is not thereby either an adaptation or a spandrel. It expresses the aspect
of our nature that leads us to be creative inventors and appreciative users of technology.
150
THE ARTS

Patel’s argument reviewed
I accept Patel’s claims about the value of music and his account of why we are attracted to
it, but I question the success of his arguments. I doubt that the differences between music
and language demonstrate that music is less likely to be an adaptation. I am unconvinced
that the transmission of musical knowledge and skill is purely cultural. And I think that
the analogy between ﬁre and music is overdrawn. I begin by attempting to show that
music behaviors do not qualify as evolutionary specializations in their own right.
The capacity of humans to acquire oral language is an adaptation in Patel’s view. He
identiﬁes ten human capacities for language acquisition that provide strong evidence
that there has been natural selection for the transmission of oral language.
 Spontaneous babbling (even by deaf babies) shows that infant speech is not simply
an imitation of adult speech.
 Humans’ lowered larynx brings the risk of choking but was necessary for speech.
 Humans are unique among primates in their capacity for vocal learning and
imitation. Infants have the capacity to learn any language but soon favor their
native tongue.
 There is a critical, early period for language acquisition.
 Deaf signing children acquire grammar in parallel with hearing children.
 While some children get more input in learning a language than others, all acquire it.
 Successive generations of users increase grammatical complexity, for example, as
in Creole.
 A single gene has been identiﬁed as exercising strong inﬂuence on speech and
language.
 And it is highly likely that humans without language abilities would be at a severe
disadvantage when it comes to survival and reproduction.
Patel presents the comparison with music as revealing an absence of evidence that
there are adaptations for music acquisition. Babbling, vocal learning, and the anatomy
of the vocal tract could all reﬂect adaptations for an acoustic communication system
that originally supported both language and vocal music, but in other respects music
does not measure up well. Music learning develops rather slowly. For example, at 5
years of age children are not as sensitive to musical keys as are adults. Also, it is not clear
that there is a critical period for music acquisition, because some good musicians ﬁrst
learn to play or compose in their teens. Not everyone is able to acquire musical skills,
and there is no evidence that nonmusical people are less successful reproducers.
Moreover, Patel continues, the case for music-speciﬁc innate capacities is weak.
Studies treating newborns as musical innocents should be regarded as controversial
because fetuses may already have had signiﬁcant exposure to music. Also, their “musical”
responses can be explained as related to speech or general auditory processing. Indeed,
many so-called “musical” recognition abilities might be aspects of auditory processing
evolved to help us negotiate the general soundscape, rather than being particular to
ART AS A TECHNOLOGY 151

music. Meanwhile, there is no evidence for a “music” gene. Tone deafness runs in
families, but the deﬁcit is not music-speciﬁc. Perfect pitch is heritable, but is not necessary
for musical ability. Patel’s overall conclusion is negative: based on current evidence,
music does not seem to be a biological adaptation.
Unlike the usual approach to the topic of music and evolution, which is piecemeal,
narrowly focused, and highly speculative, Patel offers a sustained argument that calls on
a considerable spread of data that he subjects to a powerful test: if music behaviors are
an evolutionary adaptation, this should be no less apparent than is the fact that oral
linguistic behaviors are an adaptation; and the indicators of music’s adaptedness should
parallel those for language. In terms of its rigor, the argument is impressive. Neverthe-
less, it must be queried as setting the standard for music being an adaptation at an
inappropriately high level.
First response—modularity
The ﬁrst response to Patel’s argument requires a brief introduction. As we have noted,
some theorists regard human behavior as highly modular. In other words, they think
that behavioral responses to environmental stimuli are triggered and operated auto-
matically, without higher cognitive supervision or insight. Some evolutionary psychol-
ogists defend this view, using the metaphor that the human mind operates like a Swiss
army knife. Modular functioning need not be underpinned by speciﬁc neural circuits,
but where such circuits do exist they provide further evidence that the function is
adaptive.
Opponents of this view are liable to emphasize the importance of general intelli-
gence, cognitive plasticity, and creativity. They note how human thinking is usually
self-aware and conscious, as well as involving multiple levels of intentionality. (That is,
thoughts about other people’s beliefs, desires, intentions, etc., as these concern yet
other people: for example, where you worry that she thinks that they should give more
consideration to his needs.) Undoubtedly, much of our brain functioning is auto-
mated—much of the processing the brain performs is not present to consciousness—so
the disagreement is about the degree of modularization and the comparative signiﬁ-
cance of self-conscious, executive thinking in our overall performance.
It is widely accepted that language acquisition and use is a prime example of a
modularized behavior. Children are programmed to soak up their mother language at
an astonishing rate, and we are all deeply unconscious of the structural principles that
govern our use of language. Patel’s test for whether music is an adaptation requires that
it be as highly modularized (automated) as language is. This comes out in his insistence
that, if it is an adaptation, not only should it emerge unthinkingly as an aspect of normal
development in all children; it should also be acquired as robustly as language is, and it
should be driven by music-speciﬁc neural systems.
Patel does not deny that music calls on some music-speciﬁc brain modules, but he
thinks that many cognitive mechanisms that appear to be music-speciﬁc in fact have
deep connections with other nonmusical brain functions, such as those for language.
152
THE ARTS

For instance, he accepts the modularity of beat-based rhythm processing, but argues
that this module is intimately involved in complex vocal learning. He also points out
that some music-speciﬁc neural circuitry might be the result of individual experience
and development, rather than reﬂecting innate brain specialization.
In considering these arguments, it is important to recall how ﬁercely contested are
claims both for and against the existence of genetically programmed music-speciﬁc
neural networks. Some neuroscientists agree with Patel that these are (largely) absent in
music processing. But others disagree and claim that much music processing is neurally
specialized and modular. So one premise of Patel’s argument is at least debatable.
It is true that music draws on neural circuits that are important for language, and that
there are many parallels between the ways the brain processes both language and music.
And we noted in Chapter 9 that some theorists see music as a by-product of language. In
fact, though, it is possible that music preceded language or that they had a common
origin. So, we should not assume that the relevant neural structures evolved for the sake of
language and only later were co-opted by music. All in all, it is not obvious that music has
a lesser title than language to claim “ownership” of the neural structures that it calls on.
In addition, the earlier discussion of feathers alerts us to the possibility that music
could be an adaptation that borrowed circuits originally evolved for more mundane
aspects of sound processing. If those neural units have been tweaked or modiﬁed so that
they can be applied to making or appreciating music, and if those who so behave are
thereby ﬁtter in ways they can pass on, then the tweaking or modifying is where the
adaptation lies. As I emphasized previously, judging whether we are dealing with an
adaptation involves considering the role of the relevant behavior in the creature’s
ecology. That judging is not foreclosed by learning that the heritable traits responsible
for the current behavior ﬁrst evolved to service different behaviors.
Besides, language acquisition is unusual in its degree of modularity and in its
robustness with which it is acquired. And there is no reason to assume that only
automated behaviors are adaptive. Finally, not all developmentally robust behaviors
or structures are adaptations. There is robust development of the coccyx in humans,
but it is a vestige. And not all adaptations are developmentally robust. For instance, they
may not manifest in environments other than those in which they are useful.
So Patel’s test, which requires music to measure up to language in all these respects if it
is to be acknowledged as an adaptation, sets an unreasonable standard. Music behaviors
could be adaptive even if they do not meet it. For instance, music behaviors might be
adaptive for those who have them, but not be as strongly and universally heritable as the
propensity for language is. A possible explanation for the low heritability of high-level
music behaviors might be that the realization of talent across the full range of music
behaviors requires the correctly sequenced expression of a great many different genes.
Second response—scope and spontaneous emergence
In case it is thought that the low level of genetic heritability for musical talent creates a
presumption in favor of Patel’s conclusion that music is not an adaptation, I now
ART AS A TECHNOLOGY 153

review that issue. I suggest that low heritability is true of high-level musical talent but
not of low-level music making and appreciation. And I suggest that Patel should (and
does) aim his argument at the low level. He often discusses ordinary listeners, for
example. (This is the issue of scope that I raised in Chapter 4.) Just as we are not all
professionally competent poets, playwrights, or novelists, we are not all professionally
competent composers or musicians. But the relevant question concerns whether we
can all engage our native music with understanding, as we do our mother tongue.
I argue that we can. In other words, when we make the comparison at the appropriate
level, Patel exaggerates the extent to which music differs from language.
With language we are all speakers as well as listeners, and we are all able to generate
novel utterances. Competent users are equally speakers of and listeners to linguistic
utterances. It might be thought that this is not also the case for music. Many music
lovers cannot even hum in tune, and not all performers are also composers. So if we are
checking whether music is adaptive, we might need to distinguish between various
musical behaviors. Patel’s approach tends to run all musical behaviors together. Is he
wrong to do so? No, I don’t think so, because at a relevantly basic level we are all
vocalists and we can all invent new musical tunes. It is at the level of basic ability that
musical and linguistic capacities should be compared. Once this is allowed, Patel’s claim
that musical behaviors do not emerge spontaneously as part of normal human devel-
opment becomes vulnerable.
Patel suggests that musical behaviors are mastered later than linguistic ones: a person’s
understanding of her culture’s musical tonal system is not fully formed until, say, ﬁve to
8 years of age, and many famous musicians and composers did not study music until their
teens. Yet these observations do not show that acquiring knowledge of music is not part
of normal development. The onset of sexual maturity is an obvious example of a part of
human development that emerges spontaneously only with age. It could be that music
behaviors rely for their appearance on the realization of appropriate facilitating condi-
tions—on the development of cognitive sophistication or the acquisition of emotional
sensitivities, for instance. And it is relevant to note that, just as language is unusual with
respect to the degree of its modularity, it is also exceptional in the ease and youthfulness
with which it is acquired. In this respect, language rather than music is the exception
among adaptations. The basics of language are in place at age ﬁve or six years, though the
vast majority of words in a person’s vocabulary are acquired in late childhood and early
teens. By contrast, most crucial survival skills are not fully developed until late teens.
And to return to the point just made, when we focus on basic musical skills—at a level
according to which it is appropriate to count us all as performers and composers as well as
listeners—they do emerge relatively early and prior to full competence in the mastery of
musical scales. It seems plausible to count pitch-structured, metrically regular vocalizing
as evidence of the acquisition of music behaviors, without also requiring that what is
vocalized must have a complex structure exhibiting tonal closure (that is, consistency of
key and closing on the most stable tone). Pitch-structured, metrically regular vocalizing
emerges earlier than 5 years of age in the child’s development. In fact, children begin
154
THE ARTS

to sing songs structured in terms of melodic contour rather than tonality from about
eighteen months. Such behaviors appear to be self-motivating and often unprompted,
which suggests the environmental triggering of genetic dispositions.
Because infants’ discrimination of pitch and timing differences rivals that of people
with many years of exposure to music, the psychologist Sandra E. Trehub concludes
that the rudiments of music listening are gifts of nature rather than products of culture.
Ian Cross, a musicologist, follows Trehub in claiming that children are primed for
music as much as for language. So if we consider the ﬁrst appearance of behaviors that
count as musical and as linguistic, where such behaviors are initially primitive com-
pared to what comes later, it is not obvious that the linguistic behaviors are earlier or
more spontaneous than the musical ones. Moreover, many people would count the
intrinsic appeal of music to babies and very young children as suggestive of its
connection with behaviors of evolutionary signiﬁcance.
It is also relevant to observe that music behaviors develop much more spontaneously
than reading and writing. Indeed, the acquisition of music behaviors is unspontaneous
only as a matter of degree in the comparison with oral language acquisition, which is
rather different from suggesting that such behaviors are purely cultural.
Third response—ﬁre and the positive argument
So far we have been reviewing Patel’s argument against adaptationist accounts of
music. I have tried to show that it is not successful. The case stands unproved.
I reserve until Chapter 11 further discussion of the topic of whether it is plausible to
see music as the outcome of evolutionary selection. It is now time to consider Patel’s
positive argument, which compares music making favorably to ﬁre making: ﬁre is a
technology; music is similar in relevant respects to ﬁre; so music is a technology. In
what follows I mainly challenge the second clause of this argument.
In evaluating this position, obviously it is necessary to compare music behaviors with
ﬁre behaviors. That is not easy to do, however, because the idea of ﬁre behaviors is so
vague and slippery. Take ﬁre making. There are many ways of doing it: for instance, by
taking something already burning from another ﬁre, using friction to generate sufﬁ-
cient heat to ignite something ﬂammable, focusing the rays of the sun on something
ﬂammable, striking sparks from ﬂints, using controlled electrical discharges, and gen-
erating heat by means of certain chemical reactions (for example by exposing phos-
phorous to oxygen, adding pure calcium to water, pouring sulfuric acid onto sugar,
decomposing organic matter in conﬁned places). The problem is that these various
activities seemingly have in common only that they can produce sufﬁcient heat to
ignite ﬂammable material, that is, to bring ﬁre into existence. As actions or behaviors
they do not form a coherent class. As a result, our focus falls naturally on the product,
ﬁre, rather than on its causes and the behaviors that activate them.
Music behaviors are importantly different from this, I think. They are uniﬁed with
each other and with the product, music. We hear music as an expression of the bodily
actions through which it is sounded. All the actions that go into its production and
ART AS A TECHNOLOGY 155

reception are directly relevant to the properties we experience the product as posses-
sing. On hearing music, the brain’s motor as well as auditory centers are stimulated.
Even if we were inclined to agree that ﬁre should be counted as a transformational
technology, we could have reservations about characterizing music in such terms,
because it is continuous with the processes that cause it, rather than being product-
focused.
There is a further reason for querying Patel’s parallel between music and ﬁre. He
claims that we perpetuate both because we ﬁnd them valuable. That claim is certainly
plausible for ﬁre. The value of ﬁre is not merely that it is pleasant. It promotes survival
by allowing us to withstand cold and by drying clothes. With ﬁre we can purify
contaminated water. It allows access to caves and it brings the light of day to night,
thereby extending the time for social intercourse. It can be used to drive away
predators, to stampede game animals, to smoke out game, and to harden weapons.
Above all, ﬁre eliminates bacteria from food and makes edible foods that we would not
otherwise be able to digest easily.
So profound were the effects of controlling ﬁre on the lives of our ancestors that we
should pause to consider the history of ﬁre management. It was our Hominin pre-
decessors who ﬁrst controlled ﬁre at least 790 ka, as evidenced by ancient hearths.
Because of its signiﬁcance in the lives of our forebears, it changed their evolution. In
particular, cooking and thereby softening food signiﬁcantly increased the nutrition that
could be extracted. This led to reduction both in the size of the digestive tract and in
the energetic costs of digestion. Indeed, the anthropologist Richard Wrangham con-
jectures that it was the spare energy that control of ﬁre provided by way of cooked food
that permitted the development of the energy-hungry, larger brain that marked the
line of descent to which we Homo sapiens are heir. In any case, ﬁre is inextricably
enmeshed in characteristically human behaviors, not merely an interesting but biologi-
cally incidental artifact. Fire making may be a technology, but it is part of gene-culture
coevolution because our long-standing dependence on ﬁre has fundamentally altered
the human genome.
The claim that music is a source of similarly profound beneﬁts is not so clear-cut.
Patel identiﬁes the value of music in the positive effect that it has on our emotions,
rituals, memory, and sense of identity. I imagine that he is correct about this, and it is
worth noting that both music making and music responding can produce paybacks in
these areas. We do not value music merely as a means to these desirable effects,
however, and we rarely bear them in mind when we make or seek out music. Rather
we are inclined to regard the primary value of music as intrinsic to it, as inherent in the
activities of creating and listening to it. In part, this is the common thread that uniﬁes
the various music making and music responding behaviors.
Like ﬁre, music warms our world. But note that what we value in music and the
consequential beneﬁts that come from its engaging our emotions, aiding memory,
enhancing ritual, and providing models for us to identify with are only indirectly, if at
all, connected with survival and reproduction. As well, the beneﬁts must be balanced
156
THE ARTS

against the costs. Music behaviors come with signiﬁcant costs in terms of the time,
concentration, and effort needed to raise them to the level even of average compe-
tence. There is little doubt that we value music highly, but whereas the advantages for
survival that controlling ﬁre brings in its wake are patent and are sufﬁcient to explain
why the behavior is universal, the high value we attach to music is much harder to
justify in similar terms.
Here is my suggestion: with ﬁre, the behaviors that go into its production are merely
causal means to the valued end. The means are various and they do not transmit to ﬁre
the qualities for which we value it. Fire behaviors have no underlying unity of structure
and no common basis of derivation from any single cluster or cohort of adaptive
behaviors. With music, on the other hand, there is an intimate connection between
what we value in the product and the kinds of behaviors that generate it, such that music
behaviors cannot be regarded merely as dispensable means to the end product. Music
behaviors share a deep unity, all being directed either to the human generation of
patterned sound in causally comparable ways, or to following and reacting to its patterns.
And it is not difﬁcult to trace moderately close connections between music behaviors and
perceptual, cognitive, motor, and affective systems that are interdependently related in
ways that are adaptive, even if we agree with Patel that music behaviors are not adaptive
in themselves. These differences between ﬁre behaviors and music behaviors can reason-
ably be thought to ground the distinction we were looking for—that is, the distinction
between transformational technologies that are product- not process-oriented and
behaviors that should better be classed as spandrels or adaptations.
I have agreed with Patel that we should distinguish transformational technologies
from adaptations and spandrels and that ﬁre behaviors should count as transformational
technologies. I have argued, however, that music behaviors differ from ﬁre behaviors in
being mutually integrated and uniﬁed, rather than being random but for the output
they happen to produce, and in being self-motivating rather than end-driven. In
addition, whereas the value of ﬁre lies in the product rather than in its production,
with music the value is as much in the process as the product. And whereas there is an
obvious connection between ﬁre’s promoting our survival and our valuing it, if music
promotes our ﬁtness at all this seems incidental to our valuing of it. These considera-
tions cast doubt on the claim that music behaviors are transformational technologies.
ART AS A TECHNOLOGY
157

11
Arts as Adaptations
We are approaching the ﬁnal leg of this journey with no one view ﬁrmly established as
the favorite. The main options are that art is a technology, a spandrel, or an adaptation.
I do not ﬁnd the “art as technology” theory attractive, because it presupposes a clearer
division between cultural development and the forces of evolution than I think is
plausible. But I have also questioned the “art as by-product” hypothesis and theories
arguing that the arts are adaptations with a common evolutionary purpose. One path
remains as yet unexplored: particular art forms involve evolutionarily adaptive beha-
viors that are distinctive to them. That is the topic of this chapter.
The arts in question
When it comes to evaluating claims about the evolutionary status of particular arts, it is
likely to be helpful to be able to draw on multiple disciplinary perspectives and relevant
empirical studies. In this regard, consider the case of music. There is a considerable
recent body of academic writing on the evolutionary origins of music and on its alleged
status as an adaptation, spandrel, or technology. And there is a great deal of empirical
data, including cross-cultural studies, collected by psychologists, cognitive scientists,
and neuroscientists. This suggests the possibility of triangulating the literatures on the
evolutionary psychology of music, on psychological studies of music behaviors and
their underlying brain architectures, and on the nature of music as described by
musicologists, ethnomusicologists, and philosophers of music.
Not that this will necessarily lead to a clearer understanding of the issues and their
answers. Disagreements within these various areas of music study might get in the way.
As we have seen, evolutionary psychologists dispute over what, if anything, music is an
adaptation for and also about music’s origins. We have observed that neuroscientists
disagree over whether there are music-speciﬁc brain circuits and, if there are not, over
what this might show about music’s being an adaptation. Meanwhile, not only
musicologists but also philosophers of music argue over the function of music and
over whether the object of musical appreciation is a disembodied sound structure or
something that essentially implicates its human production and response. But even if
much is contested, the spread of divergent studies and methodologies allows for a
degree of mutual calibration and testing that is higher than usual for debates on
evolution and the other arts.

There is another reason, I think, for being drawn to the discussion of music. Music
involves unlikely, demanding, exotic, and highly exaggerated behaviors, apparently to
no direct survival advantage. Yet the passion devoted to it by people of all ages and
social stations and its universal popularity in all places and periods seem to hint that it is
entwined with our deepest instincts. It charms us. We are in its thrall. So music is
paradoxically among the most and least likely products of the evolutionary path taken
by our species.
With its tantalizing character, how could we not consider it? We will do so brieﬂy at
the close of this chapter. But music has already featured so prominently in Part III that
we should seek to focus more on other art forms.
It might be thought that visual art provides a strong candidate, because our
appreciation of and response to it have been much analyzed by psychologists and
neuroscientists.
The best such work can berevealing ofimportant sources ofaesthetic value in paintings.
For example, Margaret Livingstone, a neuroscientist, demonstrates that the apparent
pulsation of the sun and its seeming hot/cold character in Claude Monet’s Impression
Sunrise (1872) depends on its being painted with the same luminance—the degree of a
color’s brightness—as the gray background clouds. Because we use an item’s luminance in
detecting its location, this painted sun is not unambiguously ﬁxed in place against the sky.
Whereas the real sun is always very much brighter than the sky. Livingstone also discusses
da Vinci’s Mona Lisa, which is widely held to depict an enigmatic, elusive smile. She
demonstrates that critical formal features deﬁning the smile are more apparent in the
coarse-information components of the image than in its detail, with the result that
the smile disappears when one focuses on it and reappears in the peripheral ﬁeld.
Despite these helpful cases, I am doubtful in general of the relevance of these
psychological studies to our topic, because they mostly relate visual art to our evolved
modes of perception rather than considering whether pictorial art is adaptive or
otherwise connected to evolution. And to my mind at least, much of what is discussed
has only limited value for the person concerned with art, as I now explain.
Although psychologists and cognitive scientists sometimes claim to reveal the nature
of art, a common approach is to demonstrate the processing and organizational
principles of perception with reference to artistic examples. For instance, parallels are
drawn between the two-dimensional depiction of perspective and the way the eye
works, or there is discussion of the evocation of principles of pattern processing in our
response to pictures. Where the works are not realistic, the analysis concerns the roles
of edges, form, and color in vision. Where they are realistic, the works are typically
treated as if they are representationally transparent and might have been replaced by
photographs or by the actual scenes they depict without alteration to the account.
Occasionally, attention is drawn to departures from true perspectivalism if these occur,
though not greatly to artistic purpose. The neuroscientist Semir Zeki acknowledges as
much when he begins his book Inner Vision with: “This is not so much a book about
art; it is more a book about the brain.”
ARTS AS ADAPTATIONS 159

More relevant to the comprehension of visual art are cases in which artists achieve
verisimilitude not by replicating what the eye would normally see, but by doing
something different that achieves the same effect under the picture’s viewing condi-
tions, which involve much less illumination and contrast than is present when objects
are viewed in daylight. For instance, “irradiation” is a painterly effect that accents edges
by exaggerating the boundaries they demarcate. And signiﬁcant facial features are often
exaggerated for artistic effect in portraits. More familiar techniques include the use of
close parallel lines and hatching in drawings and etchings for shading and shadow,
and the use of chiaroscuro—that is, light and shade—across a depicted surface to
achieve the appearance of three-dimensionality. Artists have hit upon these effects
and use them deliberately, but empirical studies can reveal the causal principles that
underlie them. This contributes only a little to our aesthetic appreciation of the artist’s
achievement, however, when we are already aware of these pictorial techniques.
The underlying bases for some more subtle aesthetic effects have been identiﬁed by
scientists. They point out how the natural interest of eye-like circles or snake-like
squiggles can be used by artists, even in abstract designs, to draw our attention. The
difﬁculty of registering fragmented cubist portraits can appeal to the fact that the brain
regions that process faces differ from those that process other kinds of objects. Similarly,
strangely colored items—blue grass and green skies, for example—are not treated by
the brain in the standard fashion, and this may be responsible for the expressive results
that are associated with them. But these tend to be local, speciﬁc effects and do not
provide a grounding for general aesthetic principles.
For the most part, neuroaesthetics does not make good its claim to move from an
account of artworks as perceptual stimuli to an explanation of how artworks function as
aesthetic stimuli in a way that reveals the former as the foundation of a biological
theory of the latter. The aesthetician Gregory Currie concludes that neuroscientiﬁc
studies of visual art
are relatively undiscriminating; they do little to illuminate our aesthetic judgements about
particular works, traditions, styles, or genres.
By contrast with music and visual art, literature and drama have not been much
studied by psychologists and neuroscientists. For instance, there is comparatively little
neuroscientiﬁc work on reading—what there is reveals brain locations associated with
reading events but not innately speciﬁed reading-speciﬁc neural circuits. And few
scientists have considered whether literary behaviors might be adaptive. Despite this,
there is considerable interest, expressed mainly by literature professors, in the possibility
that literature and drama are evolutionary adaptations. If they draw on scientiﬁc studies
in developing their arguments, as some do, they must apply them to the literary case.
The attraction of the idea that literature is an adaptation is easily grasped. Literature’s
connection with matters of evolutionary signiﬁcance is palpable. The Iliad, the Mahab-
harata, Superman comics, Beowulf, Coronation Street, Shakespeare’s plays, Swann’s Way,
The Lord of the Rings, Mills and Boon romances, the Epic of Gilgamesh, and The Sopranos
160
THE ARTS

deal with loss, love, fear, redemption, friendship, political struggle, ecstasy, remem-
brance, betrayal, loneliness, pride, retribution, and countless other humanly important
events, situations, relationships, and emotions. So, I will focus in this chapter on
evaluating arguments offered in defense of what is known as “Literary Darwinism.”
Literary Darwinism
Inevitably there has been interest in the themes that are universal in literature. At the
end of the nineteenth century, Georges Polti, a French writer, identiﬁed 36 plot types.
Christopher Booker, a journalist, lists nine. Meanwhile Joseph Carroll, a leader of the
movement known as Literary Darwinism, argues that literary themes reﬂect the kinds
of chapter headings found in textbooks of evolutionary psychology: survival, romance,
kinship relations and family, individual identity, jealousy, revenge.
Literary Darwinists take the regular appearance of these universal themes as inviting a
biological explanation. Gary Westfahl, who is a reviewer of science ﬁction and a fan of
sociobiology, proposes that science ﬁction, being a newly invented literary genre
featuring the nonhuman and unfamiliar, repeatedly drifts into themes and forms similar
to other literary genres. He claims that this indicates an “element of genetic predispo-
sition in the ways humans create and respond to literature.” But surely that conclusion
is too strong. Cultural habit in the form of literary conventions and practices could
generate the same predisposition.
It is possible that different cultures share story themes in common but view those
stories in culturally relative ways. This was the idea presented by the anthropologist
Laura Bohannon, who found that the Tiv of Nigeria responded to the plot of Hamlet
by holding that Ophelia must have been killed by witchcraft and that Claudius was
obliged to marry his brother’s widow. But even allowing the point that there are
differences in cultural beliefs and values that led the Tiv to interpret some aspects of the
story as we would not, this does not show that we do not share with the Tiv much of
the same psychology and emotional reactions. They were shocked by Claudius’
fratricide, understood Hamlet’s hesitation to kill his uncle, sympathized with his desire
to avenge his father’s murder, and so on.
Literary interpretation as applied evolutionary psychology
By far the most common application of evolutionary theory to literature is in the
generation of interpretations of works. Academic critics see whether the predictions of
evolutionary psychology about the conﬂicts and strategies that are a product of our
human nature and sexual differences are perspicuous in literary ﬁctions. For instance,
they look at jealousy and rivalry in terms of mate selection strategies, and at political
struggles as manifestations of male aggression and the drive for status. They consider
empathy and sociality with respect both to Theory of Mind—our comprehension of
the mental lives of other people—and to the human capacity to review multiple levels
of intentionality—as in “she suspects that he knows that their daughter . . . ” And,
ARTS AS ADAPTATIONS 161

typically, the behavioral predispositions described by evolutionary psychologists are
emulated in the best or most popular and absorbing ﬁctions. Usually only one or a few
works are interpreted at a time, but several quantitative studies that code and statisti-
cally test large numbers of similar works, such as fairy tales, have been attempted.
It might be objected that how literature illustrates archetypal themes reveals
biological, not literary, value. In many ways the interpretative enterprise is not unlike
the one I have just criticized in connection with the visual arts: it involves using works
of art to illustrate the scientiﬁc theory, where it might have used narratives about actual
people and events to the same effect. But I think in this case the criticism is too strong.
We are interested in and can easily be mistaken about what is fundamental in human
psychology and sociality, whereas our visual perceptual systems continue to operate
whether or not we understand how they work. And while it is surely true that there are
many aspects of literary value that are not addressed when we match evolutionary
theory against literary ﬁctions, psychological plausibility is almost always an artistic plus
in such works. Such interpretative studies are relevant not only for supporting psy-
chologists’ theories but also for demonstrating the insights and sensitivities of literary
authors, which is pertinent to measuring their achievements.
Now, a literary theorist could adopt evolutionary theories about human nature as one
interpretative strategy among many without thinking that literature is an evolved
behavior and without being committed even to the validity of the evolutionary outlook.
In fact, though, most of those who offer interpretations of literature that pay heed to
insights of evolutionary theory and psychology are committed to the view that we can
explain both the origins and current value of the literary arts in such terms and, further,
that storytelling is an adaptive behavior. As a result, they offer their readings of literary
texts as pointing to the primal source of literature’s power, interest, and appreciability.
This is not to say that they all agree in their theories. Of necessity, when I review their
program I focus on some of the main themes rather than on subtle differences in detail.
Before I launch the discussion of literature as an adaptation, however, I must register
some concerns about the project as it is usually pursued. We can readily allow that
(some) literature provides the beneﬁts that adaptationists identify as central to its nature
and originary function while remaining skeptical of the claim that literary behaviors are
adaptations favoring that function. Remember: the foot of Archaeopteryx was suitable
for perching in trees and thereby afforded the bird advantages over terrestrial species
subject to ground predation. But we know that the design of the foot was not an
adaptation for perching. So, showing that we can learn about human nature from
literature is not the same as showing that literature is an adaptation because it conveys
that knowledge.
Unfortunately for their cause, most Literary Darwinists do much better in arguing
for literature’s informational value than in demonstrating that it is adaptive. They are
also careless of the requirements of evolutionary theory in further ways. They hardly
ever take seriously the need to establish that the beneﬁts in question outweigh the costs
and that the allegedly adaptive characteristics are heritable.
162
THE ARTS

Literary Darwinism’s subject matter
The ﬁrst task is to identify the topic. Three notions are central: literature, narrative, and
ﬁction. None alone adequately captures our subject matter. Each includes something
irrelevant and excludes something that should be included.
If we understand by literature written works that display a higher than average
writerly quality or stylishness, there are at least two respects in which literature is too
exclusive to identify our topic. Most Literary Darwinists allow that storytelling was
adaptive within oral traditions that long preceded the invention of writing. Also, as
I observed in Chapter 3, to the extent that we ought to be concerned with humble
forms of art—what I earlier referred to as small “a” art—our subject will include many
works that are not especially marked by their quality or stylishness. In another respect,
literature is too broad a category. It encompasses non-narrative forms of writing, such
as essays and tracts, that are not (or not yet) considered by Literary Darwinists.
Narrative is also a broad notion. Narratives are stories or histories that describe the
temporal succession of events, actions, situations, thoughts, and the like as structured or
governed by intentions or causal regularities. Narratives are not lists of items or facts but
explain or intimate the interconnectedness of the elements on which they focus.
Narratives can be factive or ﬁctive. The vast majority of narratives—mundane accounts
of how things are in the world—are not discussed or analyzed by Literary Darwinists.
Moreover, if lyric poems do not count as narratives because they tend to characterize a
situation from some point of view rather than relating a series of events, then the
notion of narrative is too narrow as well as too broad.
Fictions deliberately describe or create worlds that differ from the actual one and,
where they are for an audience, that audience is supposed to be aware of this. (Attempts
to deceive an audience about what is true in the actual world may involve a similar kind
of storytelling, of course, but I here treat deliberate untruths as distinct from ﬁctions.)
Some ﬁctions do not concern Literary Darwinists, however—for example, the vignettes
I use as prompts in exam questions. And some apparent non-ﬁctions are of interest
because we treat them as if they are ﬁctions. Sometimes we cannot make sense of a story
except by viewing it as a ﬁction, even though it is told as fact. The creation myths and
religious stories of many societies ﬁt into this category. And in other cases, we are
indifferent to whether a narrative is true because its point is allegorical or purely
illustrative, as parables and sagas often are, or for some other reason. Even if the poet
tried truly to describe his love, it is not the factual accuracy of the poem that is of interest.
Probably the largest and most central subset of the stories that are analyzed by
Literary Darwinists fall under the heading of narrative ﬁctions. For convenience, that
is how I will refer to the subject matter of Literary Darwinism, but the topic should be
understood as qualiﬁed and gerrymandered in the ways I have just indicated. I will now
respond to skeptical suggestions purporting to undercut the possibility of separating
factual from ﬁctional narratives and thereby establish that narrative ﬁctions can be
distinguished from a wider, more inclusive notion of narrative.
ARTS AS ADAPTATIONS
163

Narrative or narrative ﬁction?
Some authors are plainly interested in the broader topic of narrative. It is the broad
topic that must be intended when it is said that all explanations are at bottom narrative,
or that narrative is the fundamental instrument of thought and indispensable to
cognition generally, or that narrative is an adaptation that has evolved to regulate
interpersonal relations and relations between society and its environment, or that
narrative evolved to tell humans who we are and how we are distinct from other
animals, or when it is said that the self is a concatenation of narratives, that narrative
brings the child into culture, that it safeguards traditional values, and that it is funda-
mental to our thinking.
The centrality of narrative to our ways of making sense of the world and our place in
it is undeniable and pervasive. Every person constructs a story about who he or she is,
emphasizing this, downplaying that. Everyone who seeks connections between the
past, present, and future provides an historical story to tie them together. Religion,
science, psychology, and all else are founded on narratives about the world, how it
came to be, how it is, how we relate to it. These are reasons for seeing the propensity to
narrative as foundational to our human natures and probably as adaptive. But so
drenched with narrative is our existence that it is unlikely that we rely on narrative
ﬁction to teach us how to shape stories about our world. Indeed, it is reasonable to
suppose that the reverse is the case, that it is our familiarity and skill with storytelling
that prepares the ground for our interest in narrative ﬁction.
In other words, if narrative ﬁction is distinctively adaptive, it is not its narrativity but
rather its ﬁctionality that should be central to its being so. Accordingly, most of the authors
who will concern us try to justify the evolutionary relevance of what happens in academic
departments of English, not History. They target the topic of narrative ﬁction, which
might be recorded in oral or written form and presented as prose, poetry, or drama.
The distinction between discourse presented as factive and as ﬁctive is not always
well observed, however. It is understandable why this is so. The creation myths and
religions of most societies will strike outsiders as ﬁctions, even if insiders take them for
fact. And the production of narrative, even where it concerns how the world is in fact,
who we actually are, or what really happened, is creative, imaginative, and construc-
tive. Fictional storytelling is an extension of non-ﬁctional ways of describing and
communicating, not a separate capacity. In addition, ﬁctions usually include descrip-
tions of many factual matters. On these grounds, Paul Hernadi, a professor of English,
sees no reason for postulating a rigid separation between nonliterary and literary
experience in the Stone Age mind.
Nevertheless, there commonly are crucial differences in our approaches to narratives
represented respectively as about what is real and what is imaginary. Try telling an
historian that his elucidation of the causes of the First World War is a ﬁction or
complaining that no birth certiﬁcate is registered for Sherlock Holmes! Contra Her-
nadi, I bet the Stone Age mind had a very robust interest in separating fact from ﬁction
164
THE ARTS

or conjecture. Those who could not do so would have found survival much more
difﬁcult than those who respected the difference between, on the one hand, knowl-
edge and, on the other, possibility, supposition, and fantasy. Similarly, our primordial
ancestors would have been keen to detect lying and deception. Successful social
regulation and self-protection rely on the skill. Though we may be indifferent some-
times to the truth of a story told as fact, typically we are not.
I allow that we need narrative to shape what we believe to be our individual and
cultural identities and histories, to communicate and preserve our personal and group
values and traditions. Similarly, our private reveries take the form of narrative, as do in a
more fractured way many dreams and hallucinations. But narratives of all these sorts
should be distinguished from those of the literary arts, even allowing a broad construal
of those arts. So, if we are to evaluate the argument that narrative ﬁction is an
adaptation, we need a narrower and more careful focus than one that targets narrative
in wider contexts.
When was literature adaptive?
Among those who hold that narrative ﬁction is an adaptation, it is important to
consider when literature was supposed to be adaptive. Hernadi thinks that storytelling
was an adaptive behavior for our ancestors, but that, like the desire for sweet food we
have inherited from them, we might be glutted to no evolutionary purpose now by
ﬁction’s universal propagation and our addiction to it. At the other end of the spectrum
is the view that storytelling is adaptive in modern times as it was not for our ancestors.
The common suggestion here is that it compensates for dissonances between our
modern life and the ancestral environment for which we are adapted. But the standard
assumption is that ﬁctional narrating was adaptive for our prehistoric predecessors and
that it remains so for us. Joseph Carroll here is exemplary:
When I speak of the adaptive functions of literature, I mean to signify the adaptive functions of
the oral antecedents of written stories, poems, and plays. The same arguments that apply to these
oral forms will be understood as extending also to their counterparts in written language.
In what follows I concentrate on views accepting that literary behaviors have a long
history of evolutionary relevance and remain ﬁtness-enhancing. Though it is widely
argued that narrative ﬁction, taken broadly, is an adaptation, as we shall see there is
considerable disagreement about what it is alleged to be an adaptation for.
Literature, mate attraction, and social standing
The ﬁrst suggestion is the now familiar one that literature is a prop for seduction and
mate attraction. Both Geoffrey Miller and Denis Dutton note that a large vocabulary is
a reliable sign of intelligence and that the skillful use of language offers many oppor-
tunities for displaying wit, erudition, originality, and playfulness. John Constable, an
English literature academic, offers a more restricted version of the thesis: that verse
form is so difﬁcult to bring off that its mastery and use are what is attractive.
ARTS AS ADAPTATIONS 165

The problems with this general approach were rehearsed in Chapter 8, so I will deal
swiftly with them here. On this account, what appears to be adaptive (or sexually
attractive) is high intelligence rather than verbal eloquence as such. And in any case, the
focus should be on storytelling and what is distinctive to it, rather than on general aptitude
in the use of language. Meanwhile, much ﬁctional narrating takes place under conditions
in which mate selection is not at issue—for example, between a mother and her infants or
between children. No doubt storytelling can be appropriated for sexual display, but this is
unlikely to be its original or primary purpose. And even if versifying is more difﬁcult than
ordinary storytelling, focusing there does not make the case more convincing.
A related idea—that wordsmiths attain social rather than sexual status through their
art—is predictably prone to similar objections. Michelle Scalise Sugiyama, an evolu-
tionary psychologist interested in narrative among hunter-gatherers, argues that the
story’s presenter gets to set the agenda and further his own interests, thereby augment-
ing his standing in the community. But even if this is so, it is not obvious that this
person will have a comparatively higher ﬁtness in the group than its best hunter, cook,
dancer, or comic.
As we saw in Chapter 8, Brian Boyd also regards art behaviors as adaptive for the way
they attract attention to the artist. He applies his account speciﬁcally to narrative
ﬁction. He notes that gossip can be misleading and boring, whereas ﬁction is win–
win for storyteller and listener because
skilled storytellers secure our attention by appealing to our cognitive craving to comprehend the
actions and intentions of others, while serving their own aims both through the attention they garner
and through appealing to interests that we either share or can be made to think we share with them.
And he notes that adoption of the ﬁctive stance allows the artist to enhance the interest
of the narrative by mixing elements of the everyday and familiar with what is fantastic
or merely possible.
Such arguments are not sufﬁcient to make the case that storytelling is adaptive,
however. While a gifted few ﬁction authors can make riches from their trade, there is
no evidence of which I am aware that the most skilled produce comparatively more
descendants than others. And if they did, it would be more appropriate to identify the
adaptation as residing in the person’s comparatively enhanced power and status, with
the creation and presentation of ﬁction being only one of many possible ways of
achieving these.
The social beneﬁts of literature
A widespread view locates the beneﬁts of literature as accruing to the group rather than
the individual. John D. Niles, a professor of English, maintains that oral narrative serves
important functions of education and acculturation:
It tends to be one of the important means by which children absorb the values of adult society
and learn to pattern their behavior according to accepted norms. For adults, it conﬁrms the nexus
166
THE ARTS

of understandings that constitute their knowledge of the past and of the world around them,
their social structure, and their moral action.
While the narratives that serve these functions could be ﬁctional, many presumably
are not. But some writers explicitly discuss how ﬁctions can accomplish such results.
Stories serve to deﬁne and establish moral and social boundaries, thereby preparing their
audience for appropriate roles and social actions. And their ﬁctionality allows them to be
more effective in dramatizing charismatic, altruistic heroes and in satirizing selﬁsh, evil
villains. Moreover, it has been argued that, without art, the inevitable tragedies of
existence would destabilize society. The philosopher Noe¨l Carroll sums up:
nothing transmits cultural values better than art, for inasmuch as art may engage feeling, emotion,
perception, imagination, and cognition all at once, it encodes, so to say, cultural information
redundantly across a number of faculties, thereby embedding it more deeply in memory and
making it more readily available for retrieval than otherwise it would be.
Must the holders of the view that literature’s evolutionary signiﬁcance lies in group
beneﬁts be committed to embracing the reality of multilevel selection theory? That is,
must they accept that evolution operates on group differences, not only on differences
between individuals, to favor some groups over others? Multilevel selection theory as
applied to literature in this way requires two things. First, the idea would be that
literature-endowed groups survived and expanded more successfully than literature-
impoverished groups. Second, it would have to be the case that the relevant inter-
group pressures were more signiﬁcant or powerful than selective forces operating via
intra-group competition between each group’s individual members.
Alternatively, it would be possible to stick with individuals as the units of evolu-
tionary selection provided it could be argued that, in beneﬁtting groups, the presenta-
tion and appreciation of ﬁctional literature do not beneﬁt all group members equally.
The claim would be that differences at the individual level favor more artistic indivi-
duals, even as the group as a whole beneﬁts.
Hernadi takes the second option of showing how group beneﬁts can be reconciled
with taking individuals to be the evolutionary units of selection. He proposes that,
through literature, the group beneﬁts in increased altruism and that this can be
explained by reference to kin selection—helping those who are related to us and
thereby furthering genes we share in common—without requiring a commitment to
group selection. Ellen Dissanyake is another who talks of group beneﬁts while main-
taining that selection operates on individuals only.
Other theorists adopt the ﬁrst course by explicitly invoking the theory of multilevel
selection in support of their positions. That is, they think that in this case competition
between groups and their comparative survival is governed by evolutionary principles.
In doing so, they emphasize beneﬁts that literature brings to the group, but they do not
usually attempt to demonstrate that the ﬁrst and second conditions for group selection
(that I just identiﬁed) apply. For instance, they do not argue that competition between
ARTS AS ADAPTATIONS
167

groups is more signiﬁcant in settling how many descendants people have than compe-
tition between each group’s members.
Most theorists who appeal to group beneﬁts in claiming that literary behaviors are
adaptive remain silent on both counts: on whether they embrace group selection and
understand what that commits them to, or if not, on how to reconcile stories about
general group beneﬁts with a framework that sees individuals (or their genes) as the
units of evolutionary selection. This undermines the convincingness of their appeals to
Darwinian theory.
Now, I do not doubt that much storytelling has many of the social beneﬁts claimed
for it, and it is plausible to suggest that ﬁctions understood as such can achieve these
beneﬁts in a more compelling fashion than other narrative forms by making the crucial
issues more lively and prominent. But I think that ﬁctions can also produce group
detriments. They can disseminate inappropriate or transgressive values and points of
view as easily as they spread morally sensitive sentiments. And they can entrench
damaging standpoints, such as racist and sexist attitudes. Moreover, some forms of
ﬁction, such as social satire, are often aggressive in how they function. It is not obvious
that the positive group effects inevitably outweigh the negative ones.
It should be noted, in addition, that literature can become an escape from society
rather than the point of entry. More generally, art looks to some commentators to be
more about competition between individuals for status or sexual attention than about
conserving the group and its way of life. With these reservations in mind, the claim that
narrative ﬁction is an adaptation selected for the production of group beneﬁts should be
seen to be shaky.
Fiction as instructive thought experiment
The most widely represented argument for the position that the creation and con-
sumption of narrative ﬁction is an adaptive behavior notes that ﬁctions provide worlds
that can be imaginatively explored without generating real-world risks and conse-
quences. Though these ﬁctional worlds differ more or less from the actual world, our
encounters with them furnish information or skills that have important real-world
applications with genuine survival value. The idea is that, by exploring ﬁctional
scenarios and narratives many aspects of which are or could become true, literature
cultivates the skills and enriches the knowledge we need to plot our way successfully
through the world. By engaging with ﬁctions we are projected into the minds and
shoes of people with lives, situations, beliefs, feelings, and experiences quite different
from our own. We learn in concrete detail what it is like to have one’s uncle murder
one’s father and marry one’s mother, to be stopped by an old sailor who tells of the
consequences that followed from his killing an albatross at sea, or to travel to different
lands populated variously by midgets, giants, unpractical devotees of music and math-
ematics, immortals, and civilized horses.
Denis Dutton summarizes the broad-brush view:
168
THE ARTS

The features of a stable human nature revolve around human relationships of every variety: social
coalitions of kinship or tribal afﬁnity; issues of status; reciprocal exchange; the complexities of sex
and child-rearing; struggles over resources; benevolence and hostility; friendship and nepotism;
conformity and independence; moral obligations, altruism, and selﬁshness; and so on . . . These
issues constitute the major themes and subjects of literature and its oral antecedents. Stories are
universally constituted in this way because of the role storytelling can play in helping individuals
and groups develop and deepen their own grasp of human social and emotional experience.
Brian Boyd puts it this way:
Fiction . . . preselects information of relevance, prefocuses attention on what is strategically impor-
tant, and thereby simpliﬁes the cognitive task of comprehension. At the same time it keeps strategic
information ﬂowing at a much more rapid pace than normal in real life, and allows a comparatively
disengaged attitude to the events unfolding. . . . Fiction aids our rapid understanding of real-life
social situations, activating and maintaining this capacity at high intensity and low cost.
Critics of Literary Darwinism object to the way it reduces literature to plot lines.
Jonathan Kramnick, an English professor, satirizes Dutton’s ideas in these terms:
The disposition to tell stories is an adaptation because it helped us survive and was passed on with
reproduction. The stories we tell are (oddly) about this process of survival and the passing on of
things like stories. We need not have any idea how any design speciﬁc to literary form mediated
this trait. Form turns to plot and plot to theme.
Eugene Goodheart, another literature academic, similarly regards the search for uni-
versal themes in literature as reductionist. While Joseph Carroll is a critic of Goodheart,
he agrees that those who merely point to Darwinian themes betray a naı¨ve and vulgar
application of Darwinist thought to the appreciation of literature.
These complaints have some bite, but they may underestimate the extent to which
speciﬁc details of individual works become the focus of interest for the light they shed
on the themes they bring so vividly to life. In other words, it is not their themes but the
speciﬁc ways in which these are handled and elaborated that are the primary source of
literary value.
Many Literary Darwinists subscribe to the general idea that literature illustrates
archetypal situations but then emphasize different aspects of that idea. For instance, it
is said that ﬁction provides mental maps that help guide our emotional lives, and that,
by ﬁltering what is tangential, it allows us to see deep into the structure of our nature. It
provides models for the resolution of conﬂicts between human goals, it reﬁnes our
ethical sense of empathy and sympathy, and it experiments with our Theory of Mind
capacities. More speciﬁcally, some authors argue that our experience of ﬁction trains us
in the detection of deception, fantasy, and pretense.
As I read it there are two aspects to this kind of position. The ﬁrst is that ﬁction
provides us with useful information. Given our highly social nature, much of this
information concerns social life and human psychology. When we learn about the
interests, desires, beliefs, attitudes, and points of view of people who are not like us, we
ARTS AS ADAPTATIONS
169

are liable to become better at understanding and empathizing with similar people in the
real world. Second, simply by rehearsing the relevant mind-reading skills, attitudes, and
feelings, we might become more adept at applying them.
As a ﬁrst step to evaluating this position we should consider whether our experience
of ﬁction delivers the kind of information or skills that can be transferred proﬁtably to
our real-world behavior. There is an obvious reason for doubting this in the ﬁrst
instance. What we learn about is the world of the ﬁction. Its world differs from the real
world and there are non-negligible dangers in extrapolating from the one to the other.
In the ﬁctional world, people in barroom brawls might be apparently uninjured despite
having chairs broken over their heads and being thrown through windows. And even
when we learn about ourselves from our reaction to ﬁctions, what we learn concerns
how we relate to their ﬁctional worlds, not the actual one. Still, it would be a mistake
to over-exaggerate these concerns. Many authors of ﬁctions make clear their intention
to educate their readers about reality, and, though care is needed, we can often advance
our understanding of the real world through our appreciative comprehension of the
world of the ﬁction.
Nevertheless, having allowed that ﬁctions can provide genuine knowledge of
matters beyond their boundaries, it is also relevant to concede that they can miseducate
us. And there is the additional concern that what we learn are platitudes—that pride
and prejudice damage our intimate relationships, that punishment follows crime, that
things are likely to go badly if you inadvertently kill your father and marry your
mother. In the context of the ﬁction all the rich details and subtle nuances count, but
when we export what we have acquired to the actual world where the details and
nuances are not the same, we may be left with truisms. Finally, there is the issue of
whether a focus on how literature is instructive can account adequately for the pleasure
we take in it.
A different objection maintains that we acquire Theory of Mind skills at such an
early age that the appreciation of ﬁction cannot play a signiﬁcant role in their
development. Indeed, it can be argued that the acquisition of Theory of Mind at
about the age of four years and the capacity to think in terms of what is not the case—
to think counterfactually—are both prerequisites for recognizing and understanding
ﬁctions as such. Besides, tracking the mental and emotional lives of ﬁctional characters
often does not require us to exercise Theory of Mind skills because authors, dramatists,
and moviemakers frequently allow us direct access to their characters’ thoughts via
omniscient narrators, soliloquies, voice-overs, or ﬁrst-person interior monologues.
Yet allowing all this, it seems possible that we become better and more sensitive at
reading the minds of real people who are unlike us as a result of the psychological insights
we take from ﬁctions. There are many ways in which an appreciation of narrative ﬁction
could improve us and this is one of them. That said, we are as far as ever from
demonstrating that narrative ﬁction was evolutionarily selected for this purpose.
An equivalent objection—that we have acquired the relevant skills too early to have
got them from literature—can be raised to the suggestion that appreciation of ﬁction
170
THE ARTS

promotes both the detection of deception and its more effective adoption. After all,
deception and what is called “Machiavellian intelligence” are recorded in apes and
other non-narrating animals. And preliterate children quickly learn the art of lying and
are aware that others may lie to them. Did it take ﬁctive tales of adultery to ﬁrst awaken
in men a prospective concern with the faithfulness of their spouses? Did it take made-
up stories of past loss to ﬁrst ﬁre feelings of guilt, sadness, or regret? I doubt it. The
detection of deception and cheating is certainly important to how we monitor our
relationships, and cultivation of the relevant deceptive skills might also help us to
manage them. But it is not plausible that literature supplies these skills as against
drawing on ones already developed.
As well as the concern just expressed, we might doubt that ﬁction provides sufﬁcient
novel information to hone the competence in question. Am I likely to become better
at understanding how my boss’s mind works by reading Joseph Heller’s Something
Happened or viewing the TV show The Ofﬁce as opposed to spending more time with
her under diverse circumstances? Will watching the movie The Sting make me more
skilled than I am already at detecting cheats and liars? Again, I doubt it.
It is striking how far the style of the views I have outlined departs from the
Darwinian paradigm. These literary adaptationists emphasize how ﬁctional narratives
serve as a repository of knowledge about human nature and as a tool for perfecting or
elaborating Theory of Mind and similar skills. But neither this kind of knowledge nor
the result of practice is genetically transmissible from generation to generation, and this
is required in classical Darwinian adaptations. It is precisely because we are not born
with the relevant knowledge or perfected skill that we beneﬁt from exposure to
information and practice. Their arguments often suggest that Literary Darwinists do
not appreciate what Darwinism requires.
The theory can easily be recast in appropriate terms, however. The evolutionary
account should rather be about genetically rooted dispositions and capacities to acquire
such knowledge or to hone the relevant skills. And if narrative ﬁction is adaptive
through its connection with these dispositions, it must not only engage with and
stimulate them, it must be causally responsible for them.
But how are such claims to be justiﬁed? It is difﬁcult to imagine designing an
appropriately rigorous experimental program that could put this hypothesis to the
test. We know too little about the role of ﬁctional storytelling in the lives of our distant
forebears to make a convincing case with respect to them. And the current practice of
literary interpretation provides no such test—literary critics do not use the controls or
double blinds found in scientiﬁc experiments and there are no readily agreed standards
of disconﬁrmation. Indeed, literary interpretations are often presented as if self-con-
ﬁrming, which is what allows so many disparate schools of criticism to thrive.
These considerations, which are conspicuously ignored in the work of many
Literary Darwinists, ought to temper our enthusiasm for adaptationism with respect
to ﬁctional literature’s capacity to teach about human nature and to make us more
skilled at understanding others.
ARTS AS ADAPTATIONS 171

Fictions as developmental machines
Interestingly, the evolutionary psychologists John Tooby and Leda Cosmides adopt an
approach that appears to sidestep the question of whether we acquire either useful
novel information or mind-reading skills from ﬁctions. They argue that our access to
ﬁctions is adaptive because it provides a cheap and efﬁcient way for us to ﬂesh out the
modular framework with which evolution provides the mind. In particular, exposure
to ﬁctions provides organizational development of cognitive reasoning modules that
deal with hypothetical situations.
We think that ﬁction consists of representations in a special format, the narrative, that are attended to,
valued, preserved, and transmitted because the mind detects that such bundles of representations
have a powerfully organizing effect on our neurocognitive adaptations, even though the repre-
sentations are not literally true . . . [Because they deal with ﬁctions known as such], activities that
organize an adaptation can be liberated from the constraints of having to encounter and practice the
actual task, which may be very limited, dangerous, or may simply not contain the informative
feedback or revelatory data necessary by the time the organism needs the adaptation to be
functioning effectively.
Quite apart from previously expressed concerns about the tendency for these
evolutionary psychologists to think that the mind is massively modularized—that
mostly it triggers automated behavioral routines—I do not understand how this
“ﬂeshing out” amounts to organizing the module as opposed to exercising it through
practice and providing it with content to work on. In other words, I suspect this
position is not in the end different from the one just rejected. The proposed difference
depends on the idea that this exercise “calibrates,” “tunes up,” or “ﬂeshes out” the
operation of the module during its development, but how are we supposed to cash out
the content of these metaphors? In addition, the emphasis placed by Tooby and
Cosmides on the developmental aspect of the training does not explain the ongoing
fascination that ﬁction holds for adults.
Imaginative thinking and pretense
Earlier I suggested that narrative so saturates our world that it could not be an
adaptation distinctive to literature as such. That is why, in trying to locate the adapta-
tion, we attended to the ﬁctionality of narrative ﬁction. But a similar objection can be
raised with regard to ﬁctionality itself. So fundamental are ﬁctive ways of thinking
outside the literary context that it is reasonable to view narrative ﬁction as an offshoot
of that practice, rather than as its source.
At a very young age, children adopt games of pretense and make believe. They make
pies from mud, pour non-existent tea from toy kettles, and exchange imaginary goods
for imaginary money. In other words, they are ﬁctioneers. Though they are not yet
able to reason in abstract ways, they understand the rules of their games and the
implications of those rules for what happens in their game-worlds. For example, if
tilting the toy kettle over a cup counts as ﬁlling the cup with tea, they understand that if
the cup is accidentally knocked over before its tea is drunk that tea is spilled on the
172
THE ARTS

ground. So, the games they play reveal their capacity to apply make-believe over a
range of scenarios, not only those ﬁctionally enacted in the game but also others that
the game could throw up, including unplanned ones and ones that may never occur.
That is, they can think counterfactually.
Fantasy, pretense, game-playing, and daydreaming remain with us as adults, of
course, but it is not only in these situations that we adopt ﬁctional modes of thinking.
We use practical reasoning to avoid blundering blindly through the universe. When
we do, we constantly and knowingly deal with what is not the case. In considering the
future we make suppositions and consider what would follow from them. “If inﬂation
stays at the present rate, how will the markets react?” This involves imaginatively
entertaining the reality of non-actual events. And in learning from the past we consider
not only what did happen but also what might have happened instead. “Would more
or fewer people have died before the end of the war had the atomic bombs not been
dropped on Japan in 1945?” That is, we consider counterfactual situations, ones we
know never to have obtained. As it happens, remembering the past, thinking about the
future, and conceiving the viewpoint of others all draw on episodic memory and
activate the same neural circuits.
So extensive and crucial is our use of ﬁctional thinking from 2 years of age and up
that it seems unlikely that we depend on narrative ﬁction to alert us to the uses and
possibilities of thinking about what is not the case. As children we pretended that our
pets were lions and tigers, that they could speak, and that they too could see our
imaginary companions. As adults we planned the hunt, speculating where the animals
would be found and wondering how we would cope if they caught wind of us. We
considered if our relative would have survived had he noticed the lion footprints or we
speculated on what that tragically dead child might have grown up to be like. It seems
unlikely that such thoughts would have preoccupied us only after ﬁreside tale telling
made the possibilities of ﬁction evident. Rather, it is reasonable to suppose that the
reverse is the case—our familiarity and skill with make-believe modes of thinking
about the actual world prepare the ground for our interest in ﬁctional literature. So
I agree with this from Jonathan Kramnick:
Natural selection did not need literature to represent “possible but non-existent states of affairs,”
for example. It only needed the mind's ability to form sentences in the conditional tense.
The role of ﬁction in hypothetical and counterfactual practical reasoning is not
acknowledged by most of the authors who regard literary ﬁctions as essential in
perfecting our capacity to project into and understand the minds of other people.
John Tooby and Leda Cosmides are exceptional in giving it its due. This may be why
they claim that the value of literary ﬁctions is organizational, rather than residing in
knowledge or skills that we export to the real world.
What response is available to the objection that we do not need ﬁctional narratives
to teach us how to think hypothetically and counterfactually? In what respects do
narrative ﬁctions extend our thinking and response beyond what practical reasoning in
ARTS AS ADAPTATIONS
173

real-world situations delivers? Well, we have the input and experience of a range of
authors to call on, rather than relying mainly on our own thought. And as I have
allowed, they supply information about their own and their ﬁctional characters’ ﬁrst-
person points of view, which is often denied to us in ordinary direct experience of
others. But, and here is the sticking point, do narrative ﬁctions provide valuable
information that we could not glean from autobiographies, biographies, histories,
and the researches of the social sciences? It is far from clear that they do.
Admittedly, the worlds of narrative ﬁctions are licensed to depart further from the
actual one than are factive narratives presented and intended as such. But as I have
already observed, this can make it harder, not easier, to extrapolate information that is
usefully rich to the real world. It is not clear, therefore, that involvement with literary
ﬁction provides comparative advantage in ﬁtness over someone who relies only on
these other, factive sources of information. Once again it looks as if what is adaptive is
narrativity, not ﬁctionality as such.
One person who has argued that literary ﬁctions provide a form of moral knowledge
that cannot be communicated or acquired in any other way is the philosopher Martha
Nussbaum, though I hasten to add that she has no interest in connecting literature to
evolution. Writing of Henry James’ The Golden Bowl, she asks:
Why, as people with an interest in understanding and self-understanding, couldn't we derive
everything we require from a text that stated and argued for these conclusions about human
beings plainly and simply, without the complications of character and conversation, without the
stylistic and structural complexities of the literary – not to mention the particular obliquities,
ambiguities, and parentheses of this particular literary text?
She continues:
The claims of this text concerning value and imperfection are views whose plausibility and
importance are difﬁcult to assess without the sustained exploration of particular lives that a text
such as this one makes possible.
And she goes on to explain the author’s skill and insight in presenting and structuring
the story’s detail, the role of James’ intra-textual editorial comments in directing the
reader, and the necessity that the reader follows the text in its complete detail if he is
to engage fully with its moral vision and attain a proper understanding of this.
Nussbaum’s approach involves a close and reﬂective reading of particular literary
texts. Although the qualities that turn novels into works of moral philosophy are found
across a spread of works, plainly she thinks that, overall, only a tiny minority of works
and authors can achieve this transformation, as Henry James does. (Where I earlier
highlighted ﬁction over narrative and literature, she swings the emphasis more to
literature.) Nussbaum does not offer a defense of the specialness of narrative ﬁction
in general. But she does demonstrate the kind of thing that might be involved in
arguing that novelistic ﬁctions have distinctively special resources for communicating
important (moral) facts and for reﬁning our discernment of the subtle complexities that
174
THE ARTS

are crucial to making appropriately sensitive moral judgments when faced with the
messy contingency of reality.
The special case of the novel
If we accept Nussbaum’s argument—and not everyone does—it implies that only
works as complexly structured and detailed as novels can be a source of morally
signiﬁcant information that factive narratives cannot so readily convey. It is also
important to her view that novels can be pored over and thought about in the process
of following them. This focus on the novel, as against other forms of ﬁctional narrative,
raises a point that is not usually addressed in the discussion of literature and evolution,
though many who write on the topic plainly have novels as their primary focus. While
oratorical, dramatic, and poetic oral traditions no doubt are very ancient, writing and
reading are inventions of comparatively recent times and neither became widespread
until much more recently. The novel has existed as an art form only slightly more than
400 years. Miguel de Cervantes’ Don Quixote dates to 1605 and 1615, and is often
identiﬁed as the ﬁrst novel (though it had many non-Western precedents). This fact
invites us to consider whether written literature, and especially the novel, should be
distinguished in its achievements and effects from oral culture. It is reasonable to think
that the development of the novel has enabled literary forms and topics not possible in
oral culture. Unlike oral stories, written ones can be consumed at the reader’s pace,
they allow for back-tracking, and they can invite passage by passage reﬂection.
Suppose this is indeed the case, what does it prove? It might demonstrate the extent
to which the novel has transcended the origins and adaptive function (if it had one) of
prehistoric narrative ﬁctions. But there is a more intriguing possibility that, if it could be
established, would put Literary Darwinism on a ﬁrmer footing. It might be that the
novel has taken on a new and special evolutionary signiﬁcance in virtue of those
qualities that distinguish it from earlier types of ﬁctional narrative.
Counting against the plausibility of this last suggestion is the slow timescale on which
evolution operates. With this in mind, Michael Austin, an English professor, writes:
imaginative literature in any form that we would recognize—and many that we would not—
emerged too recently in history to have been speciﬁc adaptations for their current purposes.
Yet, comparatively accelerated evolutionary change is possible when the environment is
unstable, as has been true of the cultural environment of humans over recent centuries.
And as I indicated at the close of Chapter 8, it would be interesting to see exploration in
Darwinian terms of the special character of the written novel. Nevertheless, the hope of
bringing the written novel, as a distinctive literary form, within the ambit of evolutionary
accounts of human behavior must be slight and no one has yet attempted that task.
The value of literature
There are a number of adaptations within the immediate vicinity of ﬁctional narrative:
our propensity to narrativize the world, our capacity to think in terms of what is not
ARTS AS ADAPTATIONS 175

actual and what is merely possible, and our ability to understand others by projecting into
their mental and emotional lives. We implement these capacities across a range of
contexts with real-world payouts. But our production and engagement with narrative
ﬁction are more likely a consequence of than a fundamental contributor to these adaptive
behaviors. And while it is plausible to make the case that our engagement with narrative
literature produces many kinds of beneﬁt, the further arguments offered as demonstrating
that narrative ﬁction is an evolutionary adaptation are disappointingly slight. The value of
literature is not in doubt, however. We can learn from it. And although I have not stressed
the obvious point, it provided pleasure and amusement as well. But these facts are bound
to be acknowledged by almost everyone. And most who do admit them feel no
compulsion to postulate a connection to evolution on that basis.
Music as an adaptation
We now turn brieﬂy to adaptationist accounts of music.
Music and sexual selection
Darwin is the most famous promulgator of the idea that music is used by man to out-
compete rivals and to attract mates by appealing to their aesthetic sense. He wrote:
When we treat of sexual selection we shall see that primeval man, or rather some early progenitor
of man, probably ﬁrst used his voice in producing true musical cadences, that is in singing, as do
some of the gibbon-apes at the present day; and we may conclude from a widely-spread analogy,
that this power would have been especially exerted during the courtship of the sexes,–would
have expressed various emotions, such as love, jealousy, triumph,–and would have served as a
challenge to rivals.
And again:
All these facts with respect to music and impassioned speech become intelligible to a certain
extent, if we may assume that musical tones and rhythm were used by our half-human ancestors,
during the season of courtship, when animals of all kinds are excited not only by love, but by the
strong passions of jealousy, rivalry, and triumph.
As we have seen, the position remains popular, being advocated by Geoffrey Miller
and others. Their idea is that excellence in musical behaviors displays intelligence,
creativity, emotional sensitivity, and the capacity to “waste” time without loss of
comparative ﬁtness. Music honeys the performer’s words and emboldens their dancing.
It displays their physical attributes and health. Meanwhile, if the devotee ﬁnds his music
catchy, he is always present to her as his melodies and words run repeatedly in her head.
In support of this thesis, Miller notes that music comes to the fore in adolescence, plays
a prominent role in courtship, and that more pop music artists are male. He draws
attention to the apparently prodigious copulatory success of musicians such as Mick
Jagger, Jimi Hendrix, John Lennon, and Jerry Garcia.
176
THE ARTS

We have already considered powerful objections to Miller’s theory in Chapter 8 and
I won’t elaborate them again here. But we should note that music is no less prominent
in ritual, private entertainment, and other spheres of life than in courtship. Women are
highly musical and it is they, more than men, who sing to their children. In addition,
musicality develops in children long before sexuality. And much music making is
cooperative and involves the group, rather than being competitive and featuring the
individual. Miller responds that music is done in groups but not for groups, but that is
surely not always the case. In the music repertoires of small-scale cultures, romantic and
courtship songs make up only a small part.
There are several points to make about the sexual attractiveness and fertility of
musicians. Until the early nineteenth century most music was made in the home by
amateurs, and by women as much as men. Even the best composers and musicians were
servants in the employ of the nobility or church. They were regarded as craftsmen
rather than as charismatic sex stars. Some, such as J. S. Bach, fathered large families. But
if anyone could attract sexual favors via music, it is more likely to be those with the
wealth and prestige to commission and pay for the production of such exotic and costly
items as operas and symphonies, not composers and performers.
It was only with the rise of a middle class and the public demand for high-end art
that music making became a profession. No doubt histories are right to suggest that
some virtuoso composer-performers, such as Nicolai Paganini and Franz Liszt in the
nineteenth century, attracted more than their fair share of female admirers. But there is
no evidence of which I am aware to suggest that musicians then were more attractive to
females than other skilled artists or other socially prominent males. In fact, the reverse:
as mentioned in Chapter 8, a study of European male composers showed that they
produced signiﬁcantly fewer children than the general European population. Even
well into the twentieth century, only a small minority of composers and musicians
could make a wealthy career. So, if music is an adaptation that exploits its attractiveness
to potential partners, this is an outcome of only the past few centuries.
The biomusicologist Steven Brown summarizes the case against Miller’s account of
music in terms that echo objections to Miller encountered in Chapter 8:
Sexual display is but one area where music-making–often in combination with dance–has found
an important role in human cultures. However, it is difﬁcult to see courtship as the raison d’eˆtre of
music. Once music evolved, it was cooptable in the form of sexual displays, even highly
competitive ones, but I doubt that this was the initial driving force for the evolution of music’s
melodic and rhythmic systems.
Ian Cross’s theory
The most fully developed explanation of music as an evolved adaptation has been put
forward by the musicologist Ian Cross. He makes much of the fact that the meaning
music conveys is often various and ambiguous. He writes of music’s “polysemic
nature” and “transposable aboutness” by way of indicating its lack of a ﬁxed semantic
ARTS AS ADAPTATIONS
177

meaning. Another favorite slogan is “ﬂoating intentionality,” used to indicate that
music simultaneously can be self-referential—presumably by exemplifying its proper-
ties or by drawing attention to internal structures and relationships—and can also be
interpreted as referring to the world beyond its boundaries. Though music is a mode of
communication, he maintains, it does not inform as language does.
Cross adopts from evolutionary psychology the view that the mind is comprised of
modules that issue in specialized, automated behavioral responses to environmental
triggers. These modules are initially independent of each other, but the previously
mentioned special characteristics of music allow it to open channels of communication
between them.
Music’s ﬂoating intentionality might have been a factor in the emergence of domain-general
competence by virtue of the capacity of musical behaviors simultaneously to be embedded in,
and to signify differently within, different domains of human mental life. Music is conceived of
here as underpinning a capacity to integrate information across different cognitive domains by
offering a means of bridging the gap between these domains by virtue of its semantic openness
and its ability to be integrated with other activities.
As a result, music plays a crucial role in cognitive development.
In addition, music produces many positive group beneﬁts according to Cross. Music
coordinates and “transposably intentionalizes”—I am not sure what is meant by this—
time in sound and action. It synchronizes our bodies and aligns our thoughts. It thereby
rehearses management of social interactions and promotes ﬂexibility in social behavior.
It reinforces group beliefs. Because individuals are free to develop their own inter-
pretations of its signiﬁcance, however, music’s “polyvalent meanings” also facilitate
peaceful interactions that in nonmusical contexts might result in conﬂict. Finally, music
provides the source of the human capacity for metaphor by inviting us to juxtapose
thoughts from different domains.
Yet more than this, Cross maintains, music may have enabled the emergence of
human culture.
Music, as a communicative behaviour, fulﬁls a generic function in affording us space to rehearse and
to sustain our social ﬂexibility, permitting the expression of, and most likely having contributed to
the conditions allowing the evolutionary emergence of, the human capacity for culture.
Moreover, music shapes social behavior in a positive direction.
Without musicality the ﬂexibility in managing social relations that characterises modern humans
and that constitutes the matrix within which abstract conceptions such as social justice can take
form is less likely to have arisen.
In short:
Music seems to have at least two generic functionalities, in underwriting social ﬂexibility and in
facilitating intellectual ﬂexibility. These two generic functions of musicality would seem to me to
be likely preconditions for the emergence of abstract concepts that frame and give meaning to
178
THE ARTS

human interaction, such as that of social justice, that aspect of morality which is concerned with
the achievement of equity in human relations.
Critical discussion of Cross’s theory
Who would have thought that the absence of speciﬁc meaning in music would have
such far-reaching beneﬁcial consequences! And, indeed, there is reason to be wary of
the account of musical meaning that is on offer here. In general, musical repetition and
the unfolding of musical structure and pattern should not be equated with self-
reference. We note the formal order of similar windows in a house without usually
taking this to imply that the windows refer to each other. The repetition of musical
ideas in a piece is analogous.
Also, the fact that people sometimes ﬁnd meaning in music does not show that it
thereby refers to the world. It is revealing in this context that Cross cites the philoso-
pher Susanne K. Langer with approval. She argued that music is an important bearer of
linguistically inexpressible but humanly signiﬁcant meaning. Cross similarly conveys
the impression that, in denying a speciﬁc, language-like semantics to music, neverthe-
less it has its own manner of communicating ineffable meaning.
This view faces many objections but I do not review them here because there is a
simpler, decisive response to the claim about music’s lack of semantic meaning. The most
popular and common form of music surely is song. And it is widely assumed that music
originated in song—or at least that song became foundational for music by the time
language had evolved. And even if music preceded language, it almost certainly accom-
panied dances that were invested with ritual signiﬁcance or with narrative meaning.
Though vocal music can be wordless, song generally marries music to words: “Stand
by your man” and “All you need is love,” “Londonderry air” and “Scarborough fair,”
“Light my ﬁre” and “Smoke gets in your eyes.” Traditionally, music never had the
transposable aboutness and ﬂoating intentionality that Cross praises, because either it
came with words with a quite speciﬁc semantic content or it accompanied dances with
ritual meaning and representational signiﬁcance. In the West, purely instrumental
“abstract” music is a development of recent centuries. No theory discussing music’s
origins, primary functions, and most frequent uses should take it as the default case.
If most music lacks the special mode of meaning that Cross makes central to his
theory, his account of how music supposedly yields cognitive and social beneﬁts is
already in serious trouble. And there are further grounds for interrogating the stories he
tells about these matters.
Cross’s explanation of the cognitive beneﬁts of music—that its lack of deﬁnite
meaning allows it to engineer bridges between domain-speciﬁc parts of the mind—is
hostage to the view that the brain is heavily modularized. This supposition has been
challenged not only by philosophers of biology but also by recent evolutionary
psychologists. And where is the evidence in favor of the bridging thesis? Of course,
training and intensive exposure to music alter neural structures, but that is only to be
expected—extensive training in any number of mental or physical disciplines has the
ARTS AS ADAPTATIONS
179

same kind of result. Cross cites a study showing that music lessons lead to a small
increase in IQ. But there could be many explanations for this gain. And to make the
connection with domain-crossing cognitive ﬂexibility that Cross relies on, it would be
necessary to share Cross’s commitment to two controversial theses: that the individual’s
development repeats the evolutionary trajectory of the species’ development; and that
the emergence of general intelligence in the species as a whole is a consequence of the
breaking down of barriers between mental modules.
Of course, other theorists have suggested that music aids cognitive development in
other ways—for example, by preparing infants for the acquisition of language and
social interaction. It is difﬁcult to know how to evaluate such claims. In general,
individuals with congenital musical defects show otherwise normal mental and social
development.
Turning now to the alleged social beneﬁts of music, Cross’s more extreme claims—
that music paved the way for culture generally and that it facilitated the emergence
of the sense of social justice—strike me as extravagantly speculative. Where is the
evidence to show, for instance, that musicians and composers are more socially
responsible and sensitive to others’ rights than less musical people, or that judges and
human rights activists are more musical than other folk?
Nevertheless, as we saw in the discussion of music’s origins in Chapter 8, many
theorists identify social beneﬁts produced by music: it bonds and coordinates, promotes
conﬂict resolution, and mimics mutual grooming by triggering the release of endorphins.
Most of these authors go on to represent music behaviors as naturally selected for the sake
of social beneﬁts. Yet in claiming evolutionary signiﬁcance for group beneﬁts garnered
from music, they do not explicitly embrace multilevel selection theory in order to argue
that natural selection operates on groups as well as individuals. Nor, alternatively, do they
explain how these beneﬁts differentially affect the ﬁtness of individuals within the group.
To make the connection with evolution, they should do one or the other.
The hypothesis that music is an adaptation for the promotion of sociality is some-
times supported by reference to two forms of developmental disorder. Sufferers of
Williams syndrome, which combines intellectual impairment with high sociality, often
are strongly drawn to music; whereas Aspergers-like autism, which impairs sociality,
goes with indifference to music’s expressiveness. The neuroscientist Ani Patel chal-
lenges this last claim, however. Autistic people are sensitive to music’s expressiveness
and some individuals have achieved a high level of musicality. He concludes:
there are at present no data to suggest that singing is needed for normal social or emotional
development.
We can also question whether music produces the social beneﬁts that have been
claimed. Even if group singing triggers the release of endorphins, does that mean it
functions to replace the hands-on grooming of our primate cousins? Doesn’t music
divide the group and the generations as often as it uniﬁes them? While some music can
be used to pacify, can’t other music be used to ramp up anger and violence? And even if
180
THE ARTS

music does produce the social beneﬁts claimed for it, it remains to demonstrate that it
was selected for that function. Mathematics and reading are also sources of similarly
widespread beneﬁts, although, as mentioned earlier, neither is an evolutionarily select-
ed adaptation. Besides, ethnomusicologists have recorded so many functions to which
music has been put that it is difﬁcult to see where we would begin to distinguish what
music can be used for from what, if anything, it was selected by evolution for.
A different, more rigorous approach to the connection between music behaviors and
evolution is recommended by the neuroscientists Josh McDermott and Marc Hauser.
They reason that perceptual capacities that are developmentally ﬁxed, unique, and
speciﬁc to music are strong candidates for adaptations for music. So, rather than trying
to analyze the evolutionary origins of music by considering which among its many
possible functions is central, they focus on music perception and on the neural systems
that underlie this. The many studies they review tested music perception across cultures
and in children, nonhuman animals, and people with brain damage with respect to
melody, pitch, tonality, consonance and dissonance, expressiveness, and other musical
parameters. They conclude that the data are suggestive but do not decisively point to
innate, unique, music-speciﬁc capacities. Some effects might be the result of learning,
even in the womb, and others might indicate perceptual capacities shared with other
species or ones evolved for language rather than music perception.
Two other neuroscientists, Timothy Justus and Jeffrey J. Hutsler, conducted a
similar, equally extensive literature review and arrived at the same conclusion. Here
is their summary:
In our view, given the current state of knowledge about music cognition, there is no compelling
reason to argue categorically that music is a cognitive domain that has been shaped directly by
natural selection. Such a conclusion is still consistent with the belief that music is a universal and
cherished part of being human, as many of humanity's most important achievements share similar
evolutionary pasts. It is also consistent with the idea that music is a product of human biology, as
all cultural knowledge is represented and processed in a network of brains.
It is important to note that the verdict is not negative; rather it is “unproved,” given
the current data. What are the prospects for resolving the present uncertainties via
further experiment? McDermott and Hauser seem to be optimistic that an experimental
program could settle the matter. And Justus and Hutsler point to new leads that
cognitive neuroscience might pursue. Not everyone shares this optimism, however.
The paucity of the Hominin fossil record might mean that we can never obtain the data
that would tell us about music’s origin and earliest evolutionary function. And given the
signiﬁcant overlap in neural areas employed by language and music, a further problem
concerns our ignorance of the relation between the origins of language and of music. As
noted earlier, whereas some people see music as consequent on language, others see it as
a precursor of language or hold that music and language arose from a joint vocal source.
As I said, these studies set a higher standard than evolutionary psychologists usually
apply to themselves. But that standard might be inappropriately high if it privileges the
ARTS AS ADAPTATIONS 181

search for music-speciﬁc brain networks above all else. Music behaviors could be
adaptive without being served by music-speciﬁc brain circuits, according to Bjo¨rn
Merker, a biomusicologist.
The consistency and speciﬁcity across cultures of the peculiar human propensity to sing and
dance raises a strong presumption that it rests on a biological foundation . . . It is by no means
evident why such a propensity, even as a full-ﬂedged adaptation, should be expected to engender
specializations of the auditory system and its cognitive superstructure. On the contrary, one
would expect it to rely upon, exploit, and even adapt its structural forms to the capacities of our
sophisticated sense of hearing evolved over a hundred million years.
How frustrating! The arguments of musicologists and psychologists urging that
music is an adaptation are at best incomplete and unsatisfying. Meanwhile, at this
time, brain science cannot clarify the issue. I understand very well the desire to identify
music as an adaptation. It is a distinctively human practice, highly valued and found
everywhere and at all times. It seems to be peculiarly central to our humanity as such.
But taking it as an adaptation involves a leap of faith.
182
THE ARTS

12
Conclusion
Let us take stock and see what we can draw from Part III’s discussions of the various
possible relations between art and evolution.
In Chapter 10, we explored the view that art is a technology, a cultural product resting
on evolved capacities of a general kind that lead us to be creators, transmitters, preservers,
and incremental improvers of the valuable achievements of our predecessors. I suggested
that this approach most naturally aligns with one that sees almost all culture as a self-
elaborating superstructure erected on a broad, ancient evolutionary base. But that
picture, which presupposes the isolation of cultural change from biological evolution,
is problematic. There are good reasons to suppose that genetic evolution and cultural
evolution are often connected. And this undermines the idea that nature and nurture can
be treated as separate. In any case, there is reason to think that evolution operates not only
on general conditions and aptitudes but also in a fashion that is subtly responsive to
speciﬁcally local or to changing conditions, in which case the connection between art
and evolution could be closer and more direct than the technology model presupposes.
Of course, this is not to deny the importance of culture in the way it shapes the
direction the arts take. But consider these analogies. Writing can be done by carving,
engraving, or etching a hard surface, by marking an absorbent surface with ink using a
nib or brush, by typing on a keyboard, or by touching an electronically sensitized glass
screen. Cooking can involve applying ﬂames to a foodstuff, boiling it in water, baking
it, immersing it in astringent liquids such as lime juice, or placing it in a microwave.
What methods are available to a person for writing or cooking plainly depends on that
person’s cultural location, among other things. But the underlying purposes and out-
comes can be seen to be the same, despite differences at the local, cultural level. So it is
also with art behaviors, I claim. They can take many different, culturally inﬂected forms
and call on local genres, conventions, and traditions. But though cultures may enact
them differently, we recognize all people as making music, performing dramas,
painting depictions, and so forth, as was discussed in Chapter 4.
In Chapter 9, I considered the idea that art is a by-product of adaptations with
non-art agendas. I argued against attempts to characterize music in such terms and
questioned the failure of theorists to agree on the adaptation to which music stands as a
by-product, or how music derives from it.
So, is art an adaptation? In Chapter 8, I doubted the success of theories treating all the
arts as sharing an adaptive function. Either these simplify and abstract too far in ﬁnding

functions that the arts might share. Or they imply that the adaptation lies beyond art—for
instance, in imaginative creativity—and that the arts, along with many other things,
merely provide routes for its implementation. I suspect that, if any of the arts are
adaptations, they will be so in their own speciﬁc fashion. This is not merely because
they involve different media but, rather, because they achieve their purposes in very
different ways and seem to be suited to very different functions. Yet in Chapter 11, when
I considered various theories locating the adaptive importance of narrative ﬁction and of
music in their individual characteristics, the results were unconvincing.
If technology, spandrel and adaptation exhaust the logical space of possibilities, as
I believe they do, it looks as if something has gone wrong. I have raised doubts equally
against all three! Have I set the expected standard too high? I do not think so. It is not
unreasonable to adopt a skeptical stance when a host of conﬂicting hypotheses are
advanced to explain this or that art behavior, especially where the supporting argu-
ments are far short of compelling.
The fact is that some of the people from the humanities who take up these issues
have political agendas and only a loose grasp of what the science requires. If they refer
to the scientiﬁc literature, they sometimes seem to cherry-pick sources that support the
conclusion they have already drawn. And for their part, the scientists are sometimes
naı¨ve in their understanding of aesthetic theory and of what art appreciation typically
involves. They regularly over-interpret the signiﬁcance of aesthetic- or art-directed
empirical studies. Though he cites only one source (from 1974) on philosophical
aesthetics, the evolutionary psychologist Randy Thornhill writes patronizingly:
Philosophical aesthetics yields a list of unresolved issues that aestheticians through the ages have
attempted to treat. Darwinian aesthetics accounts for the central place of these issues in the minds
of aestheticians and helps resolve them.
He then makes the error I identiﬁed previously of equating any unreﬂective preference
with an aesthetic judgment and goes on to maintain that “all mobile animals from
amoebae to primates are environmental aestheticians.”
I should stress that I have not chosen the weakest theories to discuss. Rather,
I focused on the ones that are widely acknowledged or that I ﬁnd most plausible.
But the point is this: even where bias and narrow-sightedness are carefully avoided,
it is invariably difﬁcult to ascertain what was true in prehistory. The requisite evidence
is extremely hard to come by and difﬁcult to interpret. Any theory is bound to be
vulnerable to the charge that its conclusion is not incontrovertibly established. So, the
upshot of my counter-arguments and questionings is to leave the discussed theories
unproved rather than falsiﬁed, though in the process I hope to have indicated why
some of the unproved theories might be stronger candidates than others.
Many of the doubts and concerns I have expressed could be put aside if the appropriate
empirical evidence is unearthed. For example, we might be able to settle some disagree-
ments about music’s evolutionary status if we could ascertain when language evolved and
how its evolution stands with respect to the evolution of music behaviors. And who
184
THE ARTS

knows what innate, task-speciﬁc neural networks will be identiﬁed by neuroscientists in
the future? Can we expect our uncertainties about art’s evolutionary standing to be
answered in the course of time? I don’t know. It certainly is possible that we may never
settle the debate about art’s origins. And even if we could discover art’s origins, this might
not help us resolve issues about its present evolutionary status, if it has any.
When I review the theories and the evidence, I am doubtful that the arts, either
together or singly, are selected to serve an adaptive function. If I had to bet, I would say
that the adaptations that give rise to art behaviors are intelligence, imagination, humor,
sociality, emotionality, inventiveness, curiosity. Though art is mediated by culture, it
gives direct and immediate expression to these traits and dispositions, so I would
identify it as a by-product rather than as a technology. Art gives vivid and powerful
expression to these qualities, which are central to our human nature and indicate our
humanity.
Art behaviors as signals of ﬁtness
I want to return to an idea defended in Chapter 9. I tried to show that, even if the arts,
taken as group, came to us as a spandrel, they would not remain incidental. Because art
behaviors are a universal aptitude, but are, nevertheless, extremely costly to sustain,
they signal ﬁtness. As I have explained, saying that art is universal amounts to claiming
that very nearly everyone has a modest level of expertise in some arts as a creator or
performer, a high knowledge and appreciation of some other arts, and average
competence across a spread of yet more. Being merely average with regard to art
behaviors is very costly indeed. It calls for attaining a high level of knowledge or skill in
one or another art arena. It demands investment of time, attention, training, resources,
and energy. Not every quality or trait that is near-universal comes cheap.
Just as there are a few unfortunate people with deﬁcits that affect their capacity to
acquire full-blown language, to interact socially, and so on, so there might be people
whose artistic abilities are unusually limited. On the one hand, this is more likely to
occur with respect to artistic abilities than for very robust systems, such as those for
language, because a far-ﬂung spread of diverse genes is likely to be involved in
perfecting artistic skills. But on the other hand, a person who is naturally deﬁcient in
music might be good at painting; and someone who has trouble following dramatic
action might be a skillful dancer.
It is not only those who are markedly poor in art behaviors that send a meaningful
signal. Some people will do much better than the average in terms of their level of
expertise or of the spread of arts in which they perform well. A few others will do
noticeably worse. We will regard the former group as signaling high ﬁtness, supposing
that art attainment correlates well with other signs of ﬁtness such as intelligence,
imagination, and sensitivity. And we will regard the latter group as comparatively less
ﬁt on account of their comparative ineptitude, taking this to correlate with underlying
genetic shortfalls or with the damaging effects of environmental impingements.
CONCLUSION 185

Moreover, the arts offer many different, diverse opportunities and invite specializa-
tion. Calling the relevant behaviors universal tends to mask the extent to which they are
informationally complex and nuanced. Not only do they signal ﬁtness, they signal many
kinds, shades, and degrees of ﬁtness. In this regard, consider the drives that centrally
shape the kind of lives humans lead: to reproduce, to belong to the group, to discover
meaning in the world and our lives, to be resourceful, to be creative, to achieve what
matters to us, to be acknowledged and valued for who we are and what we have done.
These drives can ﬁnd expression in countless non-art behaviors and there are many ways
their connection with our biological ﬁtness can be signaled. But the arts are extremely
varied and rich in their potential to channel, exercise, and exhibit these energies. Art
behaviors are intensely subtle and interesting indicators of our individual differences as
well as our shared commonalities. As such, they are markers of extreme importance.
Are not powerful signals of high ﬁtness likely to take on the role of adaptations?
In the case of the peacock’s tail, this is indeed what happens. But that is because, for this
species, one key signal leads directly to reproductive success or failure. For humans the
situation is very different. Many factors are relevant to assessing our biological ﬁtness
and there are myriad ways of signaling each of the relevant factors. Art behaviors
provide powerful indicators of our various qualities, skills, values, and the rest, but so
also do many non-art behaviors. We can acknowledge the relevance of art behaviors as
complex indicators of ﬁtness without having to demonstrate that they serve as adapta-
tions rather than as by-products of non-art adaptations.
The arts and human nature
What can we take away from the discussion in Part III? Are art behaviors important
aspects of our biologically rooted human nature? Is art connected to evolution? I think
the answer to both questions is yes. If art is not a purely cultural technology then it should
be either an adaptation or a spandrel. Both of these are the products of evolution. And as
multifaceted markers of ﬁtness, the arts cannot be incidental to our biological agendas.
There should be no question that art behaviors, or the propensities to learn them, are part
of human nature, and not in the trivial sense in which whatever we do gives expression to
our species’ character. So Ellen Dissanayake is right to stress that art is universal, ancient, and
intrinsically pleasurable, and right also to suggest that this strongly indicates that art connects
to evolution. These terms need to be qualiﬁed and elaborated, though.
Keeping in mind that “art” here refers to appropriate folk, domestic, decorative, and
popular entertainment practices, as well as to high art contexts, art is universal in the
sense that most normal people are art creators or performers, at least at a modest level,
in a subset of their culture’s art forms. And as art appreciators, they have detailed
knowledge of at least some of their culture’s sub-genres and passing competence in
many more.
Since all historically documented cultures have practices we would normally
acknowledge as artistic, even if they do not always separate these practices from
186
THE ARTS

practical concerns and wider social systems, it seems fair to infer that art is ancient and
existed prehistorically. We cannot be precise, of course, but so many theorists refer to
Upper Paleolithic art without the qualiﬁcation of scare quotes that we might reason-
ably suppose that some forms of art go back more than 30,000 years. Perhaps we should
be more careful than to make this assumption, given how little we know of the use
made of such paintings and carvings. But as I pointed out, if we came across similar
depictions in a cave used by an isolated group only a few thousand years ago, we would
be very unlikely to withhold the term “art,” even were we to be similarly ignorant of
the functions to which their depictions were put.
Art is intrinsically pleasurable in the sense that its making and consideration are
frequently self-motivating. We may do these things with no other end in view. This
is not to deny, however, that art can be and in some contexts perhaps always is
harnessed to some practical function. When art is made to have functions beyond
that of being contemplated for its own sake, this typically does not rule out its
contemplation or, where relevant, reﬂection on how its aesthetic and artistic properties
contribute to its satisfying its practical function.
It is necessary to note that the enjoyment we get from art often has a cognitive
dimension, rather than being a visceral thrill, because this is crucial to explaining the
attraction of artistic tragedies, horrors, and other negatively charged works dealing with
the darker or more bizarre and disgusting aspects of existence. With this in mind, it
might be better to say that we ﬁnd art intrinsically rewarding rather than intrinsically
pleasurable, because pleasure is too readily equated with sensations that feel good.
And ﬁnally, it is important to observe that the claim that art is a source of pleasure is
one about art in some generic sense, not about all individual art behaviors or works of
art. It can be extremely difﬁcult to make very good works of art, so many are likely to
be disappointing to some extent. In any case, there is no reason why all art should aim
to be very good where what is average might sufﬁce for a given time or setting. The
claim about art being rewarding is to be understood as one about the point of much
art—that it aims to reward an interest taken in it as art, whatever further interests it
might serve—rather than about the success of individual works in meeting that point,
or even about the subservience of all art to that typically primary purpose.
Dissanayake takes the facts that art is universal, ancient, and intrinsically pleasurable
together as pointing to the fact that art connects to evolution. More particularly, she thinks
they show that art is adaptive. That is, she infers the strongest possible connection
between art and evolution. But we can accept that art behaviors are deeply rooted in
human nature and depend ultimately on evolution while adopting weaker views: for
example, that art is a spandrel that survives because it does not limit or undermine the
comparative ﬁtness of those who display it. Only the view that art is a life-enhancing
technology distances it from evolution.
What our obsession with the arts makes clear is that we are a species that craves
stimulation, challenge, and entertainment. I think both Geoffrey Miller and Ellen
Dissanayake are right to this extent: by making and appreciating art, we envelop
CONCLUSION
187

ourselves in an environment of heightened interest and emotion. Miller’s view limits
the relevance of this to mate attraction. Instead, I would argue, as I did with respect to
human beauty in Chapter 7, that art behaviors are more generally about self-deﬁnition,
self-expression, and sociality. Meanwhile, by focusing on the humble, pre-symbolic
beginnings of art, Dissanayake underrates the level of informational richness which art
behaviors are capable of conveying. In my view, the importance of art is more
pervasive than either of these theories can account for. It is more foundational in
generating our sense of ourselves, both as individuals and as members of communities.
In this connection, Ani Patel is correct to object to views characterizing the arts as
incidental frills and to emphasize, instead, the extent to which the arts transform and
add meaning to our lives. But I do not share his view that the arts are so distanced by
culture from the adaptations they draw on that they qualify as technologies.
It is fascinating to identify those suites of behavior that are mastered by nearly every
person despite the extremely high cost this imposes. Such behaviors are the touchstones
of our humanity. They identify what is important to us as a species. They indicate what
has directed our pathway and contributed to our success. Such behaviors are both
puzzling and magniﬁcent: puzzling because their inordinate cost seems to go beyond
what is necessary for survival, and magniﬁcent because we take on their burden with
such cheerful eagerness. They include our commitment to ritualized competition and
to spirituality and religion. Among them, art behaviors are central. We are driven to be
artists and art appreciators, as is testiﬁed by the place accorded to art in every society and
epoch. Were we not so impelled, we would be less than fully human.
188
THE ARTS

Endnotes
Part I. Key Concepts
Introduction
p. 1 Excalibur: found Sima de los Huesos (Bones Pit), the Atapuerca mountains, Spain in 1998.
1–2 percent of axes: Corbey et al. 2004.
Currie quote: 2009:1; see also Currie 2004, 2011.
p. 2 Hand axes as aesthetic artifacts (or as art): S. L. Washburn 1970, Brothwell 1976, Geist 1978,
Hadingham 1979, Dissanayake 1980, 1988, Oakley 1981, Pfeiffer 1982:83–4, 1985:117,
Sandars 1985, Lumsden 1991, Mithen 1996, 2003, 2005, Kohn and Mithen 1999,
G. Miller 2000a, Solso 2003, Corbey et al. 2004, Zaidel 2005, R. Berleant 2007, B. Boyd
2007a, 2009a, Lumley 2009, C. Renfrew 2009.
Homo heidelbergensis: this species is sometimes assimilated to Homo erectus or Homo rhodesiensis.
First makers of stone tools: most likely to have been Australopithecus garhi: Semaw 2000, Gräslund
2005.
Oldest stone tools: Semaw et al. 1997, Deacon 1998, Klein 2000, 2009, Semaw 2000, Gosden
2003, Sterelny 2003, 2012, S. Carroll 2005, Gräslund 2005, Richerson and Boyd 2005, Stout
et al. 2005, Gamble 2007, Clack 2009, Lumley 2009, Jeffares 2010.
Hand axes: the date of 1.65 ma is from Klein 2000. Sterelny 2003, Lumley 2009. Asfaw et al.
1992 give 1.4 ma; Jeffares 2010 and Sterelny 2012 give 1.8 ma. Some prefer a more
conservative ﬁgure of 500 ka for the ﬁrst hand axes: R. Berleant 2007, Gamble 2007.
Composite tools—stone heads hafted to wood, for example—date from 250 ka: Klein 2000.
Ochre: the date of 300 ka is from Hadingham 1979, Oakley 1981, Watts 1999, Coe 2002,
Davidson 2003, Barham 2004. G. Miller 2000a gives 100 ka; Mellars 2005 suggests at least 150
ka; Dissanayake 1988 nominates 500 ka. M. Clark 2002:173 identiﬁes this use as revealing an
aesthetic sense. Power 2004 suggests that, between 500–100 ka, ochre was extensively used by
female Hominins as personal decoration in ritual contexts and she notes in Power 1999 the
extensive use of henna and red camwood, as well as ochre, as a bodily decoration by modern
era African tribes.
Skepticism about aesthetic use of ochre: Mithen 1999, Corbey et al. 2004, Sterelny 2008, 2012.
Ochre as preservative: Sollas 1915:221, Keeley 1980. For evidence against, see Watts 1999.
Ochre as medicine: Velo 1984, Klein 2009.
Ochre as sunblock and insect repellant: Sollas 1915:223, Keeley 1980.
Ochre used in glue: Ambrose 1998, Klein 2009, De Smedt and De Cruz 2011.
Ochre as polish: R. White 1993, Klein 2009.
Ochre as a menstruation mask: Knight et al. 1995, Power 1999, 2004, Clack 2009.
Ochre as decoration: Mellars 1996, Watts 1999, Power 2004, McBrearty and Stringer 2007.
Ornaments: the date of 40 ka is from R. White 1993, Mithen 1996:156, 173–5, Sterelny 2008,
2012. R. White 1989a puts the date at 35 ka. For disagreement, see Pfeiffer 1982:204.
Earlier examples of ornaments: Marshack 1990, 1991, Henshilwood et al. 2004, Conard 2005,
Henshilwood 2005, Mellars 2005, Vanhaeren 2005, Vanhaeren et al. 2006, McBrearty and

Stringer 2007, Barton et al. 2009, Currie 2009, Mayer et al. 2009. Other examples of
perforated shells are at Qafzeh cave, Israel, dated to 92 ka; at Taforalt cave, Morocco, dated
to 82 ka; and at Blombos cave, South Africa, dated to 77 ka.
Sea shells: R. White 1993:342–3 cites Y. Taborin to the effect that only a few taxa of shells were
favored; they were removed a long way from their sources, and they were worked with an
aesthetic view of the ﬁnal product of which they would be part.
Eggshells: De Smedt and De Cruz 2011 identify as among the oldest artworks 270 engraved
ostrich eggshell fragments from Diepkloof Rock Shelter, South Africa, dated to 65–55 ka.
Teeth: only some teeth of only a limited number of mammals were used. Fox canines, red deer
and reindeer vestigial canines, and horse and bovid incisors predominate: R. White 1993:343,
2003. Common or large-scale items, such as mammoth ivory, were sometimes carved to
resemble scarcer or less easily obtained items, such as red deer canines: R. White 1989b. The
humans of 40 ka reserved the difﬁcult-to-work ivory for beads and sculptures: R. White 2004,
De Smedt and De Cruz 2011.
Stones: R. White 1992, 1993 lists belemnite, pyrite, hematite, chlorite, calcite, lignite, serpenti-
nite (steatites) as well as jet.
p. 3 Sungir graves: the ﬁgure of 250 fox teeth is from Mithen 1996:175, Klein 2009:694.
R. White 1993:338 gives a total of 200 fox canines with 150 on the belt. Either way, at four
canines per fox this represents a lot of foxes! For more on the Sungir grave: Hadingham
1979:75–7, Pfeiffer 1982:65–7, R. White 2003:141–5. The date of 28 ka is from Mithen
1996, Kuzmin et al. 2004. Dunbar 2004:187–8 gives 22 ka; Harris 1989, Klein 2009 offer 24
ka; R. White 2003 gives 25–22 ka.
Neanderthals apparently had beads: some evidence suggests early Homo sapiens artifacts have been
misattributed to Neanderthals: Benazzi et al. 2011.
Neanderthals using personal decorations: Joyce 1975, Marshack 1991, d’Errico et al. 1998,
Conard 2005, Vanhaeren 2005, Gamble 2007:46, Zilhão 2007, Sterelny 2008, Currie 2009,
Choi 2010, Zilhão et al. 2010. For contrary views or skepticism: Harris 1989, R. White 1992,
1993, 2003, Mithen 1999, 2005, Klein 2000, 2009, Lewis-Williams 2002, 2009, Sterelny
2003, Barham 2004, Mellars 2005, J. Renfrew 2009.
Bead artifacts as art: Barham 2004, Zilhão 2007, Klein 2009. Though Vanhaeren 2005 notes the
aesthetic appeal of beads, she lists thirteen other uses for them.
Symbolic behavior: Marshack 1991, R. White 1992, 1993, 2003, Deacon 1998, Power 1999,
Watts 1999, McBrearty and Brooks 2000, Henshilwood et al. 2002, Davidson 2003, Solso
2003, Tomasello 2003, Barham 2004, Mellars 2005, Mithen 2005, Marean et al. 2007,
Lumley 2009, Sterelny 2012. For criticism that a view of the symbolic is too broad if it does
not distinguish ornamentation and aesthetic appreciation from depiction or representation:
Currie 2004, Mithen 2005. A reply is that ornamentation may have served as insignia
identifying group membership: Coe 2002, B. Boyd 2007a, 2009a, De Smedt and De
Cruz 2011.
Psychological (or behavioral) modernity: a skeptical response in Sterelny 2003:166: ‘Our
Pleistocene forebears did not have contemporary minds in a Pleistocene world; and we do
not have essentially Pleistocene minds in our contemporary world.’
Blombos cave: Henshilwood et al. 2001, Power 2004, Mithen 2005, Klein 2009.
p. 4 Cave paintings and petroglyphs: older, simpler ones are known; for instance, those in
Auditorium cave, Bhimbetka, India, are dated to 200 ka.
190
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 2–4

Erotic drawings in caves: Collins and Onians 1978, Marshack 1991. Guthrie 2005 argues that
these were made by adolescent males. For the suggestion that these drawings might be symbols
rather than erotic images, see Davis 1986, and for a response, see Marshack 1986.
Mistakes in depiction: Guthrie 2005:91–112.
Skepticism that cave drawings are art: Davis 1986. Klein 2000, 2009 is agnostic on the matter.
Some put “art” in scare quotes: Conkey 2009, Van Gelder and Sharpe 2009. For discussion:
Ucko and Rosenfeld 1967:117–22, 165–74, Coe 1992, R. White 1992, Corbey et al. 2004,
Heyd 2005, Morphy 2005, Morales 2005.
Cave paintings identiﬁed as art: Grosse 1897, Sollas 1915, Ucko and Rosenfeld 1967, Berlyne
1971, Weiner 1971, Joyce 1975, Brothwell 1976, E. O. Wilson 1975, 1978, 1998, Collins
and Onians 1978, Geist 1978, E. Fisher 1979, Hadingham 1979, Dissanayake 1980, 1988,
1995a, Pfeiffer 1982, 1985, Sandars 1985, Halverson 1987, Mithen 1988, 1996, 2005, Harris
1989, Marshack 1991, Coe 1992, 2002, Diamond 1992, 1997, Mellars 1996, 2005, 2009a,
R. Boyd and Silk 1997, Deacon 1998, Tomasello 1999, Klein 2000, 2009, Lewis-Williams
2002, 2004, 2009, Conard 2003, 2005, Corballis 2003, Davidson 2003, Solso 2003, R. White
2003, Barham 2004, Berghaus 2004, Corbey et al. 2004, Dunbar 2004, Bataille 2005,
S. Carroll 2005, Gräslund 2005, Guthrie 2005, Heyd 2005, Morales 2005, Richerson and
Boyd 2005, B. Boyd 2009a, Clottes 2009, Currie 2009, Donald 2009, Dutton 2009, Lumley
2009, Scalise Sugiyama and Sugiyama 2009, Whitley 2009, Hampton 2010, Mark Landau
et al. 2010, De Smedt and De Cruz 2011, Zaidel 2011. The term “portable art,” for small,
transportable items, such as carved ﬁgurines, is equally common.
Paintings have a religious function: Lewis-Williams 2002, 2009; see also Clottes 2009, Donald
2009, Mellars 2009a, Whitley 2009. For criticism: Marshack 1991:404–6, Guthrie 2005.
Under inﬂuence of hallucinogens: Allen 1999. Self-induced hallucination was involved: Lewis-
Williams 2002, 2009.
Calendric function: Marshack 1991.
Critical discussion of claim that paintings used as hunting magic: Ucko and Rosenfeld 1967,
Collins and Onians 1978, Hadingham 1979, Halverson 1987, R. White 2003, Montelle 2004,
Bataille 2005, Guthrie 2005, Currie 2009, Klein 2009.
“For their own sake”: Halverson 1987. For comment: Frost 1987.
Lamarque quote: 2005:22.
Pigment heated up to 1000C: Ucko and Rosenfeld 1967, R. White 2003, Currie 2009.
Harsh weather: Ucko and Rosenfeld 1967, Joyce 1975, Mellars 1996, Mithen 1996, Lewis-
Williams 2002, Berghaus 2004.
Dunbar quote: 2004:6.
Venus ﬁgurines: Dobres 1996, C. Renfrew 2009. The much older Venuses of Tan-Tan,
Morocco, and of Berekhat Ram, Israel, which are dated to 200+ka, are crude and their
interpretation as carved female representations is doubtful: Mithen 1999, 2005, Davidson
2003, R. White 2003, Conard 2005; but see Klein 2009:410.
Le Mas d’Azil spear thrower is one of seven that share a similar design. According to one
interpretation, the animal is a juvenile ibex that is defecating, with two woodpeckers depicted
on the large, extruded piece of feces: Guthrie 2002, 2005, B. Boyd 2009a. A more aestheti-
cally coherent interpretation is that the animal is a chamois that is giving birth and that it is the
fetal sack with no birds that is shown: Bandi 1988, Demoulin 2002. The representational
design of this atlatl maximizes its strength: Guthrie 2002, 2005:290.
ENDNOTES FOR P. 4
191

p. 5 Early ﬂute found at Hohle Fels cave, Germany: Conard et al. 2009. Conard 2005 describes
other ﬂutes that may be as old; see also Klein 2009. Bones with holes have been claimed as
earlier ﬂutes, but their status as musical instruments is questioned: Kunej and Turk 2000,
Mithen 2005. Discussion of Late Paleolithic musical instruments or sound-makers: Morley
2009.
Drums and rattles: Huron 2003. Pfeiffer 1982:180–1 speculates that a Mammoth hipbone could
be used as a xylophone, struck with an antler hammer; see also Hadingham 1979:71.
Hunting bow at 64 ka: Lombard and Phillipson 2010. Klein 2009 gives 20 ka or earlier.
Chapter 1
p. 9 List of aesthetic properties: Sibley 1959, Hermere´n 1988, Goldman 1990.
How a work’s identity depends on relations between it and what lies beyond its borders: Gracyk
2009.
Aesthetic experience: Stecker 2006 identiﬁes the aesthetic with the kind of experience to which
it gives rise; N. Carroll 2000a, 2002, 2006 equates it to the kinds of properties on which it
focuses. For different accounts of aesthetic experience: Walton 1993, Iseminger 2004.
p. 12 Reid quote: 1790:456.
Darwin quotes: 1880, pt. 1, ch. 3:92 and pt. 2, ch. 11:329; see also 1880, pt. 3, ch. 21:616.
Bowerbirds: Darwin 1880, pt. 2, ch. 13:381–2.
Birds have aesthetic taste: Comfort 1962a, Armstrong 1973, Thorpe 1974, Joyce 1975, Dawkins
and Krebs 1978, Diamond 1982, 1991, 1992, Martindale 1990, F. Turner 1991a, DePryck
1999, Roele and Wind 1999, Ralevski 2000, de Waal 2001, G. Miller 2001, Welsch 2004. In
choice experiments, birds, monkeys, and raccoons favored order, symmetry, and regularity
over irregularity and asymmetry: Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1988. He interprets this as showing that they
have aesthetic tastes.
Hartshorne quote: 1973:10.
Precursor of human aesthetic taste: Berlyne 1971, Fuller 1983, Allott 1994, Welsch 2004,
Deacon 2006.
Hirn quote: 1900:188.
p. 13 Animal advocates reluctant to regard animal choices as aesthetic: for example, Rolston
1987.
G. Miller 2000a, 2001.
p. 14 Welsch 2004.
We cannot assume that mate choice in other species has an aesthetic motivation: Dissanayake
1995a:66.
Welsch 2004 quote: http://www.contempaesthetics.org/newvolume/pages/article.php?arti-
cleID = 243
Comfort quote: 1962a:121.
Darwin quote: 1880, pt. 1, ch. 3:92.
de Waal quote: 2001:175.
Joyce quote: 1975:10.
Equation of an aesthetic response with perceptually founded pleasure: noted in Schellekens
2011. Further examples are by F. Turner: ‘The color and shapes of the ﬂowers are a precise
record of what bees ﬁnd attractive, and it would be a paradoxically anthropocentric mistake to
assume that . . . there is nothing in common between our pleasure in ﬂowers and theirs. The
192
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 5–14

play behavior of many higher species has an irreducible element of pleasure in beauty’
(1991a:40, also 1995:198). Welsch writes: ‘Beauty is brain-happiness’ (2008:25, see also
2004); see also DePryck 1999, S. Brown and Dissanayake 2009, Rolls 2011. Whiten
1976:37 contrasts viewing for pleasure, which he deems purely aesthetic, from viewing for
interest and observes that chimpanzees do both.
A study of very non-aesthetic, lustful anticipation in quail: Domjan 2002.
p. 15 Chimpanzees have aesthetic sense: Whiten 1976, Pfeiffer 1982:74–5, Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1988,
Grinde 1996, Lenain 1997, B. Boyd 2001, 2009a, de Waal 2001. B. Boyd 2001, 2009a claims
that dolphins in a Hawaiian marine park have developed a gymnastic display that utilizes air
bubbles for aesthetic effect.
Morris quote: 1962:14.
Aesthetic experience like an emotion: Cowie 2011, Prinz 2011, Rolls 2011.
Color sight in birds: Rand 1974:36. Birds see further into the ultraviolet end of the spectrum:
Hunt et al. 1998.
p. 16 Kant 1951 [1790].
Disinterestedness: Bullough 1912, Ducasse 1929, Stolnitz 1960. For a less extreme view:
Beardsley 1958, 1969, 1970.
Challenges to aesthetic attitude theory: Dickie 1964, 1965.
Some psychologists adopt the Kantian model: Martindale 1988, 1990, Overing 1996. For a more
sophisticated approach: Lumsden 1991.
p. 17 Grosse 1897. For more recent examples: Overing 1996, Guthrie 2005.
Morreall 1991.
p. 18 A defense of sentimentality in art: Solomon 1997. On kitsch: Kulka 1988, 1996, Higgins
2009a. How kitsch is bad in art (though aesthetic): Dorﬂes 1969.
Dewey 1980 [1934]. For criticism that Dewey’s account does not go far enough: Irvin 2008a.
Aesthetics of the everyday: Leddy 2005, Eaton 2006, Shelley 2007, Saito 2007, Irvin 2008b,
Dowling 2010.
Itches and aesthetic experience: Irvin 2008b. For an exchange: Soucek 2009, Irvin 2009.
The distal senses: Korsmeyer 1999:ch. 1–2 records how philosophers ranked sight and hearing
above the other senses from ancient times on epistemic, moral, and aesthetic grounds, and
how in the eighteenth century this hierarchy of the senses was imported into aesthetic theory.
Van Damme 1996 argues that a proper review of non-Western aesthetics requires the
inclusion of all the senses.
Proprioception as an aesthetic sense: Montero 2006. For further discussion: D. Davies 2011a.
The aesthetics of smells: Sibley 2001, Brady and Kuehn 2005, and Shiner and Kriskovets 2007.
Odor or scent in sexual attraction: Wedekind and Füri 1997, Milinski 2003, Thornhill and
Gangestad 2003, Wedekind 2007. Dutton 2009 follows Beardsley 1958 in arguing that the
lack of intrinsic relations among smells prevents them serving as an artistic medium.
Food: Korsmeyer 1999; see also Allhoff and Monroe 2007, C. Todd 2011.
Wine, beer, and whiskey: Allhoff and Draper 2007, Hales 2007, Allhoff et al. 2009.
Somaesthetics: Shusterman 2000.
Parsons and Carlson 2008. I am skeptical about the linguistic claim. In India and Southeast Asia,
the term “rasa” has the same dual use as the English word “taste.” In the aesthetic context, the
rasas (states induced in the appreciator of a play or other artwork) include the erotic: Higgins
2009b.
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 14–18
193

p. 19 “Perhaps an element of personal taste remains in their shared judgments”: see Hume
1995 [1757].
On the tension between the exercise of taste and the objectivity of aesthetic judgment in Kant
and Hume: Schellekens 2009; see also Lumsden 1991.
On evaluation and objectivity: S. Davies 2006a:ch. 8.
On the aesthetic standing of simple properties: Dickie 1996:27, 118–19, 142, 151, Stecker 2006.
p. 20 Knowledge of art genres and traditions necessary for appreciation of art: Danto 1964, 1981,
Walton 1970, Goldman 1990, Zangwill 1995, Iseminger 2004, Gracyk 2009.
Knowledge of natural science necessary for appreciation of nature: Carlson 2000, Budd 2002,
A. Berleant 2002, Parsons 2002, Brady 2003.
p. 21 Functional beauty in history: Tatarkiewicz 1972.
Xenophon quote: Memorabilia, Book III, Ch. 8, Section 6–7. Socrates voices a similar view in the
dialogue Hippias Major at 295c–d.
Functional beauty: S. Davies 2006b. Parsons and Carlson 2008 develop a related view according
to which functional beauty measures an item’s ﬁtness for its proper (biological or artifactual)
function. For a critical review of their arguments: S. Davies 2010a.
p. 22 Knowledge necessary for environmental aesthetic experience: Hepburn 1963, Saito 1984,
N. Carroll 1993a, 2001, Stecker 1997a, Eaton 1998, Godlovitch 1998, Carlson 2000, Budd
2002, Matthews 2002, Brady 2003, Lintott 2004, Moore 2007, Saito 2007.
Parsons and Carlson quote: 2008:116; see also Parsons 2007.
p. 24 Distinguishing aesthetic from artistic properties: N. Carroll 2000a, 2002.
Conceptual art: N. Carroll 2006, Goldie and Schellekens 2009, D. Davies 2011b:ch. 10. Shelley
2003 argues that non-perceptual artworks can possess, and be appreciated for possessing,
aesthetic properties.
Include artistic in aesthetic: Gaut 2005a, Goldman 2009.
Chapter 2
p. 25 Critical discussion of deﬁnitions of art: S. Davies 1991, 1997a, 2000, 2008.
Art a product of the Enlightenment: Shiner 2001, 2003; see also Overing 1996, Jannidis 2008.
Art is a cultural construct and as such is not universal: Lewis-Williams 2002, 2004.
p. 26 Greek concept overlapped with ours: Moravcsik 1993.
Rejection of eighteenth-century aesthetic theory: S. Davies 2006a:ch. 3.
Contemplation one among many functions for art: N. Carroll 2004, S. Davies 2006b. Morales
2005 notes that attempts to disenfranchise the art of non-Western cultures rests on the mistaken
assumption that art must be non-functional; see also Van Damme 1996. The primatologist de
Waal 2001:152 questions whether humans make art only for its own sake and if their aesthetic
sense is purely cultural rather than innate.
Art enhances functionality: Hirn 1900.
Dutton 2009.
p. 27 Cannot deﬁne art as the sum of its forms: S. Davies 2008.
Gaut 2000. Criteria of Egyptian art: Gaut 2000:34.
Dutton 2009:ch. 3.
194
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 19–27

Sometimes cluster accounts are presented as deﬁnitions of art: as in Bond 1975, Snoeyenbos
1978. At other times they are intended to be anti-deﬁnitional: as in Dissanayake 1988:ch. 2,
Gaut 2000, Dutton 2009. For discussion of the issue: Adajian 2003, S. Davies 2004, Gaut
2005b.
Ethnocentric bias in cluster account: artistic individuality and freedom of expression are not
acceptable in small-scale hunter-gatherer societies, such as those of the Bushmen of the
Kalahari or the Aborigines of Arnhem Land: Barham 2004:107.
p. 28 Cluster theory accounts for marginal cases: Gaut 2000, Dutton 2009:63, Coe 2002:77.
Guthrie quote: 2005:374.
Barham quote: 2004:108. He adopts his deﬁnition from Bednarik 2000.
p. 29 For a hybrid deﬁnition similar to the one I propose: Stecker 1997b, 2000.
First art: S. Davies 1997a.
Art without the concept: Lopes 2007.
Philosophers’ arguments for art in non-Western cultures: Moravcsik 1988, Blocker 1993,
S. Davies 2000, Dutton 2000a, 2009, N. Carroll 2004, Lamarque 2005, Morales 2005.
Art of African civilizations: Layton 1991, Van Damme 1996.
Art institutions in small-scale societies: Van Damme 1996.
p. 30 Art is universal: Grosse 1897, Arnheim 1988, Dissanayake, 1988, 1995a, 1995b, 1999a,
2000a, Moravcsik 1988, D. E. Brown 1991, Lumsden 1991, Coe 1992, 2002, Blocker 1993,
2001, Ludmany 1999, S. Davies 2000, Dutton 2000a, 2003a, 2005, 2009, Ralevski 2000,
Tooby and Cosmides 2001, N. Carroll 2004, Corbey et al. 2004, Guthrie 2005, Deacon 2006,
Donald 2006, Steen 2006, M. Turner 2006, B. Boyd 2008a, 2009a, Welsch 2008, De Smedt
and De Cruz 2010, Mark Landau et al. 2010, J. Carroll 2011. It is not always obvious whether
these writers mean by this that art is found in every culture (pan-cultural) or, alternatively, that
every person is a maker or appreciator of art.
Tourist art: for a detailed discussion of whether tourist art can express a culture’s artistic values,
with special attention to the case of Bali: S. Davies 2001:ch. 6.
Age of Australian rock art: this may be very ancient, but it is difﬁcult to conﬁrm precise dates:
R. White 2003. Chaloupka 1984 offers 35 ka, as does Flood 2006:178, though Lewis 1988
challenges the adequacy of Chaloupka’s evidence. Davidson 2003 gives 30 ka; Watchman
1993 and Klein 2009 both suggest 25 ka. Depictions of humans and animals are not common
until 20 ka: Lewis 1988, Flood 1997, 2006.
p. 31 Humans as the tool-using animal: Oakley 1961.
Bowerbirds as artists: Diamond 1991, 1992, G. Miller 2000a:267–70, de Waal 2001:165. And let
us not forget the male Three-spined Stickleback, which decorates its nest with shiny objects if
it has access to them: Milius 2003, O¨ stlund-Nilsson and Holmlund 2003.
Bowers as ritualized display: Dissanayake 1988:101. Precursors of human art: Allott 1994. Display
something artistic: B. Boyd 2001, 2009a. Would be art if made by humans: Dutton 2009.
Elephants and/or chimpanzees as artists: Rensch 1973, Sebeok 1979, Davis 1986, Ehmann 1987,
Diamond 1991, 1992, Henley 1992; see also Pfeiffer 1982:74–5. On the art of Congo, a
chimpanzee: Morris 1962, de Waal 2001:168–74, E. O. Wilson 1975, Whiten 1976, Fuller
1983. An amusing spoof on cats as artists: Silver and Busch 1994.
Drumming in apes: Fitch 2005. Other creatures that drum, but not to musical effect, include
Palm Cockatoos and woodpeckers.
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 27–31
195

Elephants and whales as musicians: Glausiusz 2001. Recordings of the Thai Elephant Orchestra
are released by Mulatta Records.
Dickie 1974:45–6.
Dutton 2009:7.
p. 32 Lenain 1997, 1999; see also G. Miller 2000a.
de Waal 2001:171 disagrees with Lenain on the grounds that chimpanzees try to counterbalance
marks introduced to the page by humans; see also Morris 1962:80–6, Davis 1986, Eibl-
Eibesfeldt 1988:35–6.
Drawing in the wild: Diamond 1991, 1992 claims that wild elephants often draw in the dust with
their trunks. Ehmann 1987 discusses drawing by captive elephants.
Transforming marks into more familiar shapes: Bleakney 1970.
Bird culture: Diamond 1991, 1992, Sterelny 2003:151.
Birdsongs are learned: Thorpe 1956, 1974, Ardrey 1967, E. O. Wilson 1975, Dawkins and Krebs
1978, Fagen 1981, Deacon 1998, Whaling 2000, de Waal 2001, Fitch 2005, McDermott and
Hauser 2005a, Merker 2005, Mithen 2005, Levitin 2006.
Sexual selection: see Chapter 3.
Change in birdsong: Lynch et al. 1989.
Birdsong is like novel utterance in humans: one who makes this misleading comparison is Levitin
2006:265. He also suggests that change in birdsong is driven by a female preference for more
complex songs.
Birdsong lacks hierarchical structure: Ball 2010.
Birdsong is musical: Darwin 1880, pt. 2, ch. 13. For criticism: Wallaschek 1891.
Birdsong as art: Joyce 1975. As possessing musical structure: de Waal 2001:155–6; see also
Thorpe 1974 and Marler 2000.
McDermott and Hauser quote: 2005a:39; see also Hauser and McDermott 2003.
Importance of considering links between human and animal song: Marler 2000, Fitch 2005,
2006, Merker 2005, 2006.
p. 33 Bowerbirds attracted to colored items: Diamond 1991. The Satin Bowerbird in Australia
seeks blue items. Those occurring naturally are mainly ﬂowers, but (as Diamond 1982 notes)
the birds are avid collectors of blue human rubbish. Hirn 1900 notes their indiscriminate
collecting when arguing against the view that bowerbirds are artists.
Bowers as part of extended phenotype: Dennett 1991:415. Birds do show considerable ﬂexibility
in response to local conditions and available materials when constructing their nests, however:
Hansell and Ruxton 2008. This may strengthen the case for regarding nests as artifacts.
Bower making automatic: Ardrey 1967, Lenain 1999.
Bowers replaced courtship plumage: Gilliard 1969, Matt Ridley 1994:158.
Birds too dumb to be musicians: Hartshorne 1973 disagrees; they vary their songs in the order in
which these are sung and in the number of times phrases are repeated. For a more skeptical
approach to these data: Armstrong 1973.
Parrots: Pepperberg 1999, Huber and Gajdon 2006. Lenain 1997:24 cites Conrad Lorenz as
claiming that the acrobatic aerial displays of parrots are art.
Corvids: Balda and Kamil 2002, Heinrich 2000, 2002, Taylor and Gray 2009. Lenain 1997:24
cites Conrad Lorenz as claiming that the acrobatic aerial displays of Corvids are art.
Dancing parrots: Patel et al. 2009. Ball 2010 argues that the capacity of parrots to coordinate with
a steady pulse shows not that they are musical but rather that a sense of rhythm is pre-musical.
196
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 31–33

Gibbon songs: Geissman 2000. Fitch 2005 denies these are songs because, while they are learned,
they are not as varied as the songs of many birds are.
Humpback songs: Hartshorne 1973:29–31, Thorpe 1974:131–2, Payne 2000, Mithen 2005, Ball
2010. Dolphins, seals and sea lions are also singers: Hartshorne 1973, Fitch 2005.
p. 34 Payne quote: 2000:135.
Chapter 3
p. 35 The ﬁrst edition of Darwin’s On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection or the
Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle of Life appeared in 1859. Wallace’s Contributions to
the Theory of Natural Selection was published in 1870. For accounts of the history of evolution-
ary theory: Cronin 1991, G. Miller 1998, Gould 2002, Bowler 2003. For detailed expositions
of evolutionary theory: Dawkins 1986, Patterson 1999, Gould 2002, Mayr 2002, Mark Ridley
2004.
The spread of genes in a population: this calculation (from Pinker and Bloom 1992) is based on
formulae outlined in J. B. Haldane 1927. In fact, the time in generations depends on the size of
the population. Where the advantage is 1 percent and the population is 10,000 individuals, the
mutation will become ﬁxed in 1,980 generations: S. Carroll 2005:245.
Units and mechanisms of selection: Dawkins 1989, Godfrey-Smith 2000, 2009, Okasha 2006.
Note both that organism genealogies used to map species in the tree of life can diverge from
gene genealogies and that evolution often operates on organisms rather than genes, so there
can be no simple reduction of organism talk to gene talk.
Multilevel selection theory: D. S. Wilson 2002, 2007, Richerson and Boyd 2005, D. S. Wilson
et al. 2008. For criticism: Dawkins 1994, Sterelny and Grifﬁths 1999, Kerr and Godfrey-Smith
2002, Okasha 2006, Sterelny 2006, Godfrey-Smith 2009, Hampton 2010.
Developmental systems theory: Oyama 1985, Grifﬁths and Gray 1994, 2005; see also Oyama,
Grifﬁths, and Gray 2001, Dunbar and Barrett 2007. For criticism: Sterelny et al. 1996, God-
frey-Smith 2001, Kitcher 2001, Sterelny 2001.
p. 36 Memes: Lumsden and Wilson 1985, Dawkins 1989, J. Brown and Greenhood 1991,
Dennett 1991, Koch 1993, Gatherer 1997, Blackmore 1999, Laland and Brown 2011. For
criticism: Sperber 1996, Whitmeyer 1998, Pinker 1999, 2007, Sterelny and Grifﬁths 1999,
Aunger 2000, 2002, 2006, 2007, Godfrey-Smith 2000, 2009, Distin 2004, Richerson and
Boyd 2005, Sterelny 2006, Mameli 2008. For an over-stretched account of music in terms
of memes: Jan 2007. On artworks as memes: Dennett 1990a; for criticism: Brook 2002. For
a selectionist account of artworks’ survival as memes or cultural viruses: Comfort 1962a,
Rancour-Laferriere 1981, B. Boyd 1998, 2009a, Cooke 1999a, Perricone 2004, D. S. Wilson
2005. For the related idea that artistic value can be analyzed on the model of evolutionary
ﬁtness: R. Richards 2004.
Cladistic relations between languages: Dunn et al. 2005.
Gene-culture co-evolution: Lumsden and Wilson 1985, Durham 1991, Tomasello 1999,
Richerson and Boyd 2005, Sterelny 2006, Mameli 2008, J. Carroll 2011, De Smedt 2011,
Laland and Brown 2011.
Changes in human dentition, jaw size, and gut: Charlesworth and Charlesworth 2003, Clack
2009, Wrangham 2009.
Increased lactose tolerance: Geist 1978, Harris 1989, Deacon 1998, Clutton-Brock 1999, Laland
et al. 2000, Richerson and Boyd 2005, Tishkoff et al. 2007.
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 33–36
197

Increased resistance to malaria: Tishkoff et al. 2001.
Human evolution did not come to a halt in the distant past: Foley 1995, Buller 2005:108–12,
J. Carroll 2006, Laland and Brown 2011.
Changing immune system: Matt Ridley 1994.
Ongoing adaptive evolution in ASPM, a gene that plays a role in brain size: Mekel-Bobrov et al.
2005.
Human evolution is rapid and ongoing: E. O. Wilson 1978:86–9, D. S. Wilson 2002, Sterelny
2003, Richerson and Boyd 2005.
p. 37 Choosy females, competing males: Bateman 1948. For a more complex and nuanced list of
mating strategies: Trivers 1972, N. Davies 1991, G. Miller 1998, Paul 2002, Gangestad 2007.
Peacocks: Petrie et al. 1991. For criticism: Welsch 2004.
Peacock tails as signaling good genes: Petrie 1994.
Runaway sexual selection: R. A. Fisher 1958, Trivers 1972, Harvey and Bradbury 1991, Rolls
2011. By contrast, natural selection usually operates slowly, but under circumstances of rapid
environmental change, for instance, it might be much quicker.
Sexual selection subsumed within natural selection: Caspari 1972, Mayr 1972, Simpson 1972.
For the current state of sexual selection theory: Jones 1996, Paul 2002.
p. 38 Inclusive ﬁtness: Hamilton 1964.
Simpson quote: 1972:30.
Darwin on animals as aesthetes: for a defense of Darwin and a review of the debate that ensued:
Cronin 1991, Matt Ridley 1994:130–45, G. Miller 1998, 1999. See the discussion of this topic
in Chapter 1.
Early critic of sexual selection: Wallace 1871.
Choosy animals: Cronin 1991:246, G. Miller 2000a:41–4.
Beauty as an honest signal of ﬁtness: Lumsden 1991, Buss 1994, Matt Ridley 1994, Symons
1995, Zahavi and Zahavi 1997, Etcoff 1999, Pinker 1999, Ralevski 2000, D. S. Wilson 2002,
Skamel 2003, Voland 2003, Flesch 2007, Perrett 2010. For skepticism about the honesty of
such signals: Dawkins and Krebs 1978. Some, such as Thornhill 1998, 2003, think that the
mate preferences of nonhuman creatures are aesthetic and also that they track ﬁtness. G. Miller
1998, 1999, 2000a, 2001 argues that choosing for beauty is compatible with choosing for
ﬁtness where the two are correlated. As we saw in Chapter 1, Welsch 2004 argues against the
correlation, but does so on unconvincing grounds. Meanwhile, some claim that beauty maps
truth at a cosmic level because it characterizes the rules and operations of the physical universe:
F. Turner 1991a, 1995, Trout 1993. For criticism: De Sousa 2004.
The “handicap principle”: Grafen 1990, Harvey and Bradbury 1991, Matt Ridley 1994, Zahavi
and Zahavi 1997, G. Miller 1998, 1999, 2000a, Power 1999, Getty 2006, Rolls 2011.
p. 39 Wallace 1889, 1891. By Wallace’s account, a colorblind peahen would not be at a
disadvantage in choosing a mate so long as the mate’s comparative vigor was evident: see
Hirn 1900:191–2. This contrasts with the handicap view, in which the peahen picks her mate
by the excellence of his plumage, which indirectly testiﬁes to the quality of his genes: see
Cronin 1991:195.
Species recognition: Enquist and Arak 1993.
R. A. Fisher 1915, 1958. See Paul 2002 for a review, including discussion of whether mate
selection detects or creates ﬁtness.
Zebra ﬁnches: Burley 1988a, 1988b; see also Harvey and Bradbury 1991, Roele and Wind 1999.
198
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 36–39

Mate choice in humans has an aesthetic aspect: Skamel 2003.
Sexual dimorphism: Trivers 1972. Sexual dimorphism correlates in species according to the
degree of their polygyny and is generally absent in monogamous species. With Homo sapiens
males 5–12 percent taller than females, humans qualify as a mildly polygynous species:
E. O. Wilson 1978, Alexander et al. 1979, Diamond 1992:71, Wright 1994, Storey 1996,
G. Miller 1998, 2000a. It has been said (for example, in Caspari 1972) that sexual selection
cannot operate if the sex ratio is 1:1 and the mating system is monogamous because all
individuals pair. This is not correct, however, if individuals vary in their ﬁtness and mates
are selected to match the ﬁtness of the chooser: Harvey and Bradbury 1991, G. Miller
2000a:196–8, Hooper and Miller 2008.
p. 40 Monogamous relationships: testes size provides one indication of a primate’s mating
pattern: Harvey and Harcourt 1984, Harris 1989, Diamond 1992, Buss 1994, Matt Ridley
1994. In chimpanzees, females copulate with many males. The more sperm a male produces,
the higher his chances of impregnating any given female. In gorillas, males have almost
exclusive mating rights with their female partners so for them sperm production is not a
major issue. Male chimpanzees have large testes, gorillas have small ones, and humans have
intermediate ones. This implies that humans are largely monogamous but may indulge in
extra-pair copulations—that is, with someone other than the current long-term partner—
under some conditions. Typically, it is human males that are open to casual sex, though extra-
pair copulations may beneﬁt women when they provide better genes for her children than
those of her long-term partner: Symons 1979, Buss 1994, M. Wilson and Daly 1992,
J. Simpson and Orin˜a 2003, Thornhill and Gangestad 2003, Guthrie 2005, Clack 2009,
Perrett 2010. For critical discussion of this explanation: Buller 2005:290–300. There is a
tendency to polyandry in all primates: Paul 2002.
Even-handed sexual selection in humans: Wright 1994, G. Miller 1998, 1999, 2000a, 2001,
Power 1999, Hooper and Miller 2008, Rolls 2011.
G. Miller 2000a, 2001.
Sociobiology: E. O.Wilson, 1975, 1978. For criticism: Gould 1980a, Kitcher 1985, Gräslund
2005. For a more balanced evaluation: Sterelny 1995, Mameli 2008, Laland and Brown 2011.
For a defense of E. O. Wilson: J. Carroll 2004:71–7.
p. 41 Biologically modern humans: the date of 160 ka is from T. D. White et al. 2003, S. Carroll
2005, Richerson and Boyd 2005, Richardson 2007. Others give about 200 ka: E. O. Wilson
1998, Tomasello 1999, McDougal et al. 2005, B. Wood 2005, Vanhaeren et al. 2006, Klein
2009, Wrangham 2009. The ﬁgure of 200 ka is also supported by mitochondrial DNA genetic
mutation evidence: Tang et al. 2002. Klein 2000 has reservations about how anatomically
similar to present-day humans these ﬁrst specimens were. For discussion of the origins and
subsequent global spread of modern humans: Mellars 1996, Klein 2000, 2009, Dunbar 2004,
Gräslund 2005, B. Wood 2005:104–15. For doubt about the coherence of the notion of a
“modern human”: Gamble 2007, Sterelny 2008.
Cultural explosion at 45–35 ka: Weiner 1971, Pfeiffer 1982, 1985, Fuller 1983, Halverson 1987,
Bräuer 1989, Harris 1989, J. Brown and Greenhood 1991, Marshack 1991, R. White 1992,
1993, 2003, R. Boyd and Silk 1997, Baron-Cohen 1999, Lock 1999, Currie 2004, Zaidel
2005, R. Berleant 2007, Clack 2009, Whitley 2009. Some extend the date to 50 ka: Diamond
1997, Corballis 2003, Dunbar 2004 (but cf. Dunbar 2000), Klein 2000, 2009. Or to 60 ka:
Mithen 1996, 1999, J. Carroll 2004.
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 39–41
199

Earlier date for psychologically modern humans: Frost 1987, Foley 1995, Ambrose 1998,
Corballis 1999, Watts 1999, Carruthers and Chamberlain 2000, McBrearty and Brooks
2000, Lewis-Williams 2002, Gosden 2003, Henshilwood and Marean 2003, Solso 2003,
Sterelny 2003, 2012, Barham 2004, Conard 2005, Gräslund 2005, Henshilwood 2005,
Mellars 2005, Soressi 2005, Vanhaeren 2005, Gamble 2007, McBrearty and Stringer 2007.
The environment of evolutionary adaptation: Orians 1980, Tooby and Cosmides 1989a, 1989b,
1990a, 1992, Pinker 1994, 1999, Symons 1995, Cosmides and Tooby 1997, Thornhill 1998,
Allen 1999, Scalise Sugiyama 2001a, Barrow 2005, Grodal 2008, Hampton 2010. For critical
discussion: see Chapter 6.
Representative discussions of Evolutionary Psychology: Tooby and Cosmides 1990a, Cosmides
et al. 1992b, Cosmides and Tooby 1997.
Critics of Evolutionary Psychology: Sterelny 1995, 2001, 2003, Grifﬁths 1996, Eagly and Wood
1999, M. Clark 2002, Gould 2002, Lloyd and Feldman 2002, D. S. Wilson 2002, Gray et al.
2003, Hogan 2003a, 2003b, Sterelny and Fitness 2003a, Travis 2003, Buller 2005, Richerson
and Boyd 2005, J. Carroll 2006, 2011, Richardson 2007, Smolak and Murnen 2007, Swami
and Furnham 2007, Mameli 2008, Kramnick 2011, Laland and Brown 2011. For a response to
Buller: Machery and Barrett 2006. For a response to Hogan: Gottschall 2004.
Modular minds: Tooby and Cosmides 1989a, 1992, Cosmides and Tooby 1997, Pinker 1999.
For discussion: Mithen 1996, Frankenhuis and Ploeger 2007, De Smedt 2011. For a review:
Barrett and Kurzban 2006.
Evolutionary psychologists now favoring cognitive plasticity: Dunbar and Barrett 2007.
Just So adaptationist stories: Gould and Lewontin 1979, Gould 1980a, Schlinger 1996.
Reverse engineering as abductive explanation: Holcomb 1996; see also Dennett 1987, 1990b,
1995, D. S. Wilson 2002. For criticism: Grifﬁths 1996.
Just So non-adaptationist stories: Brandon 1990, Richerson and Boyd 2005.
Cannot reverse engineer Evolutionary Psychology’s hypotheses: Grifﬁths 1996, Sterelny and
Fitness 2003b, Buller 2005:93–107, Richardson 2007.
Child development: in the past it was commonly assumed that ontogeny—the structural
development of the fetus and child—recapitulates phylogeny—the species’ history. But
even if this is not the case, child development studies are often used to see which abilities
do not depend upon substantial cultural input and are stably part of human cognitive
architecture.
Social reasoning: Cosmides and Tooby 1992a, 1992b, 2000a. For skepticism: Prinz 2007:265–6.
For a list of other successful research programs in evolutionary psychology: Frankenhuis and
Ploeger 2007.
p. 43 New evolutionary psychology: Dunbar and Barrett 2007 (the introductory essay of a recent
handbook on evolutionary psychology).
Chapter 4
p. 45 Spandrel: an architectural term ﬁrst applied to biological features by Gould and Lewontin
1979. They characterized spandrels as necessary by-products of the structures on which they are
based, but this aspect of the view has been challenged: Dennett 1995:272–3, Houston 2009.
For further discussion: J. Carroll 2004:237–40.
Art as a vestige: both Hegel 1975 [1835–8] and Danto 1986 hold that contemporary art is like a
vestige in that it outlives an historically necessary function it played in the past. They suggest
200
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 41–45

that art has now discharged its purpose, so that it persists in a post-historical phase. Dissanayake
1988 holds a similar view. She maintains that post-eighteenth-century Fine Art no longer
builds community, which is art’s evolutionary purpose on her view. All these writers are here
referring to Western Fine Art.
p. 47 Aesthetics discourse is a product of Western culture and modernist thought: Overing 1996,
Gow 1996, Lewis-Williams 2002, 2004.
Arguments against the view that aesthetics is a modernist Western invention: Anderson 1990,
Blocker 1993, 2001, Coote 1996, Morphy 1996, 2005, Van Damme 1996, Ludmany 1999,
Lamarque 2005, R. Berleant 2007. Studies on or mentioning the aesthetic judgments made
within non-Western cultures include: Crowley 1966, Fernandez 1966, Davenport 1968,
1986, R. Thompson 1968, Layton 1991, Van Damme 1996, D. Washburn 2006. Statistically
signiﬁcant agreement between New Haven (Connecticut) art experts and BaKwele (Bantu-
speaking people from western equatorial Africa) carvers concerning the aesthetic qualities of
photographs of African masks: Child and Siroto 1965. For further discussion: Van Damme,
1996, especially ch. 5.
p. 48 Language as an adaptation: Pfeiffer 1985, Harris 1989, Pinker and Bloom 1992, Pinker
1994, 2003, R. Boyd and Silk 1997, Deacon 1998, Corballis 1999, Hurford 1999, Lock 1999,
Falk 2000, G. Miller 2000a, Sterelny 2003, J. Carroll 2004, 2011, Dunbar 2004, Barrow 2005,
Patel 2008, Clack 2009, Fitch 2010, Hampton 2010. But for skepticism that we can know that
human languages are adaptations: Gould 2002, Hauser et al. 2002, Richardson 2007. And
note that there is considerable disagreement over when language evolved. How one answers
that question will depend on whether one characterizes language as purely verbal, and hence
as requiring a specialized larynx and the neural resources for ﬁne breath control, or whether
communication via gestures and facial expressions qualiﬁes. For a defense of a gestural account
of the origins of language: Corballis 2002, 2003; see also Marshack 1991, Pinker 1994, Mellars
1996. For criticism: Dunbar 2003. Language development correlated with the expansion of
raw-material transfer networks over the period 1 ma to 130 ka: Marwick 2003.
Surveys of Komar and Melamid: Wypijewski 1997. For further detail, see Chapter 6.
Danto 1997.
Dutton 2003b, 2007, 2009.
Dissanayake 1998.
p. 49 Cross-cultural facial attractiveness: Langlois and Roggman 1990, Cunningham et al. 1995,
Symons 1995, Jones 1996, Langlois et al. 2000, Dion 2002, Rhodes et al. 2002, Welsch 2008,
Perrett 2010. Thakerar and Iwawaki 1979 recorded cross-cultural agreement in female
judgments of male facial attractiveness, but noted that English participants, by contrast with
Asian participants, attached more importance to physical than psychological features. Cross-
racial agreement about the attractiveness of the faces of a cross-racial sample of men: Zebro-
witz et al. 1993. In medieval texts, the markers of female beauty are those currently identiﬁed
as such by evolutionary psychologists: Da Soller 2010.
Waist-to-hip ratio: Singh 1993a, 1993b, Matt Ridley 1994:282–4, Symons 1995, Jones 1996,
Pinker 1999, Roele and Wind 1999, Low 2000, Cunningham and Shamblen 2003, Skamel
2003, Barash and Barash 2005, George et al. 2008, Perrett 2010, Rolls 2011.
Cross-cultural waist-to-hip ratio preference: Buss 1989, 1994, Singh 1994, 2002, Jones 1996,
Cunningham and Shamblen 2003, Scott et al. 2007, Welsch 2008. For criticism: Gray et al.
2003, Buller 2005:227–8, M. Bateson et al. 2007. Yu and Shephard 1998 are skeptical of the
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 45–49
201

universality of the preference; for a reply: Singh 2002. Signiﬁcant national differences in
judgments based on waist-to-hip ratios concerning female attractiveness and health have been
found: Tove´e et al. 2007, Swami et al. 2008.
Processing universals in pictures: Eysenck 1941, Coss 1968, Bleakney 1970, Geist 1978, Eibl-
Eibesfeldt 1988, Alland 1989a, Lumsden 1991, F. Turner 1991a, 1991b, 1995, 1999a, Solso
1994, 2003, Latto 1995, Grinde 1996, Aiken 1998, 1999, Akker 1999, Pinker 1999:526–30,
Ramachandran and Hirstein 1999, Sütterlin 1999, 2003, Zeki 1999, 2000, 2006, G. Miller
2000a:142, Ralevski 2000, Edwards 2003, Thornhill 2003. For criticism: Voland 2003,
M. Turner 2006, DeSmedt and De Cruz 2010. A number of authors draw attention to the
recurrence of the “golden section” in visual art and architecture: Arnheim 1988, Eibl-
Eibesfeldt 1988, Bourassa 1991, F. Turner 1991a, 1995, Ludmany 1999, Ralevski 2000,
Edwards 2003, Welsch 2008. For skepticism about its alleged aesthetic value: Berlyne 1971,
Perrett 2010, McManus 2011. For a detailed review: Green 1995.
Art as action, not artifact: Dissanayake 1980, 1988, 1995a, 1995b, 2007, 2008a, 2008b, S. Brown
and Dissanayake 2009.
p. 50 We should focus on virtuosos and experts if the relevant behaviors and traits currently
afford comparatively more ﬁtness: G. Miller 2000a:14.
Heritability of creativity is modest and lower than that for general intelligence: Plomin et al.
1997, G. Miller 2000a. For commentary and disagreement about musical talent: Howe et al.
1998 and their discussants.
The extent to which expertise depends on practice: Ericsson et al. 1993.
The “handicap principle”: see note to p. 37.
p. 51 Small “a” notion of art: S. Davies 2000, 2006a.
Mass and popular art: Novitz 1989a, 1992, 1993, Anderson 1990, N. Carroll 1993b, 1993c,
1998, Cohen 1993, 1999, Gracyk 2007. Connections between mass art and evolved human
capacities: N. Carroll 2004.
Modernist and postmodernist art as no longer serving art’s evolutionary function: Dissanayake
1988, 1995a, F. Turner 1995, G. Miller 1999, 2000a, Dutton 2000b, 2009, Pinker 2002. For
criticisms: Easterlin 2005, Zunshine 2006, Goodheart 2007, Tanaka 2010.
The Iliad: Fox 1995, 2005, Gottschall 2001, 2008c, Barash and Barash 2005, B. Flesch 2007,
B. Boyd 2009a.
The Odyssey: Fox 1995, Flesch 2007, B. Boyd 2009a.
Shakespeare: Hiatt 1989, Stiller et al. 2003, Barash and Barash 2005, B. Boyd 2005b, Nettle
2005a, 2005b, Nordlund 2005, 2007, Oatley and Mar 2005, Stiller and Hudson 2005, Flesch
2007, J. Carroll 2011.
Tolstoy: Rancour-Laferriere 1993, J. Carroll 1999, Barash and Barash 2005.
Jane Austen: J. Carroll 1995a, 1999, 2004, 2005, B. Boyd 1998, Barash and Barash 2005,
Zunshine 2006, 2009, Flesch 2007, J. Carroll et al. 2009, Vermeule 2010.
Dickens: J. Carroll 1995a, 2004, Barash and Barash 2005, Flesch 2007, Zunshine 2008.
Other “serious” authors discussed by Literary Darwinists (see Chapter 11): Sophocles ( J. Carroll
1995a), Dryden (Zunshine 2008), Defoe ( J. Carroll 1995a, Zunshine 2006), Alexander Pope
(Vermeule 2010), Richardson (Zunshine 2006, Vermeule 2010), Fielding (Vermeule 2010),
Walter Scott and Anne Radcliffe (Kruger et al. 2005), Dumas (Barash and Barash 2005), Hugo
(Barash and Barash 2005), Emily Bronte¨ ( J. Carroll 2008, 2011), George Eliot ( J. Carroll
1995a, 2011), Flaubert (Barash and Barash 2005, Vermeule 2010), Dostoevsky (Cox 1999),
202
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 49–51

Lewis Carroll (Zunshine 2008), Hardy ( J. Carroll 1999, 2004, 2011, Barash and Barash 2005),
Henry James ( J. Carroll 1995a, Flesch 2007), Oscar Wilde ( J. Carroll 2011), Wharton
(Saunders 2009, Vermeule 2010), Proust (Flesch 2007), Woolf (Zunshine 2006), F. Scott
Fitzgerald (Barash and Barash 2005), Faulkner (Barash and Barash 2005), Hemingway (Scalise
Sugiyama 1996b), Nabokov (Barash and Barash 2005, Zunshine 2006, 2008), Malamud
(Swirski 2011), Steinbeck (Barash and Barash 2005), J. M. Coetzee (Vermeule 2010), and
Peter Carey (Easterlin 2005).
Chided for concentrating on high literature: by Pinker 2007.
Non-Western literatures: Scalise Sugiyama 1996a, 2005, Thiessen and Umezawa 1998, Jobling
2001, B. Boyd 2005b, Gottschall 2005, Oatley and Mar 2005, Booker 2005.
Prehistoric theater: Hansen 1999.
Folk tales: Rabkin 1983, 1995, Cooke 1995, Niles 1999, Easterlin 2001, Jobling 2001, Scalise
Sugiyama 2003, 2004, Booker 2005, Gottschall 2005, 2008a, Steen 2005.
Oral narratives: Niles 1999, Hernadi 2001, Scalise Sugiyama 2001a, 2001b, Scalise Sugiyama and
Sugiyama 2009.
Myths, epics, and legends: J. Carroll 1995a, Fox 1995, Nesse 1995.
Popular ﬁction: Rabkin 1983, 1995, 1998, Cooke 1987, 2002, J. Miller 1987, Whissel 1996,
Westfahl 1999, Barash and Barash 2005, Salmon 2005, Booker 2005, Zunshine 2006, 2008,
Flesch 2007.
Children’s stories: Astington 1990, Storey 1996, B. Boyd 2001, 2009a.
Nonsense rhymes etc.: Storey 1996.
p. 53 Quintilianus quote: 1983:120.
Darwin quote: 1880, pt. 3, ch. 19:570.
Music universal among adults: Blacking 1973, Cross 2003a, 2003b, Fitch 2005, Mithen 2005,
Dissanayake 2006, Cross and Morley 2009.
Music only recently a spectator sport: Levitin 2006.
p. 55 Universals in music: Hutchinson 1978, Roederer 1984, Epstein 1988, Maˆche 2000, Meyer
2000, Nettl 2000, Trehub 2000, Drake and Bertrand 2003, Hauser and McDermott 2003,
Justus and Hutsler 2005, McDermott and Hauser 2005a, Higgins 2006, 2012, Cross 2007,
J. McDermott 2008, Stevens and Byron 2009, De Smedt and De Cruz 2010.
Universal themes in literature: Polti 1977 [1895], Arnheim 1988, J. Carroll 1995a, 1995b, 1999,
2004, 2007a, 2011, E. O. Wilson 1998, Cooke 1999b, Hernadi 2001, Scalise Sugiyama 2001a,
2001b, Hogan 2003a, 2008a, Booker 2005, Dutton 2005, 2009, Gottschall 2005, 2008a, B.
Boyd 2009a. Universals in poetic structure: F. Turner and Po¨ppel 1988, F. Turner 1991a,
1999a, 1999b, Trout 1993, Constable 1997, Swirski 2010.
Cross-cultural musical expression: Balkwill and Thompson 1999, Krumhansl 2002, Fritz et al.
2009, W. F. Thompson and Balkwill 2010. But for reservations and concerns, see S. Davies
2011.
Virtuosic skill across art traditions: Dutton 2003a, 2005, 2009.
Beauty of the body: see note to p. 49 on cross-cultural agreement concerning facial beauty. For
discussion of the connection between the beauty of the Balinese legong dance and the beauty of
the dancer: S. Davies 2012.
Westerners recognize non-Western art as such: S. Davies 1997a, 2000, 2003.
p. 57 “A fascinating experiment”: Huron 2006:47–8, 53–5.
The complex iconography of “dot” paintings: Bardon 1991.
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 51–57
203

Bark paintings: Layton 1991:94–6, 137–44.
p. 58 Dissanayake 1988, 1995a.
Grosse quote: 1897:312–13.
Origins of feathers: Gould and Vrba 1982. This is seen as the most likely explanation, but sexual
display and biomechanical support are recognized as other possible explanations: Sumida and
Brochu 2000.
p. 59 Dennett 1995:233.
Richardson 2007:48–52.
Richardson quote: 2007:52.
Moore quote: 2007:168.
p. 60 Appleton quote: 1996:150.
p. 61 We should not always follow our nature: Kingsbury 2011.
Hildebrand quote: 1999:10.
Evolutionary utility is often not appealed to in reasons given for a choice: Thornhill 2003 goes
too far, however, in suggesting that the utilities underlying such preferences are always totally
out of reach of introspection; see also S. Kaplan 1992.
p. 62 Origin of art does not explain its current relevance: Currie 2004.
Art could be about sexual selection now, even if that is not how it originated: De Smedt and De
Cruz 2010.
Part II. The Aesthetic
Chapter 5
p. 65 Neglected topic: Parsons 2007, Brady 2009.
Evolutionary psychologists on animals in environment: Heerwagen and Orians 1993, Kellert
1993. Preference for habitat research over animal study: Ulrich 1993.
Thornhill quote: 1998:562.
Aversion to spiders and snakes: Mundkur 1983, E. O. Wilson 1984, 1998, Herzog and Burghardt
1988, Tooby and Cosmides 1990b, J. Brown and Greenhood 1991, Kellert 1993, Ulrich
1993, B. Boyd 1998, Orians 2001, Tooby and Cosmides 2001, Gräslund 2005, Austin 2007,
Dutton 2009, Kramnick 2011. We share this pre-programmed aversion with monkeys,
baboons, chimpanzees and many other primates: Morris 1962, Coss 1968, E. O. Wilson
1984, Sagan and Druyan 1992, B. Boyd 2008a. In human infants aversive reactions to snakes
are initially absent but emerge by the third year. “This delayed avoidance behavior appears to
be triggered at the stage of maturity when the child would be capable of escaping” (Coss
1968:278). We do not have a similar automatic response to more dangerous technologies,
such as guns: Heerwagen and Orians 1993, Ulrich 1993, Tooby and Cosmides 1997, Cooke
1999b, Orians 2001.
p. 66 Wittgenstein 1967:223.
Dog domestication: Diamond 1997, Clutton-Brock 1999, Coppinger and Coppinger 2001,
Braastad and Bakken 2002, Sablin and Khlopachev 2002, Guthrie 2005, Wang and Tedford
2008, Clack 2009, Klein 2009. Some date the domestication of dogs or their Canid ancestors
to 110 ka: Vila` et al. 1997. But the reliability of the mitochondrial DNA evidence for the early
date is seriously challenged: Coppinger and Coppinger 2001, Wang and Tedford 2008:160–1.
204
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 57–66

DNA afﬁnities and circumstantial fossil evidence suggest that dogs accompanied the humans
who entered America via the Bering Strait in 15–10 ka: Wang and Tedford 2008.
Dingoes: Hadingham 1979, Serpell 1988, Diamond 1997. Dingoes apparently reached Australia,
probably by boat, only 5 ka. By contrast, the ﬁrst human settlers of Australia arrived about
50 ka. Corbett 1985 argues that dingoes can be tamed but not domesticated, that is, their pups
are wild. Coppinger and Coppinger 2001 generalize this view to all wild Canids. They argue
that dogs became self-domesticated by adapting to the village environment that then was new.
Humanly selected breeding of dogs for desired canine traits is required to produce working
dogs.
Dogs’ sensitivity to humans’ social clues: Hare et al. 2002.
Burials with animal parts: Geist 1978, Mithen 1999, Braastad and Bakken 2002, Currie 2004,
Clack 2009, Lumley 2009, Mayer et al. 2009.
Burial of human with dog: Clutton-Brock 1999, Wang and Tedford 2008:155–8.
p. 67 Ritual burial of animals: Mithen 1996:224.
First domestic cat: Wang and Tedford 2008, Clack 2009, Driscoll et al. 2009.
Humans identiﬁed with animals: Whitt et al. 2001.
Ritual use of horns: Clutton-Brock 1999.
Totemism: Joyce 1975:44–6, Mithen 1996:166. Universal potency and appropriation of snake
symbols: Mundkur 1983, E. O. Wilson 1984.
Therianthropes in cave art: Marshack 1991, Bataille 2005:55, 66, Guthrie 2005. The most
famous and peculiar is the so-called Sorcerer of Trois Fre`res cave in south-western France.
The cave is dated to 13 ka.
Arnhem Land art: Lewis 1988, Flood 1997, Chippindale 2004.
Number of animal representations in caves as compared to human ones: Guthrie 2005.
Animal pictures more realistic than human pictures: Joyce 1975, R. White 2003, Bataille 2005.
Accuracy of animal pictures: Gould 1996; see also Collins and Onians 1978, Geist 1978, Harris
1989, Marshack 1991, Guthrie 2005: ch. 2. An extinct species of ﬂying fox has been posited
on the basis of Australian rock art: Pettigrew et al. 2008.
Go¨bekli Tepe: Schmidt 2000, C. Renfrew 2009.
p. 68 Sheep and goats as meat: Clutton-Brock 1999.
Dairy cattle: Clutton-Brock 1999.
Domestication of horses, water buffalo, donkeys, camels, and elephants dates to 5–4 ka:
Diamond 1997 (except that he holds that the elephant was tamed, not domesticated),
Clutton-Brock 1999.
Few domesticated animals in Americas: Harris 1989.
Roman and Chinese dogs: Clutton-Brock 1999.
The Iliad: Steiner 2005.
Medieval knights: K. Clark 1977.
Dogs and cats not always well treated: Thomas 1983, Ritvo 1988, Serpell 1988.
Spread of cats: Braastad and Bakken 2002, Driscoll et al. 2009.
Indigenous Americans’ fondness for pets: Serpell 1988, Clutton-Brock 1999.
Pets recorded in nearly all traditional societies: Diamond 1997.
Rousseau and Bentham: Thomas 1983, Steiner 2005, Wolloch 2006.
Christian saints and animals: K. Clark 1977.
p. 69 Dutch and Flemish animal painting: Wolloch 2006, ch. 6.
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 66–69
205

Number of dogs in US: Coppinger and Coppinger 2001.
Number of pet cats: Driscoll et al. 2009.
Animal names for cars and sports teams: E. O. Wilson 1998.
Sports teams include the badgers, blue jays, bobcats, broncos, bruins, buffalos, bulldogs, bulls,
colts, cougars, coyotes, cubs, diamond-backs, dogs, dolphins, eagles, falcons, gamecocks,
gators, hawks, kangaroos, kookaburras, lions, magpies, ospreys, panthers, pumas, rams, raptors,
seahawks, sharks, springboks, tigers, wallabies, wolf pack, and wolverines. Cars include the
barracuda, beetle, bluebird, bronco, cheetah, cobra, colt, cougar, eagle, falcon, ﬁrebird, ﬁreﬂy,
fox, hornet, impala, jaguar, kitten, lark, lynx, mustang, palomino, pinto, pony, rabbit, ram,
roadrunner, robin, skyhawk, skylark, spider, sunbird, swift, taurus, tercel, thunderbird, and
viper.
p. 70 Attitudes to animals: Kellert 1988.
Bible’s attitude to animals: Thomas 1983, Steiner 2005.
History of animal protection agencies: Ritvo 1988.
Changing attitudes to animals: Thomas 1983, Steiner 2005, Wolloch 2006.
Children’s fascination with animals: animals occur in stories by and for children (B. Boyd 2007b),
children’s language and maths exercises (Kellert 1993), childhood taxonomies (Shepard 1993),
and child art (De Smedt and De Cruz 2010). For surveys of modern children’s attitudes to
animals and how these develop: Kellert 1988.
Health beneﬁts of pets: Katcher and Beck 1988, Kellert 1993, Shepard 1993, Coppinger and
Coppinger 2001, Braastad and Bakken 2002, Hooker et al. 2002, Fine 2006. But note that the
beneﬁts are not necessarily mutual: Coppinger and Coppinger 2001. Shepard 1993 deplores
the slavery imposed on pets.
p. 71 Rolston quote: 1987:195.
E. O. Wilson quote: 1984:130.
p. 72 Herzog and Burghardt quote: 1988:76–7.
Attribute nobility etc. to animals: Lorenz 1971, Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1988. On the prevalence of an
anthropomorphic approach to animals in all societies: Steiner 2005, Wolloch 2006.
p. 73 Mickey Mouse: Gould 1980b.
Neotenous appearance of some animals or their young: Bleakney 1970, Lorenz 1971, Eibl-
Eibesfeldt 1988, Herzog and Burghardt 1988, Morreall 1991, Perrett 2010. Modiﬁcation of
children’s toy animals to make them more neotenous: De Smedt and De Cruz 2010.
Toddlers: Herzog and Burghardt 1988.
What we like about animals: Kellert 1988:159.
On breeding pure lines selected in part for appearance: Derry 2003.
Darwin quotes: 1859:39, 87.
Herzog and Burghardt quote: 1988:80.
p. 74 Appreciate adaptedness of animals: Parsons 2007, Parsons and Carlson 2008.
Share related perceptual systems: notice that we share more of our color vision with birds than
with most other mammals. See note to p. 15 on bird color vision. We lose out by comparison
with other mammals on most of the aesthetic delights of smells and scents. But see note to
p. 18 on odor.
p. 75 Expressive association of animals with habitats: Brady 2009.
p. 76 Barrow quote: 2005:120–1.
Disliked creatures (bat, cockroach, mosquito, rat, snake, spider, wasp): Kellert 1988.
206
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 69–76

p. 77 Liked creatures: Kellert 1988.
Cave and rock art do not always accurately depict all and only the species present in the area or
their relative abundance: Mithen 1988, Harris 1989, Guthrie 2005. For discussion of the ﬂora
and fauna of the region in the Upper Paleolithic: Mellars 2009a.
Herzog and Burghardt quote: 1988:78–9.
p. 78 Russow 1981.
Formal integrity is normative in biological kinds: S. Davies 2006b, 2010b.
p. 79 Paley 2006:107.
God as creator of natural beauty: Tatarkiewicz 1972.
Medieval theological tradition: Clement of Alexandria, Athanasius, Alcuin, Ulrich of Strasbourg,
Robert Grosseteste, and the twelfth-century Victorines.
Animals imagined as artworks: Joyce 1975:10.
Zangwill quote: 1995:116. For criticisms: S. Davies 2006b, Parsons 2007.
p. 80 Snakes: E. O. Wilson observes that “it is possible to . . . learn to handle snakes without
apprehension or even to like them in some special way, as I did—but the adaptation takes a
special effort and is usually a little forced and self-conscious” (1984:95).
p. 84 Selective breeding has been to the detriment of many breeds: Lorenz 1971, Coppinger and
Coppinger 2001, Hare et al. 2002.
Insects as food: the bigger, more abundant, and more concentrated that small creatures are, the
more likely they will be regarded as good to eat, provided that larger animals are scarce and
difﬁcult to obtain: Harris 1989:161.
Different attitudes to bloodsports: Herzog and Burghardt 1988.
Chapter 6
p. 86 Melamid quote: in Wypijewski 1997:31–2.
p. 87 Dutton quote: 2009:18.
E. O. Wilson quotes: 2006:62, 68, 1984:1.
Ulrich quote: 1993:88.
p. 88 Subscribers to something like the biophilia hypothesis: Orians 1980, 2001, S. Kaplan 1982,
1992, Appleton 1984, 1990, 1996, Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1988, D. E. Brown 1991, Lumsden 1991,
Sagan and Druyan 1992, Kellert 1993, Trout 1993, Thornhill 1998, 2003, Pinker 1999, 2002,
Sütterlin 2003, Barrow 2005, Cowie 2011, Joye 2011, Rolls 2011. Ulrich 1993 argues that the
genetic basis of landscape preferences is difﬁcult to prove. He is more conservative than many
in anticipating that the genetic contribution is in the range 20–40 percent, with some learning
or conditioning necessary for emergence of the response. No doubt some authors over-
emphasize the biological aspect of the response to nature. Bourassa 1991, referring to the
ﬁrst edition of Appleton 1996, accuses Appleton of this.
The value of speed: S. Kaplan 1982, 1992, R. Kaplan and S. Kaplan 1989; see also Ulrich 1993,
Ruso et al. 2003.
The value of depth assessment of habitat: Orians 1980.
Heerwagen and Orians 1993.
S. Kaplan 1982, 1992:585.
Trout quote: 1993:185.
Appleton quote: 1996:63; see also Barrow 2005:121.
p. 89 Doubt that the human evaluation of landscape is aesthetic: Swirski 2010.
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 77–89
207

For positive accounts of the environment of evolutionary adaptation, see note to p. 41.
Bipedalism: fossil evidence suggests that bipedalism evolved in Ardipithecus about 5.2 ma, soon
after the split between the chimpanzee and Hominin lineages (Haile-Selassie 2001), although
by 4.4 ma this bipedalism was still facultative rather than obligatory: Lovejoy et al. 2009.
Increasing aridity forced early Hominins to extend their daily foraging range. This favored
bipedal locomotion, which is more energy-efﬁcient than all known forms of primate terrestrial
locomotion: Leonard and Robertson 1997.
p. 90 Prospect and refuge: Appleton 1984, 1990, 1996; see also Orians 1980, Heyligers 1981,
Clamp and Powell 1982, Woodcock 1982, Conrad 1993, Hildebrand 1999, Edwards 2003,
Barrow 2005, Herrington 2009. For criticism of Appleton: Bourassa 1991.
S. Kaplan 1988, 1992; see also R. Kaplan and S. Kaplan 1989.
Signs of presence of humans a positive for landscapes: Orians 1980, Ruso et al. 2003.
Preference for mystery: S. Kaplan 1982, 1992, Woodcock 1982, Herzog and Smith 1988,
R. Kaplan and S. Kaplan 1989, Orians and Heerwagen 1992, Thornhill 1998, Barrow
2005. Appleton 1990 discusses the draw of the horizon in similar terms. Hildebrand 1999
considers architectural features that entice exploration. But Bourassa 1991 doubts whether
mystery would be preferred over the legibility of landscape.
p. 91 Dutton quote: 2009:27–8.
We are drawn to explore: R. Kaplan and S. Kaplan 1989 class both complexity and mystery under
the heading “exploration” (with coherence and legibility grouped under “understanding”).
The “out of Africa” account of the spread of Homo sapiens: Mellars 1996, 2005, Mithen 1996,
2005, Ambrose 1998, G. Miller 1998, Corballis 2002, Edwards 2003, Currie 2004, Dunbar
2004, Gräslund 2005, Richerson and Boyd 2005, Clack 2009, Klein 2009, C. Renfrew 2009.
Hampton 2010 and Zaidel 2011 give the early date of 100 ka for the departure from Africa.
Gosden 2003 suggests a little less than 100 ka. For an example of the earlier view that Homo
sapiens ﬁrst evolved in Europe: Geist 1978.
Dates of human global spread: these dates are from Dunbar 2004. B. Wood 2005 gives
slightly later dates. Klein 2009 gives 60–50 ka for the departure from Africa, 45 ka for the
arrival in Australia, 20 ka for the occupation of Siberia, and 12 ka for the Americas.
Gräslund 2005 gives 90 ka for the departure from Africa, 60 ka for Australia, 45 ka for
eastern Asia, and 30 ka for Japan. Weiner 1971 gives 30–11 ka for the crossing to America.
Gosden 2003 gives 90 ka for the Middle East, 50 ka for Europe and Australia, and 20–15 ka
for the Americas.
Dunbar quotes: 2004:33.
Weiner quote: 1971:160.
The comfort of familiar territory: Orians 1980.
Adults tend to prefer the environments they are most familiar with: Balling and Falk 1982, Lyons
1983, R. Kaplan and S. Kaplan 1989.
Environment preference studies: Balling and Falk 1982, S. Kaplan 1988, 1992, Nasar 1988:Sect.
II, R. Kaplan and S. Kaplan 1989, Heerwagen and Orians 1993, Ulrich 1993.
p. 92 Decorate with plants: Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1988, Heerwagen and Orians 1993, Ulrich 1993,
Hildebrand 1999, Sütterlin 1999.
E. O. Wilson quote: 1992:350.
Current real-estate preference: Orians 1980, E. O. Wilson 1984, Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1988.
208
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 89–92

Well-being, health, and recovery in natural habitats: R. Kaplan and S. Kaplan 1989, Orians
2001, Heerwagen and Orians 1993, Kellert 1993, Ulrich 1993, Ruso et al. 2003. This is noted
also with respect to gardens in R. Kaplan and S. Kaplan 1989, Ross 1998, Marcus and Barnes
1999, Cooper 2006, Herrington 2009.
Reduction of stress improves performance: Ulrich 1993.
Painting studies: Paulson 1982, Appleton 1984, 1990, 1996, Heerwagen and Orians 1993,
Edwards 2003, Barrow 2005. Bourassa 1991 also provides examples but makes the point,
not widely acknowledged elsewhere, that the converse is (also) true: landscapes are ap-
proached through the prism of art.
Gender-differentiated landscape preferences: Woodcock 1982. Gender-differentiated prefer-
ences of architectural spaces according to their prospect-refuge characteristics: Nasar et al.
1983, Hildebrand 1999.
Landscape in other arts: Orians 1980, Appleton 1996.
Urban and architectural design: Appleton 1990, 1996, Ulrich 1993, Hildebrand 1999, Barrow
2005, Joye 2011.
Appleton quote: 1996:168.
“Inhabitants of a housing project”: Hildebrand 1999.
p. 93 Many people like humanly modiﬁed landscapes: Ruso et al. 2003.
People regularly class humanly modiﬁed environments as natural: R. Kaplan and S. Kaplan 1989,
Bourassa 1991, Kellert 1993, Appleton 1996, Herrington 2009.
E. O. Wilson quote: 1984:13.
Adaptiveness of negative responses to nature: R. Kaplan and S. Kaplan 1989, Orians and
Heerwagen 1992, Kellert 1993, Ulrich 1993.
On ecocriticism in literature: J. Carroll 2001.
Snakes: according to an April 2010 BCC news report, about 1,000,000 people annually are
bitten by snakes and as many as 100,000 of these die as a result. E. O. Wilson 1984:96 gives the
annual death rate over large stretches of Asia as ﬁve persons per 100,000 each year.
p. 94 Advocates of the savanna hypothesis: E. O. Wilson 1975, 1984, Orians 1980, Balling and
Falk 1982, S. Kaplan 1982, 1992, Tooby and DeVore 1987, Dissanayake 1988, 1995a, 2000a,
Orians and Heerwagen 1992, Heerwagen and Orians 1993, Ulrich 1993, Appleton 1996,
Cosmides and Tooby 1997, Thornhill 1998, 2003, Tooby and Cosmides 2001, Dutton
2003b, 2007, 2009, Edwards 2003, Barrow 2005, Guthrie 2005, Welsch 2008, De Smedt
and De Cruz 2010.
High productivity of savanna: Orians 1980, E. O. Wilson 1984, Ulrich 1993.
Low-branching trees: Orians and Heerwagen 1992, Heerwagen and Orians 1993, Thornhill
1998, 2003.
We design our parks and gardens on the savanna model: Orians 1980, E. O. Wilson 1984, Eibl-
Eibesfeldt 1988, Orians and Heerwagen 1992, Barrow 2005. Both the English landscape
garden and Japanese garden are analyzed as savanna derivatives: S. Kaplan 1992, Heerwagen
and Orians 1993, M. Miller 1993. For a different comparison between them: Appleton
1996:200–2.
E. O. Wilson quote: 1984:13.
Childhood preference for savanna: Balling and Falk 1982; see also Bourassa 1991, S. Kaplan
1992, M. Miller 1993, Orians and Heerwagen 1992, Ulrich 1993, Ruso et al. 2003, Barrow
2005.
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 92–94
209

p. 95 Balling and Falk quotations: 1982:10, 22.
Lyons 1983.
Synek and Grammer 1998.
Taste for pictorial complexity increases with age: Gardner 1982, Dissanayake 1988, Lumsden
1991, Synek and Grammer 1998.
Study of environment preferences: Han 2007.
The story of the environment of evolutionary adaptedness is incoherent: Foley 1995.
Brain chemistry suggests that modern humans evolved in a marine rather than savanna environ-
ment: Crawford et al. 1999.
Against the savanna hypothesis: Sterelny 1995, R. Boyd and Silk 1997, Potts 1998a, 1998b,
McBrearty and Brooks 2000, J. Carroll 2004, 2006, 2011, Gräslund 2005, Dunbar and Barrett
2007, Laland and Brown 2011.
p. 96 Rapid environmental change in sites of Hominin development: Potts 1998a, 1998b,
Richerson and Boyd 2000, 2005, M. Clark 2002, D. S. Wilson 2002, Sterelny 2003, Bamford
2005, S. Carroll 2005, Mellars 2005, Richardson 2007, Jeffares 2010.
Quick warming followed by slow cooling: Mellars 1996, Labeyrie 2000, Shackleton 2001,
Guthrie 2005, Richerson and Boyd 2005, Klein 2009.
Change in climate and vegetation in habitat occupied by late Neanderthals: Bordes 1961,
Hadingham 1979, Mellars 1996, Potts 1998a, Gilligan 2007.
Hadingham quote: 1979:87.
Mellars 2009a.
Potts quote: 1998a:129–30; see also Potts 1998b:95.
p. 97 For a list of both environmental and social factors relevant to our predecessors’ evolution:
Tooby and DeVore 1987:201.
Importance of poorly understood social environment: Sterelny 2003, Sterelny and Fitness 2003b,
Buller 2005, Richerson and Boyd 2005, Richardson 2007, Klein 2009:683, Hampton 2010,
Laland and Brown 2011. For the suggestion that this objection is exaggerated: Machery and
Barrett 2006.
Group size: Wobst 1974 and Dissanayake 1995a estimate these bands at 25 people. Geist 1978
goes for 20–25. E. Fisher 1979:174 suggests 20–40. Guthrie 2005 opts for 25–40. Gräslund
2005 suggests 30–50. Dunbar 2000, 2004 puts the maximum at about 150 but argues that they
lived in groups of about 30 most of the time. Mithen 1996 claims the groups would have been
“large” but less than 130. Clack 2009 estimates 100, as does E. O. Wilson 1975 and G. Miller
2000a. By contrast, Richerson and Boyd 2005:229 suggest that tribes would bring together
hundreds, perhaps a few thousand, people. Toward the end of the Pleistocene there is
evidence that some sites attracted comparatively large groupings, perhaps on a seasonal basis:
Gosden 2003, Mellars 2009a.
On the correlation between brain case volume and group size in primates generally: Dunbar
1992. On the role of diet in human brain size: Deacon 1998, Crawford et al. 1999, H. Kaplan
et al. 2000, Solso 2003, Wrangham 2009.
High human rates of spontaneous abortion and stillbirth: Coe 2002. Infanticide was historically
and geographically widespread: Harris 1989, see also Dunbar 2004.
Birth rates: hunter-gatherers have one child about every four years: Geist 1978, Symons 1979:91,
1995, Lancaster and Lancaster 1983, H. Fisher 1992, 2004, R. Boyd and Silk 1997, Diamond
1997, Low 2000, Dunbar 2004, Gräslund 2005, Clack 2009. G. Miller 2000a speculates that
210
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 95–97

among our distant ancestors a woman would have her ﬁrst child when she was about 20 years
of age and would have children at intervals of three years. M. Clark 2002:123 predicts each
female would have had only four or ﬁve children; see also Weiner 1971. For skepticism about
such calculations: Sterelny and Fitness 2003b.
Foley quote: 1995:202. Others who question the comparison between present-day foragers and
our Pleistocene ancestors: Gosden 2003, Sterelny 2003, R. White 2003, J. Carroll 2006,
Hampton 2010.
p. 98 Surviving in arid wastes: for a personal anecdote about the northern Australian environ-
ment: Diamond 1997: 295–7.
p. 99 Changing attitudes to nature: Ritvo 1988, Appleton 1990, 1996, Tuan 1993, Schama
1995, Herrington 2009, Cowie 2011.
The deer mouse: Wecker 1963.
p. 100 Bonner quote: 1980:147.
Potts quote: 1998b:95; see also 1998a:112, Henrich and McElreath 2003, Sterelny 2003,
Richerson and Boyd 2005, J. Carroll 2006, Richardson 2007.
Chapter 7
p. 102 Beauty of virtuous character: Cooper 2008.
Differences in mate preferences according to gender: Ford and Beach 1951, Symons 1979, 1995,
Crook 1980, Buss 1989, 1992, 1994, Kenrick et al. 1990, D. E. Brown 1991, Ellis 1992, Matt
Ridley 1994, Wright 1994, Bouckaert and Boulanger 1997, R. Boyd and Silk 1997, G. Miller
1998, 2000a:211–15, Etcoff 1999, Pinker 1999:480–7, Low 2000, Fletcher and Stenswick
2003, H. Fisher 2004, Guthrie 2005:312–25, Einon 2007, Swami and Furnham 2007,
Hampton 2010, Rolls 2011.
The relation between age and female fecundity: Jones 1996, Guthrie 2005. And in males: Buller
2005:220.
Folk tales from many different countries bear out these gender-based preferences: Gottschall
2005, 2008a.
For skepticism about the female desire for men with status and the male desire for youthful
women: Buller 2005:ch.5. For skepticism about Buss’s evidence: Vickers and Kitcher 2002.
For arguments that mate preferences are cultural rather than biological: Eagly and Wood 1999,
Smolak and Murnen 2007. And for a response: Fletcher 2002.
Male physical characters preferred by females: Cunningham et al. 1990, Ellis 1992, Buss 1994,
Etcoff 1999, Bordo 2000, G. Miller 2000a, Little et al. 2002, Thornhill and Gangestad 2003,
H. Fisher 2004, Swami and Furnham 2007, Rolls 2011.
Male traits sought by unpaired women looking for temporary relationships or by paired women
looking for extra-pair copulations: Kenrick et al. 1990, Buss 1994, Penton-Voak et al. 1999,
J. Simpson and Orin˜a 2003, Skamel 2003, Thornhill and Gangestad 2003, H. Fisher 2004,
Rhodes et al. 2005, Perrett 2010. When it comes to sex with someone other than their long-
term partner, women are fussy, but over different things. If they are not choosing for
investment and commitment, which are crucial in a successful long-term partner, they are
likely to choose instead for good genes.
Men unfussy in choosing short-term partners: Trivers 1972, Symons 1979, Buss 1994, Wright
1994, Jones 1996, Guthrie 2005, Clack 2009.
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 97–102
211

Men fussy in choosing long-term partners: Trivers 1972, Geist 1978, Buss 1992, 1994, Kenrick
et al. 1990, Wright 1994, Pinker 1999, 2007, G. Miller 2000a, Fletcher and Stenswick 2003,
H. Fisher 2004, Guthrie 2005, Swami and Furnham 2007, Clack 2009, Rolls 2011.
Reducing women to their bodies: these views might be especially insulting to the physically
disabled: Kerner 2006. For discussion of relations between beauty and physical anomaly, see
Silvers 2000.
p. 103 A nuanced and careful account of what evolutionary psychologists (and their opponents)
might be committed to: J. R. Richards 2000.
Prettiness as distinct from beauty: Breidbach 2003. Harrowing but beautiful art: Silvers 2000,
Korsmeyer 2006.
Beauty as an honest signaling for ﬁtness: see note to p. 40.
Symons 1995.
Importance of the face: Alicke et al. 1986, Brewer et al. 2007, Rhodes and Simmons 2007,
Perrett 2010. But note that the judgment usually covers a variety of factors, including the
voice and body: Saxton et al. 2009.
The attractiveness of symmetry and hypernormalcy: Symons 1979, 1995, Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1988,
Buss 1994, Grinde 1996, Jones 1996, G. Miller 1998, Thornhill 1998, E. O. Wilson 1998,
2003, Etcoff 1999, Pinker 1999, Ramachandran and Hirstein 1999, 2000a, Low 2000,
Grammer et al. 2003, J. Simpson and Orin˜a 2003, Skamel 2003, Thornhill and Gangestad
2003, H. Fisher 2004, Barrow 2005, Rhodes and Simmons 2007, Swami and Furnham 2007,
Welsch 2008, Perrett 2010, Rolls 2011. On symmetry and the face: Symons 1979, 1995,
Alicke et al. 1986, Dissanayake 1988, Langlois and Roggman 1990, Langlois et al. 1994, Matt
Ridley 1994:287–8, Pinker 1999:484, Rhodes et al. 2002, Rubenstein et al. 2002, Skamel
2003, Solso 2003, Zaidel et al. 2005, Clack 2009, Perrett 2010. Many of these authors also
note that neotenous (youthful) proportions and features (such as comparatively large eyes) add
to the attractiveness of female faces. For reservations about the correlation between facial
attractiveness and health: Rubenstein et al. 2002. For reservations about the correlation of
facial symmetry with long-term health and ﬁtness: Rhodes et al. 2001, Laland and Brown
2011. But for contrary evidence: J. Simpson and Orin˜a 2003. For a review: Perrett 2010:ch. 7.
The preference for symmetry carries over to artifacts and makes them appear attractive: Kohn
and Mithen 1999, Halberstadt and Rhodes 2000, G. Miller 2001, Mithen 2003, Barrow 2005,
Welsch 2008. On pictorial balance: Locher 2006.
Signs of health: Symons 1979, Morris 1985, Buss 1989, 1994, Etcoff 1999, Pinker 1999,
Cunningham and Shamblen 2003. In women, light skin may indicate endocrinological health
and fecundity: Symons 1995, Perrett 2010.
Medieval texts: Da Soller 2010.
We like what is unusual: Alley and Cunningham 1991, Perrett et al. 1994, Symons 1995, Jones
1996, E. O. Wilson 1998, Etcoff 1999:150–3, Martindale 1999, Pinker 1999:484, Cunning-
ham and Shamblen 2003, Zaidel and Deblieck 2007, Perrett 2010. For reservations, see
Langlois et al. 1994, Rubenstein et al. 2002.
The peak-shift effect: P. Bateson 1983, Martindale 1990, 1999, Alley and Cunningham 1991,
Enquist and Arak 1993, Latto 1995, E. O. Wilson 1998, Kindy 1999, Pinker 1999,
Ramachandran and Hirstein 1999, Cunningham and Shamblen 2003, Skamel 2003 Martindale
2007. So-called because it pushes the average to a different level.
p. 104 Darwin quote: 1880, pt. 3, ch. 19:585.
212
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 102–104

Female secondary sexual features a result of sexual selection: Hirn 1900, Geist 1978, Lancaster
and Lancaster 1983, Morris 1985, Harris 1989, F. Turner 1991a, Buss 1994, Matt Ridley
1994, Jones 1996, G. Miller 1998, 2000a, Etcoff 1999, Low 2000, Skamel 2003, Guthrie
2005:340–2, Wells 2006, Clack 2009, Rolls 2011. There are cultural differences as regards the
appropriate relative sizes of these features. Large buttocks are admired in Africa, and whereas
Brazilian men prefer women with large buttocks and small breasts, with US men this is
reversed: Jones 1996:145. For the view that selection by males is not responsible for such
features: Symons 1979, Einon 2007. M. Clark 2002:43 argues that the breasts enlarged
primarily to allow eye contact between the mother and her nursing baby.
Waist-to-hip ratio: see notes to p. 49.
Body weight: The ratio of 0.7 can be displayed by unusually slim women and by overweight
women; the ratio depends on whether such fat as a woman has is on the hips rather than on the
stomach. Different societies show different preferences for desired body mass. Singh’s 1993a,
1994 male participants preferred the 0.7s in each weight class to those with higher waist-to-hip
ratios, and of the 0.7s they preferred the one in the mid-weight (120 lb) range. Tassinary and
Hansen 1998 suggest that body weight and the absolute width of the waist, rather than the
waist-to-hip ratio, are what make women attractive to men. For comparison of waist-to-hip
ratio with body mass index: McBurney and Streeter 2007, Swami and Furnham 2007.
Incest avoidance: Westermarck 1921; see also D. E. Brown 1991:ch. 5. For skepticism: Harris
1989. The deleterious effect of inbreeding on many species: E. O. Wilson 1978, D. E. Brown
1991, Sagan and Druyan 1992:249–50. The latter regard (1992:373–4) parent–child incest
avoidance as nearly invariable among primates, as well as in birds. For discussion of cultural
input into norms for incest avoidance: E. O. Wilson 1998, Prinz 2007:281–6.
Female preferences about male odor: Wedekind and Füri 1997, Penton-Voak et al. 1999,
Milinski 2003, J. Simpson and Orin˜a 2003, Thornhill and Gangestad 2003, Gangestad
2007, Wedekind 2007, Perrett 2010. Men are also sensitive to the effect: Wedekind and
Füri 1997.
Attractiveness of strangers: Buss 1994, G. Miller 1998, 2000a, H. Fisher 2004.
Faking mate attractiveness: Low 1979, 2000, Tooke and Camire 1991, Buss 1992, Clack 2009.
p. 105 Male chimpanzees prefer older females: Schultz 1969, Paul 2002.
Death in childbirth: at the site at which the hand axe Excalibur was found (see note to p. 1),
where the remains of of 32 Homo heidelbergensis were interred, female mortality peaked at the
age 15–19 years: Bermúdez de Castro et al. 2004, Lumley 2009.
Female fecundity: Symons 1995, Guthrie 2005:315.
p. 106 Women limiting conception: Guthrie 2005:370, citing animal population dynamics; see
also Weiner 1971, Geist 1978, Symons 1995.
Our ancestors would often have gone hungry: Harris 1989, Guthrie 2005:346, Wells 2006,
Wrangham 2009.
Family size: none of this is to suggest that our forebears lived in nuclear families, but it is likely
that the groups were small (see note to p. 97) and that comparatively few people survived to be
grandparents. Weiner 1971:162–3 suggests that only 10 percent of the population passed the
age of 40 years and that only half survived to be 20.
Cave art shows chubby women: Guthrie 2005:342. As well, many Paleolithic depictions of large
mammals show them with signiﬁcant fat deposits which they would have possessed for only a
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 104–106
213

few months of the year: Guthrie 2005. Women are also shown as obese in Bushmen art:
Power 2004.
Venus ﬁgurines: the assumption in Swami and Furnham 2007 that these are accurate representa-
tions of female body mass index for the time is implausible given how much the female
features of these ﬁgurines are distorted in other respects.
Guthrie 2005:366–70. It has been suggested that many of the “fat” ﬁgurines show pregnant
women: see Marshack 1991, McCoid and L. McDermott 1996. Marshack 1991 canvasses the
view that they served as fertility magic and mother goddesses. For criticism: R. White 2003.
On the view that the artists were women: E. Fisher 1979, McCoid and McDermott 1996,
McDermott 1996. Women (and children) drew ﬁnger ﬂutings (lines drawn by the ﬁngers on
soft surfaces): Clottes 2009, Van Gelder and Sharpe 2009.
Erotic appeal of ﬁgurines: Guthrie 2005:330–2, 338–9, 364–5; see also Geist 1978, Bataille 2005,
Mellars 2009b. By contrast, Hadingham 1979:221–5 emphasizes the number of sexless
ﬁgurines. The ratio of 0.655 is unusually low for women who are not corseted but is not
unusual for representations of women. Singh 2002 reports a study of 330 (photographs) of
artworks dating from 32 ka to 1999 that showed the most frequent waist-to-hip ratio was in
the range 0.6–0.7. Jomon ﬁgurines from prehistoric (16.5–2.5 ka) Japan display the ratio of
0.7: Hudson and Aoyama 2007. Ramachandran and Hirstein 1999 offer Paleolithic Venuses
and later statues of Indian goddesses as appealing to the peak-shift effect; see note to p. 103. For
criticism: Hyman 2010.
Footprints of adolescents in caves: R. White 2003:79, 120, Guthrie 2005, Clottes 2009.
Footprints of children are also recorded: Clottes 2009.
Men attracted to voluptuous women: Guthrie 2005:349.
P. Brown 1991.
Plumpness favored in many societies: Popenoe 2004, Richerson and Boyd 2005:20.
Cross-cultural variability in female weight preferences: Swami et al. 2008; see also Ford and
Beach 1951. For a review: Swami and Furnham 2007.
p. 107 Food availability affects waist-to-hip preference: Scott et al. 2007, Tove´e et al. 2007.
For alternative accounts of the causes of eating disorders: Hampton 2010.
Female thinness goes with status in industrialized cultures: Smuts 1992, Etcoff 1999, Ralevski
2000, Cunningham and Shamblen 2003, Clack 2009.
Female body fat: 15 percent of body weight is regarded as dangerously low and about 30–40
percent is considered normal in Western health manuals. It takes 50–80,000 calories (1 kilo/
2.2 pounds of fat = 9,000 calories) to produce a viable infant: Frisch 1988. Lactation requires
500–1,000 calories per day above normal intake: Frisch 1988; Einon 2007 gives 800–1,100.
Food shortages regular among present-day hunter-gatherers: Scalise Sugiyama and L. Sugiyama
2009.
Feasting: Harris 1989, Wrangham 2009:180–1.
Rosenblatt quote: 1974:87.
Perrett quote: 2010:141.
Mortality in Homo heidelbergensis: see note to p. 105.
Hunter-gatherer mortality: Meindl 1992.
p. 108 Diversity of sexual preferences: Swami and Furnham 2007.
Effects of sexual selection: the Wodaabe of Nigeria and Niger provide an example: see Trout
1993, Dutton 2000b, G. Miller 2000a, B. Boyd 2005a, 2009a, 2009b. The men display
214
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 106–108

endurance and health in dances at which women, who favor tallness, big eyes, white teeth and
straight noses, select their preferred male. All these traits are more apparent in the Wodaabe
than in neighboring tribes.
Evolutionary psychologists not usually interested in individual differences: Foley 1995, J. Carroll
1999, 2004, 2006, 2011. But see Tooby and Cosmides 1990b, G. Miller 1998, 2000a, Nettle
2007 for discussion of individual differences.
p. 109 Parents select their children’s spouses: this was Westermarck’s 1921 line of objection to
Darwin’s account of sexual selection.
The importance to men of sexual ﬁdelity in their partners (as a guarantee of their paternity):
Trivers 1972, Symons 1979, Crook 1980:157–8, J. Brown and Greenhood 1991, Buss 1994,
Matt Ridley 1994:227–30, Wright 1994, Pinker 1999:488–9, G. Miller 2000a:332–4, Thorn-
hill and Gangestad 2003, Guthrie 2005, Clack 2009. For the view that this is more a social than
biological behavior: W. Wood and Eagly 2002; for criticism: Gottschall 2008a. How male
concerns about paternity turn into attempts to control women’s bodies: Dinnerstein 1976,
Chodorow 1978, Symons 1979, Ong 1981, Benjamin 1988, Diamond 1992:95–7, M. Wilson
and Daly 1992, Storey 1996, Okin 1998, Low 2000, Thornhill and Gangestad 2003, Clack
2009. On violence such as “honor killings” against women: Talbott 2005:93–5.
Male genital mutilation: male circumcision is common though it apparently does not have the
hygiene beneﬁts sometimes claimed for it. Some Australian Aborigines have the practice of
penile sub-incision: E. Fisher 1979:155.
Female genital mutilation in Africa: Buss 1994:138.
Footbinding held to promote health: Mackie 1996.
Clitoral contact allegedly fatal: Mackie 1996, Talbott 2005:95–8.
Older women and mothers complicit in supporting agendas of masculine control of younger
women: Okin 1998.
Footbinding as means to seclude women and ensure their ﬁdelity: Mackie 1996:1001–2; see also
Sagan and Druyan 1992:214, M. Wilson and Daly 1992, Low 2000, Veblen 2001:109,
Dunbar 2004:94, Swami and Furnham 2007.
Matchmaking: Buss 1989, Rockman 1994.
High failure of arranged marriages: A. P. Wolf and Haung 1980, M. Wilson and Daly 1992:310,
Buller 2005: 272–3. For skepticism: Rosenblatt 1974, Prinz 2007:282–3.
Dress as sign of marital status or wealth: Low 1979, 2000.
End of footbinding: Mackie 1996.
p. 110 Others against opposing biology and culture: Tooby and Cosmides 1992, Grifﬁths and
Gray 1994, Pinker 1999:45–7, Goldie 2000, D. S. Wilson 2002, Richerson and Boyd 2005.
Ethics and evolution: the nineteenth-century evolutionists Spencer 1966, vol. 11 [1851] and
Huxley 1893 thought of ethics as beyond the scope of evolution. For Spencer, that was so
much the worse for conventional morality; whereas for Huxley, it showed the importance of
moral constraints on our evolved natures. For discussion: J. Carroll 1995a.
Altruism as well as selﬁshness part of our nature: Talbott 2005.
Altruism: the evolutionary psychology literature on topics such as human reciprocal altruism lies
beyond my remit. For a review: Prinz 2007:ch. 7.
F. Turner quote: 1991a:6.
p. 111 Love: not always seen as a good basis for marriage: Rosenblatt 1974. Its biochemistry and
neurology: H. Fisher 2004, Zeki 2009. As an emotion: Lazarus 1991. As an adaptation:
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 108–111
215

E. O. Wilson 1978, Frank 1988, Fletcher 2002, Fletcher and Stenswick 2003, H. Fisher 2004,
Rolls 2011. As not adaptive: Prinz 2004.
Nonhuman animals experience love: H. Fisher 2004.
The need for cooperation and mutual trust among our forebears: Geist 1978, Pinker 1994,
H. Kaplan et al. 2000, G. Miller 2000a, Gosden 2003, Guthrie 2005, Flesch 2007. For
accounts of the centrality of cooperation in human nature: Richerson and Boyd 2005,
Tomasello 2009.
Love in at least 147 of 166 cultures: Jankowiak and Fischer 1992.
Love a literary universal: Gottschall 2008a.
p. 112 Spencer quote: 1966, vol. 14:387.
Halo effect: Shapiro et al. 1976, Bull and Rumsey 1986, Kuhlenschmidt and Conger 1988, Eagly
et al. 1991, Feingold 1992, Zebrowitz 1997, Etcoff 1999, Langlois et al. 2000.
Men predict that attractive personality goes with low waist-to-hip ratio: Singh 1994.
Ugly effect: Editors of the Harvard Law Review 1987, Etcoff 1999.
Better treatment of attractive people: West and Brown 1975, Patzer 1985, Bull and Rumsey
1986, Raza and Carpenter 1987, Langlois et al. 1990, Hamermesh and Biddle 1994, Zebro-
witz 1997, Langlois et al. 2000, Swami and Furnham 2007, Perrett 2010.
Attractive people treated better in court: Stewart 1980, Zebrowitz and McDonald 1991, Swami
and Furnham 2007.
p. 113 Women may overrate their physical attractiveness: Brewer et al. 2007.
The rebuffed did not breed: Fletcher and Stenswick 2003.
p. 114 R. A. Fisher quote: 1915:191.
Being treated as beautiful enhances self-esteem and performance: Etcoff 1999.
Helpful people look more attractive: Perrett 2010.
p. 116 We value what is evolutionarily useful: N. Carroll 2002 argues that the reality of
evolution shows that nothing is intrinsically valuable. Not everything serves an evolutionary
purpose, however, and many of the things that do are intrinsically pleasurable. Stecker 2006
criticizes Carroll’s view.
Part III. The Arts
Chapter 8
p. 121 Pinker 2007.
Art enables science: B. Boyd 2009a:124.
B. Boyd quote: 2005a:166–7.
Ball quote: 2010:29; see also Kingsbury 2011 on Dutton.
p. 122 DePryck 1999.
Writing, reading, and mathematics are not adaptations: Justus and Hutsler 2005.
No correlation between artistic value and a connection with evolution: Easterlin 1999, Dis-
sanayake 2006, Dutton 2009.
Literary Darwinism: coined by J. Carroll 2004. B. Boyd 2009a prefers “evocriticism.”
Discussions of literature and evolution often highly polemical: see J. Carroll 1995a, 1995b, 2004,
2007a, 2007b, 2011, Evans 2005, B. Boyd 2006a, 2009a, Gottschall 2008a, 2008b, Swirski
2010.
Pinker quote: 1999:534.
216
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 111–122

p. 123 Pinker quote: 2002:405.
Later reformulation: Pinker 2007.
p. 124 Dissanayake and Miller vulnerable to the charge that art relies on some more basic
adaptation: S. Davies 2005, De Smedt and De Cruz 2010.
Dissanayake on art, ritual, and play: 1988:75–105, 1995a:45–56, 2006.
G. Miller on gossip, humor, etc.: 2000a.
G. Miller’s sexual selection explanation for art: 1998, 1999, 2000a, 2001. Miller’s conclusion was
anticipated by other writers: Hirn 1900, Comfort 1962b, E. O. Wilson 1978, Eibl-Eibesfeldt
1988, Harris 1989, Diamond 1992, Power 1999, and for music, Darwin 1880. Miller’s
supporters include Dutton 2000b, 2009, Voland 2003, Barash and Barash 2005, Zaidel
2005, Levitin 2006, Perricone 2011, and up to a point, Welsch 2004.
Sexual selection and sexual dimorphism: some object to Miller that sexual selection always goes
with a high degree of sexual dimorphism, which humans do not display: S. Brown 2000a,
Huron 2003, Patel 2008, Cross 2009, Ball 2010. But this does not seem to be right. Runaway
sexual selection in polygynous species goes with runaway change, but selection for sex-based
markers of ﬁtness in largely monogamous species need not do so: Low 1979, G. Miller 2000a.
See notes to pp. <39> and <40>.
Artistic talent not highly heritable: see note to p. 50.
Males compete for partners more than females: Trivers 1972.
p. 125 Coe 2002. It seems to me that Coe’s own theory—that art originated in the need to
identify ancestors and that it serves as a badge of clan membership and kinship—must be open
to the same objection. Much of the cave art of Europe was not suited to that function because
of its underground location.
Cave art not publicly viewed: children of both sexes, adolescents, and women did enter some
caves: Guthrie 2005, Stapert 2007, Clottes 2009, Van Gelder and Sharpe 2009. Nevertheless,
much cave art would be unlikely to have been widely viewed. The most spectacular images of
Chauvet are in a cave that was rarely frequented: Clottes 2009.
Art did not originate in sexual competition or display: Dissanayake 1999a, 2000a; see also:
B. Boyd 2005a, 2007a, 2009a, J. Carroll 2007b, Ball 2010.
Women and children disenfranchised as art makers by Miller: Dissanayke 2000b, Glausiusz
2001, B. Boyd 2005a, 2009a, Cross 2007, J. Carroll 2007b. Guthrie 2005 argues that
the prehistoric record favors men’s art only because women’s art employed less durable
materials.
Children not rehearsing mate selection: Fitch 2006 argues that this shows that music did not
originate in the service of sexual selection.
Art separated from reproduction: B. Boyd 2005a, Dissanayake 2006, Pinker 2007.
Males make most art: G. Miller 1999. Rolls 2011 thinks this is plausible, but that women’s
interest in gossip might make them more creative in literary ﬁction!
Miller’s examples are all Western: Cross 2001, 2003b, Ball 2010, De Smedt and De Cruz 2010.
Lack of evidence that musicians leave more children: Fitch 2005.
p. 126 Composers left fewer children than the average: Fukui 2001a. A confounding factor here,
however, is that only legitimate children were considered.
Men’s artworks serve as ﬁtness indicators in female mate choice: Clegg et al. 2008.
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 123–126
217

p. 127 B. Boyd quote: 2009a:79, 2009b:218; see also 2005a, 2007a. Others who conclude sexual
selection piggybacks on more central functions of art: Dissanayake 1999a, Dunbar 2005, Cross
and Morley 2009.
J. Carroll quote: 2004:xxi.
Ball quote: 2010:21.
Mithen quote: 2005:180.
B. Boyd 2001, 2005a, 2007a, 2008a, 2008b, 2009a. For a critical response to 2009a: Mellmann
2010. For a similar theory: Donald 2009.
B. Boyd quote: 2005a:152 (and 2005b:10).
B. Boyd quote: 2009a:108.
Pinker quote: 2007:174.
Ralevski 2000.
p. 128 Koch quotes: 1988:96 (see also 1984), 1993:77.
For criticism of Koch’s theory: J. Carroll 2004.
Art reﬁnes perceptual skill: Alland 1977, 1989a, Ludmany 1999, F. Turner 1991a, 1991b, Zeki
1999, 2000, Tooby and Cosmides 2001, Huron 2003, De Sousa 2004, B. Boyd 2007a, 2008a,
2009a.
Allott 1994; see also B. Boyd 2005a, 2009a.
p. 130 Not all sensory pleasures or preferences are aesthetic: Dissanayake 1995a:66, 1999a.
Neuroscientiﬁc approaches to painting: see note to p. 49.
Artistic quality: Dissanayake 1998, 1999a, 2000a.
Biological ﬁtness not reducible to copulatory frequency: Dissanayake 1982, 1984, 1988, 1995a,
2000a.
Human evolution stopped 40–20 ka: for the contrary view, see notes to p. 36.
Universal and innate dispositions: De Sousa 2004 thinks that Dissanayake confuses what is innate
with what is universal. Eye color is innate but not universal; and English may become the
universal language but would not be innate. On the distinction between developmental ﬁxity
and universality or pan-culturalism, see Grifﬁths 2002.
Fitness as reproductive success: Dissanayake 1995a:36, 2000a:21.
Change over past 20,000 years is cultural: Dissanayake 1988, 1995a, 2000a.
Art behaviors as patterns or syndromes of creation and response: Dissanayake 1988.
Art behaviors as rhythms and modes of mutuality: Dissanayake 2000a.
Art as universal, innate, old, and a source of intrinsic pleasure: Dissanayake 1988, 1995a.
Dissanayake “Homo aestheticus” quote: 1995a:xix.
Art as making special: Dissanayake 1980, 1982, 1984, 1988, 1995a, 1995b, 2006, 2008b.
Art as elaboration: Dissanayake 2000a.
Making special dates to 100 ka: Dissanayake 1988, 2008b.
Appearance of art 60–40 ka: Dissanayake 2000a.
Arts united with ritual and play: Dissanayake 1974, 1979, 1982, 1988, 2000a, 2008a, 2008b.
The identiﬁcation of music with religious ritual in many societies: Morley 2009.
Art promotes group beneﬁts: Dissanayake 1974, 1979, 1982, 1988, 2000a, 2008a. De Smedt and
De Cruz 2010 see a potential inconsistency in Dissanayake’s stressing group beneﬁts while
holding that selection operates on individuals, not groups. It is fairly clear, though, that
Dissanayake has in mind that favorable group conditions improve the ﬁtness of individual
members of the group.
218
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 127–130

Art promotes group beneﬁts: B. Boyd 2005a denies that societies which treated important
activities as special would have greater success because important activities need to take
place regardless of embellishment. However, that they must occur does not show that they
cannot be made more effective by being made yet more special.
Art promotes social identity and cohesiveness: in Dissanayake 2007 she places the emphasis
somewhat differently. She suggests that art has the function of relieving tension and anxiety
and she afﬁrms its role in group coordination.
Alienation of modern life: Dissanayake 2000a:188–92, 198–200, 1990, 1995a:137.
p. 131 Dissanayake quote: 1988:194–5. Alland 1989b objects to the assumptions derived from
sociobiology that he detects as underlying this aspect of Dissanayake’s view.
Criticism of high Western art of twentieth century: Dissanayake 1980, 1988:183, 188–92,
198–200, 1990, 1995a:137.
Theories focusing on art’s origins tend to be reductive: S. Davies 2005.
Four criteria of aesthetic quality: Dissanayake 1998, 2000a:209–21.
Some super stimuli do not engage what matters to us: Dissanayake 2000a:120, 123.
Making special too broad a notion: Lewis-Williams 2002, S. Davies 2005, De Smedt and De
Cruz 2010.
Dissanayake ignores art’s semantic, symbolic, and representational character: S. Davies 2005. In
this respect Dissanayake might deserve Ralevski’s 2000 objection that she hardly differentiates
animals (peacock’s tails) from humans (Armani suits).
Dissanayake quote: 1995a:85, 94.
Dissanayake deals with proto-aesthetic behaviors rather than the aesthetic itself: see Dissanayake
1998, 1999a.
p. 132 Art originated in play: Hirn 1900, Spencer 1966, vol. 5:693–4 [1880], Dissanayake 1974,
Alland 1977, 1989a, Collins and Onians 1978, Geist 1978, Fuller 1983, Ralevski 2000, Tooby
and Cosmides 2001, Carruthers 2002, B. Boyd 2004, 2005a, 2007a, 2008a, 2008b, 2009a,
Currie 2004, Guthrie 2005, Zaidel 2005, Deacon 2006, Heath 2006, Eibl and Mellmann
2008. Molino 2000 holds that art and play have a common origin. For Grosse 1897, play is the
transition from practical matters to art.
Play in animals: Groos 1898, Spencer 1966, vol. 5:694–8 [1880], Rensch 1973, Fagen 1981,
Smith 1984, Bekoff and Byers 1998, B. Boyd 2004, 2007a, 2008a, 2009a.
Origin of music in pre-linguistic vocalizing: Darwin 1880, pt. 3, ch. 19:572, Grosse 1897,
Sperber 1996, S. Brown 2000b, Falk 2000, Merker 2005, Mithen 2005, Baroni 2008,
Gardiner 2008, Fenk-Oczlon and Fenk 2009–10, Panksepp 2009–10.
Origin of music as by-product of the evolution of language: Spencer 1966, vol. 14 [1857], Granit
1977, Pinker 1999, Falk 2000, Barrow 2005, De Smedt and De Cruz 2010.
Origin of music in infant-directed speech: Roederer 1984, Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1988, Storr 1992,
Dissanayake 1999b, 2000a, 2000b, 2006, 2008a, Freeman 2000, Trehub 2000, 2003a, 2003b,
Trainor and Schmidt 2003, Falk 2004, Fitch 2005, Koelsch and Siebel 2005, Mithen 2005,
Alcorta et al. 2008, Baroni 2008, Panksepp 2009–10. Wermke and Mende 2009–10 identify
babies’ crying as the source of music. Parncutt 2009–10 suggests that the origins of music are
prenatal.
Origin of music in attracting mates: Darwin 1880, Hirn 1900, G. Miller 2000a, 2000b, Levitin
2006, Dutton 2009.
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 130–132
219

Origin of music in cross-domain cognitive development: Cross 2001, 2003a, 2003b, 2003c,
2008, 2009, 2009–10. Music prepares the baby for future mental life and speech: Roederer
1984, Tooby and Cosmides 1989b, Trehub 2003a, 2003b, Levitin 2006, Merker 2006.
Origin of music in evocation of affectively charged memories: Schubert 2009–10.
Origin of music as a response to the signiﬁcance for our ancestors of environmental sounds:
Boero and Bottoni 2008.
Origin of music in effecting social differentiation of individuals: Ralevski 2000, Grewe et al.
2009–10.
Origin of music in inciting group effort: S. Brown 2000a, Huron 2003, B. Boyd 2005a,
2007a.
Origin of music in ensuring bonding, synchrony, coordination, entrainment, and group emo-
tional catharsis: Hirn 1900, Roederer 1984, Dissanayake 1988, 1995a, 1999a, Eibl-Eibesfeldt
1988, Storr 1992, S. Brown 2000a, 2000b, Merker 2000, Fukui 2001a, Cross 2001, 2003a,
2003b, 2009, Dunbar 2003, 2004, Huron 2003, B. Boyd 2005a, 2007a, 2009a, Koelsch and
Siebel 2005, Mithen 2005, Alcorta et al. 2008, Morley 2009, Bisphan 2009–10.
Origin of music in promoting conﬂict resolution: Fukui 2001b, Huron 2003, Bown and Wiggins
2009–10, Cross 2009–10.
Origin of music in serving as a form of mutual grooming: Dunbar 2003, 2004.
Origin of music in providing group defense of territory: S. Brown 2000b, B. Boyd 2009a, Hagen
and Hammerstein 2009–10. Koch 1984, 1993 traces the origin of all art to displacement
behaviors involved in territorial defense.
Other beneﬁts: Huron 2003.
Music is multifunctional: This is consistent with the view presented in Brattico et al. 2009–10,
that the explanation of the origin of aesthetic experience in music is likely to involve a more
heterogeneous set of biological mechanisms than is often assumed.
Music cannot unite the group if its prime purpose is as a competitive form of male display:
B. Boyd 2005a, Pinker 2007, Dutton 2009.
p. 133 Ball quote: 2010:5–6.
Spencer quote: 1966, vol. 14:443–4; see also 1966, vol. 19:40.
p. 134 The origins of the cochlea: Granit 1977:12–13, C. Nussbaum 2007:52.
Writing and reading are approximately 5,000 years old: for a useful discussion: Gosden
2003.
Chapter 9
p. 136 Spandrel: Gould and Lewontin 1979. Strictly speaking, their architectural example from
San Marco in Venice is called a “pendentive” and pendentives are far from architecturally
irrelevant because they add strength: Mark 1996, Houston 1997.
“The default assumption”: Tooby and Cosmides 2001.
Facial recognition circuits activated by portraits: Solso 2003, Costa and Corazza 2006, De Smedt
and De Cruz 2010, 2011.
p. 137 De Smedt and De Cruz quote: 2010:710. For recent examples of the view that visual art is
a by-product: Deacon 2006, Donald 2006, De Smedt and De Cruz 2010.
Disagreement about whether art behaviors are supported by art-speciﬁc brain networks: consider
music. Among those who deny that there are music-speciﬁc modules are Justus and Hutsler
2005, Patel 2008, Ball 2010. Mithen 2005 notes that music centers are dispersed throughout
220
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 132–137

the brain, but suggests that this is consistent with modularity. Among those who claim that
there are music-speciﬁc brain circuits are S. Brown 2000a, Peretz 2000, Peretz and He´bert
2000, Lewis 2002, Huron 2003, Peretz and Coltheart 2003, Levitin 2006, Feist 2007,
C. Nussbaum 2007:72–7.
Problem of distinguishing innate neural structures from those acquired via learning in music:
McDermott and Hauser 2005a.
Evidence indecisive for music: McDermott and Hauser 2005a.
The absence of specialized circuits does not show that art is not an adaptation: argued for music in
Merker 2006.
Evolutionary psychologists have been wary of equating modularity of the mind with neural
localization and speciﬁcity: Barrett and Kurzban 2006.
Zeki 2000, 2006; see also Solso 2003.
p. 138 Darwin quote: 1880, pt. 3, ch. 19:569–70.
Wallace quote: 1889:468. For a modern version of the view: Feist 2007.
Pinker “cheesecake” quote: 1999:534, 538.
The other arts: Pinker 2002, 2007.
More theories of music as a spandrel: see Patel 2010 for a similar list.
Music a by-product of language: Granit 1977, Falk 2000, Barrow 2005, De Smedt and De Cruz
2010.
Barrow quote: 2005:233.
p. 139 Spencer 1966, vol. 14. For early skepticism: Grosse 1897.
Sperber quote: 1996:142.
Music an offshoot of affective systems: Panksepp 2009–10.
Music and “Theory of Mind”: Livingstone and Thompson 2009–10.
It is difﬁcult to understand Pinker’s metaphor: J. Carroll 1998, 2011, Hernadi 2001, Grodal
2008, Dutton 2009. On J. Carroll versus Pinker: Eibl and Mellmann 2008.
p. 140 Pinker did intend to identify music as a by-product: Justus and Hutsler 2005 suggest
instead that Pinker regards music as an exaptation—that is as an adaptation based on structures
that evolved earlier. But they give the term an unusual deﬁnition and, in my view, misrepre-
sent Pinker. For the classic description of exaptation: Gould and Vrba 1982.
Exercise of the senses is a source of pleasure: Berlyne 1971, Martindale 2007, B. Boyd 2009a.
Purely instrumental music invites “off-line” exploration of scenarios: Levinson 2006,
C. Nussbaum 2007. For criticism of Levinson’s approach: S. Davies 2006c.
Music provides respite from the world: Goldman 1992.
p. 141 Most discourse is thin in informational content: Dunbar’s 1996 account of language as
social grooming would be one theory that runs against the model that sees language as adaptive
solely for its information-bearing capacity.
As a costly spandrel, music should have been selected against: J. Carroll 1998, Huron 2003,
B. Boyd 2005a, 2008a, 2009a, Levitin 2006. Gottschall 2008b rightly questions the validity of
this argument by substituting senescence for music.
p. 142 Music is not always pleasant: Cross 2005–6, Ball 2010.
Pinker’s view of music trivializes its value: J. Carroll 1998, 2004, Patel 2010.
Pinker’s view of music is ethnocentric and focused on historically recent models: Cross 2001,
2003b, 2005, 2007, B. Boyd 2005a.
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 137–142
221

Literature is not adaptive: Pinker 2002, 2007; see also Eibl and Mellmann 2008, De Smedt and
De Cruz 2010.
Literature is adaptive: Tooby and Cosmides 2001. On the relation between their view and
Pinker’s: Mellmann 2011.
Barkow 1992.
Flesch quotes 2007: 21, 46.
p. 144 Form becomes norm: Grifﬁths 2002 characterizes the tendency to think this way as
involving “folk essentialism,” but concedes the reality of the effect. See also Kingsbury 2011.
p. 145 Absent navel: surgery can result in the absence of a belly button. A reduced one can be the
outcome of a lotus birth or premature caesarean.
Comparatively minor departures from norms of bodily structure: where these may impact on
performance more generally and are easily adjusted, of course we can and should make the
alteration. To mention just one relatively common problem, cleft palates, which can interfere
with enunciation, are surgically restored as a standard procedure in First World countries.
Honest because costly signals: see note to p. 37 on the “handicap principle.”
Many different kinds of techno music: Sean Cooper in M. Erlewine et al. 1997: 1155–6.
p. 146 Social Darwinism: the mistaken equation of nature with norm is criticized in Goodheart
2007.
Left-handedness: historically, many societies tried to prohibit the use of the left hand for certain
tasks such as eating or writing, but this did not eliminate left-handedness from the population.
There are, however, cultural inﬂuences on its prevalence. For a review: Llaurens et al. 2009.
Chapter 10
p. 148 Writing and reading are spandrels: Gould 1997a, 1997b.
Language and culture products of large brain: Gould 1977.
Tomasello 1999; see also Grodal 2008.
Mithen 1996.
p. 149 Richerson and Boyd 2005.
Patel 2008, 2010. For different reasons, musicologists and social scientists are liable to assume that
biology is irrelevant to culture and to view music as a culturally determined product: for
example, Walker 2004.
p. 150 Patel quote: 2008:401; his italics.
p. 151 Language as an adaptation: Patel 2008:259–366. See note to p. 48.
Gene for language: S. Carroll 2005:274–6.
Compared to language, music is not an adaptation: Patel 2008:371–400. Kramnick 2011 adopts a
parallel strategy of comparing ﬁctional literature to language in arguing that the former is not
an adaptation as the latter is.
Musical responses of newborns not innocent: Patel 2008; see also Justus and Hutsler 2005,
McDermott and Hauser 2005a.
p. 152 Swiss army knife model of the human mind: see note to p. 41 on modular minds.
Modular functioning need not be underpinned by speciﬁc neural circuits: Barrett and Kurzban
2006.
Human cognition not all modularly encapsulated: Sterelny 1995, 2003, Mithen 1996, Tomasello
1999, Fodor 2000, Currie 2004, Dunbar 2004, Buller 2005, Justus and Hutsler 2005,
Richerson and Boyd 2005, J. Carroll 2011.
222
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 142–152

p. 153 Patel allows for beat-based rhythm module: 2006, 2008:402–11.
Patel allows for music-speciﬁc neural circuitry generated by experience: 2008:357.
Debate about the existence of music-speciﬁc brain networks: see notes to p. 137.
Overlap in language and music brain areas: Maess et al. 2001, Levitin and Menon 2003,
Besson and Friederici 2005, Fitch 2005, Justus and Hutsler 2005, Koelsch and Siebel
2005, Ball 2010.
Parallels between processing of music and language: Fenk-Oczlon and Fenk 2009–10.
Music preceded language or both had a common origin (that is, the musilanguage hypothesis):
see notes to p. 32.
Language’s modularity special: Sterelny 2003:177–81.
Not all developmentally robust behaviors are adaptations and not all adaptations are develop-
mentally robust: Mameli 2008.
Low heritability of high-level musical talent: three of Johann Sebastian Bach’s sons were also
composers, and Mozart’s father, Leopold, was a professional musician; but it is not clear
whether this sort of evidence points to an inherited genetic component in musical talent. See
Pratt 1977, Howe et al. 1998 and their discussants.
p. 154 Low- versus high-level musical capacities: Barrow 2005 argues against music’s being an
adaptation on much the same grounds as Patel, by contrasting how mixed musical abilities are
by comparison with the robust expertise all show in language mastery. He makes very clear,
however, that he is considering high degrees of musicianship in composing and performing.
Children’s acquisition of language: Bloom 2000.
Most survival skills not acquired until late teens: H. Kaplan et al. 2000, Sterelny 2003:168.
p. 155 Children sing melodies at 18 months: Ball 2010.
Trehub 2003a, 2003b; see also Feist 2007, J. McDermott 2008. Infants as young as eight months
are able to extract and remember three-note sequences: Saffran et al. 1999.
Cross 2001, 2003a, 2003b, 2005–6.
Appeal of music to babies: see references to p. 132 for those who ﬁnd the origins of music in
infant-directed speech.
p. 156 Music stimulates motor as well as auditory regions of the brain: Janata and Grafton 2003,
Koelsch et al. 2006.
Origin of ﬁre control: Pfeiffer 1982, 1985, Gräslund 2005, Fessler 2006, Sterelny 2012. Klein
2009 allows that control over ﬁre might date to 1.51 ma but gives the established date as
780 ka. Gamble 2007 and Lumley 2009 offer the more conservative date of 400 ka for hearths.
Klein 2000 identiﬁes the ﬁrst “incontestable” hearth at 200 ka. While our nearest relative, the
chimpanzee, does not control ﬁre, in some respects it shows a more sophisticated understand-
ing of wild ﬁre than modern humans: Pruetz and LaDuke 2010.
Fire changed human evolution: Tooby and DeVore 1987, Sterelny 2001, Barrow 2005, Fessler
2006.
Fire changed digestion: H. Kaplan et al. 2000, Clack 2009, Wrangham 2009. For criticism:
Schoeninger 2010. Earlier I quoted Patel 2008:401 on ﬁre as saying “there is no going back,
even though we might be able to live without this ability.” This fails to acknowledge how ﬁre has
changed us in irreversible ways.
Wrangham 2009. For critical discussion of the hypothesis: Sterelny 2003:110–12.
Fire has altered the human genome: Sterelny 2001.
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 153–156
223

Chapter 11
p. 159 Livingstone 2002:38–40 (Impression Sunrise), 68–73 (Mona Lisa).
Art used to illustrate the processing and organizational principles of perception: for example,
F. Turner 1991a, Solso 1994, 2003, Latto 1995, Ramachandran and Hirstein 1999, Zeki 1999,
2000, 2006. S. Brown and Dissanayake 2009 observe critically that neuroaesthetics applies as
much to the visual appreciation of things generally as to art.
Zeki quote: 2000:1.
p. 160 Irradiation: Livingstone 2002:122–7, De Smedt and De Cruz 2010, N. Carroll et al. 2012.
Portraits exaggerate facial features: Costa and Corazza 2006.
Eye-like circles and snake-like squiggles: Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1988, Aiken 1998.
Currie quote: 2003:708.
For other philosophers’ evaluations of the relevance of neuroaesthetics for understanding visual
art: Lopes 2003, Rollins 2004, Kulvicki 2006, Stokes 2009, Hyman 2010, N. Carroll et al.
2012.
Neuroscientiﬁc work on reading: M. Wolf 2007, Dehaene 2009.
Brain locations rather than domain-speciﬁc modules associated with reading: Kramnick 2011.
p. 161 Universal themes in literature: see note to p. 55.
Polti’s 1977 [1895] 36 plot types: supplication, deliverance, crime pursued by vengeance,
vengeance taken for kindred on kindred, pursuit, disaster, falling prey to cruelty or misfortune,
revolt, daring enterprise, abduction, the enigma, obtaining, enmity of kinsmen, rivalry of
kinsmen, murderous adultery, madness, fatal imprudence, involuntary crimes of love, slaying
of a kinsman unrecognized, self-sacriﬁcing for an ideal, self-sacriﬁce for kindred, all sacriﬁced
for a passion, necessity of sacriﬁcing loved ones, rivalry of superior and inferior, adultery,
crimes of love, discovery of the dishonor of a loved one, obstacles to love, an enemy loved,
ambition, conﬂict with a god, mistaken jealousy, erroneous judgment, remorse, recovery of a
lost one, and loss of loved ones.
Booker 2005 augments an initial seven basic plots with two more, giving: overcoming the
monster, rags to riches, quest, voyage and return, comedy, tragedy, rebirth, rebellion, and
mystery.
J. Carroll 1995a, 1999, 2004.
Westfahl quote: 1999:220.
Universality of literary themes reﬂects cultural diffusion rather than common human nature:
Hogan 2003a, 2003b, 2008a, 2008b. For criticism: Gottschall 2004.
Bohannon 1966.
The Tiv share some of our responses to Hamlet: Konner 1988, Storey 1996, Scalise Sugiyama
2003, B. Boyd 2005b.
Literary interpretation as applied evolutionary psychology: J. Miller 1987, Hiatt 1989, Rancour-
Laferriere 1993, J. Carroll 1995a, 1999, 2004, 2005, 2007a, 2011, Fox 1995, 2005, Nesse
1995, Scalise Sugiyama 1996b, Storey 1996, Whissel 1996, B. Boyd 1998, 2001, 2005b,
2009a, Cox 1999, Easterlin 2001, 2005, Cooke 2002, Barash and Barash 2005, Kruger et al.
2005, Nettle 2005a, 2005b, Nordlund 2005, Salmon 2005, Zunshine 2006, 2008, 2009,
Flesch 2007, Swirski 2010, 2011, Vermeule 2010. For salutary warnings about dangers of the
approach: Mellmann 2011.
p. 162 Quantitative studies: these are advocated and conducted most prominently by Jonathan
Gottschall; see Gottschall 2005, 2008a, and J. Carroll et al. 2009, J. Carroll 2011.
224
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 159–162

“It might be objected”: as in Dissanayake 1999a. By contrast, and unconvincingly in my view,
Harpham 2008 suggests that the mystery of literary value can now be solved.
Evolutionary story just another interpretative tool: some such view is advocated in Nor-
dlund 2002, Zunshine 2006, 2007, Mellmann 2011. For an exchange on the topic:
B. Boyd 2006b, 2007c. Flesch 2007 suggests that narrative ﬁction is a by-product rather
than an adaptation; see Chapter 9. Vermeule 2010 is agnostic about whether literature is
an adaptation.
p. 164 Interested in the broader notion of narrative: Niles 1999, Scalise Sugiyama 2001a, 2001b,
2008, Scalise Sugiyama and L. Sugiyama 2009.
All explanations are at bottom narrative: Rabkin 1983.
Narrative is the fundamental instrument of thought: M. Turner 1996:4–5.
Narrative is an adaptation for regulating relations: Hoeg 2009:1.
Narrative evolved to tell humans who we are: Booker 2005; see also Oatley and Mar 2005.
The self is a concatenation of narratives, etc.: Storey 1996.
Centrality of narrative: Misia Landau 1991.
Creation myths and communications with spirits treated as like ﬁctions: for example, B. Boyd
2005a, 2009a:199–206.
Fictional storytelling is an extension of non-ﬁctional storytelling: Dutton 2009.
Fictions usually describe many factual matters: Scalise Sugiyama 2001a, 2001b, 2008.
Hernadi 2001.
Fiction versus history: for perceptive discussions, see Zunshine 2006, Swirski 2010.
Need narratives for identity and history: Novitz 1989b, Fireman et al. 2003.
p. 165 Hernadi 2001.
Literature compensates for dissonance of modern life: Storey 1996, Austin 2007. A different view
is that art buffers fear of death: Mark Landau et al. 2010.
J. Carroll quote: 1999:160.
Literary behaviors have long history: Kramnick 2011 thinks the Literary Darwinist must be
committed to saying that contemporary novels have the same function as Stone Age tales, but
I argue later that this need not be so.
G. Miller 2000a, Dutton 2009.
Constable 1997; see also G. Miller 2000a.
p. 166 Scalise Sugiyama 1996a.
Forager or hunter as narrator: Scalise Sugiyama 2001a, 2001b, Scalise Sugiyama and L. Sugiyama
2009.
Fiction might be interpreted as a kind of simulated gossip: Nettle 2005a, Flesch 2007, Pinker
2007, Vermeule 2010.
B. Boyd quote: 2001:201; see also 2005a:166–7.
The ﬁctive stance: Lamarque and Olsen 1994. For a review of empirical work on literary reading:
Miall 2006.
Fiction mix of familiar and fantastic: B. Boyd 2005a, 2009a.
Gifted few ﬁction authors: see Dunbar 2005 on why good storytellers might be rare.
Niles quote: 1999:129; see also Storey 1996, Dunbar 2005.
p. 167 Stories deﬁne moral and social boundaries: Rabkin 1983, 1995, Argyros 1991, Cox 1999.
Stories dramatize heroes and villains: Cooke 1999b, Hernadi 2001.
Art keeps society stable: Argyros 1999.
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 162–167
225

N. Carroll quote: 2004:102.
Hernadi 2001.
Dissanayake 1988, 1990, 1995a, 1995b.
Some adopt multilevel selection theory: S. Brown 2000a, B. Boyd 2005a, 2009a, Flesch 2007. As
an opponent of multilevel selection theory, Pinker 2007 thinks this is an error.
p. 168 Aggressive ﬁction: Kernan 1973.
Fictional literature more about competition than group unity: B. Boyd 2005a, Dutton 2009.
Fictional literature provides social knowledge and skill: Rabkin 1983, Hobbs 1990, Argyros
1991, Scalise Sugiyama 1996a, 2001a, 2001b, 2005, J. Carroll 1999, 2004, 2007a, Gottschall
2004, Zunshine 2006, Swirski 2008, Scalise Sugiyama and L. Sugiyama 2009. Pinker 2002,
2007 allows the plausibility of the position—and is applauded on this score in B. Boyd 2005a,
J. Carroll 2006, Austin 2007, Dutton 2009—but ultimately he is critical of it. De Smedt and
De Cruz 2010 share Pinker’s reservations.
p. 169 Dutton quote: 2009:118.
B. Boyd quote 2009a:192–3.
Kramnick quote: 2011:345.
Goodheart 2007; see also Flesch 2007, Kelleter 2008, Spolsky 2008, Eibl 2009. For critical
discussion: Slingerland 2008, Swirski 2008, J. Carroll 2011.
J. Carroll 2011:81. For discussion: Kelleter 2008.
Narrative ﬁction furnishes cognitive maps: J. Carroll 1995a, 2004, 2005, 2007b.
Narrative ﬁction reveals our nature: J. Carroll 1999:170.
Narrative ﬁction models resolution of goal conﬂict: Scalise Sugiyama 2005.
Narrative ﬁction enhances empathy and sympathy: Storey 1996.
Narrative ﬁction trains Theory of Mind: Zunshine 2006, 2008, 2009; see also Oatley and Mar
2005, Austin 2007, Flesch 2007, Vermeule 2010, Rolls 2011.
Narrative ﬁction teaches deception: Cooke 1998, Hansen 1999, Hernadi 2001, Zunshine 2006,
Flesch 2007, Hoeg 2009, Vermeule 2010.
p. 170 Can learn about the real world from ﬁctions: S. Davies 1997b, Currie 1998.
Fiction can miseducate: Currie 1997, Flesch 2007, Foy and Gerrig 2008.
Learn only platitudes from ﬁction: Lamarque 2006, 2010. Pinker 2007 also suspects that we
might take from ﬁction nothing subtler than the psychological assumptions we started with.
Narrative ﬁction as instruction does not adequately account for the pleasure we take in it: Flesch
2007.
Learn Theory of Mind too early to need ﬁctional stories for its development: B. Boyd 2005a,
2009a, Swirski 2010.
Children master Theory of Mind at three levels of intentionality—he believes that she wants her
mother to think—at about 5 years of age: Callaghan et al. 2005.
Understanding stories presupposes mastery of Theory of Mind and counterfactual reasoning:
Astington 1990.
We are often given direct access to minds of ﬁctional characters: N. Carroll 2000b.
Literature reﬁnes Theory of Mind skills: by the age of ten, children have not yet fully mastered
higher-order Theory of Mind skills: Liddle and Nettle 2006. There is evidence that subtle
reﬁnements to the skill occur later in adult life: Happe´ et al. 1998.
p. 171 Deception in animals: Dawkins and Krebs 1978, de Waal 1998, Byrne 1999.
Literature as repository of knowledge: J. Carroll 1999, 2004, Scalise Sugiyama 2005, 2008.
226
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 167–171

p. 172 Cosmides and Tooby 2000b, Tooby and Cosmides 2001. Although he does not agree
that the mind is massively modularized, J. Carroll 2004, 2011 also sees ﬁction as a way of
organizing motivational systems that are not driven by instinct; see also Eibl and Mellmann
2008, Scalise Sugiyama 2008.
Tooby and Cosmides quote: 2001:21.
Childhood play involves modes of counterfactual and hypothetical thinking: Leslie 1987, 1994,
Carruthers 2002, Singer and Singer 2011.
B. Boyd 2008a, 2009a stresses how pretend play kindles interest in narrative ﬁctions.
p. 173 Stecker 1997b:282–3 emphasizes the use of ﬁction in counterfactual reasoning.
Remembering the past, thinking of the future and conceiving the viewpoint of others involve
the same neural circuits: Buckner and Carroll 2007, Schacter and Addis 2007a, 2007b.
Kramnick quote: 2011:331.
Tooby and Cosmides 1990a, 2001, Cosmides and Tooby 2000b; see also Scalise Sugiyama 2008,
Swirski 2008.
p. 174 Fiction extends our imaginations in ways that factive literature cannot: B. Boyd
2009a:188–99.
M. Nussbaum quotes: 1990:139, 138; see also 1995.
p. 175 Critics of Nussbaum: Kalin 1992, Lamarque and Olsen 1994, Posner 1997, 1998. For a
response to the latter: Nussbaum 1998.
On the origins of writing and reading: see note to p. 134.
Early Western novels: Daniel Defoe’s Robinson Crusoe is from 1719, Jonathan Swift’s Gulliver’s
Travels is 1726, Voltaire’s Candide is 1759, Laurence Sterne’s Tristram Shandy came out in
1759–67.
Earlier novels: Thiessen and Umezawa 1998 discuss The Tale of Genji; Zunshine 2006 considers
Heliodrus’ An Ethiopian Romance.
Novel allows possibilities oral literature does not: Easterlin 2005.
Austin quote: 2007:217.
p. 176 Darwin quotes: 1880, pt. 1, ch. 3:87 and pt. 3, ch. 19:572. For early skepticism: Grosse
1897.
G. Miller 2000a, 2000b. Other adherents of sexual selection accounts for music include Hirn
1900, P. Todd 2000, Levitin 2006, Alcorta et al. 2008, Dutton 2009, Dean et al. 2009–10, van
den Broek and Todd 2009–10.
Sexual exploits of pop musicians: G. Miller 1999, 2000a, 2000b. Ball 2010:21 deplores this style
of “theorizing by celebrity anecdote.”
p. 177 Music made in but not for groups: G. Miller 2000b.
Love songs only small part of repertoire in small-scale cultures: Grosse 1897, S. Brown 2000a.
Composers produced fewer children: Fukui 2001a, Fitch 2005.
S. Brown quote: 2000a:248–9.
Cross reiterates basically the same position in 1999, 2001, 2003a, 2003b, 2003c, 2005, 2005–6,
2007, 2008, 2009, 2009–10, and Cross and Morley 2009.
p. 178 Cross quote: 2007:658.
Music’s semantic openness: Tooby and Cosmides 1989a suggest that music’s lack of reference
makes it a non-confrontational system for the expression of mood and feeling. See also Levitin
2006. Listening to music can lower testosterone levels in males (while increasing it in females)
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 172–178
227

and certain kinds of music reduce stress by lowering cortisone levels: Fukui and Yamashita
1998, Fukui 2001b, Lewis 2002.
Cross quotes: 2005–6:114, 123.
p. 179 Langer 1942.
Critical discussion of Langer’s theory: S. Davies 1994.
Music originated in song: Spencer 1966, vol. 14:403 [1857], Darwin 1880, pt. 3, ch. 19:569,
Grosse 1897, Dissanayake 1995a:118, Huron 2003, Besson and Friederici 2005, Levitin 2006,
Fenk-Oczlon and Fenk 2009–10, Lehmann et al. 2009–10.
Philosophers’ arguments against a high degree of mind modularity: Tomasello 1999, Fodor
2000, Sterelny 2003, Currie 2004, Buller 2005.
Evolutionary psychologists reject a high degree of mind modularity: Dunbar and Barrett 2007.
Training affects the brain: on changes to brain structure resulting from training in juggling, see
Draganski et al. 2004.
p. 180 Cross cites a study: Schellenberg 2004 cited in Cross and Morley 2009.
Music lessons increase IQ: Schellenberg 2004; see also 2006. For critical review: Ball 2010:251–3.
There is evidence that the learning of speciﬁc musical skills can inﬂuence the learning of speciﬁc
non-musical skills, such as mathematics: Gardiner 2008. Musical training also increases a person’s
ability to identify certain emotions (particularly sadness and fear) in human speech (both in her
own and in a foreign language): W. F. Thompson et al. 2004.
Emergence of general intelligence: Cross 1999, 2001, 2003b approvingly cites Mithen 1996 in
which it is argued that the human mind developed by breaking down barriers between
separate, specialized mental modules.
Critical discussion of Mithen’s account: Lewis-Williams 2002, Gosden 2003, Sterelny 2003,
Currie 2004. And for skepticism about the role assigned to modularity within evolutionary
psychology, see notes to pp. 153>, and <this page.
Music aids infant development: Roederer 1984, Dissanayake 1999b, 2000a, 2000b, 2008a,
Trehub 2000, 2003a, 2003b, Trainor and Schmidt 2003, Koelsch and Siebel 2005, Ball 2010.
Congenital musical defects do not diminish other mental capacities: Patel 2008.
Social beneﬁts of music: see notes to p. 132.
Music releases endorphins: Dunbar 2003, 2004.
Williams syndrome and autism support hypothesis that music has social beneﬁts: Huron 2003,
Levitin 2006.
Patel quote: 2008:371. On the improvisational and other musical skills of “savant” autistics:
Mottron et al. 2006.
Not obvious that music’s function is to provide social grooming: Fitch 2005.
p. 181 Lists of many functions regularly served by music: S. Brown 2000a, Dissanayake 2006,
Ball 2010:11–16.
Hauser and McDermott 2003, McDermott and Hauser 2005b, McDermott 2008.
Justus and Hutsler quote: 2005:21.
Paucity of the Hominin fossil record: Fitch 2006; see also Ball 2010.
Overlap in brain areas used by music and language: see note to p. 153.
p. 182 Merker quote: 2006:95–6.
228
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 178–182

Chapter 12
p. 184 Thornhill quotes: 2003:20, 1998:553.
p. 186 Dissanayake 1988.
p. 187 Upper Paleolithic cave painting called art: see note to p. 3.
ENDNOTES FOR PP. 184–187
229

Glossary
adaptation: a feature that helped previous members of a species reproduce more
successfully than others of their species and that was passed on by them to their
descendants.
adaptive: ﬁtness-enhancing (see below).
aesthetic, the: in eighteenth-century philosophic theory, this referred to the beautiful and
sublime (see below) and to their opposites, as well as to their apprehension or to
the experience of them. Contemporary aestheticians generally class a wide range of
properties as aesthetic—for instance, being graceful, awkward, elegant, or balanced—
but these often can be viewed as subspecies of the beautiful, the sublime, or their
opposites.
ﬁtness: an organism’s comparative potential for reproductive success. Realized ﬁtness is
measured in terms of comparative reproductive success, or in terms of the comparative
number of genes an organism succeeds in passing down to future generations. (See
inclusive ﬁtness.)
gene-culture coevolution: the theory that biology and culture do not operate independently,
but rather inﬂuence and alter each other. Our biology can constrain culture: the Olympics
are unlikely to feature sustained yet unassisted human ﬂying. Yet, by altering the social and
physical environment, culture can affect what adaptations are favored: control of ﬁre
altered the requirements of digestion and the energy obtainable from foodstuffs.
Holocene: period covering the last 10,000 years, which saw the emergence of larger human
groups, agriculture, animal domestication, settled village life, and stored surpluses.
Hominid: see Hominin.
Hominin: humans and their immediate ancestors, back to the ancestor shared in
common with the chimpanzee line. Excludes Gorillini (gorillas) and Panini (chimps),
though these belong with humans in the order of Hominoids. Hominins were
formerly and less precisely called Hominids.
inclusive ﬁtness: a gene-centered version of ﬁtness that measures it not only by counting
the genes passed down by an individual but also by taking account of genes passed
down by his or her relatives, these being weighted according to the closeness of the
relationship.
ka: thousand years ago.

levels of intentionality: thoughts that consider the thoughts others have about yet other
people. For example, where I know that he thinks that his wife cares that her mother
worries that her father regrets . . . After about ﬁve levels we tend to get confused.
ma: million years ago.
multilevel selection theory: the view that, under certain conditions, the units of evolution-
ary selection may be groups rather than individuals.
Paleolithic: covers the period from 2.6 ma to about 10 ka. The Lower Paleolithic runs
from 2.5 ma to 180 ka. The Middle Paleolithic falls between 180 and 40 ka, and the
Upper Paleolithic encompasses 40–10 ka. The Paleolithic overlaps with the Pleisto-
cene (see below) and was followed by the Holocene (see above).
Pleistocene: covers the period from 2.6 ma to 10 ka. Overlaps with the Paleolithic (see
above) and is succeeded by the Holocene (see above).
selection: in biology, the process by which some traits spread within a population as a
result of improving the comparative ﬁtness of the organisms which have them.
Selection is “natural” when the traits in question improve ﬁtness by suiting the
organism better to its environment. Selection is “sexual” when the traits in question
improve the organism’s chances of being chosen as a mate relative to other members of
its sex. Sexual selection falls within natural selection if it is appropriate to see potential
mates simply as elements additional to those that make up the organism’s environment.
spandrel: in evolutionary theory, a by-product of an adaptation (see above) that is not an
adaptation for direct utility or ﬁtness (see above) in itself.
sublime, the: in eighteenth-century philosophic theory, this typically referred to the
aesthetic quality of being awesome, impressive, grave, or elevated. The sublime,
though powerful and potentially negative, yields a positive experience through being
comprehended by the human mind.
Theory of Mind: our awareness of others as having a mental life like our own and our
capacity to project into and understand that mind and the beliefs, intentions, and
desires that move it, even where these differ from our beliefs, intentions, and desires.
Venus ﬁgurines: small statuettes (often classed as portable art) or reliefs of the heads, busts,
or bodies of women, often depicted as naked or partially clothed. Hundreds of examples
are known. The majority of examples fall in the period 30–11 ka and, though concen-
trated in Europe, they have been located as far to the east as Siberia. Some of these (from
the region of France and east to the former Soviet Union) have exaggerated breasts,
buttocks and genitals, with other parts of the body, including the face, de-emphasized or
even missing.
GLOSSARY 231

References
Adajian, Thomas. 2003. On the Cluster Account of Art. British Journal of Aesthetics 43:379–85.
Aiken, Nancy E. B. 1998. The Biological Origins of Art. Westport: Praeger.
——1999. How Art Arouses Emotion. In Sociobiology and the Arts, edited by J. B. Bedaux and
B. Cooke, 159–73. Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Akker, Paul van den. 1999. Visual Order in Figurative Art: To Zoom in on Mannerism. In
Sociobiology and the Arts, edited by J. B. Bedaux and B. Cooke, 191–222. Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Alcorta, Candace S., Sosis, Richard, and Finkel, Daniel. 2008. Ritual Harmony: Toward an
Evolutionary Account of Music. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 31:576–7.
Alexander, Richard D., Hoogland, John L., Howard, Richard D., Noonan, Katharine M., and
Sherman, Paul W. 1979. Sexual Dimorphism and Breeding Systems in Pinnipeds, Ungulates,
Primates, and Humans. In Evolutionary Biology and Human Social Behavior: An Anthropological
Perspective, edited by N. A. Chagnon and W. Irons, 402–35. North Sciutate: Duxbury Press.
Alicke, Mark D., Smith, Richard H., and Klotz, M. L. 1986. Judgments of Physical Attractive-
ness: The Role of Faces and Bodies. Personality Social Psychological Bulletin 12:381–9.
Alland Jr, Alexander. 1977. The Artistic Animal: An Inquiry into the Biological Roots of Art. Garden
City: Anchor Books.
——1989a. Affect and Aesthetics in Human Evolution. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism
47:1–14.
——1989b. Review of Dissanayake’s What Is Art For? Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism
47:392–3.
Allen, Wayne E. 1999. Biochemicals and Brains: Natural Selection for Manipulators of Sexual
Ecstasy and Fantasy. Biopoetics: Evolutionary Explorations in the Arts, edited by B. Cooke and
F. Turner, 157–74. Lexington: ICUS.
Alley, Thomas R. and Cunningham, Michael R. 1991. Averaged Faces are Attractive, but Very
Attractive Faces are Not Average. Psychological Science 2:123–5.
Allhoff, Fritz and Draper, Paul, editors. 2007. Wine and Philosophy: A Symposium on Thinking and
Drinking. Malden: Wiley-Blackwell.
Allhoff, Fritz and Monroe, Dave, editors. 2007. Food and Philosophy: Eat, Think, and be Merry.
Malden: Wiley-Blackwell.
Allhoff, Fritz, Adams, Marcus P., and MacLean, Charles, editors. 2009. Whiskey and Philosophy:
A Small Batch of Spirited Ideas. Malden: Wiley-Blackwell.
Allott, Robin. 1994. The Pythagorean Perspective: The Arts and Sociobiology. Journal of Social
and Evolutionary Systems 17:71–90.
Ambrose, Stanley. 1998. Chronology of the Late Stone Age and Food Production in East Africa.
Journal of Archaeological Science 25:377–92.
Anderson, Richard L. 1990. Popular Art and Aesthetic Theory: Why the Muse is Unembar-
rassed. Journal of Aesthetic Education 24 (4):33–46.
Appleton, Jay. 1984. Prospects and Refuges Revisited. Landscape Journal 3:91–103.
——1990. The Symbolism of Habitat: an Interpretation of Landscape in the Arts. Seattle: University of
Washington Press.

——1996. The Experience of Landscape. Chichester: Wiley. Second edition.
Ardrey, Robert. 1967. The Territorial Imperative: A Personal Inquiry into the Animal Origins of
Property and Nations. London: Collins.
Argyros, Alexander J. 1991. A Blessed Rage for Order: Deconstruction, Evolution, and Chaos. Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
——1999. Tragedy and Chaos. Biopoetics: Evolutionary Explorations in the Arts, edited by
B. Cooke and F. Turner, 335–46. Lexington: ICUS.
Aristides Quintilianus. 1983. On Music, translated by T. Mathieson. New Haven: Yale Univer-
sity Press.
Armstrong, Edward Allworthy. 1973. A Study of Bird Song. New York: Dover.
Arnheim, Rudolf. 1988. Universals in the Arts. Journal of Social and Biological Structures 11:60–5.
Asfaw, Berhane, Beyene, Yonas, Suwa, Gen, Walter, Robert C., White, Tim D., Woldegabriel,
Giday, and Yemane, Tesfaye. 1992. The Earliest Acheulian from Konso-Gardula, Ethiopia.
Nature 360:732–5.
Astington, J. W. 1990. Narrative and the Child’s Theory of Mind. In Narrative Thought and
Narrative Language, edited by B. K. Britton and A. D. Pellegrini, 151–71. Hillsdale: L. Erlbaum.
Aunger, Robert. 2002. The Electric Meme. New York: Simon & Schuster.
——2006. What’s the Matter with Memes? In Richard Dawkins: How a Scientist Changed the Way
We Think, edited by A. Grafen and M. Ridley, 176–88. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——2007. Memes. In The Oxford Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology, edited by R. I. M. Dunbar
and L. Barrett, 599–604. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——editor. 2000. Darwinizing Culture: The Status of Mimetics as a Science. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Austin, Michael. 2007. The Inﬂuence of Anxiety and Literature’s Panglossian Nose. Philosophy
and Literature 31:215–32.
Balda, Russell P. and Kamil, Alan C. 2002. Spatial and Social Cognition in Corvids: An
Evolutionary Approach. In The Cognitive Animal: Empirical and Theoretical Perspectives on Animal
Cognition, edited by M. Bekoff, C. Allen, and G. M. Burghardt, 129–34. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Balkwill, Laura-Lee and Thompson, William Forde. 1999. A Cross-cultural Investigation of
the Perception of Emotion in Music: Psychophysical and Cultural Cues. Music Perception
17:43–64.
Ball, Philip. 2010. The Music Instinct. London: Bodley Head.
Balling, John D. and Falk, John H. 1982. Development of Visual Preference for Natural
Environments. Environment and Behavior 14:5–28.
Bamford, Marian K. 2005. Environmental Changes and Hominid Evolution: What the Vegeta-
tion Tells Us. In From Tools to Symbols: From Early Hominids to Humans, edited by F. d’Errico
and L. Blackwell, 103–20. Johannesburg: Witwatersrand University Press.
Bandi, H. G. 1988. Mise bas et non de´fe´cation. Nouvelle interpre´tation de trois propulseurs
magdale´niens sur de bases zoologiques, e´thologiques et symboliques. Espacio, Tiempo y Forma,
se´rie I, Prehistoria 1:133–47.
Barash, David L. and Barash, Nanelle R. 2005. Madame Bovary’s Ovaries: A Darwinian Look at
Literature. New York: Delacorte.
Bardon, Geoffrey. 1991. Papunya Tula: Art of the Western Desert. Sydney: McPhee Gribble/
Penguin.
REFERENCES
233

Barham, Lawrence S. 2004. Art in Human Evolution. In New Perspectives on Prehistoric Art, edited
by G. Bergaus, 105–30. Westport: Praeger.
Barkow, Jerome H. 1992. Beneath New Culture is Old Psychology: Gossip and Social Stratiﬁ-
cation. In The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture, edited by
J. H. Barkow, L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby, 627–37. New York: Oxford University Press.
Baron-Cohen, Simon. 1999. The Evolution of a Theory of Mind. In The Descent of Mind:
Psychological Perspectives on Hominid Evolution, edited by M. C. Corballis and S. E. G. Lea,
261–77. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Baroni, Mario. 2008. Music, Musicality, and “Musilanguage.” Musicae Scientiae, 12, special
number, 197–213.
Barrett, H. Clark and Kurzban, Robert. 2006. Modularity in Cognition: Framing the Debate.
Psychological Review 113:628–47.
Barrow, John D. 2005. The Artful Universe Expanded. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Expand-
ed edition.
Barton, R. N. E., Bouzouggar, A., Collcutt, S. N., Schwenninger, J.-L., and Clark-
Balzan, L. 2009. OSL Dating of the Aterian Levels at Dar es-Soltan I (Rabat, Morocco)
and Implications for the Dispersal of Modern Homo sapiens. Quaternary Science Reviews
28:1914–31.
Bataille, Georges. 2005. The Cradle of Humanity: Prehistoric Art and Culture, edited by S. Kendall,
translated by S. Kendall and M. Kendall. New York: Zone Books. [A collection of essays
published between 1930 and 1959.]
Bateman, A. J. 1948. Intra-sexual Selection in Drosophila. Journal of Heredity 2:349–68.
Bateson, Melissa, Cornelissen, Piers L., and Tove´e, Martin J. 2007. Methodological Issues in
Studies of Female Attractiveness. In The Body Beautiful: Evolutionary and Socio-Cultural Perspec-
tives, edited by V. Swami and A. Furnham, 46–62. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Bateson, P. P. G. 1983. Rules for Changing the Rules. In Evolution from Molecules to Men, edited
by D. S. Bendall, 483–507. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Beardsley, Monroe C. 1958. Aesthetics: Problems in the Philosophy of Criticism. New York:
Harcourt, Brace and Word.
——1969. Aesthetic Experience Regained. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 28:3–11.
——1970. The Aesthetic Point of View. In Perspectives in Education, Religion, and the Arts,
Volume 3, edited by H. E. Kiefer and M. K. Munitz, 219–37. Albany: State University of
New York Press.
Bednarik, Robert. 2000. Proposed Glossary of Rock Art Research. AURA Newsletter 8.
Bekoff, Marc and Byers, John A., editors. 1998. Animal Play: Evolutionary, Comparative, and
Ecological Perspectives. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Benazzi, Stefano, Douka, Katerina, Fornai, Cinzia, Bauer, Catherine C., Kullmer, Ottmar,
Svoboda, Jirı´, Pap, Ildiko´, Mallegni, Francesco, Bayle, Priscilla, Coquerelle, Michael, Con-
demi, Silvana, Ronchitelli, Annamaria, Harvati, Katerina, and Weber, Gerhard W. 2011.
Early Dispersal of Modern Humans in Europe and Implications for Neanderthal Behaviour.
Nature 479:525–8.
Benjamin, Jessica. 1988. The Bonds of Love: Psychoanalysis, Feminism, and the Problem of Domination.
New York: Pantheon.
Berghaus, Günter. 2004. The Discovery and Study of Prehistoric Art. In New Perspectives on
Prehistoric Art, edited by G. Bergaus, 1–10. Westport: Praeger.
234
REFERENCES

Berleant, Arnold. 2002. Environment and the Arts: Perspectives on Environmental Aesthetics. Alder-
shot: Ashgate.
Berleant, Riva. 2007. Paleolithic Flints: Is an Aesthetics of Stone Tools Possible? Contemporary
Aesthetics 5, http://www.contempaesthetics.org/newvolume/pages/article.php?articleID= 488
Berlyne, D. E. 1971. Aesthetics and Psychobiology. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Bermúdez de Castro, Jose´ Marı´a, Martino´n-Torres, Marı´a, Lozano, Marina, Sarmiento, Susana,
and Muela, Ana. 2004. Paleodemography of the Atapuerca: Sima De Los Huesos Hominin
Sample: A Revision and New Approaches to the Paleodemography of the European Middle
Pleistocene Population. Journal of Anthropological Research 60:5–26.
Besson, Mireille and Friederici, Angela D. 2005. Part II: Language and Music—A Comparison.
Introduction. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1060:57–8.
Bisphan, John C. 2009–10. Music’s “Design Features”: Musical Motivation, Musical Pulse, and
Musical Pitch. Musicae Scientiae 13:41–61.
Blacking, John. 1973. How Musical is Man? Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Blackmore, Susan. 1999. The Meme Machine. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bleakney, J. Sherman. 1970. A Possible Evolutionary Basis for Aesthetic Appreciation in Men
and Apes. Evolution 24:477–9.
Blocker, H. Gene. 1993. The Aesthetics of Primitive Art. Lanham: University Press of America.
——2001. Non-Western Aesthetics as a Colonial Invention. Journal of Aesthetic Education
35 (4):3–13.
Bloom, Paul. 2000. How Children Learn the Meaning of Words. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Boero, Daniela Lenti and Bottoni, Luciana. 2008. Why We Experience Musical Emotions:
Intrinsic Musicality in an Evolutionary Perspective. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 31:585–6.
Bohannon, Laura. 1966. Shakespeare in the Bush. Natural History Magazine August-September,
28–33.
Bond, E. J. 1975. The Essential Nature of Art. American Philosophical Quarterly 12:177–83.
Bonner, John Tyler. 1980. The Evolution of Culture in Animals. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Booker, Christopher. 2005. The Seven Basic Plots: Why We Tell Stories. London: Continuum.
Bordes, F. 1961. Mousterian Cultures in France. Science 134:803–10.
Bordo, Susan. 2000. Beauty (Re)Discovers the Male Body. In Beauty Matters, edited by
P. Z. Brand, 112–54. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Bouckaert, Andre and Boulanger, Bruno. 1997. Marriage Distance between Birthplaces and Age
Differences between Mates. Human Biology 69:241–51.
Bourassa, Steven C. 1991. The Aesthetics of Landscape. London: Belhaven Press.
Bowler, Peter J. 2003. Evolution: The History of an Idea. Los Angeles: The University of California
Press. Third edition.
Bown, Oliver and Wiggins, Geraint. 2009–10. From Maladaptation to Competition to Coop-
eration in the Evolution of Musical Behaviour. Musicae Scientiae 13:387–411.
Boyd, Brian. 1998. Jane, Meet Charles: Literature, Evolution, and Human Nature. Philosophy
and Literature 22:1–30.
——2001. The Origin of Stories: Horton Hears a Who. Philosophy and Literature 25:197–214.
——2004. Laughter and Literature: A Play Theory of Humor. Philosophy and Literature 28:1–23.
——2005a. Evolutionary Theories of Art. In The Literary Animal: Evolution and the Nature of
Narrative, edited by J. Gottschall and D. S. Wilson, 147–76. Evanston: Northwestern Univer-
sity Press.
REFERENCES
235

Boyd, Brian. 2005b. Literature and Evolution: A Bio-Cultural Approach. Philosophy and Litera-
ture 29:1–23.
——2006a. Getting it all Wrong: Bioculture Critiques Cultural Critique. American Scholar
75 (4):18–20.
——2006b. Fiction and Theory of Mind. Philosophy and Literature 30:590–600.
——2007a. Artistic Animals: Common and Unique Features of Music and Visual Art. In Visual
Animals: Crossovers, Evolution, and New Aesthetics, edited by I. North, 15–26. Parkside, South
Australia: Contemporary Art Museum of South Australia.
——2007b. Tails within Tales. In Knowing Animals, edited by L. Simmons and P. Armstrong,
217–43. Leiden: Brill.
——2007c. Fiction and Theory of Mind: an Exchange. Philosophy and Literature 31:196–9.
——2008a. Art and Evolution: Spiegelman’s The Narrative Corpse. Philosophy and Literature
32:31–57.
——2008b. Art as Adaptation: A Challenge. Style 42:138–43.
——2009a. On The Origin of Stories. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
——2009b. Art and Selection. Philosophy and Literature 33:204–20.
Boyd, Robert and Silk, Joan B. 1997. How Humans Evolved. New York: W. W. Norton.
Braastad, Bjarne O. and Bakken, Morten. 2002. Behaviour of Dogs and Cats. In The Ethology of
Domestic Animals, edited by P. Jensen, 173–92. Wallingford: CABI Publishing.
Brady, Emily. 2003. Aesthetics of the Natural Environment. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
——2009. Aesthetic Appreciation of Expressive Qualities in Animals. Postgraduate Journal of
Aesthetics, 6 (3):1–14.
——and Kuehn, Glenn. 2005. Snifﬁng and Savoring: The Aesthetics of Smells and Tastes. In
The Aesthetics of Everyday Life, edited by A. Light and J. M. Smith, 177–93. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Brandon, Robert N. 1990. Adaptation and Environment. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Brattico, Elvira, Brattico, Pauli, and Jacobsen, Thomas. 2009–2010. The Origins of the Aesthetic
Enjoyment of Music—A Review of the Literature. Musicae Scientiae 13:15–39.
Bräuer, Günter. 1989. The Evolution of Modern Humans: A Comparison of the African
and non-African Evidence. In The Human Revolution: Behavioral and Biological Perspectives on
the Origins of Modern Humans, edited by P. Mellars and C. Stringer, 122–54. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
Breidbach, Olaf. 2003. The Beauties and the Beautiful: Some Considerations from the Perspec-
tive of Neuronal Aesthetics. In Evolutionary Aesthetics, edited by E. Voland and K. Grammer,
39–68. Berlin: Springer.
Brewer, J., Archer, J., and Manning J. 2007. Physical Attractiveness: The Objective Ornament
and Subjective Self-Ratings. Journal of Evolutionary Psychology 5:29–38.
Brook, Donald. 2002. Art and History. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 60:331–40.
Brothwell, Don R. 1976. Visual Art, Evolution, and Environment. In Beyond Aesthetics: In-
vestigations into the Nature of Visual Art, edited by D. Brothwell, 41–63. London: Thames and
Hudson.
Brown, Donald E. 1991. Human Universals. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Brown, James Cooke and Greenhood, William. 1991. Paternity, Jokes and Song: A Possible
Evolutionary Scenario for the Origin of Language and Mind. Journal of Social and Biological
Structures 14 (3):255–309.
236
REFERENCES

Brown, Peter J. 1991. Culture and the Evolution of Obesity. Human Nature 2:31–57.
Brown, Steven. 2000a. The “Musilanguage” Model of Music Evolution. In The Origins of Music,
edited by N. L. Wallin, B. Merker, and S. Brown, 271–300. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——2000b. Evolutionary Models of Music: From Sexual Selection to Group Selection. Perspec-
tives in Ethology 13:231–81.
——and Dissanayake, Ellen. 2009. The Arts are more than Aesthetics: Neuroaesthetics as
Narrow Aesthetics. In Neuroaesthetics (Foundations and Frontiers of Aesthetics), edited by
M. Skov and O. Vartanian, 43–57. Amityville: Baywood.
Buckner, Randy L. and Carroll, Daniel C. 2007. Self-projection and the Brain. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences 11:49–57.
Budd, Malcolm. 2002. The Aesthetic Appreciation of Nature. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Bull, Ray and Rumsey, Nichola. 1986. The Social Psychology of Facial Experience. New York:
Springer.
Buller, David J. 2005. Adapting Minds: Evolutionary Psychology and the Persistent Quest for Human
Nature. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bullough, Edward. 1912. “Psychical Distance” as a Factor in Art and an Aesthetic Principle.
British Journal of Psychology 5:87–118.
Burley, Nancy. 1988a. Wild Zebra Finches have Band-color Preferences. Animal Behavior
36:123–7.
——1988b. The Differential-Allocation Hypothesis: An Experimental Test. American Naturalist
132:611–28.
Buss, David M. 1989. Sex Differences in Human Mate Preferences: Evolutionary Hypotheses
Tested in 37 Cultures. Behavior and Brain Science 12:1–49.
——1992. Mate Preference Mechanisms: Consequences for Partner Choice and Intrasexual
Competition. In The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture, edited
by J. H. Barkow, L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby, 249–66. New York: Oxford University Press.
——1994. The Evolution of Desire. New York: Basic Books.
Byrne, Richard W. 1999. Human Cognitive Evolution. In The Descent of Mind: Psychological
Perspectives on Hominid Evolution, edited by M. C. Corballis and S. E. G. Lea, 71–87. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Callaghan, Tara, Rochat, Philippe, Lillard, Angeline, Claux, Mary Louise, Odden, Hal, Itakura,
Shoji, Tapanya, Sombat, and Singh, Saraswati. 2005. Synchrony in the Onset of Mental-state
Reasoning. Evidence from Five Cultures. Psychological Science 16: 378–84.
Carlson, Allen. 2000. Aesthetics and the Environment: The Appreciation of Nature, Art and Architecture.
London: Routledge.
Carroll, Joseph. 1995a. Evolution and Literary Theory. Columbia: University of Missouri Press.
——1995b. Evolution and Literary Theory. Human Nature 6 (2):119–34.
——1998. Pinker’s Cheesecake for the Mind. Philosophy and Literature 22:478–85.
——1999. The Deep Structure of Literary Representations. Evolution and Human Behavior
20 (3):159–73.
——2001. The Ecology of Victorian Fiction. Philosophy and Literature 25:295–313.
——2004. Literary Darwinism: Evolution, Human Nature, and Literature. London: Routledge.
——2005. Human Nature and Literary Meaning. A Theoretical Model Illustrated with a
Critique of Pride and Prejudice. In The Literary Animal: Evolution and the Nature of Narrative,
edited by J. Gottschall and D. S. Wilson, 76–106. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.
REFERENCES
237

Carroll, Joseph. 2006. The Human Revolution and the Adaptive Function of Literature.
Philosophy and Literature 30:33–49.
——2007a. Evolutionary Approaches to Literature and Drama. In The Oxford Handbook of
Evolutionary Psychology, edited by R. I. M. Dunbar and L. Barrett, 637–48. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
——2007b. The Adaptive Function of Literature. In Evolutionary and Neurocognitive Approaches to
Aesthetics, Creativity and the Arts, edited by C. Martindale, P. Locher, and V. M. Petrov, 31–45.
Amityville: Baywood.
——2008. The Cuckoo’s History: Human Nature in Wuthering Heights. Philosophy and Literature
32:241–57.
——2011. Reading Human Nature: Literary Darwinism in Theory and Practice. Albany: State
University of New York Press.
——Gottschall, John, Johnson, John A., and Kruger, Daniel J. 2009. Human Nature in
Nineteenth-Century British Novels: Doing the Math. Philosophy and Literature 33:50–72.
Carroll, Noe¨l. 1993a. On Being Moved by Nature: Between Religion and Natural History. In
Landscape, Natural Beauty and the Arts, edited by S. Kemal and I. Gaskell, 244–66. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
——1993b. The Nature of Mass Art. 1992 Philosophic Exchange (State University of New York,
College at Brockport) 23:5–37.
——1993c. Mass Art, High Art, and the Avant-Garde: A Response to David Novitz. 1992
Philosophic Exchange (State University of New York, College at Brockport) 23:51–62.
——1998. A Philosophy of Mass Art. New York: Oxford University Press.
——2000a. Art and the Domain of the Aesthetic. British Journal of Aesthetics 40:191–208.
——2000b. Art and Ethical Criticism: An Overview of Recent Directions of Research. Ethics
110:350–87.
——2001. Emotion, Appreciation, and Nature. In Beyond Aesthetics, 384–94. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
——2002. Aesthetic Experience Regained. British Journal of Aesthetics 42:145–68.
——2004. Art and Human Nature. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 62:95–107.
——2006. Aesthetic Experience: A Question of Content. In Contemporary Debates in Aesthetics
and the Philosophy of Art, edited by M. Kieran, 69–97. Oxford: Blackwell.
——Moore, Margaret, and Seeley, William P. 2012. The Philosophy of Art and Aesthetics,
Psychology, and Neuroscience: Studies in Literature, Music, and Visual Arts. In Aesthetic
Science: Connecting Minds, Brains, and Experience, edited by A. P. Shimamura and S. E. Palmer,
31–62. New York: Oxford University Press.
Carroll, Sean B. 2005. Endless Forms Most Beautiful: The New Science of Evo Devo and the Making of
the Animal Kingdom. New York: W. W. Norton.
Carruthers, Peter. 2002. Human Creativity: Its Cognitive Basis, its Evolution, and its Connec-
tions with Childhood Pretence. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 53:225–49.
Carruthers, Peter and Chamberlain, Andrew. 2000. Introduction. In Evolution and the Human
Mind, edited by P. Carruthers and A. Chamberlain, 1–12. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Caspari, Ernst. 1972. Sexual Selection in Human Evolution. In Sexual Selection and the Descent of
Man, 1871–1971, edited by B. Campbell, 332–56. London: Heinemann.
Chaloupka, George. 1984. From Paleoart to Casual Paintings. Monograph Series 1. Darwin:
Northern Territory Museum of Arts and Sciences.
238
REFERENCES

Charlesworth, Brian and Charlesworth, Deborah. 2003. Evolution: A Very Short Introduction.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Child, Irvin L. and Siroto, L. 1965. BaKwele and American Esthetic Evaluations Compared.
Ethnology 4:349–60.
Chippindale, Christopher. 2004. Hunter-Gatherer Imagery in Aboriginal Australia: Interpreting
Rock Art by Informed and Formal Methods. In New Perspectives on Prehistoric Art, edited by
G. Bergaus, 31–49. Westport: Praeger.
Chodorow, Nancy. 1978. The Reproduction of Mothering: Psychoanalysis and the Sociology of Gender.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Choi, Charles Q. 2010. Heavy Brows, High Art? Newly Unearthed Painted Shells Show
Neandertals were Homo sapiens’s Mental Equals. Scientiﬁc American 302 (March):18–19.
Clack, Timothy. 2009. Ancestral Roots: Modern Living and Human Evolution. New York: Macmillan.
Clamp, Peter and Powell, Mary. 1982. Prospect-refuge Theory under Test. Landscape Research
7 (3):7–8.
Clark, Kenneth. 1977. Animals and Men: the Relationship as Reﬂected in Western Art from Prehistory
to the Present Day. New York: William Morrow.
Clark, Mary E. 2002. In Search of Human Nature. London: Routledge.
Clegg, Helen, Nettle, Daniel, and Miell, Dorothy. 2008. A Test of Miller’s Aesthetic Fitness
Hypothesis. Journal of Evolutionary Psychology 6:101–15.
Clottes, Jean. 2009. Sticking Bones into Cracks in the Upper Paleolithic. In Becoming Human:
Innovation in Prehistoric Material and Spiritual Culture, edited by C. Renfrew and I. Morley,
195–211. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Clutton-Brock, Juliet. 1999. A Natural History of Domesticated Mammals. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. Second edition.
Coe, Kathryn. 1992. Art: The Replicable Unit—an Inquiry into the Possible Origin of Art as a
Social Behavior. Journal of Social and Evolutionary Systems 15:217–34.
——2002. The Ancestress Hypothesis: Visual Art as Adaptation. New Brunswick: Rutgers Univer-
sity Press.
Cohen, Ted. 1993. High and Low Thinking about High and Low Art. Journal of Aesthetics and Art
Criticism 51, 151–6.
——1999. High and Low Art, and High and Low Audiences. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism
57:137–43.
Collins, D. and Onians, J. 1978. The Origins of Art. Art History 1:1–125.
Comfort, Alex. 1962a. On Laying Plato’s Ghost. In Darwin and the Naked Lady. Discursive Essays
on Biology and Art, 119–35. New York: George Brazilier.
——1962b. Darwin and Freud. In Darwin and the Naked Lady. Discursive Essays on Biology and
Art, 23–42. New York: George Brazilier.
Conard, Nicholas J. 2003. Palaeolithic Ivory Sculptures from Southwestern Germany and the
Origins of Figurative Art. Nature 426:830–2.
——2005. An Overview of the Patterns of Behavioural Change in Africa and Eurasia during
the Middle and Late Pleistocene. In From Tools to Symbols: From Early Hominids to Humans,
edited by F. d’Errico and L. Blackwell, 294–332. Johannesburg: Witwatersrand University
Press.
——Malina, Maria, and Münzel, Susanne C. 2009. New Flutes Document the Earliest Musical
Tradition in Southwestern Germany. Nature 460:737–40.
REFERENCES
239

Conkey, Margaret W. 2009. Materiality and Meaning-making in the Understanding of the
Paleolithic “Arts.” In Becoming Human: Innovation in Prehistoric Material and Spiritual Culture,
edited by C. Renfrew and I. Morley, 179–94. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Conrad, Janet. 1993. Prospect-refuge Theory: An Experimental Approach. MA Dissertation. Brisbane:
Queensland University of Technology.
Constable, John. 1997. Verse Form: A Pilot Study in the Epidemiology of Representations.
Human Nature 8:171–203.
Cooke, Brett. 1987. The Human Alien: In-groups and Out-breeding in Enemy Thine. In Aliens,
the Anthropology of Science Fiction, edited by G. E. Slusser and E. S. Rabkin, 179–98. Carbon-
dale: Southern Illinois University Press.
——1995. Microplots: The Case of Swan Lake. Human Nature 6:183–96.
——1998. Introduction: Deception, Self-Deception and the Other. In The Fantastic Other: an
Interface of Perspectives, edited by B. Cooke, G. E. Slusser, and J. Marti-Olivella, iii–viii.
Amsterdam: Rodopi.
——1999a. Pushkin and the Memetics of Reputation. In Sociobiology and the Arts, edited by
J. B. Bedaux and B. Cooke, 279–98. Amsterdam: Rodopi.
——1999b. The Promise of a Biothematics. In Sociobiology and the Arts, edited by J. B. Bedaux
and B. Cooke, 43–62. Amsterdam: Rodopi.
——2002. Human Nature in Utopia: Zamyatin’s We. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.
Cooper, David E. 2006. A Philosophy of Gardens. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——2008. Beautiful People, Beautiful Things. British Journal of Aesthetics 48:247–60.
Coote, Jeremy. 1996. Is Aesthetics a Cross-cultural Category: For the Motion. In Key Debates in
Anthropology, edited by T. Ingold, 266–71. London: Routledge.
Coppinger, Raymond and Coppinger, Lorna. 2001. Dogs: A New Understanding of Canine Origin,
Behavior, and Evolution. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Corballis, Michael C. 1999. Phylogeny from Apes to Humans. In The Descent of Mind: Psycholog-
ical Perspectives on Hominid Evolution, edited by M. C. Corballis and S. E. G. Lea, 40–70.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——2002. From Hand to Mouth: The Origins of Language. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
——2003. From Hand to Mouth: The Gestural Origins of Language. In Language Evolution,
edited by S. Kirby and M. Christiansen, 201–18. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Corbett, Laurie. 1985. Morphological Comparisons of Australian and Thai Dingoes: A Reappraisal
of Dingo Status, Distribution, and Ancestry. Proceedings of the Ecology Society of Australia 13:277–91.
Corbey, Raymond, Layton, Robert, and Tanner, Jeremy. 2004. Archaeology and Art. In
A Companion to Archaeology, edited by J. L. Bintliff, 357–79. Oxford: Blackwell.
Cosmides, Leda and Tooby, John. 1992a. Cognitive Adaptations for Social Exchange. In The
Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture, edited by J. H. Barkow,
L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby, 163–228. New York: Oxford University Press.
—— ——1997. The Modular Nature of Human Intelligence. In The Origin and Evolution of
Intelligence, edited by A. G. Sheibel and J. W. Schopf, 71–101. Sudbury: Jones and Bartlett.
—— ——2000a. The Cognitive Neuroscience of Social Reasoning. In The New Cognitive
Neurosciences, edited by M. S. Gazzaniga, 1259–70. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
—— ——2000b. Consider the Source: The Evolution of Adaptations for Decoupling and
Metarepresentations. In Metarepresentations: a Multidisciplinary Perspective, edited by D. Sperber,
53–115. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
240
REFERENCES

—— ——and Barkow, Jerome H. 1992b. Evolutionary Psychology and Conceptual Integra-
tion. In The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture, edited by
J. H. Barkow, L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby, 3–15. New York: Oxford University Press.
Coss, Richard G. 1968. The Ethological Command in Art. Leonardo 1:273–87.
Costa, Marco and Corazza, Leonardo. 2006. Aesthetic Phenomena as Supernormal Stimuli: The
Case of Eye, Lip, and Lower-face Size and Roundness in Artistic Portraits. Perception 35:229–46.
Cowie, Roddy. 2011. Beauty is Felt, not Calculated; and it does not Fit in Boxes. In The Aesthetic
Mind: Philosophy and Psychology, edited by E. Schellekens and P. Goldie, 89–105. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Cox, Gary. 1999. The Biology of Dostoevsky’s Crime and Punishment: Cultural Text as Adaptive
Mechanism. In Sociobiology and the Arts, edited by J. B. Bedaux and B. Cooke, 175–90.
Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Crawford, M. A., Bloom, M., Broadhurst, C. L., Schmidt, W. F., Cunnane, S. C., Galli, C.,
Gehbremeskel, K., Linseisen, F., Lloyd-Smith, J., and Parkington, J. 1999. Evidence for the
Unique Function of Docosahexaenoic Acid during the Evolution of the Modern Hominid
Brain. Lipids 34, Supplement 1:534–47.
Cronin, Helena. 1991. The Ant and the Peacock. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Crook, John H. 1980. The Evolution of Human Consciousness. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Cross, Ian. 1999. Is Music the Most Important Thing We Ever Did? Music, Development, and
Evolution. In Music, Mind and Science, edited by Suk Won Yi, 10–39. Seoul: Seoul National
University Press.
——2001. Music, Mind, and Evolution. Psychology of Music 29:95–102.
——2003a. Music, Cognition, Culture, and Evolution. The Cognitive Neuroscience of Music,
edited by I. Peretz and R. J. Zatorre, 42–56. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
——2003b. Music and Biocultural Evolution. In The Cultural Study of Music: A Critical Introduc-
tion, edited by M. Clayton, T. Herbert, and R. Middleton, 19–30. New York: Routledge.
——2003c. Music as Biocultural Phenomenon. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences (The
Neurosciences and Music) 999:106–11.
——2005. Music and Meaning, Ambiguity and Evolution. In Musical Communication, edited by
D. Miell, R. A. R. MacDonald, and D. J. Hargreaves, 27–43. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——2005–6. Music and Social Being. Musicology Australia 28:114–26.
——2007. Music and Cognitive Evolution. In The Oxford Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology,
edited by R. I. M. Dunbar and L. Barrett, 649–67. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——2008. Musicality and the Human Capacity for Culture. Musicae Scientiae, 12, special
number, 147–65.
——2009. The Nature of Music and its Evolution. In The Oxford Handbook of Music Psychology,
edited by S. Hallam, I. Cross, and M. Thaut, 3–13. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——2009–10. The Evolutionary Nature of Musical Meaning. Musicae Scientiae 13:179–200.
——and Morley, Iain. 2009. The Evolution of Music: Theories, Deﬁnitions and the Nature of
the Evidence. In Communicative Musicality: Exploring the Basis of Human Companionship, edited
by S. Malloch and C. Trevarthen, 61–82. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Crowley, Daniel J. 1966. An African Aesthetic. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 24: 519–24.
Cunningham, Michael R., Barbee, Anita P., and Pike, C. L. 1990. What do Women Want?
Facial-metric Assessment of Multiple Motives in the Perception of Male Facial Physical
Attractiveness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 59:61–72.
REFERENCES
241

Cunningham, Michael R., Roberts, Alan R., Barbee, Anita P., Druen, Perri B., and Wu,
Cheng-Huan. 1995. “Their Ideas of Beauty are on the Whole the Same as Ours”: Consisten-
cy and Variability in the Cross-cultural Perception of Female Physical Attractiveness. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 68:261–79.
Cunningham, Michael R. and Shamblen, Stephen R. 2003. Beyond Nature Versus Culture:
A Multiple Fitness Analysis of Variations in Grooming. In Evolutionary Aesthetics, edited by
E. Voland and K. Grammer, 201–37. Berlin: Springer.
Currie, Gregory. 1997. The Moral Psychology of Fiction. In Art and its Messages: Meaning,
Morality, and Society, edited by S. Davies, 49–58. University Park: Pennsylvania State Univer-
sity Press.
——1998. Realism of Character and the Value of Fiction. In Aesthetics and Ethics: Essays at the
Intersection, edited by J. Levinson, 161–81. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——2003. Aesthetics and Cognitive Science. In The Oxford Handbook of Aesthetics, edited by
J. Levinson, 706–21. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——2004. Arts and Minds. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
——2009. Art of the Paleolithic. In A Companion to Aesthetics, edited by S. Davies,
K. M. Higgins, R. Hopkins, R. Stecker, and D. E. Cooper, 1–10. Malden: Wiley-Blackwell.
——2011. The Master of the Masek Beds: Handaxes, Art, and the Minds of Early Humans. In
The Aesthetic Mind: Philosophy and Psychology, edited by E. Schellekens and P. Goldie, 9–31.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Danto, Arthur C. 1964. The Artworld. Journal of Philosophy 61:571–84.
——1981. The Transﬁguration of the Commonplace. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
——1986. The Philosophical Disenfranchisement of Art. New York: Columbia University Press.
——1997. How Can It Be the “Most Wanted Painting” even if Nobody Wants It? In Painting by
Numbers: Komar and Melamid’s Scientiﬁc Guide to Art, edited by J. Wypijewski, 124–40. New
York: Farrar, Straus, Giroux.
Darwin, Charles. 1859. On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection or the Preservation of
Favoured Races in the Struggle of Life. London: John Murray. Sixth edition 1872.
——1880. The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex. London: D. Appleton. Revised and
augmented edition. First edition 1871.
Da Soller, Claudio. 2010. Beauty, Evolution, and Medieval Literature. Philosophy and Literature
34:95–111.
Davenport, William H. 1968. Sculpture of the Solomon Islands. Expedition 10:4–25.
——1986. Two Kinds of Value in the Eastern Solomon Islands. In The Social Life of Things:
Commodities in Cultural Perspective, edited by A. Appadurai, 95–109. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Davidson, Iain. 2003. The Archaeological Evidence of Language Origins: States of Art. In
Language Evolution, edited by S. Kirby and M. Christiansen, 140–57. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Davies, David. 2011a. “I’ll be Your Mirror”? Embodied Agency, Dance, and Neuroscience. In
The Aesthetic Mind: Philosophy and Psychology, edited by E. Schellekens and P. Goldie, 346–56.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——2011b. The Performing Arts. Malden: Wiley-Blackwell.
Davies, Nicholas B. 1991. Mating Systems. In Behavioural Ecology, edited by J. R. Krebs and
N. B. Davies, 263–94. Oxford: Blackwell. Third edition.
242
REFERENCES

Davies, Stephen. 1991. Deﬁnitions of Art. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
——1994. Musical Meaning and Expression. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
——1997a. First Art and Art’s Deﬁnition. Southern Journal of Philosophy 35:19–34.
——1997b. Introduction. In Art and Its Messages: Meaning, Morality, and Society, edited by
S. Davies, 1–16. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.
——2000. Non-Western Art and Art’s Deﬁnition. In Theories of Art Today, edited by N. Carroll,
199–216. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
——2001. Musical Works and Performances. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
——2003. Essential Distinctions for Art Theorists. In Art and Essence, edited by S. Davies and
A. C. Sukla, 3–16. Westport: Praeger.
——2004. The Cluster Theory of Art. British Journal of Aesthetics 44: 297–300.
——2005. Ellen Dissanayake’s Evolutionary Aesthetic. Biology and Philosophy 20:291–304.
——2006a. The Philosophy of Art. Oxford: Blackwell.
——2006b. Aesthetic Judgment, Artworks, and Functional Beauty. Philosophical Quarterly
56:224–41.
——2006c. Artistic Expression and the Hard Case of Pure Music. In Contemporary Debates in
Aesthetics and the Philosophy of Art, edited by M. Kieran, 179–91. Oxford: Blackwell.
——2008. Trying to Deﬁne Art as the Sum of the Arts. Pazhouhesh Nameh-e Farhangestan-e Honar
(Research Journal of the Iranian Academy of the Arts), 8, Spring, 12–23.
——2010a. Functional Beauty Examined. Canadian Journal of Philosophy 40:315–32.
——2010b. Why Art is not a Spandrel. British Journal of Aesthetics 50:333–41.
——2011. Cross-cultural Musical Expressiveness: Theory and the Empirical Programme. In
Philosophical Aesthetics and Aesthetic Psychology, edited by E. Schellekens and P. Goldie, 376–88.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——2012. Beauty, Youth, and the Balinese Legong Dance. In Beauty Revisited, edited by
P. Z. Brand, 259–79. Indianapolis: Indiana University Press.
Davis, Whitney. 1986. The Origins of Image Making. Current Anthropology 27:193–202.
Dawkins, Richard. 1986. The Blind Watchmaker. Harlow: Longman Scientiﬁc and Technical.
——1989. The Selﬁsh Gene. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Second edition.
——1994. Burying the Vehicle. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 17:616–17.
——and Krebs, John R. 1978. Animal Signals: Information or Manipulation? In Behavioural
Ecology, edited by J. R. Krebs and N. B. Davies, 282–309. Oxford: Blackwell.
Deacon, Terrence. 1998. The Symbolic Species: The Co-evolution of Language and the Human Brain.
London: Penguin.
——2006. The Aesthetic Faculty. In The Artful Mind: Science and the Riddle of Human Creativity,
edited by M. Turner, 21–53. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dean, Roger T., Byron, Tim and Bailes, Freya A. 2009–10. The Pulse of Symmetry: On the
Possible Co-evolution of Rhythm in Music and Dance. Musicae Scientiae 13:341–67.
Dehaene, Stanislas, 2009. Reading in the Brain: The Science and Evolution of a Human Invention.
New York: Viking.
Demoulin, Emmanuel. 2002. Les Faons aux Oiseaux. Le Propulseur 4/5:1–5.
Dennett, Daniel C. 1987. The Intentional Stance. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——1990a. Memes and the Exploitation of Imagination. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism
48:127–35.
REFERENCES
243

Dennett, Daniel C. 1990b. The Interpretation of Texts, People and Other Artifacts. Philosophy
and Phenomenological Research 50:177–94.
——1991. Consciousness Explained. London: Penguin Books.
——1995. Darwin’s Dangerous Idea. New York: Simon & Schuster.
DePryck, Koen. 1999. Toward an Archaeology and Futurology of Mind. Possible Evolutionary
Advantages of Learning Difﬁculties. In Sociobiology and the Arts, edited by J. B. Bedaux and
B. Cooke, 253–77. Amsterdam: Rodopi.
d’Errico, Francesco, Zilhão, João, Julien, Michele, Bafﬁer, Dominique, and Pelegrin, Jacques.
1998. Neanderthal Acculturation in Western Europe? A Critical Review of the Evidence and
its Interpretation. Current Anthropology 39 Supplement:S1–S44.
Derry, Margaret E. 2003. Bred for Perfection: Shorthorn Cattle, Collies, and Arabian Horses since 1800.
Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press.
De Smedt, Johan. 2011. Common Minds, Uncommon Thoughts: A Philosophical Anthropological
Investigation of Uniquely Human Creative Behavior, with an Emphasis on Artistic Ability, Religious
Reﬂection, and Scientiﬁc Study. Ph.D. Dissertation. Ghent: University of Ghent.
——and De Cruz, Helen. 2010. Toward an Integrative Approach of Cognitive Neuroscientiﬁc
and Evolutionary Psychological Studies of Art. Evolutionary Psychology 8:695–719.
——and De Cruz, Helen. 2011. A Cognitive Approach to the Earliest Art. Journal of Aesthetics
and Art Criticism 69:379–89.
De Sousa, Ronald. 2004. Is Art an Adaptation? Prospects for an Evolutionary Perspective on
Beauty. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 62:109–18.
de Waal, Frans B. M. 1998. Chimpanzee Politics: Power and Sex among Apes. Baltimore: John
Hopkins University Press. Revised edition.
——2001. The Ape and the Sushi Master. New York: Basic Books.
Dewey, John. 1980. Art as Experience. New York: Perigee Books. First published 1934.
Diamond, Jared. 1982. Evolution of Bowerbirds’ Bowers: Animal Origins of the Aesthetic Sense.
Nature 297 (May):99–102.
——1991. Art of the Wild. Discover 12 (February):78–85.
——1992. The Third Chimpanzee: The Evolution and Future of the Human Animal. New York:
Harper Collins.
——1997. Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. New York: W. W. Norton.
Dickie, George. 1964. The Myth of the Aesthetic Attitude. American Philosophical Quarterly 1:56–65.
——1965. Beardsley’s Phantom Aesthetic Experience. Journal of Philosophy 62:129–36.
——1974. Art and the Aesthetic: An Institutional Analysis. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
——1996. The Century of Taste. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dinnerstein, Dorothy. 1976. The Mermaid and the Minotaur: Sexual Arrangements and Human
Malaise. New York: Harper & Row.
Dion, Karen K. 2002. Cultural Perspectives on Facial Attractiveness. In Facial Attractiveness:
Evolutionary, Cognitive, and Social Perspectives, edited by G. Rhodes and L. A. Zebrowitz,
239–59. Westport: Ablex.
Dissanayake, Ellen. 1974. A Hypothesis of the Evolution of Art from Play. Leonardo 7 (3):211–18.
——1979. Ethological View of Ritual and Art in Human Evolutionary History. Leonardo
12 (1):27–31.
——1980. Art as a Human Behavior: Toward an Ethological View of Art. Journal of Aesthetics and
Art Criticism 38:397–406.
244
REFERENCES

——1982. Aesthetic Experience and Human Evolution. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism
41:145–55.
——1984. Does Art Have Selective Value? Empirical Studies of the Arts 2:35–49.
——1988. What Is Art For? Seattle: University of Washington Press.
——1990. Art for Life’s Sake. The World & I (April):571–83.
——1995a. Homo Aestheticus: Where Art Comes From and Why. Seattle: University of Washington
Press.
——1995b. Chimera, Spandrel, or Adaptation: Conceptualizing Art in Human Evolution.
Human Nature 6 (2):99–117.
——1998. Komar and Melamid Discover Pleistocene Taste. Philosophy and Literature 22:486–96.
——1999a. Sociology and the Arts: An Introduction. In Sociobiology and the Arts, edited by
J. B. Bedaux and B. Cooke, 27–42. Amsterdam: Rodopi.
——1999b. Antecedents of Musical Meaning in the Mother-Infant Dyad. Biopoetics: Evolution-
ary Explorations in the Arts, edited by B. Cooke and F. Turner, 367–98. Lexington: ICUS.
——2000a. Art and Intimacy: How the Arts Began. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
——2000b. Antecedents of the Temporal Arts in Early Mother-Infant Interaction. In The Origins of
Music, edited by N. L. Wallin, B. Merker, and S. Brown, 389–410. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——2006. Ritual and Ritualization: Musical Means of Conveying and Shaping Emotions in
Humans and Other Animals. In Music and Manipulation: On the Social Uses and Social Control of
Music, edited by S. Brown and U. Volgsten, 31–56. Oxford: Berghahn.
——2007. What Art Is and What Art Does: An Overview of Contemporary Evolutionary
Hypotheses. In Evolutionary and Neurocognitive Approaches to Aesthetics, Creativity and the Arts,
edited by C. Martindale, P. Locher, and V. M. Petrov, 1–14. Amityville: Baywood.
——2008a. If Music is the Food of Love, What About Survival and Reproductive Success?
Musicae Scientiae, 12, special number, 169–95.
——2008b. Beyond Words: Can Literary Darwinism Address the Unsaid and Inexpressible in
Literary Creation and Response? Style 42:161–5.
Distin, Kate. 2004. The Selﬁsh Meme: A CriticalReassessment.Cambridge:Cambridge University Press.
Dobres, Marcia-Anne. 1996. Venus Figurines. The Oxford Companion to Archaeology, chief editor
B. M. Fagan, 740–1. New York: Oxford University Press.
Domjan, Michael. 2002. Cognitive Modulation of Sexual Behavior. In The Cognitive Animal:
Empirical and Theoretical Perspectives on Animal Cognition, edited by M. Bekoff, C. Allen, and
G. M. Burghardt, 97–103. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Donald, Merlin. 2006. Art and Cognitive Evolution. In The Artful Mind: Cognitive Science and the
Riddle of Human Creativity, edited by M. Turner, 3–20. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——2009. The Roots of Art and Religion in Material Culture. In Becoming Human: Innovation
in Prehistoric Material and Spiritual Culture, edited by C. Renfrew and I. Morley, 95–103.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dorﬂes, Gillo, editor. 1969. The World of Bad Taste. New York: Universe Books.
Dowling, Christopher. 2010. The Aesthetics of Daily Life. British Journal of Aesthetics 50:225–42.
Draganski, Bogdan, Gaser, Christian, Busch, Volker, Schuierer, Gerhard, Bogdahn, Ulrich, and
May, Arne. 2004. Changes in Grey Matter Induced by Training. Nature 427:311–12.
Drake, Carolyn and Bertrand, Daisy. 2003. The Quest for Universals in Temporal Processing in
Music. In The Cognitive Neuroscience of Music, edited by I. Peretz and R. Zattore, 21–31.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
REFERENCES
245

Driscoll, Carlos A., Clutton-Brock, Juliet, Kitchener, Andrew C., and O’Brien, Stephen J. 2009.
The Taming of the Cat. Scientiﬁc American 300 (June):68–75.
Ducasse, Curt J. 1929. The Philosophy of Art. New York: Dial Press.
Dunbar, Robin I. M. 1992. Neocortex Size as a Constraint on Group Size in Primates. Journal of
Human Evolution 22:469–93.
——1996. The Evolution of Language. London: Faber & Faber.
——2000. On the Origin of the Human Mind. In Evolution and the Human Mind, edited by
P. Carruthers and A. Chamberlain, 238–53. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——2003. The Origin and Subsequent Evolution of Language. In Language Evolution, edited by
S. Kirby and M. Christiansen, 219–34. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——2004. The Human Story: A New History of Mankind’s Evolution. London: Faber & Faber.
——2005. Why are Good Writers so Rare? An Evolutionary Perspective on Literature. Journal of
Cultural and Evolutionary Psychology 3:7–21.
——and Barrett, Louise. 2007. Evolutionary Psychology in the Round. In The Oxford Handbook
of Evolutionary Psychology, edited by R. I. M. Dunbar and L. Barrett, 3–9. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Dunn, Michael, Terrill, Angela, Reesink, Ger, Foley, Robert A., and Levinson, Stephen
C. 2005. Structural Phylogenetics and the Reconstruction of Ancient Language History.
Science 309 (September 23):2072–5.
Durham, William H. 1991. Coevolution: Genes, Culture, and Human Diversity. Stanford: Stanford
University Press.
Dutton, Denis. 2000a. But They Don’t Have Our Concept of Art. In Theories of Art Today,
edited by N. Carroll, 217–38. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
——2000b. Art and Sexual Selection. Philosophy and Literature 24:512–21.
——2003a. Universalism, Evolutionary Psychology, and Aesthetics. In Art and Essence, edited by
S. Davies and A. C. Sukla, 213–26. Westport: Praeger.
——2003b. Aesthetics and Evolutionary Psychology. In The Oxford Handbook of Aesthetics,
edited by J. Levinson, 693–705. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——2005. Aesthetic Universals. In The Routledge Companion to Aesthetics, edited by B. Gaut and
D. M. Lopes, 279–91. London: Routledge. Second edition.
——2007. Art, Landscape, and Pleistocene Life. In Visual Animals: Crossovers, Evolution, and New
Aesthetics, edited by I. North, 59–68. Parkside, South Australia: Contemporary Art Museum of
South Australia.
——2009. The Art Instinct. New York: Bloomsbury Press.
Eagly, Alice H., Ashmore, Richard D., Makhijani, Mona G., and Longo, Laura C. 1991. What is
Beautiful is Good, but . . . : A Meta-analytic Review of Research on the Physical Attractive-
ness Stereotype. Canadian Journal of Behavioral Science 15:35–42.
Eagly, Alice H. and Wood, Wendy. 1999. The Origin of Sex Differences in Human Behavior:
Evolved Dispositions versus Social Roles. American Psychologist 54:408–23.
Easterlin, Nancy L. 1999. Do Cognitive Predispositions Predict or Determine Literary Value
Judgments? Narrative, Plot, and Aesthetics. Biopoetics: Evolutionary Explorations in the Arts,
edited by B. Cooke and F. Turner, 241–61. Lexington: ICUS.
——2001. Hans Christian Andersen’s Fish out of Water. Philosophy and Literature 25:251–77.
——2005. How to Write the Great Darwinian Novel: Cognitive Predispositions, Cultural
Complexity, and Aesthetic Evaluation. Journal of Cultural and Evolutionary Psychology 3:23–38.
246
REFERENCES

Eaton, Marcia Muelder. 1998. Fact and Fiction in the Aesthetic Appreciation of Nature. Journal
of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 56:149–56.
——2006. Beauty and Ugliness In and Out of Context. In Contemporary Debates in Aesthetics and
the Philosophy of Art, edited by M. Kieran, 39–50. Oxford: Blackwell.
Editors. 1987. Facial Discrimination: Employment Discrimination on the Basis of Physical
Appearance. Harvard Law Review 100:2035–52.
Edwards, Arthur M. 2003. Images of Eden: an Enquiry into the Psychology of Aesthetics. Lancaster:
Skylark Press.
Ehmann, James. 1987. The Elephant as Artist. National Wildlife 25 (February–March):26–8.
Eibl, Karl. 2009. The Induction Instinct: Evolution and Poetic Application of a Cognitive Tool.
Studies in the Literary Imagination 42 (2):43–60.
——and Mellmann, Katja. 2008. Misleading Alternatives. Style 42:166–71.
Eibl-Eibesfeldt, Irenäus. 1988. The Biological Foundations of Aesthetics. In Beauty and the Brain:
Biological Aspects of Aesthetics, edited by I. Rentschler, B. Herzberger, and D. Epstein, 29–68.
Basel: Birkhäuser.
Einon, Dorothy. 2007. The Shaping of Women’s Bodies: Men’s Choice of Fertility or Heat
Stress Avoidance? In The Body Beautiful: Evolutionary and Socio-Cultural Perspectives, edited by
V. Swami and A. Furnham, 131–58. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Ellis, Bruce J. 1992. The Evolution of Sexual Attraction: Evaluative Mechanisms in Women. In
The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture, edited by J. H. Barkow,
L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby, 267–88. New York: Oxford University Press.
Enquist, Magnus and Arak, Anthony. 1993. Selection of Exaggerated Male Traits by Female
Aesthetic Sense. Nature 361:446–8.
Epstein, David. 1988. Tempo Relations in Music: A Universal? Beautyand the Brain: Biological Aspects
of Aesthetics, edited by I. Rentschler, B. Herzberger, and D. Epstein, 91–116. Basel: Birkhäuser.
Ericsson, K. Anders, Krampe, Ralf Th., and Tesch-Ro¨mer, Clemens. 1993. The Role of Deli-
berate Practice in the Acquisition of Expert Performance. Psychological Review 100:363–406.
Erlewine, Michael, Bogdanov, Vladimir, Woodstra, Chris, Erlewine, Stephen Thomas, and
Unterberger, Richie, editors. 1997. All MusicGuide to Rock. San Francisco: Miller Freeman Books.
Etcoff, Nancy. 1999. Survival of the Prettiest: The Science of Beauty. New York: Doubleday.
Evans, Dylan. 2005. From Lacan to Darwin. In The Literary Animal: Evolution and the Nature of
Narrative, edited by J. Gottschall and D. S. Wilson, 38–55. Evanston: Northwestern University
Press.
Eysenck, Hans J. 1941. Empirical Determinations of an Aesthetic Formula. Psychological Review
48 (1):83–92.
Fagen, Robert. 1981. Animal Play Behavior. New York: Oxford University Press.
Falk, Dean. 2000. Hominid Brain Evolution and the Origins of Music. In The Origins of Music,
edited by N. L. Wallin, B. Merker, and S. Brown, 197–216. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——2004. Prelinguistic Evolution in Early Hominins: Whence Motherese? Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 27:491–541.
Feingold, Alan. 1992. Good-looking People are Not What We Think. Psychological Bulletin
111:304–41.
Feist, Gregory J. 2007. An Evolutionary Model of Artistic and Musical Creativity. In Evolutionary
and Neurocognitive Approaches to Aesthetics, Creativity and the Arts, edited by C. Martindale,
P. Locher and V. M. Petrov, 15–30. Amityville: Baywood.
REFERENCES
247

Fenk-Oczlon, Gertraud and Fenk, August. 2009–10. Some Parallels between Language and
Music from a Cognitive and Evolutionary Perspective. Musicae Scientiae 13:201–26.
Fernandez, James W. 1966. Principles of Opposition and Vitality in Fang Aesthetics. Journal of
Aesthetics and Art Criticism 25:53–64.
Fessler, Daniel M. T. 2006. A Burning Desire: Steps toward an Evolutionary Psychology of Fire
Learning. Journal of Cognition and Culture 6:3–4.
Fine, Aubrey H., editor. 2006. Handbook on Animal-Assisted Therapy: Theoretical Foundations and
Guidelines for Practice. Amsterdam: Elsevier Press. Second edition.
Fireman, Gary D., McVay, Ted E., and Flanagan, Owen J., editors. 2003. Narrative and
Consciousness: Literature, Psychology, and the Brain. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fisher, Elizabeth. 1979. Women’s Creation. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Fisher, Helen E. 1992. Anatomy of Love: The Natural History of Monogamy, Adultery and Divorce.
Norton: New York.
——2004. Why We Love: The Nature and Chemistry of Romantic Love. New York: Henry Holt.
Fisher, R. A. 1915. The Evolution of Sexual Preference. Eugenics Review 7:184–92.
——1958. The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection. New York: Dover. Second edition.
Fitch, W. Tecumseh. 2005. The Evolution of Music in Comparative Perspective. Annals of New
York Academy of Sciences 1060:29–49.
——2006. On the Biology and Evolution of Music. Music Perception 24:85–8.
——2010. The Evolution of Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Flesch, William. 2007. [Comeuppance]: Costly Signaling, Altruistic Punishment, and Other Biological
Components of Fiction. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Fletcher, Garth J. O. 2002. The New Science of Intimate Relationships. Oxford: Blackwell.
——and Stenswick, Melissa. 2003. The Intimate Relationship Mind. In From Mating to Mentality:
Evaluating Evolutionary Psychology, edited by K. Sterelny and J. Fitness, 71–93. London:
Psychology Press.
Flood, Josephine. 1997. Rock Art of the Dreamtime: Images of Ancient Australia. Sydney: Angus and
Robertson.
——2006. The Original Australians: Story of the Aboriginal People. Crows Nest: Allen & Unwin.
Fodor, Jerry A. 2000. The Mind doesn’t Work that Way: The Scope and Limits of Computational
Psychology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Foley, Robert. 1995. The Adaptive Legacy of Human Evolution: A Search for the Environment
of Evolutionary Adaptedness. Evolutionary Anthropology 4:194–203.
Ford, Clellan S. and Beach, Frank A. 1951. Patterns of Sexual Behavior. New York: Harper &
Row.
Fox, Robin. 1995. Sexual Conﬂict in the Epics. Human Nature 6 (2):135–44.
——2005. Male Bonding in the Epics and Romances. In The Literary Animal: Evolution and the
Nature of Narrative, edited by J. Gottschall and D. S. Wilson, 126–46. Evanston: Northwestern
University Press.
Foy, Jeffrey E. and Gerrig, Richard J. 2008. How Might Literature do Harm? Style 42:175–8.
Frank, Robert H. 1988. Passions within Reason: The Strategic Role of the Emotions. New York:
Norton.
Frankenhuis, Willem E. and Ploeger, Annemie. 2007. Evolutionary Psychology versus Fodor:
Arguments for and against the Massive Modularity Hypothesis. Philosophical Psychology
20:687–710.
248
REFERENCES

Freeman, Walter. 2000. A Neurobiological Role of Music in Social Bonding. In The Origins of
Music, edited by N. L. Wallin, B. Merker, and S. Brown, 411–24. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Frisch, Rose E. 1988. Fatness and Fertility. Scientiﬁc American 258 (March):70–7.
Fritz, Thomas, Jentschke, Sebastian, Gosselin, Nathalie, Sammler, Daniela, Peretz, Isabelle,
Turner, Robert, Friederici, Angela D., and Koelsch, Stefan. 2009. Universal Recognition of
Three Basic Emotions in Music. Current Biology 19 (7):573–6.
Frost, Robin. 1987. Comments on Halverson’s “Art for Art’s Sake in the Paleolithic.” Current
Anthropology 28:77–9.
Fukui, Hajime. 2001a. Is Music the Peacock’s Tail? Human Behavior and Evolution Society
Conference. London.
——2001b. Music and Testosterone. A New Hypothesis for the Origin and Function of Music.
Annals of the New York Academy of the Sciences 930:448–51.
——and Yamashita, Masako. 1998. The Effects of Music and Stress on Testosterone in Men and
Women. In Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Music Perception and Cognition,
437–42. Seoul: Seoul National University.
Fuller, Peter. 1983. Art and Biology. In The Naked Artist, 2–19. London: Writers and Readers.
Gamble, Clive. 2007. Origins and Revolutions: Human Identity in Earliest Prehistory. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Gangestad, Steven W. 2007. Reproductive Strategies and Tactics. In The Oxford Handbook of
Evolutionary Psychology, edited by R. I. M. Dunbar and L. Barrett, 321–32. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Gardiner, Martin F. 2008. Responses to Music: Emotional Signaling, and Learning. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences 31:580–1.
Gardner, Howard. 1982. Art, Mind, and Brain: A Cognitive Approach to Creativity. New York:
Basic Books.
Gatherer, Derek. 1997. The Evolution of Music—A Comparison of Darwinian and Dialectical
Methods. Journal of Social and Evolutionary Systems 20:75–92.
Gaut, Berys. 2000. “Art” as a Cluster Concept. In Theories of Art Today, edited by N. Carroll,
25–44. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
——2005a. Art, Emotion, and Ethics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——2005b. The Cluster Account of Art Defended. British Journal of Aesthetics 45:273–88.
Geissman, Thomas. 2000. Gibbon Song and Human Music from an Evolutionary Perspective. In
The Origins of Music, edited by N. L. Wallin, B. Merker, and S. Brown, 103–23. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Geist, Valerius. 1978. Life Strategies, Human Evolution, Environmental Design: Toward a Biological
Theory of Health. New York: Springer.
George, Hannah R., Swami, Viren, Cornelissen, Piers L., and Tove´e, Martin J. 2008. Prefer-
ences for Body Mass Index and Waist-to-Hip Ratio do not vary with Observer Age. Journal of
Evolutionary Psychology 6:207–18.
Getty, Thomas. 2006. Sexually Selected Signals are not like Sports Handicaps. Trends in Ecology
and Evolution 21:83–8.
Gilliard, E. Thomas. 1969. Birds of Paradise and Bower Birds. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.
Gilligan, Ian. 2007. Neanderthal Extinction and Modern Human Behaviour: The Role of
Climate Change and Clothing. World Archaeology 39:499–514.
Glausiusz, Josie. 2001. The Genetic Mystery of Music. Discover 22 (8):70.
REFERENCES
249

Godfrey-Smith, Peter. 2000. The Replicator in Retrospect. Biology and Philosophy 15:403–23.
——2001. On the Status and Explanatory Structure of Developmental Systems Theory. In
Cycles of Contingency: Developmental Systems and Evolution, edited by S. Oyama, P. E. Grifﬁths,
and R. D. Gray, 283–97. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——2009. Darwinian Populations and Natural Selection. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Godlovitch, Stan. 1998. Valuing Nature and the Autonomy of Natural Aesthetics. British Journal
of Aesthetics 38:180–97.
Goldie, Peter. 2000. The Emotions: a Philosophical Exploration. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——and Schellekens, Elisabeth. 2009. Who’s Afraid of Conceptual Art? London: Routledge.
Goldman, Alan H. 1990. Aesthetic Qualities and Aesthetic Value. Journal of Philosophy 87:23–37.
——1992. The Value of Music. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 50:35–44.
——2009. Aesthetic Properties. In A Companion to Aesthetics, edited by S. Davies, K. M. Higgins,
R. Hopkins, R. Stecker, and D. E. Cooper, 124–8. Malden: Wiley-Blackwell.
Goodheart, Eugene. 2007. Darwinian Misadventures in the Humanities. Edison: Transaction.
Gosden, Chris. 2003. Prehistory: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gottschall, Jonathan. 2001. Homer’s Human Animal Ritual Combat in The Iliad. Philosophy and
Literature 25:278–94.
——2004. Literary Universals and the Sciences of the Mind. Philosophy and Literature 28:202–17.
——2005. Quantitative Literary Study: A Modest Manifesto and Testing the Hypotheses of
Feminist Fairy Tale Studies. In The Literary Animal: Evolution and the Nature of Narrative, edited
by J. Gottschall and D. S. Wilson, 199–224. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.
——2008a. Literature, Science, and a New Humanities. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
——2008b. What are Literary Scholars For? What is Art For? Style 42:186–91.
——2008c. The Rape of Troy: Evolution, Violence, and the World of Homer. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Gould, Stephen Jay. 1977. Ontogeny and Phylogeny. Cambridge: Belknap Press.
——1980a. Sociobiology and the Theory of Natural Selection. In Sociobiology, Beyond Nature/
Nurture? Reports, Deﬁnitions, and Debate, edited by G. W. Barlow and J. Silverberg, 257–69.
Boulder: Westview Press.
——1980b. A Biological Homage to Mickey Mouse. In The Panda’s Thumb: More Reﬂections in
Natural History, 95–107. New York: W.W. Norton.
——1996. A Lesson from the Old Masters. Natural History 105 (8):16–24.
——1997a. Evolution: The Pleasures of Pluralism. New York Review of Books 44 (11, 26 June).
——1997b. The Exaptive Excellence of Spandrels as a Term and Prototype. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Science (US) 94:10750–5.
——2002. The Structure of Evolutionary Theory. Cambridge: Belknap Press.
——and Lewontin, Richard C. 1979. The Spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian
Paradigm: a Critique of the Adaptationist Programme. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London,
series B 205:581–98.
——and Vrba, Elisabeth S. 1982. Exaptation—A Missing Term in the Science of Form.
Paleobiology 8 (1):4–15.
Gow, Peter. 1996. Is Aesthetics a Cross-cultural Category: Against the Motion. In Key Debates in
Anthropology, edited by T. Ingold, 271–5. London: Routledge.
Gracyk, Theodore. 2007. Searching for the “Popular” and the “Art” of Popular Art. Philosophy
Compass 2/3:380–95.
250
REFERENCES

——2009. Ontological Contextualism. In A Companion to Aesthetics, edited by S. Davies,
K. M. Higgins, R. Hopkins, R. Stecker, and D. E. Cooper, 449–53. Malden: Wiley-Blackwell.
Grafen, Alan. 1990. Biological Signals as Handicaps. Journal of Theoretical Biology 144:517–46.
Grammer, Karl, Keki, Viktoria, Striebel, Beate, Atzmüller, Michaela, and Fink, Bernhard. 2003.
Bodies in Motion: A Window to the Soul. In Evolutionary Aesthetics, edited by E. Voland and
K. Grammer, 295–323. Berlin: Springer.
Granit, Ragnar. 1977. The Purposive Brain. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gräslund, Bo. 2005. Early Humans and their World, translated by N. Price. London: Routledge.
Gray, Russell D., Heaney, Megan, and Fairhall, Scott. 2003. Evolutionary Psychology and the
Challenge of Adaptive Explanation. In From Mating to Mentality: Evaluating Evolutionary
Psychology, edited by K. Sterelny and J. Fitness, 247–68. London: Psychology Press.
Green, Christopher D. 1995. All that Glitters: A Review of Psychological Research on the
Aesthetics of the Golden Section. Perception 24:937–68.
Grewe, Oliver, Nagel, Frederik, Altenmulkler, Eckart, and Kopiez, Reinhard. 2009–10. Indi-
vidual Emotional Reactions towards Music: Evolutionary-based Universals? Musicae Scientiae
13:261–87.
Grifﬁths, Paul E. 1996. The Historical Turn in the Study of Adaptation. British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science 47:511–32.
——2002. What Is Innateness? Monist 85:70–85.
——and Gray, Russell D. 1994. Developmental Systems and Evolutionary Explanation. Journal
of Philosophy 91:277–304.
————2005. Discussion: Three Ways to Misunderstand Developmental Systems Theory.
Biology and Philosophy 20:417–25.
Grinde, Bjorn. 1996. The Biology of Visual Aesthetics. Journal of Social and Evolutionary Systems
19:31–40.
Grodal, Torben. 2008. Evolutionary Theory and the Naturalistic Fallacy. Style 42:192–6.
Groos, Karl. 1898. The Play of Animals, translated by E. L. Baldwin. New York: D. Appleton.
Grosse, Ernst. 1897. The Beginnings of Art. New York: Appleton.
Guthrie, R. Dale. 2002. Paleolithic Atlatl Weights and their Decoration: How Function Affects
Fancy. Anthropological Papers of the University of Alaska 2:137–54.
——2005. The Nature of Paleolithic Art. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hadingham, Evan. 1979. Secrets of the Ice Age: The World of Cave Artists. New York: Walker.
Hagen, Edward D. and Hammerstein, Peter. 2009–2010. Did Neanderthals and other Early
Humans Sing? Seeking the Biological Roots of Music in the Territorial Advertisements of
Primates, Lions, Hyenas, and Wolves. Musicae Scientiae 13:291–320.
Haile-Selassie, Yohannes. 2001. Late Miocene Hominids from the Middle Awash, Ethiopia.
Nature 412:178–81.
Halberstadt, Jamin and Rhodes, Gillian. 2000. The Attractiveness of Non-face Averages:
Implications for an Evolutionary Explanation of the Attractiveness of Average Faces. Psycho-
logical Science 11:285–89.
Haldane, J. B. S. 1927. A Mathematical Theory of Natural and Artiﬁcial Selection. Part
V. Selection and Mutation. Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 23:838–44.
Hales, Steven D., editor. 2007. Beer and Philosophy: The Unexamined Beer Isn’t Worth Drinking.
Malden: Wiley-Blackwell.
Halverson, John. 1987. Art for Art’s Sake in the Paleolithic. Current Anthropology 28:63–71, 82–9.
REFERENCES
251

Hamermesh, Daniel S. and Biddle, Jeff E. 1994. Beauty and the Labor Market. American Economic
Review 84:1174–94.
Hamilton, William D. 1964. The Genetical Evolution of Social Behaviour. I and II. Journal of
Theoretical Biology 7:1–52.
Hampton, Simon. 2010. Essential Evolutionary Psychology. Los Angeles: Sage.
Han, Ke-Tsung. 2007. Responses to Six Major Terrestrial Biomes in Terms of Scenic Beauty,
Preference, and Restorativeness. Environment and Behavior 39:529–56.
Hansell, Mike and Ruxton, Graeme, D. 2008. Setting Tool Use within the Context of Animal
Construction Behaviour. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 23:73–8.
Hansen, Brian. 1999. A Prehistory of Theatre: A Path with Six Turnings. Biopoetics: Evolutionary
Explorations in the Arts, edited by B. Cooke and F. Turner, 347–65. Lexington: ICUS.
Happe´, Francesca G. E., Winner, Ellen, and Brownell, Hiram. 1998. The Getting of Wisdom:
Theory of Mind in Old Age. Developmental Psychology 34:358–62.
Hare, Brian, Brown, Michelle, Williamson, Christina, and Tomasello, Michael. 2002. The
Domestication of Social Cognition in Dogs. Science 298:1634–6.
Harpham, Geoffrey Galt. 2008. Disciplinary Fitness. Style 42:197–201.
Harris, Marvin. 1989. Our Kind: Who We are, Where We Came from, Where We are Going. New
York: Harper & Row.
Hartshorne, Charles. 1973. Born to Sing: An Interpretation and World Survey of Bird Song. Bloom-
ington: Indiana University Press.
Harvey, Paul H. and Harcourt, A. H. 1984. Sperm Competition, Testes Size, and Breeding
Systems in Primates. In Sperm Competition and the Evolution of Animal Mating Systems, edited by
R. Smith, 589–659. New York: Academic Press.
Harvey, Paul H. and Bradbury, Jack W. 1991. Sexual Selection. In Behavioural Ecology, edited by
J. R. Krebs and N. B. Davies, 203–33. Oxford: Blackwell. Third edition.
Hauser, Marc D., Chomsky, Noam, and Fitch, W. Tecumseh. 2002. The Faculty of Language:
What is it, Who has it, and How did it Evolve? Science 298:1569–79.
Hauser, Marc and McDermott, Josh. 2003. The Evolution of the Music Faculty. Nature
Neursocience 6:663–8.
Heath, Shirley Brice. 2006. Dynamics of Completion. In The Artful Mind: Science and the Riddle of
Human Creativity, edited by M. Turner, 133–50. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Heerwagen, Judith H. and Orians, Gordon H. 1993. Humans, Habitats, and Aesthetics. In The
Biophilia Hypothesis, edited by S. R. Kellert and E. O. Wilson, 138–72. Washington: Island Press.
Hegel, G. W. F. 1975. Hegel’s Aesthetics: Lectures on Fine Art, translated by T. M. Knox. 2 vols.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. First published 1835–8.
Heinrich, Bernd. 2000. Testing Insight in Ravens. In The Evolution of Cognition, edited by
C. Heyes and L. Huber, 289–305. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——2002. Raven Consciousness. In The Cognitive Animal: Empirical and Theoretical Perspectives on
Animal Cognition, edited by M. Bekoff, C. Allen and G. M. Burghardt, 47–52. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Henley, David R. 1992. Facilitating Artistic Expression in Captive Mammals: Implications for
Art Therapy and Art Empathicism. Art Therapy: Journal of the American Art Therapy Association
9 (4):178–92.
Henrich, Joseph and McElreath, Richard. 2003. The Evolution of Cultural Evolution. Evolu-
tionary Anthropology 12:123–35.
252
REFERENCES

Henshilwood, Christopher S. 2005. Stratigraphic Integrity of the Middle Stone Age Levels at
Blombos Cave. In From Tools to Symbols: From Early Hominids to Humans, edited by F. d’Errico
and L. Blackwell, 441–58. Johannesburg: Witwatersrand University Press.
——d’Errico, Francesco, Vanhaeren, Marian, van Niekerk, K., and Jacobs, Zenobia. 2004.
Middle Stone Age Shell Beads from South Africa. Science 295:1278–80.
——d’Errico, Francesco, Yates, Royden, Jacobs, Zenobia, Tribolo, Chantal, Duller, Geoff
A. T., Mercier, Norbert, Sealy, Judith C., Valladas, Helene, Watts, Ian, and Wintle, Ann
G. 2002. Emergence of Modern Human Behavior: Middle Stone Age Engravings from South
Africa. Science 295:1278–80.
——and Marean, Curtis W. 2003. The Origin of Modern Human Behavior: Critique of the
Models and their Test Implications. Current Anthropology 44:627–51.
——Sealy, Judith C., Yates, Royden, Cruz-Uribe, K., Goldberg, P., Grine, F. E., Klein, R. G.,
Poggenpoel, C., van Niekerk, K., and Watts, Ian. 2001. Blombos Cave, Southern Cape,
South Africa: Preliminary Report on the 1992–1999 Excavations of the Middle Stone Age
Levels. Journal of Archaeological Science 28:421–48.
Hepburn, Ronald W. 1963. The Aesthetic Appreciation of Nature. British Journal of Aesthetics
3:195–209.
Hermere´n, Go¨ran. 1988. The Nature of Aesthetic Qualities. Lund: Lund University Press.
Hernadi, Paul. 2001. Literature and Evolution. SubStance: A Review of Theory and Literary Criticism
(94/95):55–71.
Herrington, Susan. 2009. On Landscapes. New York: Routledge.
Herzog Jr, Harold A. and Burghardt, Gordon M. 1988. Attitudes toward Animals: Origins and
Diversity. In Animals and People Sharing the World, edited by A. N. Rowan, 75–94. Hanover:
University Press of New England.
Herzog, Thomas and Smith, Gregory A. 1988. Danger, Mystery, and Environmental Preference.
Environment and Behavior 20:320–44.
Heyd, Thomas. 2005. Rock Art Aesthetics: Trace on Rock, Mark of Spirit, Window on Land.
In Aesthetics and Rock Art, edited by T. Heyd and J. Clegg, 37–49. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Heyligers, Petrus C. 1981. Prospect-refuge Symbolism of Dune Landscapes. Landscaper Research
6 (1):7–11.
Hiatt, L. R. 1989. On Cuckoldry. Journal of Social and Biological Structures 12:53–72.
Higgins, Kathleen Marie. 2006. The Cognitive and Appreciative Impact of Musical Universals.
Revue Internationale de Philosophie 60:487–503.
——2009a. Kitsch. In A Companion to Aesthetics, edited by S. Davies, K. M. Higgins,
R. Hopkins, R. Stecker, and D. E. Cooper, 393–6. Malden: Wiley-Blackwell.
——2009b. Rasa. In A Companion to Aesthetics, edited by S. Davies, K. M. Higgins, R. Hopkins,
R. Stecker, and D. E. Cooper, 492–4. Malden: Wiley-Blackwell.
——2012. The Music Between Us. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hildebrand, Grant. 1999. The Origins of Architectural Pleasure. Los Angeles: University of
California Press.
Hirn, Yrjo¨. 1900. The Origins of Art: A Psychological and Sociological Inquiry. London: Macmillan.
Hobbs, Jerry R. 1990. Literature and Cognition. Stanford: Center for the Study of Language and
Information.
Hoeg, Jerry. 2009. Why did Narrative Evolve? (Human) Nature and Narrative. Studies in the
Literary Imagination 42 (2):1–13.
REFERENCES
253

Hogan, Patrick Colm. 2003a. The Mind and its Stories: Narrative Universals and Human Emotion.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——2003b. Cognitive Science, Literature, and the Arts: A Guide for Humanists. New York: Routledge.
——2008a. Of Literary Universals: Ninety-Five Theses. Philosophy and Literature 32:145–60.
——2008b. For Evolutionary Criticism, Against Genetic Absolutism. Style 42:202–6.
Holcomb III, Harmon R. 1996. Just So Stories and Inference to the Best Explanation in
Evolutionary Psychology. Minds and Machines 6:525–40.
Hooker, Shirley D., Holbrook Freeman, Linda, and Stewart, Pamela. 2002. Pet Therapy
Research: A Historical Review. Holistic Nursing Practice 17 (1):17–23.
Hooper, Paul L. and Miller, Geoffrey F. 2008. Mutual Mate Choice Can Drive Costly Signaling
Even Under Perfect Monogamy. Adaptive Behavior 16:53–70.
Houston, Alasdair I. 1997. Are the Spandrels of San Marco really Panglossian Pendentives?
Ecology and Evolution 12:125.
——2009. San Marco and Evolutionary Biology. Biology and Philosophy 24:215–30.
Howe, Michael J. A., Davidson, Jane W. and Sloboda, John A. 1998. Innate Talents: Reality or
Myth? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 21:399–407, 432–42.
Huber, Ludwig and Gajdon, Gyula K. 2006. Technical Intelligence in Animals: The Kea Model.
Animal Cognition 9:295–305.
Hudson, Mark J. and Aoyama, Mami. 2007. Waist-to-hip Ratios of Jomon Figurines. Antiquity
81:961–71.
Hume, David. 1995. Of the Standard of Taste. In The Philosophy of Art: Readings Ancient and Modern,
edited by A. Neill and A. Ridley, 254–69. New York: McGraw–Hill. First published 1757.
Hunt, Sarah, Bennett, Andrew T. D., Cuthill, Innes C., and Grifﬁths, Richard. 1998. Blue Tits
are Ultraviolet Tits. Proceedings of the Royal Society B 265:451–5.
Hurford, James R. 1999. The Evolution of Language and Languages. In The Evolution of Culture:
an Interdisciplinary View, edited by R. I. M. Dunbar, C. Knight, and C. Power, 173–93. New
Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.
Huron, David. 2003. Is Music an Evolutionary Adaptation? In The Cognitive Neuroscience of Music,
edited by I. Peretz and R. J. Zatorre, 57–75. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——2006. Sweet Anticipation: Music and the Psychology of Expectation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hutchinson, William. 1978. The Problem of Universals in Music. Music and Man 2 (3/4):235–46.
Huxley, Thomas Henry. 1893. Evolution and Ethics. In Collected Essays, vol. 9, 46–116. New
York: Greenwood.
Hyman, John. 2010. Art and Neuroscience. In Beyond Mimeses and Convention. Representations in
Art and Science. Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science, edited by R. Frigg and M. C. Hunter,
245–61. Dordrecht: Springer.
Irvin, Sherri. 2008a. The Pervasiveness of the Aesthetic in Ordinary Experience. British Journal of
Aesthetics 48:29–44.
——2008b. Scratching an Itch. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 66:25–35.
——2009. Aesthetics and the Private Realm. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 67:226–30.
Iseminger, Gary. 2004. The Aesthetic Function of Art. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Jan, Steven B. 2007. The Memetics of Music: a Neo-Darwinian View of Musical Structure and Culture.
Aldershot: Ashgate.
Janata, Petr and Grafton, Scott T. 2003. Swinging in the Brain: Shared Neural Substrates for
Behaviors Related to Sequencing and Music. Nature Neuroscience 6:682–7.
254
REFERENCES

Jankowiak, William. R. and Fischer, Edward F. 1992. A Cross-cultural Perspective on Romantic
Love. Ethnology 31:149–55.
Jannidis, Fotis. 2008. Evolutionary Psychology and Literary Studies. Style 42:217–21.
Jeffares, Ben. 2010. The Co-evolution of Tools and Minds: Cognition and Material Culture in
the Hominin Lineage. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 9:503–20.
Jobling, Ian. 2001. The Psychological Foundations of the Hero-Ogre Story. Human Nature
12:247–72.
Jones, Doug. 1996. Physical Attractiveness and the Theory of Sexual Selection. Ann Arbor: Museum of
Anthropology.
Joyce, Robert. 1975. The Esthetic Animal: Man, theArt-created Art Creator. Hicksville: Exposition Press.
Joye, Yannick. 2011. Biophilic Design Aesthetics in Art. Journal of Aesthetic Education 45 (2):17–35.
Justus, Timothy and Hutsler, Jeffrey J. 2005. Fundamental Issues in the Evolutionary Psychology
of Music: Assessing Innateness and Domain Speciﬁcity. Music Perception 23:1–27.
Kalin, Jesse. 1992. Knowing Novels: Nussbaum on Fiction and Moral Theory. Ethics, 103:135–51.
Kant, Immanuel. 1951. Critique of Judgment, translated by J. H. Bernard. New York: Haffner.
First edition 1790.
Kaplan, Hillard, Hill, Kim, Lancaster, Jane, and Hurtado, A. Magdalena. 2000. A Theory of
Human Life History Evolution: Diet, Intelligence, and Longevity. Evolutionary Anthropology
9:156–85.
Kaplan, Rachel and Kaplan, Stephen. 1989. The Experience of Nature: A Psychological Perspective.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kaplan, Stephen. 1982. Where Cognition and Affect Meet: A Theoretical Analysis of Prefer-
ence. In Knowledge for Design, edited by P. Bart, A. Chen, and G. Francesato, 183–8.
Washington, DC: Environmental Design Research Association.
——1988. Perception and Landscape: Conceptions and Misconceptions. In Environmental
Aesthetics: Theory, Research, and Applications, edited by J. L. Nasar, 45–55. New York: Cam-
bridge University Press.
——1992. Environmental Preference in a Knowledge-Seeking, Knowledge-Using Organism.
In The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture, edited by
J. H. Barkow, L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby, 581–98. New York: Oxford University Press.
Katcher, Aaron Honori and Beck, Alan M. 1988. Health and Caring for Living Things. In
Animals and People Sharing the World, edited by A. N. Rowan, 53–73. Hanover: University
Press of New England.
Keeley, Lawrence. 1980. Experimental Determination of Stone Tool Uses: A Microwear Analysis.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kellert, Stephen R. 1988. Human-Animal Interactions: A Review of American Attitudes to
Wild and Domestic Animals in the Twentieth Century. In Animals and People Sharing the
World, edited by A. N. Rowan, 137–75. Hanover: University Press of New England.
——1993. The Biological Basis for Human Values of Nature. In The Biophilia Hypothesis, edited
by S. R. Kellert and E. O. Wilson, 42–69. Washington: Island Press.
Kelleter, Frank. 2008. Complex Realities, Adequate Reductions: A Reply to Joseph Carroll.
Style 42:222–8.
Kenrick, Douglas T., Sadalla, Edward K., Groth, Gary, and Trost, Melanie R. 1990. Evolution,
Traits, and the Stages of Human Courtship: Qualifying the Parental Investment Model. Journal
of Personality 58:97–116.
REFERENCES
255

Kernan, Alvin B. 1973. Aggression and Satire: Art Considered as a Form of Biological Adaptation.
In Literary Theory and Structure: Essays in Honor of William K. Wimsatt, edited by W. K. Wimsatt,
F. Brady, M. Price, and J. J. E. Palmer, 115–29. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Kerner, Emily. 2006. Negotiating Beauty: The Intersection of Disability and Gender in the
Development of Identity. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Association for Women
in Psychology, Ann Arbor, from http://www.allacademic.com/meta/p93669_index.html
Kerr, Benjamin and Godfrey-Smith, Peter. 2002. Individualist and Multi-level Perspectives on
Selection in Structured Populations. Biology and Philosophy 17:477–517.
Kindy, Julia. 1999. Of Time and Beauty. Journal of Consciousness Studies 6 (June-July):61–3.
Kingsbury, Justine. 2011. Review of Dutton’s The Art Instinct. Biology and Philosophy 26:141–50.
Kitcher, Philip S. 1985. Vaulting Ambition: Sociobiology and the Quest for Human Nature. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
——2001. Battling the Undead: How (and How Not) to Resist Genetic Determinism. In
Thinking about Evolution: Historical, Philosophical, and Political Perspectives, edited by R. S. Singh,
C. B. Krimbas, D. B. Paul, and J. Beatty, 396–414. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Klein, Richard G. 2000. Archaeology and the Evolution of Human Behavior. Evolutionary
Anthropology 9:17–36.
——2009. The Human Career: Human Biological and Cultural Origins. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press. Third edition.
Knight, Chris, Power, Camilla, and Watts, Ian. 1995. The Human Symbolic Revolution:
A Darwinian Account. Cambridge Archaeological Journal 5:75–114.
Koch, Walter A. 1984. Art: Biogenesis and Semiogenesis. Semiotica 49:283–304.
——1988. Evolution of Culture as the Evolution of Stereotypes. Canadian-American Slavic
Studies 22 (1–4):77–100.
——1993. The Biology of Literature. Bochum: Brockmeyer.
Koelsch, Stefan, Fritz, Thomas, Cramon, D., Yves, V., Müller, Karsten, and Friederici, Angela
D. 2006. Investigating Emotion with Music: An fMRI study. Human Brain Mapping 27:239–50.
Koelsch, Stefan and Siebel, Walter A. 2005. Towards a Neural Basis of Music Perception. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences 9:578–84.
Kohn, Marek and Mithen, Steven. 1999. Handaxes: Products of Sexual Selection? Antiquity
73:518–26.
Konner, Melvin. 1988. Everyman. The Sciences 28 (6):6–8.
Korsmeyer, Carolyn. 1999. Making Sense of Taste: Food and Philosophy. Ithaca: Cornell University
Press.
——2006. Terrible Beauties. In Contemporary Debates in Aesthetics and the Philosophy of Art, edited
by M. Kieran, 51–63. Oxford: Blackwell.
Kramnick, Jonathan. 2011. Against Literary Darwinism. Critical Inquiry 37:315–47.
Kruger, Daniel J., Fisher, Maryanne, and Jobling, Ian. 2005. Proper Hero Dads and Dark Hero
Cads: Alternate Mating Strategies Exempliﬁed in British Romance Literature. In The Literary
Animal: Evolution and the Nature of Narrative, edited by J. Gottschall and D. S. Wilson, 225–43.
Evanston: Northwestern University Press.
Krumhansl, Carol L. 2002. Music: A Link Between Cognition and Emotion. Current Directions in
Psychological Science 11 (2):45–50.
Kuhlenschmidt, Sally and Conger, Judith Cohen. 1988. Behavioral Components of Social
Competence in Females. Sex Roles 18:107–12.
256
REFERENCES

Kulka, Tomas. 1988. Kitsch. British Journal of Aesthetics 28:18–27.
——1996. Kitsch and Art. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.
Kulvicki, John. 2006. On Images: Their Structure and Content. Oxford: Clarendon.
Kunej, Drago and Turk, Ivan. 2000. New Perspectives on the Beginnings of Music: Archaeo-
logical and Musicological Analysis of a Middle Paleolithic Bone “Flute.” In The Origins of
Music, edited by N. L. Wallin, B. Merker, and S. Brown, 235–68. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Kuzmin, Y. V., Burr, G. S., Jull, A. J. T., and Sulerzhitsky, L. D. 2004. AMS 14C age of the
Upper Palaeolithic skeletons from Sungir Site, Central Russian Plain. Nuclear Instruments and
Methods in Physics Research Section B 223–4:731–4.
Labeyrie, Laurent. 2000. Glacial Climate Instability. Science 290:1905–7.
Laland, Kevin N. and Brown, Gillian R. 2011. Sense and Nonsense: Evolutionary Perspectives on
Human Behavior. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Second edition.
Laland, Kevin N., Odling-Smee, John, and Feldman, Marcus W. 2000. Niche Construction,
Biological Evolution and Cultural Change. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 23:131–75.
Lamarque, Peter. 2005. Paleolithic Cave Painting: A Test Case for Transcultural Aesthetics. In
Aesthetics and Rock Art, edited by T. Heyd and J. Clegg, 21–35. Aldershot: Ashgate.
——2006. Cognitive Values in the Arts: Marking the Boundaries. In Contemporary Debates in
Aesthetics and the Philosophy of Art, edited by M. Kieran, 127–39. Oxford: Blackwell.
——2010. The Uselessness of Art. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 68:205–14.
——and Olsen, Stein Haugom. 1994. Truth, Fiction, and Literature: A Philosophical Perspective.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Lancaster, Jane B. and Lancaster, Chet S. 1983. Parental Investment: The Hominid Adaptation.
In How Humans Adapt: A Biocultural Odyssey, edited by D. J. Ortner, 33–56. Washington, DC:
Smithsonian Institution Press.
Landau, Mark J., Sullivan, Daniel, and Solomon, Sheldon. 2010. On Graves and Graven Images:
A Terror Management Analysis of the Psychological Functions of Art. European Review of
Social Psychology 21:114–54.
Landau, Misia. 1991. Narratives of Human Evolution. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Langer, Susanne K. 1942. Philosophy in a New Key. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Langlois, Judith H., Kalakanis, Lisa E., Rubenstein, Adam J., Larson, Andrea D., Hallam, Monica
J., and Smoot, Monica T. 2000. Maxims and Myths of Beauty: A Meta-analytic and
Theoretical Review. Psychological Bulletin 126:390–423.
Langlois, Judith H. and Roggman, Lori A. 1990. Attractive Faces are only Average. Psychological
Science 1:115–21.
Langlois, Judith J., Roggman, Lori A., and Rieser-Danner, Loretta A. 1990. Infants’ Differential
Social Responses to Attractive and Unattractive Faces. Developmental Psychology 26:153–9.
Langlois, Judith H., Roggman, Lori A., and Musselman, Lisa. 1994. What is Average and What is
not Average about Attractive Faces? Psychological Science 5:214–20.
Latto, Richard. 1995. The Brain of the Beholder. In The Artful Eye, edited by R. L. Gregory,
J. Harris, P. Heard, and D. Rose, 66–94. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Layton, Robert. 1991. The Anthropology of Art. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Second
edition.
Lazarus, Richard S. 1991. Emotion and Adaptation. New York: Oxford University Press.
Leddy, Tom. 2005. The Nature of Everyday Aesthetics. In The Aesthetics of Everyday Life, edited
by A. Light and J. M. Smith, 3–22. New York: Columbia University Press.
REFERENCES
257

Lehmann, Christian, Welker, Lorenz, and Schiefenho¨vel, Wulf. 2009–10. Towards an Ethology
of Song: A Categorization of Musical Behaviour. Musicae Scientiae 13:321–38.
Lenain, Thierry. 1997. Monkey Painting, translated by C. Beamish. London: Reaktion Books.
Revised and expanded.
——1999. Animal Aesthetics and Human Art. In Sociobiology and the Arts, edited by J. B. Bedaux
and B. Cooke, 239–51. Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Leonard, William R. and Robertson, Marcia L. 1997. Rethinking the Energetics of Bipedality.
Current Anthropology 38:304–9.
Leslie, Alan M. 1987. Pretense and Representation: The Origins of “Theory of Mind.”
Psychological Review 94:412–26.
——1994. Pretending and Believing: Issues in the Theory of ToMM. Cognition 50:211–38.
Levinson, Jerrold. 2006. Musical Expressiveness as Hearability-as-expression. In Contemporary
Debates in Aesthetics and the Philosophy of Art, edited by M. Kieran, 192–204. Oxford: Blackwell.
Levitin, Daniel J. 2006. This is your Brain on Music: the Science of a Human Obsession. New York:
Dutton.
——and Menon, Vinod. 2003. Musical Structure is Processed in “Language” Areas of the
Brain: A Possible Role for Brodmann Area 47 in Temporal Coherence. NeuroImage
20:2142–52.
Lewis, David. 1988. The Rock Paintings of Arnhem Land, Australia: Social, Ecological and Material
Culture Change in the Post-Glacial Period. British Archaeological Reports International Series
415. Oxford: BAR.
Lewis, Penelope A. 2002. Musical Minds. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 6:364–7.
Lewis-Williams, J. David. 2002. The Mind in the Cave. London: Thames and Hudson.
——2004. Consciousness, Intelligence, and Art: A View of the West European Middle to
Upper Paleolithic Transition. In New Perspectives on Prehistoric Art, edited by G. Bergaus,
11–29. Westport: Praeger.
——2009. Of People and Pictures: the Nexus of Upper Paleolithic Art. In Becoming Human:
Innovation in Prehistoric Material and Spiritual Culture, edited by C. Renfrew and I. Morley,
135–58. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Liddle, Bethany and Nettle, Daniel. 2006. Higher-order Theory of Mind and Social Compe-
tence in School-Age Children. Journal of Culture and Evolutionary Psychology 4:231–44.
Lintott, Sheila. 2004. Adjudicating the Debate over Two Models of Nature Appreciation. Journal
of Aesthetic Education 38 (3):52–72.
Little, Anthony C., Penton-Voak, Ian S., Burt, Michael, and Perrett, David I. 2002. Evolution
and Individual Differences in the Perception of Attractiveness: How Cyclic Hormonal
Changes and Self-perceived Attractiveness Inﬂuence Female Preferences for Male Faces. In
Facial Attractiveness: Evolutionary, Cognitive, and Social Perspectives, edited by G. Rhodes and
L. A. Zebrowitz, 59–90. Westport: Ablex.
Livingstone, Margaret. 2002. Vision and Art: The Biology of Seeing. New York: Henry N. Abrams.
Livingstone, Steven Robert and Thompson, William Forde. 2009–10. The Emergence of Music
from the Theory of Mind. Musicae Scientiae 13:83–115.
Llaurens, V., Raymond, M., and Faurie, C. 2009. Why are Some People Left-handed? An
Evolutionary Perspective. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 364:881–94.
Lloyd, Elisabeth A. and Feldman, Marcus W. 2002. Evolutionary Psychology: A View from
Evolutionary Biology. Psychological Inquiry 13:150–6.
258
REFERENCES

Locher, Paul. 2006. Experimental Scrutiny of the Role of Balance in the Visual Arts. In New
Directions in Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, edited by P. Locher, C. Martindale, and
L. Dorfman, 19–32. Amityville: Baywood.
Lock, Andrew. 1999. On the Recent Origin of Symbollically-mediated Language and its
Implications for Psychological Science. In The Descent of Mind: Psychological Perspectives on
Hominid Evolution, edited by M. C. Corballis and S. E. G. Lea, 324–55. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Lombard, Marlize and Phillipson, Laurel. 2010. Indications of Bow and Stone-tipped Arrow Use
64,000 Years Ago in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. Antiquity 84:635–48.
Lopes, Dominic McIver. 2003. Pictures and the Representational Mind. Monist 86:632–52.
——2007. Art Without “Art.” British Journal of Aesthetics 47:1–15.
Lorenz, Konrad. 1971. Part and Parcel in Animal and Human Societies. In Studies in Animal and
Human Behaviour, vol. 2, 115–95. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Lovejoy, C. Owen, Suwa, Gen, Spurlock, Linda, Asfaw, Berhane, and White, Tim D. 2009.
The Pelvis and Femur of Ardipithecus ramidus: The Emergence of Upright Walking. Science
326:71e1–71e6.
Low, Bobbi S. 1979. Sexual Selection and Human Ornamentation. In Evolutionary Biology and
Human Social Behavior: An Anthropological Perspective, edited by N. A. Chagnon and W. Irons,
462–87. North Sciutate: Duxbury Press.
——2000. Why Sex Matters: A Darwinian Look at Human Behavior. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Ludmany, Andras. 1999. The Adaptive Role of the Aesthetic Experience: An Epistemological
Approach. In Sociobiology and the Arts, edited by J. B. Bedaux and B. Cooke, 223–37.
Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Lumley, Henry de. 2009. The Emergence of Symbolic Thought: The Principal Steps of
Hominisation leading towards Greater Complexity. In Becoming Human: Innovation in Prehis-
toric Material and Spiritual Culture, edited by C. Renfrew and I. Morley, 10–26. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Lumsden, Charles J. 1991. Aesthetics. In The Sociobiological Imagination, edited by M. Maxwell,
253–68. Albany: State University of New York Press.
——and Wilson, E. O. 1985. The Relation between Biological and Cultural Evolution. Journal
of Social and Biological Structures 8:343–59.
Lynch, Alejandro, Plunkett, Geoffrey M., Baker, Allan J., and Jenkins, Peter F. 1989. A Model of
Cultural Evolution of Chafﬁnch Song Derived with the Meme Concept. American Naturalist
133:634–53.
Lyons, Elizabeth. 1983. Demographic Correlates of Landscape Preference. Environment and
Behavior 15:487–511.
McBrearty, Sally and Brooks, Alison S. 2000. The Revolution That Wasn’t: A New Interpreta-
tion of the Origin of Modern Humans. Journal of Human Evolution 39:453–563.
McBrearty, Sally and Stringer, Chris. 2007. The Coast in Colour. Nature 449 (October 17), 793–4.
McBurney, Donald H. and Streeter, Sybil A. 2007. Waist-to-Hip Ratios and Female Attractiveness:
Comparing Apples, Oranges, and Pears. In The Body Beautiful: Evolutionary and Socio-Cultural
Perspectives, edited by V. Swami and A. Furnham, 15–28. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
McCoid, Catherine Hodge and McDermott, LeRoy D. 1996. Toward Decolonizing Gender:
Female Vision in the Upper Paleolithic. American Anthropologist 98:319–26.
REFERENCES
259

McDermott, Josh. 2008. The Evolution of Music. Nature 453:287–8.
——and Hauser, Marc D. 2005a. The Origins of Music: Innateness, Uniqueness, and Evolution.
Music Perception 23:29–59.
—— ——2005b. Probing the Evolutionary Origins of Music Perception. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences 1060:6–16.
McDermott, LeRoy. 1996. Self-representation in Upper Paleolithic Female Figurines. Current
Anthropology 37:227–75.
McDougal, Ian, Brown, Francis H., and Fleagle, John G. 2005. Stratigraphic Placement and Age
of Modern Humans from Kibish, Ethiopa. Nature 433:733–6.
Maˆche, Franc¸ois-Bernard. 2000. The Necessity of and Problems with a Universal Musicology.
In The Origins of Music, edited by N. L. Wallin, B. Merker, and S. Brown, 473–9. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Machery, Edouard and Barrett, H. Clark. 2006. Essay Review: Debunking Adapting Minds.
Philosophy of Science 73:232–46.
Mackie, Gerry. 1996. Ending Footbinding and Inﬁbulation: A Convention Account. American
Sociological Review 61:999–1017.
McManus, I. C. 2011. Beauty is Instinctive Feeling: Experimenting on Aesthetics and Art. In The
Aesthetic Mind: Philosophy and Psychology, edited by E. Schellekens and P. Goldie, 169–89.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Maess, Burkhard, Koelsch, Stefan, Gunter, Thomas C., and Friederici, Angela D. 2001. Musical
Syntax is Processed in Broca’s Area: An MEG Study. Nature Neuroscience 4:540–5.
Mameli, Matteo. 2008. Sociobiology, Evolutionary Psychology, and Cultural Evolution. In The
Oxford Handbook of the Philosophy of Biology, edited M. Ruse, 410–33. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Marcus, Clare Cooper and Barnes, Marni, editors. 1999. Healing Gardens: Therapeutic Beneﬁts and
Design Recommendations. New York: Wiley.
Marean, Curtis, Bar-Matthews, Miryam, Bernatchez, Jocelyn, Fisher, Erich, Goldberg, Paul,
Herries, Andy I. R., Jacobs, Zenobia, Jerardino, Antonieta, Karkanas, Panagiotis, Minichillo,
Tom, Nissen, Peter J., Thompson, Erin, Watts, Ian, and Williams Hope M. 2007. Early
Human Use of Marine Resources and Pigment in South Africa during the Middle Pleistocene.
Nature 449 (18 October):905–8.
Mark, Robert. 1996. Architecture and Evolution. American Scientist 84:383–9.
Marler, Peter. 2000. The Origins of Music and Speech: Insights from Animals. In The
Origins of Music, edited by N. L. Wallin, B. Merker, and S. Brown, 31–48. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Marshack, Alexander. 1986. Response to Davis on the Origin of Images. Current Anthropology
27:205–6.
——1990. Early Hominid Symbol and Evolution of the Human Capacity. In The Emergence of
Modern Humans: An Archaeological Perspective, edited by P. Mellars, 456–98. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
——1991. The Roots of Civilization. Mount Kisco: Moyer Bell. Revised and expanded.
Martindale, Colin. 1988. Aesthetics, Psychobiology, and Cognition. In The Foundations of
Aesthetics, Art, and Art Education, edited by F. Farley and R. Neperud, 7–42. New York:
Praeger.
——1990. The Clockwork Muse: The Predictability of Artistic Change. New York: Basic Books.
260
REFERENCES

——1999. Peak Shift, Prototypicality and Aesthetic Preference. Journal of Consciousness Studies 6
(June–July):52–4.
——2007. A Neural-Network Theory of Beauty. In Evolutionary and Neurocognitive Approaches
to Aesthetics, Creativity and the Arts, edited by C. Martindale, P. Locher, and V. M. Petrov,
181–94. Amityville: Baywood.
Marwick, Ben. 2003. Pleistocene Exchange Networks as Evidence for the Evolution of
Language. Cambridge Archaeological Journal 13:67–81.
Matthews, Patricia. 2002. Scientiﬁc Knowledge and the Appreciation of Nature. Journal of
Aesthetics and Art Criticism 60:37–48.
Mayer, Daniella E. Bar-Yosef, Vandermeersch, Bernard, and Bar-Yosef, Ofer. 2009. Shells and
Ochre in Middle Paleolithic Qafzeh Cave, Israel: Indications for Modern Behavior. Journal of
Human Evolution 56:307–14.
Mayr, Ernst. 1972. Sexual Selection and Natural Selection. In Sexual Selection and the Descent of
Man, 1871–1971, edited by Bernard Campbell, 87–104. London: Heinemann.
——2002. What Evolution Is. New York: Basic Books.
Meindl, Richard S. 1992. Human Populations before Agriculture. In Cambridge Encyclopaedia of
Human Evolution, edited by S. Jones, R. Martin, and R. Pribream, 406–10. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Mekel-Bobrov, Nitzan, Gilbert, Sandra L., Evans, Patrick D., Vallender, Eric J., Anderson,
Jeffrey R., Hudson, Richard R., Tishkoff, Sarah A., and Lahn, Bruce T. 2005. Ongoing
Adaptive Evolution of ASPM, a Brain Size Determinant in Homo sapiens. Science 309:1720–2.
Mellars, Paul. 1996. The Neanderthal Legacy: An Archaeological Perspective from Western Europe.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
——2005. The Impossible Coincidence. A Single-Species Model for the Origins of Modern
Human Behavior in Europe. Evolutionary Anthropology 14:12–27.
——2009a. Cognition and Climate: Why is Upper Paleolithic Cave Art Almost Conﬁned to the
Franco-Cantabrian Region? In Becoming Human: Innovation in Prehistoric Material and Spiritual
Culture, edited by C. Renfrew and I. Morley, 212–31. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——2009b. Origins of the Female Image. Nature 459:176–7.
Mellmann, Katja. 2010. The Multifunctionality of Idle Afternoons. Art and Fiction in Boyd’s
Vision of Evolution. JLTonline (09.03.2010), http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:0222-001040
——2011. Evolutionary Psychology as a Heuristic in Literary Studies. In The Evolution
of Literature: Legacies of Darwin in European Cultures, edited by S. J. James and N. Saul,
299–317. Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Merker, Bjo¨rn. 2000. Synchronous Chorusing and Human Origins. In The Origins of Music,
edited by N. L. Wallin, B. Merker and S. Brown, 315–27. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——2005. The Conformal Motive in Birdsong, Music and Language: An Introduction. Annals
of New York Academy of Sciences 1060:17–28.
——2006. The Uneven Interface between Culture and Biology in Human Music. Music
Perception 24:95–8.
Meyer, Leonard B. 2000. A Universe of Universals. In The Spheres of Music: A Gathering of Essays,
281–303. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Miall, David S. 2006. Experimental Approaches to Reader Responses to Literature. In New
Directions in Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, edited by P. Locher, C. Martindale, and
L. Dorfman, 175–88. Amityville: Baywood.
REFERENCES
261

Milinski, Manfred. 2003. Perfumes. In Evolutionary Aesthetics, edited by E. Voland and
K. Grammer, 325–39. Berlin: Springer.
Milius, S. 2003. Females Prefer Nests with Pizzazz (Fish that Decorate). Science News March 15.
163 (11):165–6.
Miller, Geoffrey F. 1998. How Mate Choice Shaped Human Nature: A Review of Sexual
Selection in Human Evolution. In Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology: Ideas, Issues, and
Applications, edited by C. Crawford and D. L. Krebs, 87–130. Mahwah: Erlbaum.
——1999. Sexual Selection for Cultural Display. In The Evolution of Culture: An Interdisciplinary
View, edited by R. I. M. Dunbar, C. Knight, and C. Power, 71–91. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press.
——2000a. The Mating Mind: How Sexual Choice Shaped the Evolution of Human Nature. New
York: Doubleday.
——2000b. Evolution of Human Music through Sexual Selection. In The Origins of Music,
edited by N. L. Wallin, B. Merker, and S. Brown, 329–60. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——2001. Aesthetic Fitness: How Sexual Selection Shaped Artistic Virtuosity as a Fitness
Indicator and Aesthetic Preference as Mate Choice Criteria. Bulletin of Psychology and the Arts
2:20–5.
Miller, Joseph D. 1987. Sex, Superman and Sociobiology in Science Fiction. In Aliens, the
Anthropology of Science Fiction, edited by G. E. Slusser and E. S. Rabkin, 78–87. Carbondale:
Southern Illinois University Press.
Miller, Mara. 1993. The Garden as an Art. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Mithen, Steven J. 1988. To Hunt or to Paint: Animals and Art in the Upper Palaeolithic. Man
23:671–95.
——1996. The Prehistory of the Mind: A Search for the Origins of Art, Religion, and Science. London:
Thames and Hudson.
——1999. Symbolism and the Supernatural. In The Evolution of Culture: an Interdisciplinary View,
edited by R. I. M. Dunbar, C. Knight, and C. Power, 147–69. New Brunswick: Rutgers
University Press.
——2003. Handaxes: The First Aesthetic Artifacts. In Evolutionary Aesthetics, edited by E. Voland
and K. Grammer, 261–75. Berlin: Springer.
——2005. The Singing Neanderthals: the Origins of Music, Language, Mind, and Body. London:
Weidenfeld & Nicolson.
Molino, Jean. 2000. Toward an Evolutionary View of Music and Language. In The Origins of
Music, edited by N. L. Wallin, B. Merker, and S. Brown, 165–76. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Montelle, Yann-Pierre. 2004. Paleoperformance: Investigating the Human Use of Caves in the Upper
Paleolithic. In New Perspectives on Prehistoric Art, edited by G. Bergaus, 131–52. Westport: Praeger.
Montero, Barbara. 2006. Proprioception as an Aesthetic Sense. Journal of Aesthetics and Art
Criticism 64:231–42.
Moore, Ronald. 2007. Natural Beauty: A Theory of Aesthetics Beyond the Arts. Peterborough:
Broadview Press.
Morales Jr, Reinaldo. 2005. Considerations on the Art and Aesthetics of Rock Art. In Aesthetics
and Rock Art, edited by T. Heyd and J. Clegg, 61–74. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Moravcsik, Julius M. 1988. Art and its Diachronic Dimensions. Monist 71:157–70.
——1993. Why Philosophy of Art in Cross-cultural Perspectives? Journal of Aesthetics and Art
Criticism 51:425–36.
262
REFERENCES

Morley, Iain. 2009. Ritual and Music: Parallels and Practice, and the Paleolithic. In Becoming
Human: Innovation in Prehistoric Material and Spiritual Culture, edited by C. Renfrew and
I. Morley, 159–75. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Morphy, Howard. 1996. Is Aesthetics a Cross-cultural Category: For the Motion. In Key Debates
in Anthropology, edited by T. Ingold, 255–60. London: Routledge.
——2005. Aesthetics across Time and Place: An Anthropological Perspective on Archaeology.
In Aesthetics and Rock Art, edited by T. Heyd and J. Clegg, 51–60. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Morreall, John. 1991. Cuteness. British Journal of Aesthetics 31:39–47.
Morris, Desmond. 1962. The Biology of Art. London: Methuen.
——1985. Bodywatching: A Field Guide to the Human Species. New York: Crown Books.
Mottron, Laurent, Dawson, Michelle, Soulie`res, Isabelle, Hubert, Benedicte, and Burack, Jake.
2006. Enhanced Perceptual Functioning in Autism: An Update, and Eight Principles of
Autistic Perception. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 36:27–43.
Mundkur, Balaji. 1983. The Cult of the Serpent: An Interdisciplinary Survey of its Manifestations and
Origins. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Nasar, Jack L., editor. 1988. Environmental Aesthetics: Theory, Research, and Application. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Nasar, Jack L., Julian, David, Buchman, Sarah, Humphreys, David, and Mrohaly, Marianne.
1983. The Emotional Quality of Scenes and Observation Points: A Look at Prospect and
Refuge. Landscape Planning 10:355–61.
Nesse, Margaret H. 1995. Guinevere’s Choice. Human Nature 6:145–62.
Nettl, Bruno. 2000. An Ethnomusicologist Contemplates Universals in Musical Sound
and Culture. In The Origins of Music, edited by N. L. Wallin, B. Merker, and S. Brown,
463–72. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Nettle, Daniel. 2005a. What Happens in Hamlet? Exploring the Psychological Foundations of
Drama. In The Literary Animal: Evolution and the Nature of Narrative, edited by J. Gottschall and
D. S. Wilson, 56–75. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.
——2005b. The Wheel of Fire and the Mating Game: Explaining the Origins of Tragedy and
Comedy. Journal of Cultural and Evolutionary Psychology 3:39–56.
——2007. Individual Differences. In The Oxford Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology, edited by
R. I. M. Dunbar and L. Barrett, 479–90. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Niles, John D. 1999. Homo Narrans: the Poetics and Anthropology of Oral Literature. Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Nordlund, Marcus. 2002. Consilient Literary Interpretation. Philosophy and Literature 26:312–33.
——2005. The Problem of Romantic Love: Shakespeare and Evolutionary Psychology. In The
Literary Animal: Evolution and the Nature of Narrative, edited by J. Gottschall and D. S. Wilson,
107–25. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.
——2007. Shakespeare and the Nature of Love: Literature, Culture, Evolution. Evanston: Northwestern
University Press.
Novitz, David. 1989a. Ways of Artmaking: the High and the Popular in Art. British Journal of
Aesthetics 29:213–29.
——1989b. Art, Narrative, and Human Nature. Philosophy and Literature 13:57–74.
——1992. The Boundaries of Art. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
——1993. Noel Carroll’s Theory of Mass Art. 1992 Philosophic Exchange (State University of
New York, College at Brockport) 23:39–49.
REFERENCES
263

Nussbaum, Charles O. 2007. The Musical Representation: Meaning, Ontology, and Emotion.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Nussbaum, Martha. 1990. Love’s Knowledge: Essays on Philosophy and Literature. New York:
Oxford University Press.
——1995. Poetic Justice: The Literary Imagination and Public Life. Boston: Beacon Press.
——1998. Exactly and Responsibly: A Defense of Ethical Criticism. Philosophy and Literature
22:343–65.
Oakley, Kenneth P. 1961. Man the Tool-Maker. London: Trustees of the British Museum
(Natural History). Fifth edition.
——1981. The Emergence of Higher Thought 3.0–0.2 Ma B.P. In The Emergence of Man,
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, series B 292:205–11.
Oatley, Keith and Mar, Raymond A. 2005. Evolutionary Pre-adaptation and the Idea of
Character in Fiction. Journal of Cultural and Evolutionary Psychology 3:179–94.
Okasha, Samir. 2006. Evolution and the Levels of Selection. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Okin, Susan Moller. 1998. Feminism and Multiculturalism: Some Tensions. Ethics 108:661–84.
Ong, Walter J. 1981. Fighting for Life. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Orians, Gordon H. 1980. Habitat Selection: General Theory and Applications to Human Behavior.
In The Evolution of Human Social Behavior, edited by J. S. Lockard, 49–66. New York: Elsevier.
—— 2001. An Evolutionary Perspective on Aesthetics. Bulletin of Psychology and the Arts 2:25–9.
——and Heerwagen, Judith H. 1992. Evolved Responses to Landscapes. In The Adapted Mind:
Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture, edited by J. H. Barkow, L. Cosmides, and
J. Tooby, 555–79. New York: Oxford University Press.
O¨ stlund-Nilsson, Sara and Holmlund, Mikael. 2003. The Artistic Three-Spined Stickleback
(Gasterosteous aculeatus). Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 53:214–20.
Overing, Joanna. 1996. Is Aesthetics a Cross-cultural Category: Against the Motion. In Key
Debates in Anthropology, edited by T. Ingold, 260–6. London: Routledge.
Oyama, Susan. 1985. The Ontogeny of Information: Developmental Systems and Evolution. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Oyama, Susan, Grifﬁths, Paul E., and Gray, Russell D., editors. 2001. Cycles of Contingency:
Developmental Systems and Evolution. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Paley, William. 2006. Natural Theology, edited by M. D. Eddy and D. Knight. Oxford: Oxford
University Press. First edition 1802.
Panksepp, Jaap. 2009–10. The Emotional Antecedents to the Evolution of Music and Language.
Musicae Scientiae 13:229–59.
Parncutt, Richard. 2009–10. Prenatal and Infant Conditioning, the Mother Schema, and the
Origins of Music and Religion. Musicae Scientiae 13:119–50.
Parsons, Glenn. 2002. Nature Appreciation, Science, and Positive Aesthetics. British Journal of
Aesthetics 42:279–95.
—— 2007. The Aesthetic Value of Animals. Environmental Ethics 27:151–69.
——and Carlson, Allen. 2008. Functional Beauty. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Patel, Aniruddh D. 2006. Musical Rhythm, Linguistic Rhythm, and Human Evolution. Music
Perception 24:99–104.
——2008. Music, Language, and the Brain. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
——2010. Music, Biological Evolution, and the Brain. In Emerging Disciplines, edited by
M. Bailar, 91–144. Houston: Rice University Press.
264
REFERENCES

——Iversen, John R., Bregman, Micah R., and Schulz, Irena. 2009. Experimental Evidence for
Synchronization to a Musical Beat in a Nonhuman Animal. Current Biology 19:1–4.
Patterson, Colin. 1999. Evolution. Ithaca: Comstock Publishing Associates. Second edition.
Patzer, Gordon L. 1985. The Attractiveness Phenomenon. New York: Plenum Press.
Paul, Andreas. 2002. Sexual Selection and Mate Choice. International Journal of Primatology
23:877–904.
Paulson, Ronald. 1982. Literary Landscapes: Turner and Constable. Hew Haven: Yale University Press.
Payne, Katharine. 2000. The Progressively Changing Songs of Humpback Whales: A Window
on the Creative Process in a Wild Animal. In The Origins of Music, edited by N. L. Wallin,
B. Merker, and S. Brown, 135–50. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Penton-Voak, Ian S., Perrett, David I., Castles, D. L., Kobayashi, T., Burt, D. M., Murray, L. K.,
and Minamisawa, R. 1999. Menstrual Cycle Alters Face Preference. Nature 399:741–2.
Pepperberg, Irene Maxine. 1999. The Alex Studies: Cognitive and Communicative Abilities of Grey
Parrots. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Peretz, Isabelle. 2000. Music Perception and Recognition. In The Handbook of Cognitive Neuro-
psychology, edited B. Rapp, 519–40. New York: Psychology Press.
——and Coltheart, Max. 2003. Modularity of Music Processing. Nature Neursocience 6:688–91.
——and He´bert, Sylvie. 2000. Toward a Biological Account of Musical Experience. Brain and
Cognition 42:131–4.
Perrett, David I. 2010. In Your Face: The New Science of Human Attraction. New York: Palgrave
Macmillan.
——May, K. I., and Yoshikawa, Sakiko. 1994. Facial Shape and Judgments of Female Attrac-
tiveness. Nature 368:239–42.
Perricone, Christopher. 2004. Art Selection, or the Preservation of Artworks in the Struggle for
Art. Journal of Aesthetic Education 38 (2):53–66.
——2011. What Women Want: (Among Other Things) Quality Art. Journal of Aesthetic
Education 45 (3):88–102.
Petrie, Marion. 1994. Improved Growth and Survival of Offspring of Peacocks with more
Elaborate Trains. Nature 371:598–99.
——Halliday, Tim, and Sanders, Carolyn. 1991. Peahens Prefer Peacocks with Elaborate Trains.
Animal Behavior 41:323–31.
Pettigrew, “Jack”, Koerner, Marilyn, McPhee, Anscar, and Wallman, Josh. 2008. An Unex-
pected Stripe-faced Flying Fox in Ice Age Rock Art of Australia’s Kimberley. Antiquity
82 (318): http://antiquity.ac.uk/projgall/pettigrew/index.html
Pfeiffer, John E. 1982. The Creative Explosion: An Inquiry into the Origins of Art and Religion. New
York: Harper & Row.
——1985. The Emergence of Humankind. New York: Harper & Row. Fourth edition.
Pinker, Steven. 1994. The Language Instinct: How the Mind Creates Language. New York: William
Morrow.
——1999. How the Mind Works. London: Penguin Books.
——2002. The Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of Human Nature. New York: Viking.
——2003. Language as an Adaptation to the Cognitive Niche. In Language Evolution, edited by
S. Kirby and M. Christiansen, 16–37. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——2007. Toward a Consilient Study of Literature. Philosophy and Literature 31:162–78.
REFERENCES
265

Pinker, Steven and Bloom, Paul. 1992. Natural Language and Natural Selection. In The Adapted
Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture, edited by J. H. Barkow,
L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby, 451–93. New York: Oxford University Press.
Plomin, Robert, DeFries, John C., McLearn, Gerald E., and Rutter, Michael. 1997. Behavioral
Genetics. New York: W. H. Freeman. Third edition.
Polti, Georges. 1977. The Thirty-six Dramatic Situations, translated by L. Ray. Boston: The Writer
Inc. First published in French in 1895.
Popenoe, Rebecca. 2004. Feeding Desire: Fatness, Beauty, and Sexuality among a Saharan People.
London: Routledge.
Posner, Richard A. 1997. Against Ethical Criticism. Philosophy and Literature 21:1–27.
——1998. Against Ethical Criticism: Part Two. Philosophy and Literature 22:394–412.
Potts, Richard. 1998a. Environmental Hypotheses of Hominin Evolution. Yearbook of Physical
Anthropology 41:93–138.
——1998b. Variability Selection in Hominid Evolution. Evolutionary Anthropology 73:81–96.
Power, Camilla. 1999. “Beauty Magic”: The Origins of Art. In The Evolution of Culture: an
Interdisciplinary View, edited by R. I. M. Dunbar, C. Knight, and C. Power, 92–112. New
Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.
——2004. Women in Prehistoric Art. In New Perspectives on Prehistoric Art, edited by G. Bergaus,
75–103. Westport: Praeger.
Pratt, R. T. C. 1977. The Inheritance of Musicality. In Music and the Brain: Studies in the Neurology of
Music, edited by M. Critchley and R. A. Henson, 22–31. London, Heinemann Medical.
Prinz, Jesse J. 2004. Which Emotions are Basic? In Emotion, Evolution, and Rationality, edited by
D. Evans and P. Cruse, 69–87. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——2007. The Emotional Construction of Morals. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——2011. Emotion and Aesthetic Value. In The Aesthetic Mind: Philosophy and Psychology, edited
by E. Schellekens and P. Goldie, 71–88. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pruetz, Jill D. and LaDuke, Thomas C. 2010. Brief Communication: Reaction to Fire by
Savanna Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes verus) at Fongoli, Senegal: Conceptualization of “Fire
Behavior” and the Case for a Chimpanzee Model. American Journal of Physical Anthropology
141:646–50.
Rabkin, Eric S. 1983. The Descent of Fantasy. In Coordinates: Placing Science Fiction and Fantasy,
edited by G. E. Slusser, E. S. Rabkin, and R. Scholes, 14–22. Carbondale: Southern Illinois
University Press.
——1995. Vegetable, Animal, Human: The Perils and Powers of Transgressing (Sociobiologi-
cal) Boundaries in Narrative. Human Nature 6 (2):165–80.
——1998. Imagination and Survival: The Case of Fantastic Literature. In The Fantastic Other: An
Interface of Perspectives, edited by B. Cooke, G. E. Slusser, and J. Marti-Olivella, 1–20.
Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Ralevski, Elizabeth. 2000. Aesthetics and Art from an Evolutionary Perspective. Evolution and
Cognition 6 (1):84–103.
Ramachandran, Vilayanur and Hirstein, William. 1999. The Science of Art: A Neurological
Theory of Aesthetic Experience. Journal of Consciousness Studies 6 (June–July):15–51.
Rancour-Laferriere, Daniel. 1981. Preliminary Remarks on Literary Memetics. Axia: Davis
Symposium on Literary Evaluation, edited by K. Menges and D. Rancour-Laferriere, 77–87.
Stuttgart: Akademischer Verlag.
266
REFERENCES

——1993. Anna’s Adultery: Distal Sociobiology vs. Proximate Psychoanalysis. Tolstoy Studies
Journal 6:33–46.
Rand, Austin L. 1974. Ornithology: An Introduction. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books. Revised
edition.
Raza, Susan M. and Carpenter, Bruce N. 1987. A Model of Hiring Decisions in Real Employ-
ment Interviews. Journal of Applied Psychology 72:596–603.
Reid, Thomas. 1790. Of Beauty. Chapter 4 of Essay 8 (Of Taste). Essays on the Intellectual and
Active Powers of Man. Dublin: printed for P. Byrne, and J. Milliken. Three volumes. Vol. 2,
448–82.
Renfrew, Colin. 2009. Situating the Creative Explosion: Universal or Local? In Becoming
Human: Innovation in Prehistoric Material and Spiritual Culture, edited by C. Renfrew and
I. Morley, 74–92. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Renfrew, Jane M. 2009. Neanderthal Symbolic Behavior? In Becoming Human: Innovation in
Prehistoric Material and Spiritual Culture, edited by C. Renfrew and I. Morley, 50–60. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rensch, Bernhard. 1973. Play and Art in Apes and Monkeys. Symposia of the Fourth International
Congress of Primatology 1:102–23.
Rhodes, Gillian, Harwood, Kate, Yoshikawa, Sakiko, Nishitani, Miwa, and McLean, Ian. 2002.
The Attractiveness of Average Faces: Cross-cultural Evidence and Possible Biological Basis. In
Facial Attractiveness: Evolutionary, Cognitive, and Social Perspectives, edited by G. Rhodes and
L. A. Zebrowitz, 35–58. Westport: Ablex.
Rhodes, Gillian and Simmons, Leigh W. 2007. Symmetry, Attractiveness and Sexual Selection.
In The Oxford Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology, edited by R. I. M. Dunbar and L. Barrett,
333–64. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rhodes, Gillian, Simmons, Leigh W., and Peters, Marianne. 2005. Attractiveness and Sexual
Behavior: Does Attractiveness Enhance Mating Success? Evolution and Human Behavior
26:186–201.
Rhodes, Gillian, Zebrowitz, Leslie A., Clark, Alison, Kalick, S. Michael, Hightower, Amy, and
McKay, Ryan. 2001. Do Facial Averageness and Symmetry Signal Health? Evolution and
Human Behavior 22:31–46.
Richards, Janet Radcliffe. 2000. Human Nature after Darwin: A Philosophical Introduction. London:
Routledge.
Richards, Richard A. 2004. A Fitness Model of Evaluation. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism
62:263–75.
Richardson, Robert C. 2007. Evolutionary Psychology as Maladaptive Psychology. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Richerson, Peter J. and Boyd, Robert. 2000. Climate, Culture, and the Evolution of Cognition.
In The Evolution of Cognition, edited by C. Heyes and L. Huber, 329–46. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
————2005. Not By Genes Alone: How Culture Transformed Human Evolution. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Ridley, Mark. 2004. Evolution. Malden: Blackwell. Third edition.
Ridley, Matt. 1994. The Red Queen: Sex and the Evolution of Human Nature. London: Penguin Books.
Ritvo, Harriet. 1988. The Emergence of Modern Pet-Keeping. In Animals and People Sharing the
World, edited by A. N. Rowan, 13–30. Hanover: University Press of New England.
REFERENCES
267

Rockman, Hannah. 1994. Matchmaker Matchmaker Make Me a Match: The Art and
Conventions of Jewish Arranged Marriages. Sexual and Marital Therapy 9:277–84.
Roederer, Juan G. 1984. The Search for a Survival Value of Music. Music Perception 1: 350–6.
Roele, Marcel and Wind, Jan. 1999. Sociobiology and the Arts: An Introduction. In Sociobiology
and the Arts, edited by J. B. Bedaux and B. Cooke, 9–26. Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Rollins, Mark. 2004. What Monet Meant: Intention and Attention in Understanding Art. Journal
of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 62:174–88.
Rolls, Edmund T. 2011. The Origins of Aesthetic: A Neurobiological Basis for Affective
Feelings and the Aesthetic. In The Aesthetic Mind: Philosophy and Psychology, edited by
E. Schellekens and P. Goldie, 116–65. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rolston III, Holmes. 1987. Beauty and the Beast: Aesthetic Experience of Wildlife. In Valuing
Wildlife: Economic and Social Perspectives, edited by D. J. Decker and G. R. Goff, 187–96.
Boulder: Westview Press.
Rosenblatt, Paul C. 1974. Cross-cultural Perspectives on Attraction. In Foundations of Interper-
sonal Attraction, edited by T. L. Huston, 79–95. New York: Academic Press.
Ross, Stephanie. 1998. What Gardens Mean. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Rubenstein, Adam J., Langlois, Judith H., and Roggman, Lori A. 2002. What Makes a Face
Attractive and Why: The Role of Averageness in Deﬁning Facial Beauty. In Facial Attractive-
ness: Evolutionary, Cognitive, and Social Perspectives, edited by G. Rhodes and L. A. Zebrowitz,
1–33. Westport: Ablex.
Ruso, Bernhart, Renninger, Lee Ann and Atzwanger, Klaus. 2003. Human Habitat Preferences:
A Generative Territory for Evolutionary Aesthetics Research. In Evolutionary Aesthetics, edited
by E. Voland and K. Grammer, 279–94. Berlin: Springer.
Russow, Lilly–Marlene. 1981. Why Do Species Matter? Environmental Ethics 3:101–12.
Sablin, Mikhail V. and Khlopachev, Gennady A. 2002. The Earliest Ice Age Dogs: Evidence
from Eliseevichi 1. Current Anthropology 43:795–9.
Saffran, Jenny R., Johnson, Elizabeth K., Aslin, Richard N., and Newport, Elissa L. 1999.
Statistical Learning of Tone Sequences by Human Infants and Adults. Cognition 70:27–52.
Sagan, Carl and Druyan, Ann. 1992. Shadows of Forgotten Ancestors. New York: Ballantine.
Saito, Yuriko. 1984. Is There a Correct Aesthetic Appreciation of Nature? Journal of Aesthetic
Education 18 (4):35–46.
——2007. Everyday Aesthetics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Salmon, Catherine. 2005. Crossing the Abyss: Erotica and the Intersection of Evolutionary
Psychology and Literary Studies. In The Literary Animal: Evolution and the Nature of Narrative,
edited by J. Gottschall and D. S. Wilson, 244–57. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.
Sandars, P. 1985. Prehistoric Art in Europe. London: Penguin. Second edition.
Saunders, Judith P. 2009. Reading Edith Wharton through an Evolutionary Lens: Evolutionary
Biological Issues in her Fiction. Jefferson: McFarland.
Saxton, Tamsin K., Burriss, Robert P., Murray, Alice K., Rowland, Hannah M., and Roberts,
S. Craig. 2009. Face, Body and Speech Cues Independently Predict Judgments of Attractive-
ness. Journal of Evolutionary Psychology 7:23–35.
Scalise Sugiyama, Michelle. 1996a. On the Origins of Narrative: Storyteller Bias as a Fitness-
enhancing Strategy. Human Nature 7:403–25.
——1996b. What’s Love Got to Do with It? An Evolutionary Analysis of “The Short Life of
Francis Macomber.” The Hemingway Review 15:15–32.
268
REFERENCES

——2001a. Narrative Theory and Function. Why Evolution Matters. Philosophy and Literature
25:233–50.
——2001b. Food, Foragers, and Folklore: The Role of Narrative in Human Subsistence.
Evolution and Human Behavior 22:221–40.
——2003. Cultural Variation is Part of Human Nature: Literary Universals, Context-Sensitivity,
and “Shakespeare in the Bush.” Human Nature 14:383–96.
——2004. Predation, Narration, and Adaptation: “Little Red Riding Hood” Revisited. Inter-
disciplinary Literary Studies 5:110–29.
—— 2005. Reverse Engineering Narrative. In The Literary Animal: Evolution and the Nature of
Narrative, edited by J. Gottschall and D. S. Wilson, 177–96. Evanston: Northwestern Univer-
sity Press.
——2008. Information is the Stuff of Narrative. Style 42:254–60.
——and Sugiyama, Lawrence. 2009. A Frugal (Re)Past: Use of Oral Tradition to Buffer
Foraging Risk. Studies in the Literary Imagination 42 (2):15–41.
Schacter, Daniel L. and Addis, Donna Rose. 2007a. The Cognitive Neuroscience of Construc-
tive Memory: Remembering the Past and Imagining the Future. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society B 362:773–86.
—— ——2007b. On the Constructive Episodic Simulation of Past and Future Events. Behav-
ioral and Brain Sciences 30:331–2.
Schama, Simon. 1995. Landscape and Memory. New York: Random House.
Schellekens, Elisabeth. 2009. Taste and Objectivity: The Emergence of the Concept of the
Aesthetic. Philosophy Compass 4/5:734–43.
—— 2011. Experiencing the Aesthetic: Kantian Autonomy or Evolutionary Biology? In The
Aesthetic Mind: Philosophy and Psychology, edited by E. Schellekens and P. Goldie, 223–35.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schellenberg, E. Glenn. 2004. Music Lessons Enhance IQ. Psychological Science 15:511–14.
——2006. Long-term Positive Associations between Music Lessons and IQ. Journal of Educational
Psychology 98:457–68.
Schlinger Jr, Henry D. 1996. How the Human got its Spots: A Critical Analysis of the Just So
Stories of Evolutionary Psychology. Skeptic 4:68–76.
Schmidt, Klaus. 2000. Go¨bekli Tepe and the Rock Art of the Near East, TÜBA-AR 3:1–14.
Schoeninger, Margaret J. 2010. Review of Wrangham’s Catching Fire. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology 143:494.
Schubert, Emory. 2009–10. The Fundamental Function of Music. Musicae Scientiae 13:63–81.
Schultz, Adolph H. 1969. The Life of Primates. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.
Scott, Isabel, Bentley, Gillian R., Tove´e, Martin J., Ahamed, Farid Uddin, and Magid, Kesson.
2007. An Evolutionary Perspective on Male Preferences for Female Body Shape. In The Body
Beautiful: Evolutionary and Socio-Cultural Perspectives, edited by V. Swami and A. Furnham,
65–87. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Sebeok, Thomas A. 1979. Preﬁgurements of Art. Semiotica 27:3–73.
Semaw, Sileshi. 2000. The World’s Oldest Stone Artifacts from Gona, Ethiopia: Their Implica-
tions for Understanding Stone Technology and Patterns of Human Evolution between 2.6
and 2.5 Million Years Ago. Journal of Archaeological Science 27:1197–1214.
——Renne, P., Harris, J. W. K., Feibel, C. S., Bernor, R. L., Fesseha, N. and Mowbray,
K. 1997. 2.5 Million-Year-Old Stone Tools from Gona, Ethiopia. Nature 385 (6614):333–6.
REFERENCES
269

Serpell, James A. 1988. Pet-Keeping in Non-Western Societies: Some Popular Misconceptions.
In Animals and People Sharing the World, edited by A. N. Rowan, 33–52. Hanover: University
Press of New England.
Shackleton, Nicholas. 2001. Climate Change across the Hemispheres. Science 291:58–60.
Shapiro, A. K., Struening, E., Shapiro, E., and Barten, H. 1976. Prognostic Correlates of
Psychotherapy in Psychiatric Outpatients. American Journal of Psychiatry 133:802–8.
Shelley, James. 2003. The Problem of Non-perceptual Art. British Journal of Aesthetics 43:363–78.
—— 2007. Aesthetics and the World at Large. British Journal of Aesthetics 47:169–83.
Shepard, Paul. 1993. On Animal Friends. In The Biophilia Hypothesis, edited by S. R. Kellert and
E. O. Wilson, 275–300. Washington: Island Press.
Shiner, Larry. 2001. The Invention of Art: A Cultural History. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
——2003. Western and Non-Western Concepts of Art: Universality and Authenticity. In Art
and Essence, edited by S. Davies and A. C. Sukla, 143–56. Westport: Praeger.
——and Kriskovets, Yulia. 2007. The Aesthetics of Smelly Art. Journal of Aesthetics and Art
Criticism 65:273–86.
Shusterman, Richard. 2000. Performing Live. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Sibley, Frank. 1959. Aesthetic Concepts. Philosophical Review, 68:421–50.
——2001. Tastes, Smells, and Aesthetics. In Approach to Aesthetics: Collected Papers on Philosophical
Aesthetics, 205–55. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Silver, Burton and Busch, Heather. 1994. Why Cats Paint: A Theory of Feline Aesthetics. Berkeley:
Ten Speed Press.
Silvers, Anita. 2000. From the Crooked Timber of Humanity, Beautiful Things Can be Made. In
Beauty Matters, edited by P. Z. Brand, 197–21. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Simpson, George Gaylord. 1972. The Evolutionary Concept of Man. In Sexual Selection and the
Descent of Man, 1871–1971, edited by B. Campbell. 17–39. London: Heinemann.
Simpson, Jeffry A. and Orin˜a, Minda. 2003. Strategic Pluralism and Context-Speciﬁc Mate
Preferences in Humans. In From Mating to Mentality: Evaluating Evolutionary Psychology, edited
by K. Sterelny and J. Fitness, 39–70. London: Psychology Press.
Singer, Dorothy G. and Singer, Jerome L. 2011. An Attitude Towards the Possible: The
Contribution of Pretend Play to Later Adult Consciousness. In The Aesthetic Mind: Philosophy
and Psychology, edited by E. Schellekens and P. Goldie, 254–67. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Singh, Devendra. 1993a. Adaptive Signiﬁcance of Female Physical Attractiveness: Role of
Waist-to-hip Ratio. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 65:293–307.
—— 1993b. Body Shape and Women’s Attractiveness: The Critical Role of Waist-to-hip Ratio.
Human Nature 4:297–321.
——1994. Is Thin Really Beautiful and Good? Relationship Between Waist-to-hip Ratio
(WHR) and Female Attractiveness. Personality and Individual Differences 16:123–32.
——2002. Female Mate Value at a Glance: Relationship of Waist-to-hip Ratio to Health,
Fecundity and Attractiveness. Neuroendocrinology Letters 23 (suppl 4):81–91.
Skamel, Uta. 2003. Beauty and Sex Appeal: Sexual Selection of Aesthetic Preferences. In
Evolutionary Aesthetics, edited by E. Voland and K. Grammer, 173–200. Berlin: Springer.
Slingerland, Edward. 2008. Good and Bad Reductionism: Acknowledging the Power of
Culture. Style 42:266–71.
Smith, Peter K., editor. 1984. Play in Animals and Humans. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
270
REFERENCES

Smolak, Linda and Murnen, Sarah K. 2007. Feminism and Body Image. In The Body Beautiful:
Evolutionary and Socio-Cultural Perspectives, edited by V. Swami and A. Furnham, 236–58. New
York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Smuts, Robert W. 1992. Fat, Sex, Class, Adaptive Flexibility and Cultural Change. Ethology and
Sociobiology 13:523–42.
Snoeyenbos, Milton H. 1978. On the Possibility of Theoretical Aesthetics. Metaphilosophy
9:108–21.
Sollas, William J. 1915. Ancient Hunters and their Modern Representatives. London: Macmillan.
Second edition.
Solomon, Robert C. 1997. In Defense of Sentimentality. In Emotion and the Arts, edited by
M. Hjort and S. Laver, 225–45. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Solso, Robert L. 1994. Cognition and the Visual Arts. Cambridge: MIT Press.
——2003. The Psychology of Art and the Evolution of the Conscious Brain. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Soressi, Marie. 2005. Late Mousterian Lithic Technology: Its Implications for the Pace of the
Emergence of Behavioural Modernity and the Relationship between Behavioural Modernity
and Biological Modernity. In From Tools to Symbols: From Early Hominids to Humans, edited by
F. d’Errico and L. Blackwell, 389–417. Johannesburg: Witwatersrand University Press.
Soucek, Brian. 2009. Resisting the Itch to Redeﬁne Aesthetics: A Response to Sherri Irvin.
Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism 67:223–26.
Spencer, Herbert. 1966. The Works of Herbert Spencer. 21 vols. Osnabrück: Otto Zeller.
Sperber, Dan. 1996. Explaining Culture: A Naturalistic Approach. Oxford: Blackwell.
Spolsky, Ellen. 2008. The Centrality of the Exceptional in Literary Study. Style 42:285–9.
Stapert, Dick. 2007. Finger Flutings by Palaeolithic Children in Roufﬁgnac Cave: Comments on
a paper by Sharpe and Van Gelder. Antiquity 81 (312): http://antiquity.ac.uk/projgall/stapert/
index.html
Stecker, Robert. 1997a. The Correct and the Appropriate in the Appreciation of Nature. British
Journal of Aesthetics 37:393–402.
——1997b. Artworks: Deﬁnition, Meaning, Value. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.
——2000. Is it Reasonable to Attempt to Deﬁne Art? In Theories of Art Today, edited by
N. Carroll, 45–64. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
——2006. Aesthetic Experience and Aesthetic Value. Philosophy Compass 1:1–10.
Steen, Francis F. 2005. The Paradox of Narrative Thinking. Journal of Cultural and Evolutionary
Psychology 3:87–105.
——2006. A Cognitive Account of Aesthetics. In The Artful Mind: Science and the Riddle of
Human Creativity, edited by M. Turner, 57–71. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Steiner, Gary. 2005. Anthropocentrism and its Discontents: The Moral Status of Animals in the History of
Western Philosophy. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Sterelny, Kim. 1995. The Adapted Mind. Biology and Philosophy 10:365–80.
——2001. Niche Construction, Developmental Systems, and the Extended Replicator. In Cycles
of Contingency: Developmental Systems and Evolution, edited by S. Oyama, P. E. Grifﬁths, and
R. D. Gray, 333–49. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——2003. Thought in a Hostile World. New York: Blackwell.
——2006. The Evolution and Evolvability of Culture. Mind and Language 21:137–65.
——2008. What is Behavioral Modernity? Nicod Lecture. At www.institutnicod.org/Sterelny-
WhatisBehaviouralMordernity.pdf
REFERENCES
271

Sterelny, Kim. 2012. The Evolved Apprentice. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
——and Fitness, Julie, editors. 2003a. From Mating to Mentality: Evaluating Evolutionary Psychology.
London: Psychology Press.
——and Fitness, Julie. 2003b. Introduction: The Evolution of Evolutionary Psychology. In
From Mating to Mentality: Evaluating Evolutionary Psychology, edited by K. Sterelny and J. Fitness,
1–12. London: Psychology Press.
——and Grifﬁths, Paul E. 1999. Sex and Death. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
——Smith, Kelly C., and Dickison, Michael. 1996. The Extended Replicator. Biology and
Philosophy 11:377–403.
Stevens, Catherine and Byron, Tim. 2009. Universals in Music Processing. In The Oxford
Handbook of Music Psychology, edited by S. Hallam, I. Cross, and M. Thaut, 14–23. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Stewart, John E. 1980. Defendants’ Attractiveness as a Factor in the Outcome of Criminal Trials:
An Observational Study. Journal of Applied Social Psychology 10:348–61.
Stiller, James and Hudson, Matthew. 2005. Weak Links and Scene Cliques within the Small
World of Shakespeare. Journal of Cultural and Evolutionary Psychology 3:57–73.
Stiller, James, Nettle, Daniel, and Dunbar, Robin I. M. 2003. The Small World of Shakespeare’s
Plays. Human Nature 14:397–408.
Stokes, Dustin R. 2009. Aesthetics and Cognitive Science. Philosophy Compass 4/5:715–33.
Stolnitz, Jerome. 1960. Aesthetics and the Philosophy of Art Criticism. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Storey, Robert F. 1996. Mimesis and the Human Animal: on the Biogenetic Foundations of Literary
Representation. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.
Storr, Anthony. 1992. Music and the Mind. New York: Free Press.
Stout, D., Quade, J., Semaw, S., Rogers, M. J., and Levin, N. E. 2005. Raw Material Selectivity of
the Earliest Stone Toolmakers at Gona, Afar, Ethiopia. Journal of Human Evolution 48:365–80.
Sumida, Stuart S. and Brochu, Christopher A. 2000. Phylogenetic Context for the Origin of
Feathers. American Zoologist 40:486–503.
Sütterlin, Christa. 1999. Ethological Aspects of Apotropaic Symbolism in Art. In Sociobiology and
the Arts, edited by J. B. Bedaux and B. Cooke, 129–57. Amsterdam: Rodopi.
——2003. From Sign and Schema to Iconic Representation. Evolutionary Aesthetics of
Pictorial Art. In Evolutionary Aesthetics, edited by E. Voland and K. Grammer, 131–70. Berlin:
Springer.
Swami, Viren and Furnham, Adrian. 2007. The Psychology of Physical Attraction. Abingdon:
Routledge.
Swami, Viren, Rozmus-Wrzesinska, Malgorzata, Voracek, Martin, Haubner, Tanja, Danel,
Dariusz, Pawlowski, Boguslaw, Stanistreet, Debbi, Chaplin, Fiona, Chaudhri, Jahanara,
Sheth, Pinal, Shostak, Alla, Zhang, Echo Xian, and Furnham, Adrian. 2008. The Inﬂuence
of Skin Tone, Body Weight, and Hair Color on Perceptions of Women’s Attractiveness and
Health: A Cross-cultural Investigation. Journal of Evolutionary Psychology 6:321–41.
Swirski, Peter. 2008. Four Ways to Skin a Cat: Evolution and Literary Study. Style 42:296–301.
——2010. Literature, Analytically Speaking: Explorations in the Theory of Interpretation, Analytic
Aesthetics, and Evolution. Austin: University of Texas Press.
——2011. “Me” First or “We” First? Literature and Paleomorality. Philosophy and Literature
35:150–67.
Symons, Donald. 1979. The Evolution of Human Sexuality. New York: Oxford University Press.
272
REFERENCES

——1995. Beauty is in the Adaptations of the Beholder: The Evolutionary Psychology
of Human Female Sexual Attractiveness. In Sexual Nature—Sexual Culture, edited by
P. R. Abramson and S. D. Pinkerton, 80–118. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Synek, Erich and Grammer, Karl. 1998, Evolutionary Aesthetics: Visual Complexity and the
Development of Human Landscape Preferences. At http://evolution.anthro.univie.ac.at/in-
stitutes/urbanethology/projects/urbanisation/landscapes/indexland.html
Talbott, William J. 2005. Which Rights Should Be Universal? Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tanaka, Jiro. 2010. Consilience, Cultural Evolution, and the Humanities. Philosophy and Litera-
ture 34:32–47.
Tang, Hua, Siegmund, David O., Peidong, Shen, Oefner, Peter J., and Feldman, Marcus
W. 2002. Frequentist Estimation of Coalescence Times from Neucliotide Sequence Data
using a Tree-based Partition. Genetics 161:447–59.
Tassinary, Louis G. and Hansen, Kristi A. 1998. A Critical Test of the Waist-to-hip Ratio
Hypothesis of Female Physical Attractiveness. Psychological Science 9:150–5.
Tatarkiewicz, Wladyslaw. 1972. The Great Theory of Beauty and its Decline. Journal of Aesthetics
and Art Criticism 31:165–80.
Taylor, Alex H. and Gray, Russell D. 2009. Animal Cognition: Aesop’s Fable Flies from Fiction
to Fact. Current Biology 19:R731–2.
Thakerar, Jitendra A. and Iwawaki, Saburo. 1979. Cross-cultural Comparisons in Interpersonal
Attraction of Females toward Males. Journal of Social Psychology 108:121–2.
Thiessen, Del and Umezawa, Yoko. 1998. The Sociobiology of Everyday Life: A New Look at a
Very Old Novel. Human Nature 9:293–320.
Thomas, Keith. 1983. Man and the Natural World: Changing Attitudes in England 1500–1800.
London: Allen Lane.
Thompson, Robert Farris. 1968. Esthetics in Traditional Africa. ARTnews 66:44–5, 63–7.
Thompson, William Forde and Balkwill, Laura-Lee. 2010. Cross-cultural Similarities. In Oxford
Handbook of Music and Emotion: Theory, Research, Applications, edited by P. N. Juslin and John
Sloboda, 755–88. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Thompson, William Forde, Schellenberg, E. Glenn, and Husain, Gabriela. 2004. Decoding
Speech Prosody: Do Music Lessons Help? Emotion 4:46–64.
Thornhill, Randy. 1998. Darwinian Aesthetics. Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology: Ideas, Issues,
and Applications, edited by C. Crawford and D. L. Krebs, 543–72. Mahwah: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
——2003. Darwinian Aesthetics Informs Traditional Aesthetics. In Evolutionary Aesthetics, edited
by E. Voland and K. Grammer, 9–35. Berlin: Springer.
——and Gangestad, Steven. 2003. Do Women Have Evolved Adaptation for Extra-pair Copula-
tion? In Evolutionary Aesthetics, edited by E. Voland and K. Grammer, 342–60. Berlin: Springer.
Thorpe, W. H. 1956. The Language of Birds. Scientiﬁc American 195:128–38.
——1974. Animal Nature and Human Nature. London: Methuen.
Tishkoff, Sarah A., Reed, Floyd A., Ranciaro, Alessia, Voight, Benjamin F., Babbitt, Courtney
C., Silverman, Jesse S., Powell, Kweli, Mortensen, Holly M., Hirbo, Jibril B., Osman, Maha,
Ibrahim, Muntaser, Omar, Sabah A., Lema, Godfrey, Nyambo, Thomas B., Ghori, Jilur,
Bumpstead, Suzannah, Pritchard, Jonathan K., Wray, Gregory A., and Deloukas, Panos. 2007.
Convergent Adaptation of Human Lactase Persistence in Africa and Europe. Nature Genetics
39:31–40.
REFERENCES
273

Tishkoff, Sarah A., Varkonyi, Robert, Cahinhinan, Nelie, Abbes, Salem, Argyropoulos, George,
Destro-Bisol, Giovanni, Drousiotou, Anthi, Dangerﬁeld, Bruce, Lefranc, Gerard, Loiselet,
Jacques, Piro, Anna, Stoneking, Mark, Tagarelli, Antonio, Tagarelli, Giuseppe, Touma, Elias
H., Williams, Scott M., and Clark, Andrew G. 2001. Haplotype Diversity and Linkage
Disequilibrium at Human G6PD: Recent Origin of Alleles that Confer Malarial Resistance.
Science 293: 455–62.
Todd, Cain. 2011. The Philosophy of Wine: A Case of Truth, Beauty, and Intoxication. Montreal:
McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Todd, Peter. 2000. Simulating the Evolution of Music Behavior. In The Origins of Music, edited
by N. L. Wallin, B. Merker, and S. Brown, 361–88. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tomasello, Michael. 1999. The Cultural Origins of Human Cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
——2003. On the Different Origins of Symbols and Grammar. In Language Evolution, edited by
S. Kirby and M. Christiansen, 94–110. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——2009. Why We Cooperate. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tooby, John and Cosmides, Leda. 1989a. Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of
Culture, Part I. Theoretical considerations. Ethology and Sociobiology 10:29–49.
—— ——1989b. Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture, Part II. Case Study:
A Computational Theory of Social Exchange. Ethology and Sociobiology 10:51–97.
—— ——1990a. The Past Explains the Present: Emotional Adaptations and the Structure of
Ancestral Environments. Ethology and Sociobiology 11:375–424.
—— ——1990b. On the Universality of Human Nature and the Uniqueness of the Individual:
The Role of Genetics and Adaptation. Journal of Personality 58:17–67.
—— ——1992. The Psychological Foundations of Culture. In The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary
Psychology and the Generation of Culture, edited by J. H. Barkow, L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby,
19–136. New York: Oxford University Press.
—— ——2001. Does Beauty Build Adapted Minds? Toward an Evolutionary Theory of
Aesthetics, Fiction and the Arts. SubStance 94/95:6–27.
—— and DeVore, Irven. 1987. The Reconstruction of Hominid Behavioral Evolution through
Strategic Modeling. In The Evolution of Human Behavior: Primate Models, edited by W. G. Kinzey,
183–237. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Tooke, William and Camire, Lori. 1991. Patterns of Deception in Intersexual and Intrasexual
Mating Strategies. Ethology and Sociobiology 12:345–64.
Tove´e, Martin J., Furnham, Adrian, and Swami, Viren. 2007. Healthy Body Equals Beautiful
Body? Changing Perceptions of Health and Attractiveness with Shifting Socioeconomic
Status. In The Body Beautiful: Evolutionary and Socio-cultural Perspectives, edited by V. Swami
and A. Furnham, 108–28. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Trainor, Laurel J. and Schmidt, Louis A. 2003. Processing Emotions Evoked by Music. In The
Cognitive Neuroscience of Music, edited by I. Peretz and R. Zattore, 310–24. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Travis, Cheryl Brown, editor. 2003. Evolution, Gender, and Rape. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Trehub, Sandra E. 2000. Human Processing Predispositions and Musical Universals. In The
Origins of Music, edited by N. L. Wallin, B. Merker, and S. Brown, 427–48. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
——2003a. The Developmental Origins of Musicality. Nature Neuroscience 6:669–73.
274
REFERENCES

——2003b. Musical Predispositions in Infancy: An Update. In The Cognitive Neuroscience of
Music, edited by I. Peretz and R. Zattore, 3–20. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Trivers, Robert L. 1972. Parental Investment and Sexual Selection. In Sexual Selection and the
Descent of Man, 1871–1971, edited by Bernard Campbell. 136–779. London: Heinemann.
Trout, Paul A. 1993. The Biology and Physics of Beauty. Brock Review 2:183–200.
Tuan, Yi-Fu. 1993. Desert and Ice: Ambivalent Aesthetics. In Landscape, Natural Beauty
and the Arts, edited by S. Kemal and I. Gaskill, 139–57. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Turner, Frederick. 1991a. Beauty: The Value of Values. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.
——1991b. Toward an Evolutionary Ontology of Beauty. Oral Tradition 6 (1):126–9.
——1995. The Culture of Hope: A New Birth of the Classical Spirit. New York: Free Press.
——1999a. The Sociobiology of Beauty. In Sociobiology and the Arts, edited by J. B. Bedaux and
B. Cooke, 63–82. Amsterdam: Rodopi.
——1999b. An Ecopoetics of Beauty and Meaning. Biopoetics: Evolutionary Explorations in the
Arts, edited by B. Cooke and F. Turner, 119–37. Lexington: ICUS.
——and Po¨ppel, Ernst. 1988. Metered Poetry, the Brain, and Time. Beauty and the Brain:
Biological Aspects of Aesthetics, edited by I. Rentschler, B. Herzberger, and D. Epstein, 71–90.
Basel: Birkhäuser.
Turner, Mark 1996. The Literary Mind. New York: Oxford University Press.
——2006. The Art of Compression. In The Artful Mind: Science and the Riddle of Human
Creativity, edited by M. Turner, 93–113. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ucko,Peter J. and Rosenfeld, Andre´e. 1967. Paleolithic Cave Art. London:Weidenfeldand Nicolson.
Ulrich, Roger S. 1993. Biophilia, Biophobia, and Natural Landscapes. In The Biophilia Hypothe-
sis, edited by S. R. Kellert and E. O. Wilson, 73–137. Washington, DC: Island Press.
Van Damme, Wilfried. 1996. Beauty in Context: Towards an Anthropological Approach to Aesthetics.
Leiden: E. J. Brill.
van den Broek, Eva M. P. and Todd, Peter M. 2009–10. Evolution of Rhythm as an Indicator of
Mate Quality. Musicae Scientiae 13:369–86.
Van Gelder, Leslie and Sharpe, Kevin. 2009. Women and Girls as Upper Palaeolithic Cave
“Artists”: Deciphering the Sexes of Finger Fluters in Roufﬁgnac Cave. Oxford Journal of
Archaeology 28:323–33.
Vanhaeren, Marian. 2005. Speaking with Beads: The Evolutionary Signiﬁcance of Personal
Ornaments. In From Tools to Symbols: From Early Hominids to Humans, edited by F. d’Errico and
L. Blackwell, 525–53. Johannesburg: Witwatersrand University Press.
——d’Errico, Francesco, Stringer, Chris, James, Sarah L. Todd, Jonathan A., and Mienis, Henk
K. 2006. Middle Paleolithic Shell Beads in Israel and Algeria. Science 312:1785–8.
Veblen, Thorstein. 2001 reprint. The Theory of the Leisure Class. New York: Modern Library.
First published 1899, cited edition 1934.
Velo, Joseph. 1984. Ochre as Medicine: A Suggestion for the Interpretation of the Archaeolog-
ical Record. Current Anthropology 25:674.
Vermeule, Blakey. 2010. Why Do We Care about Literary Characters? Baltimore: John Hopkins
University Press.
Vickers, A. Leah and Kitcher, Philip. 2002. Pop Sociobiology Reborn: The Evolutionary
Psychology of Sex and Violence. In Evolution, Gender, and Rape, edited by C. Travis,
139–68. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
REFERENCES
275

Vila`, Carles, Savolainen, Peter, Maldonado, Jesús E., Amorim, Isabel R., Rice, John E.,
Honeycutt, Rodney L., Crandall, Keith A., Lundeberg, Joachim, and Wayne, Robert
K. 1997. Multiple and Ancient Origins of the Domestic Dog. Science 276:1687–9.
Voland, Eckart. 2003. Aesthetic Preferences in the World of Artifacts—Adaptations for
the Evaluation of “Honest Signals”? In Evolutionary Aesthetics, edited by E. Voland and
K. Grammer, 239–60. Berlin: Springer.
Walker, Robert. 2004. Cultural Memes, Innate Proclivities and Musical Behaviour: A Case
Study of the Western Traditions. Psychology of Music 32 (2):153–90.
Wallace, Alfred Russel. 1870. Contributions to the Theory of Natural Selection. London: Macmillan.
——1871. Review of Darwin’s Descent of Man. The Academy 2:177–83.
——1889. Darwinism: An Exposition of the Theory of Natural Selection with some of its Applications.
London: Macmillan. Third edition 1901.
——1891. Natural Selection and Tropical Nature: Essays on Descriptive Biology. London: Macmillan.
Wallaschek, Richard. 1891. On the Origin of Music. Mind os-16:375–86.
Walton, Kendall L. 1970. Categories of Art. Philosophical Review 79:334–67.
——1993. How Marvelous! Toward a Theory of Aesthetic Value. Journal of Aesthetics and Art
Criticism 51:499–510.
Wang, Xiaoming and Tedford, Richard H. 2008. Dogs: Their Fossil Relatives and Evolutionary
History. New York: Columbia University Press.
Washburn, Dorothy. 2006. Aesthetic Universals in Cultural Perception and Practice. In New
Directions in Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts, edited by P. Locher, C. Martindale, and
L. Dorfman, 59–75. Amityville: Baywood.
Washburn, S. L. 1970. Comment on “A Possible Evolutionary Basis for Aesthetic Appreciation
in Men and Apes.” Evolution 24:824–5.
Watchman, Alan. 1993. Evidence of a 25,000-year-old Pictograph in Northern Australia.
Geoarchaeology 8:465–73.
Watts, Ian. 1999. The Origins of Symbolic Culture. In The Evolution of Culture: An Interdisciplinary
View, edited by R. I. M. Dunbar, C. Knight, and C. Power, 113–46. New Brunswick: Rutgers
University Press.
Wecker, Stanley C. 1963. The Role of Early Experience in Habitat Selection by the Prairie Deer
Mouse, Peromyscus maniculatus bairdi. Ecological Monographs 33:307–25.
Wedekind, Claus. 2007. Body Odours and Body Odour Preferences in Humans. In The Oxford
Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology, edited by R. I. M. Dunbar and L. Barrett, 315–20.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——and Füri, Sandra. 1997. Body Odor Preference in Men and Women: Do They Aim for
Speciﬁc MHC Combination or Simply Heterozygosity? Proceedings of the Royal Society London,
series B 264:1471–9.
Weiner, Joseph S. 1971. Man’s Natural History. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
Wells, Jonathan C. K. 2006. The Evolution of Human Fatness and Susceptibility to Obesity: An
Ethological Approach. Biological Reviews 81:183–205.
Welsch, Wolfgang. 2004. Animal Aesthetics. Contemporary Aesthetics 2: http://www.contem-
paesthetics.org/newvolume/pages/article.php?articleID = 243
——2008. On the Universal Appreciation of Beauty. International Yearbook of Aesthetics 12:6–32.
Wermke, Kathleen and Mende, Werner. 2009–10. Musical Elements in Human Infants’ Cries:
In the Beginning is the Melody. Musicae Scientiae 13:151–75.
276
REFERENCES

West, Stephen G. and Brown, T. Jan. 1975. Physical Attractiveness, the Severity of the
Emergency and Helping: A Field Experiment and Interpersonal Simulation. Journal of Experi-
mental Social Psychology 11:531–8.
Westermarck, Edward. 1921. The History of Human Marriage. London: Macmillan. Fifth edition.
Westfahl, Gary. 1999. The Dance with Darkness: The Limits of Human Interest in Science
Fiction. Biopoetics: Evolutionary Explorations in the Arts, edited by B. Cooke and F. Turner,
219–40. Lexington: ICUS.
Whaling, Carol. 2000. What’s Behind a Song? The Neural Basis of Song Learning in Birds. In
The Origins of Music, edited by N. L. Wallin, B. Merker, and S. Brown, 65–76. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Whissel, Cynthia. 1996. Mate Selection in Popular Women’s Fiction. Human Nature 7:427–47.
White, Randall. 1989a. Production Complexity and Standardization in Early Aurignacian Bead
and Pendant Manufacture: Evolutionary Implications. In The Human Revolution: Behavioral and
Biological Perspectives on the Origins of Modern Humans, edited by P. Mellars and C. Stringer,
366–90. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
——1989b. Toward a Conceptual Understanding of the Earliest Body Ornaments. In The Emergence
of Modern Humans, edited by E. Trinkhaus, 211–31. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——1992. Beyond Art: Toward an Understanding of the Origins of Material Representation in
Europe. Annual Review of Anthropology 21:537–64.
——1993. A Social and Technological View of Aurignacian and Castelperronian Personal
Ornaments in S. W. Europe. In El Origin del Hombre Moderno en el Suroeste de Europa, edited
by V. Barera Valde´s, 327–57. Madrid: Ministerio des Educacion y Ciencia.
——2003. Prehistoric Art: The Symbolic Journey of Mankind. New York: Harry N. Abrams.
——2004. La Parure en Ivoire des Hommes de Cro-Magnon. Pour la Science 43:98–103.
White, Tim D., Asfaw, Berhane, DeGusta, David, Gilbert, Henry, Richards, Gary D., Suwa,
Gen, and Howell, F. Clark. 2003. Pleistocene Homo sapiens from Middle Awash, Ethiopia.
Nature 423 (12 June): 742–7.
Whiten, Andrew. 1976. Primate Perception and Aesthetics. In Beyond Aesthetics: Investigations into
the Nature of Visual Art, edited by D. Brothwell, 18–40. London: Thames and Hudson.
Whitley, David S. 2009. Cave Paintings and the Human Spirit. Amherst: Prometheus Books.
Whitmeyer, Joseph M. 1998. On the Relationship between Memes and Genes: A Critique of
Dennett. Biology and Philosophy 13:187–204.
Whitt, Laurie Anne, Roberts, Mere, Norman, Waerte, and Grieves, Vicki. 2001. Indigenous
Perspectives. In A Companion to Environmental Philosophy, edited by D. Jamieson, 3–20.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Wilson, David Sloan. 2002. Darwin's Cathedral: Evolution, Religion and the Nature of Society.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
——2005. Evolutionary Social Constructivism. In The Literary Animal: Evolution and the Nature of
Narrative, edited by J. Gottschall and D. S. Wilson, 20–37. Evanston: Northwestern University
Press.
——2007. Group-level Evolutionary Processes. In The Oxford Handbook of Evolutionary
Psychology, edited by R. I. M. Dunbar and L. Barrett, 49–55. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——Vugt, Mark Van, and O’Gorman, Rick. 2008. Multilevel Selection Theory and Major
Evolutionary Transitions: Implications for Psychological Science. Current Directions in Psycho-
logical Science 17 (1):6–9.
REFERENCES
277

Wilson, Edward O. 1975. Sociobiology: The New Synthesis. Cambridge: Belknap Press.
——1978. On Human Nature. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
——1984. Biophilia. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
——1992. The Diversity of Life. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
——1998. Consilience: The Unity of Knowledge. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
——2006. The Creation. New York: W. W. Norton.
Wilson, Margo and Daly, Martin. 1992. The Man who Mistook his Wife for a Chattel. In The
Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture, edited by J. H. Barkow,
L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby, 289–322. New York: Oxford University Press.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1967. Philosophical Investigations, translated by G. E. M. Anscombe. Black-
well: Oxford. Third edition.
Wobst, H. Martin. 1974. Boundary Conditions for Paleolithic Social Systems: A Simulation
Approach. American Antiquity 39:147–78.
Wolf, A. P. and Haung, C. S. 1980. Marriage and Adoption in China, 1845–1945. Stanford:
Stanford University Press.
Wolf, Maryanne. 2007. Proust and the Squid: The Story and the Science of the Reading Brain. New
York: Harper Collins.
Wolloch, Nathaniel. 2006. Subjugated Animals: Animals and Anthropocentrism in Early Modern
European Culture. Amherst: Humanity Books.
Wood, Bernard. 2005. Human Evolution: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wood, Wendy and Eagly, Alice H. 2002. A Cross-cultural Analysis of the Behavior of
Women and Men: Implications for the Origins of Sex Differences. Psychological Bulletin
128:699–727.
Woodcock, David M. 1982. A Functionalist Approach to Environmental Preference. Ph.D. Dissertation.
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan.
Wrangham, Richard. 2009. Catching Fire: How Cooking Made Us Human. New York: Basic Books.
Wright, Robert. 1994. The Moral Animal: Evolutionary Psychology and Everyday Life. New York:
Pantheon Books.
Wypijewski, JoAnn, editor. 1997. Painting by Numbers: Komar and Melamid’s Scientiﬁc Guide to Art.
New York: Farrar, Straus, Giroux.
Yu, Douglas. W. and Shephard Jr, Glenn H. 1998. Is Beauty in the Eye of the Beholder? Nature
396:321–2.
Zahavi, A. and Zahavi, A. 1997. The Handicap Principle: A Missing Piece of Darwin’s Puzzle. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Zaidel, Dahlia W. 2005. Neuropsychology of Art: Neurological, Cognitive, and Evolutionary Perspec-
tives. New York: Psychology Press.
——2011. Neuroscience, Biology, and Brain Evolution in Visual Art. In The Aesthetic Mind:
Philosophy and Psychology, edited by E. Schellekens and P. Goldie, 44–53. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
——Aarde, Shawn M., and Baig, Kieran. 2005. Appearance of Symmetry, Beauty, and Health
in Human Faces. Brain and Cognition 57:261–3.
——and Deblieck, Choi. 2007. Attractiveness of Natural Faces Compared to Computer-
constructed Perfectly Symmetrical Faces. International Journal of Neuroscience 117:423–31.
Zangwill, Nick. 1995. The Metaphysics of Beauty. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Zebrowitz, Leslie A. 1997. Reading Faces: Window to the Soul? Boulder: Westview Press.
278
REFERENCES

——and McDonald, Susan M. 1991. The Impact of Litigants’ Baby-facedness and Attractiveness
on Adjudications in Small Claims Courts. Law and Human Behaviour 15:603–23.
——Montepare, Joann M., and Lee, Hoon Koo. 1993. They Don’t All Look Alike: Individ-
uated Impressions of Other Racial Groups. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
65:85–101.
Zeki, Semir. 1999. Art and the Brain. Journal of Consciousness Studies: Art and the Brain 6
( June–July):76–96.
—— 2000. Inner Vision. New York: Oxford University Press.
——2006. The Neurology of Ambiguity. In The Artful Mind: Science and the Riddle of Human
Creativity, edited by M. Turner, 243–70. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——2009. Splendors and Miseries of the Brain: Love, Creativity and the Quest for Human Happiness.
Malden: Wiley-Blackwell.
Zilhão, João. 2007. The Emergence of Ornaments and Art: An Archaeological Perspective on
the Origins of “Behavioral Modernity.” Journal of Archaeological Research 15:1–54.
——Angelucci, Diego, Badal-Garcı´a, Ernestina, d’Errico, Francesco, Flore´al, Daniel, Dayet,
Laure, Douka, Katerina, Higham, Thomas, Martı´nez-Sa´nchez, Marı´a Jose´, Montes-Berna´r-
dez, Ricardo, Murcia-Mascaro´s, Sonia, Pe´rez-Sirvent, Carmen, Rolda´n-Garcı´a, Clodoaldo,
Vanhaeren, Marian, Villaverde, Valentı´n, Wood, Rachel, and Zapata, Joseﬁna. 2010. Sym-
bolic use of Marine Shells and Mineral Pigments by Iberian Neandertals. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Science 107 January 19:1023–8.
Zunshine, Lisa. 2006. Why We Read Fiction: Theory of Mind and the Novel. Columbus: Ohio State
University Press.
——2007. Fiction and Theory of Mind: An Exchange. Philosophy and Literature 31:189–99.
——2008. Strange Concepts and the Stories They Make Possible. Baltimore: John Hopkins Univer-
sity Press.
——2009. Mind Plus: Sociocognitive Pleasures of Jane Austen’s Novels. Studies in the Literary
Imagination 42 (2):103–23.
REFERENCES
279

Web Resources
The following websites illustrate or discuss items and topics covered in this book.
Part I. Key Concepts
Introduction
p. 1
Excalibur: found Sima de los Huesos (Bones Pit), the Atapuerca mountains, Spain in 1998.
http://www.atapuerca.org/excaliburin.htm
http://www.modernhumanorigins.com/sima-de-los-huesos-and-hominids
http://www.sciencephoto.com/media/136943/view
http://www.sciencephoto.com/media/170699/view
Hand axes: http://antiquity.ac.uk/ProjGall/marshall/marshall.html
http://www.cope.co.za/archaeo/masterhandaxe.htm
p. 2
Hominin timeline: http://bio1151.nicerweb.com/Locked/media/ch34/homo.html
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Humanevolutionchart.jpg
http://donsnotes.com/science/biology/evolution.html
Es-Skhul cave: http://www.mfa.gov.il/MFA/History/Early%20History%20-%20Archaeology/
Archaeological%20Sites%20in%20Israel%20-%20The%20Carmel%20Caves-
p. 3
Sungir graves: http://www.donsmaps.com/sungaea.html
http://evolution-of-man.info/sungir.htm
Blombos cave: http://www.accessexcellence.org/WN/SU/caveart.php
http://archaeology.about.com/cs/humanorigins/a/blombos.htm
Chauvet cave: http://www.ancient-wisdom.co.uk/francechauvet.htm
http://www.bradshawfoundation.com/chauvet/chauvet_cave_art.php
http://www.culture.gouv.fr/culture/arcnat/chauvet/en/index.html
http://www.lehsd.k12.nj.us/users/dupuis/chauvet.htm
Cougnac cave: http://www.grottesdecougnac.com/Sitefr/index.htm
Pech Merle cave: http://www.pechmerle.com/english/introduction.html
Lascaux cave: http://www.bradshawfoundation.com/lascaux/index.php
http://www.lascaux.culture.fr/
http://www.mazzaroth.com/ChapterOne/LascauxCave.htm
Altamira cave:
http://museodealtamira.mcu.es/
http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/310
p. 4
Prehistoric art. Useful sites are:
http://arthistoryresources.net/ARTHprehistoric.html
http://www.bradshawfoundation.com/

Carvings of Vogelherd cave:
http://www.ice-age-art.de/anfaenge_der_kunst/vogelherd.php
http://www.showcaves.com/english/de/caves/Vogelherd.html
Lion person of Hohlenstein: http://www.ianslunarpages.org/lionhead.html
http://www.ice-age-art.de/anfaenge_der_kunst/hohlen/mensch.php
http://www.loewenmensch.de/lion_man.html
http://www.showcaves.com/english/de/caves/Hohlenstein.html
Venus ﬁgurines. A number of Venus ﬁgures, including those of Tan-Tan and Berekhat Ram are
shown at:
http://www.bradshawfoundation.com/sculpture/gallery.php
Venus of Kostenski: http://www.donsmaps.com/lioncamp.html
Venus of Dolnı´ Veˇstonic: http://www.donsmaps.com/dolni.html
Venus of Brassempouy:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Venus_of_Brassempouy.png
http://maisondeladame.chez-alice.fr/
La Mouthe lamp: http://www.donsmaps.com/lamouthe.html
p. 5
Le Mas d’Azil spear thrower: http://www.donsmaps.com/masdazil.html
Australian Aborigine rock art:
http://www.environment.gov.au/parks/uluru/visitor-activities/rock-art.html
http://mc2.vicnet.net.au/home/aura/web/index.html
Chapter 1
p. 13
Welsch (2004) article:
http://www.contempaesthetics.org/newvolume/pages/article.php?articleID=243
p. 23
Dinka cattle: http://www.eurekastreet.com.au/article.aspx?aeid=478
http://www.thedailybeast.com/galleries/2010/10/19/dinka-legendary-cattle-keepers-of-
sudan.html
Chapter 2
p. 27
Massim betel nut paraphernalia:
http://www.art-paciﬁc.com/artifacts/nuguinea/massim/trobkula.htm
See ﬁgures 10–12.
For a documentary on paper folding: http://www.greenfuseﬁlms.com/index.html
p. 30
Shadow puppet plays: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wayang
Japanese tea ceremony: http://japanese-tea-ceremony.net/
Islamic calligraphy: http://www.islamicart.com/main/calligraphy/index.html
p. 31
Chimpanzee paintings: http://primarilyprimates.org/videos/ppvid_Painting.htm
WEB RESOURCES
281

p. 33
Bowerbirds, including Stain Bowerbirds with blue straws:
http://www.oceanwideimages.com/categories.asp?cID=204&p=2
http://www.superstock.com/stock-photography/Ptilonorhynchidae
Listen to the songs of humpback whales: http://www.whalesong.net/
Chapter 3
A timeline of evolutionary thought: http://www.ucmp.berkeley.edu/history/evotmline.html
History of evolution: http://www.iep.utm.edu/evolutio/
The complete works of Darwin online: http://darwin-online.org.uk/
Understanding evolution: http://evolution.berkeley.edu/
Chapter 4
p. 48
Komar and Melamid’s “Most Wanted” paintings: http://awp.diaart.org/km/
p. 56
Later Cubism. Picasso’s Three Musicians (1921):
http://www.artquotes.net/masters/picasso/pablo_musicians1921.htm
North-west Amerinidian split perspective. Robert Davidson Split Beaver (1975):
http://www.alcheringa-gallery.com/past/rd_splitbeaver.html
http://coghlanart.com/rdbr4.htm
Links to classic Chinese paintings: http://www.chinapage.com/paint1.html
Six principles used to classify Chinese painters by Xie He:
http://www.rice-paper.com/uses/painting/essay.html
Egyptian perspective: http://www.bmimages.com/preview.asp?image=00244326001&imagex
=9&searchnum=0002jpg
p. 57
Paintings from Bali in shadow puppet style:
http://australianmuseum.net.au/image/Detail-of-panel-from-the-Bima-Swarga-story
http://blog.baliwww.com/arts-culture/416
Contemporary examples of Australian Aborigine “dot” paintings:
http://www.tribalworks.com/Aboriginal-Art-Dot-Painting-Gallery.htm
Various styles of contemporary Australian Aborigine paintings can be viewed at:
http://cooinda-gallery.com.au
p. 59
Archaeopteryx: http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/archaeopteryx/info.html
Part II. The Aesthetic
Chapter 5
p. 67
C¸ atal Hüyük: http://www.catalhoyuk.com/
http://globalheritagefund.org/what_we_do/overview/completed_projects/catalhoyuk_turkey
Hohlenstein-Stadel therianthrope: see websites listed at note to p. 281.
282
WEB RESOURCES

Therianthropes in cave art: Sorcerer of Trois Fre`res cave in south-western France.
http://www.faculty.umb.edu/gary_zabel/Courses/Phil%20281/Philosophy%20of %20Magic/
My%20Docu ments/Therianthropes.htm
Arnhem Land art: http://www.bradshawfoundation.com/bradshaws/index.php
http://www.environment.gov.au/parks/kakadu/visitor-activities/rock-art.html
Lascaux “cave of bulls”: see websites listed at note to p. 280.
Go¨bekli Tepe: http://www.dainst.org/en/project/goebeklitepe?ft=all
http://globalheritagefund.org/what_we_do/overview/current_projects/gobekli_tepe_turkey
p. 68
Nevali C¸ ori: http://www.hageneuer.de/fundort_anzeige.php?id=126
p. 69
Leonardo da Vinci:
http://www.royalcollection.org.uk/collection/912342/studies-for-an-equestrian-monument
Michelangelo: http://www.britishmuseum.org/explore/highlights/highlight_image.aspx?image
=com988.jpg&retpage=21653
Bosch, The Temptation of St Anthony. The goldﬁnch is in the cherry (central panel, lower left).
The barn owl is on the head of the snout-faced ﬁgure (central panel, middle left):
http://excursuses.ﬁles.wordpress.com/2011/06/bosch-stanthony.jpg
Raffaello’s God’s Creation of the Animals:
http://www.wga.hu/frames-e.html?/html/r/raphael/5roma/4/2animals.html
Dürer’s hare:
http://www.albertina.at/jart/prj3/albertina/images/img-db/1215510158296.jpeg
Velazquez stag’s head: http://www.diegovelazquez.org/ [search: stag]
Stubbs horse: http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/george-stubbs-whistlejacket
Degas horses: http://www.edgardegas.net/Animals.aspx
p. 70
Living therianthropes: the most notorious are catman (see www.anomalies-unlimited.com/
Catman.html) and lizardman (see www.thelizardman.com/).
Goya bulls: http://goya.unizar.es/InfoGoya/Work/TauromaquiaIcn.html
Picasso bulls: http://www.artyfactory.com/art_appreciation/animals_in_art/pablo_picasso.htm
Hockney dog: http://www.hockneypictures.com/works_paintings_90_12.php
Wegman dog: http://www.wegmanworld.com
Freud whippet:
http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2011/sep/20/lucian-freud-national-portrait-gallery
Greenberg: Various animal portraits are at http://www.jillgreenberg.com/tagged/animals
Schwartz primates:
http://robinschwartz.net/#/portfolio-gallleries/primate-portraits/AngelCaseylt
p. 73
Cute baby seals: http://postersandposters.com/cgi-bin/apws/apws.pl?cat=17783
Koi: http://www.koiﬁshschool.com/japanese-koi-carp.html
http://www.mpks.org/articles/RayJordan/KoiHistory3.shtml
http://www.olympickoiclub.org/aboutkoi.html
Dinka cattle: see websites at note to p. 281.
Fancy pigeons: http://pigeon00.tripod.com/fancy_pigeon_gallery.htm
WEB RESOURCES
283

p. 74
Nesting American woodcock:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:American_Woodcock_Scolopax_minor.jpg
Bar-tailed Godwit: http://alaska.usgs.gov/science/biology/shorebirds/barg_updates.html [see
section on Godwit E7]
http://www.infonews.co.nz/news.cfm?id=5885
http://www.oiseaux-birds.com/card-bar-tailed-godwit.html
Chapter 6
p. 95
Synek and Grammer article: http://evolution.anthro.univie.ac.at/institutes/urbanethology/
projects/urbanisation/landscapes/indexland.html
Chapter 7
p. 106
The historical depiction of women in pictures: http://www.arthistory.sbc.edu/imageswomen/
Chapter 11
p. 159
Neuroaesthetics: http://www.association-of-neuroesthetics.org/
http://www.neuroestetica.it/
http://www.neuroesthetics.org/
284
WEB RESOURCES

Index
Adajian, Thomas 195, 232
adaptation (Glossary term) 45, 58–60, 100–1, 230
see also evolution; spandrel
adaptive behaviors as often intrinsically
pleasurable 10, 58, 61, 82, 116, 123,
140, 216
Addis, Donna Rose 227, 269
Aesop 68
aesthetic, the (Glossary term) 28, 63, 71,
82–4, 230
alleged to be a Modernist Western
category 47–8, 201
as cross-culturally appreciable 48–9,
86–9, 146
as distinct from other perceptually based
judgments or feelings 10–11, 14–15,
88–9, 192–3
as including the everyday 18–19, 47, 81–2, 193
see also aesthetic formalism; aesthetic
properties; aesthetic response;
beautiful, the; beauty; human beauty;
Kant; sublime, the
aesthetic formalism 15–21, 26, 79, 81, 207
see also Kant
aesthetic properties 9, 17–18, 23–4,
131, 192
as complementing or relating to function 4,
11, 15, 20–1, 81, 194
see also aesthetic response; animals; artistic
properties
aesthetic response 1–2, 4, 9–10, 74, 80–2, 192
as action-guiding rather than
contemplative 11, 15, 45–6, 89
alleged to be disinterested 16, 26, 193
to animals 8, 49, 63, 65, 71–85
as confused with perceptual pleasure 14, 88,
184, 192–3, 218
cross-cultural agreement in 48–9, 86–9,
146, 203
as emotion-like 15, 77, 88, 193
as evolutionarily adaptive sometimes 6, 45–6,
63, 65, 76, 87
as evolutionarily maladaptive sometimes 75
as evolutionary spandrel 45
heritability of 7, 72, 87, 101, 146, 153
as involving all the senses 18–19, 82, 193
and morality 22–3, 65–6, 81, 146
to nature/landscape/environment 8, 20,
48–9, 59–61, 63, 76, 82, 86–95, 101,
116, 207–11
as not based on adaptations to speciﬁc
habitats 99–100
as not purely cultural 99
as non-biological sometimes 78–9
object of 9, 20–2
and objectivity 19, 48, 194
origins of 1–2, 7, 10–11
as possibly irrelevant to modern life 59–61
as part of human nature 45, 60
as universal 7, 47, 49, 146
see also aesthetic, the; aesthetic properties;
animals; birds; crustaceans; insects;
primates
aesthetic taste, see aesthetic response
Aiken, Nancy E. B. 202, 214, 232
Akan of Africa 29
Akker, Paul van den 202, 232
Alcorta, Candace S. 219–20, 227, 232
Alexander, Richard D. 199, 232
Alicke, Mark D. 212, 232
Alland Jr, Alexander 202, 218–19, 232
Allen, Wayne E. 191, 200, 232
Alley, Thomas R. 212, 232
Allhoff, Fritz 193, 232
Allott, Robin 128, 192, 195, 218, 232
Altamira cave, Spain 3, 280–1
Ambrose, Stanley 189, 200, 208, 232
Anderson, Richard L. 201–2, 232
animals 22–3, 63, 69, 75–6, 93–4, 216
alleged to be art creators 31–3, 195–6
alleged to experience aesthetic
appreciation 12, 31, 192–3
aesthetic properties of 72–85
and rarity 77–8, 80–1, 84
breeding of 73, 84, 206–7
in art 68–70, 86–7, 146, 205, 283
as companions and pets 49, 66, 68–70, 84,
173, 205–6
domestication of 36, 66–8, 73, 204–5
human attitudes to 68–71, 205–6
anthropomorphism toward 23, 69, 71–4,
79, 206
humans’ relation with 66–71, 73–4
as lacking in aesthetic appreciation 13, 192–3
as sacred 67–9
see also bears; beavers; biophilia; birds; bulls;
camels; cats; cattle; crustaceans; deer;
deer mice; dinosaurs; dogs; donkeys;
elephants; evolutionary psychology;
foxes; gibbons; goats; hares; horses;

animals (cont.)
insects; kangaroos; koi; leeches; lions;
mammoths; monkeys; pigs; primates;
rats; seals; sheep; snakes; spiders; tigers;
unicorns; water buffalo; zebras
Aoyama, Mami 214, 254
Appleton, Jay 60, 88, 92, 204, 207–9, 211, 232–3
Arak, Anthony 198, 212, 247
Archaeopteryx 59, 162, 283
Ardrey, Robert 196, 233
Argyros, Alexander J. 226, 233
Aristides Quintilianus 53, 203, 233
Aristotle 25
Armstrong, Edward Allworthy 192, 196, 233
Arnheim, Rudolf 195, 202–3, 233
art 28–30, 33, 35, 69, 121–2, 134–5, 235, 281–4
alleged to be cultural technology 8, 45,
118–19, 148–52, 158, 222–3
discussion 149, 152–7, 183, 188, 223
alleged to be eighteenth century
invention 25–6, 194
alleged to be evolutionarily adaptive, see art
behaviors
alleged to be evolutionary spandrel, see art
behaviors
alleged to be vestigial 130–1, 200–1
as ancient 4–5, 30, 50, 57–8, 62, 77, 141,
186–7, 218, 225
cannot be deﬁned as the sum of the art
forms 27, 194
cluster account of 27–8, 194–5
and cooperation 127–30, 177
craft versus 25
as cross-culturally appreciable 7, 54
common physical media 55
in part only 54, 56
universals in music 57, 203
universal narrative themes 55, 160–1, 169,
203, 224
universals in pictorial art 49, 202
depictions of women in 104, 106, 213–14,
216, 284
and human nature 6, 45, 58, 130, 186–8
hybrid account of 28–9, 195
and morality 142–3, 168–9, 174–5,
178–80, 227
origins of 7, 59, 62, 117, 129–34, 179, 217,
219–20, 228
as possibly irrelevant to its modern
function 62, 118, 129, 131, 204, 219
prehistoric 3–5, 30–1, 40, 46, 55, 65, 67, 106,
130, 187, 190–1, 207, 217, 281
as recent Western invention 7
as universal 27, 30, 50–1, 53–4, 136, 183,
186–7, 195
value of 24, 62, 118, 122, 131, 140, 157, 162,
176, 216, 218–19, 225
see also Australian Aborigine art; artistry
complementing function; China;
dance; decorative art; domestic art;
drama; Egypt; Fine Art; folk art; India;
Indonesia; Japan; literary Darwinism;
literary ﬁction; mass art; Middle
Eastern art; music; narrative; poetry;
pictures; play; popular art; skill; small
“a”; art
art behaviors 49, 117, 202
competence in 51–3, 145–6
as costly 50–1, 145–6, 185, 222
alleged to be evolutionarily adaptive 6–8,
36, 40, 43–4, 58, 117–18, 121,
126–9, 132, 142–4, 162, 166,
169–74, 177–81, 183–4, 187, 218,
222, 225–8
by “making special” 123–4, 129–31,
217–19
discussion 123–4, 131–2, 217, 219
for groups 36, 43–4, 58, 127, 132, 166–8,
178, 180, 218–20, 226
discussion 43–4, 167–8, 220
only for virtuosos 50–1, 202
via sexual selection 40, 50, 62, 123–5,
165–6, 176–7, 204, 217, 227
discussion 123, 125–6, 217–18, 226
alleged to be evolutionary spandrel 6, 8,
45–6, 62, 118, 132, 136–9, 144,
185, 221–2
discussion 139–42, 183–4, 221
heritability of 50, 124,129, 153–4, 162,
202, 223
as intrinsically pleasurable 27, 58, 130, 155,
186–7, 218
but not always 142, 187
and human nature 6, 58, 130, 188
and play 132, 218–19
as signaling biological ﬁtness 45, 50, 118–19,
126, 136, 141, 145–7, 165–6, 174,
185–6, 197, 217
as universal 7, 29–30, 50, 53–4, 62, 183,
186–7
see also art; dance; drama; literary behaviors;
music; narrating; picturing; poetry
artistic properties 24, 194
see also aesthetic properties
artistry complementing function 4–5, 26, 28,
30, 194
Asfaw, Berhane 189, 233, 259, 277
Astington, J. W. 203, 226, 233
Audubon, John James 69
Aunger, Robert 197, 233
Austen, Jane 51, 129, 202
Austin, Michael 175, 204, 225–7, 233
Australian Aborigine art 5, 30, 57, 67, 195,
203–5, 281–2
286
INDEX

Bach, Johann Sebastian 177, 223
Balda, Russell P. 196, 233
Bali, see Indonesia
Balkwill, Laura-Lee 203, 233, 273
Ball, Philip 121, 126, 133, 196–7, 216–18,
220–1, 223, 227–8, 233
Balling, John D. 94, 208–10, 233
Bamford, Marian K. 210, 233
Bandi, H. G. 192, 233
Barash, David L. 201–3, 217, 224, 233
Barash, Nanelle R. 201–3, 217, 224, 233
Bardon, Geoffrey 203, 233
Barham, Lawrence S. 28, 189–91, 195, 200, 234
Barkow, Jerome H. 142, 222, 234, 241
Barnes, Marni 209, 260
Baron-Cohen, Simon 199, 234
Baroni, Mario 219, 234
Barrett, H. Clark 200, 210, 221–2, 234, 260
Barrett, Louise 197, 200, 210, 228, 246
Barrow, John D. 76, 138, 200–1, 206–9, 212,
219, 221, 223, 234
Bar-tailed Godwit 74, 83, 284
Barton, R. N. E. 190, 234
Bataille, Georges 191, 205, 214, 234
Bateman, A. J. 198, 234
Bateson, Melissa 201, 234
Bateson, P. P. G. 212, 234
Beach, Frank A. 211, 214, 248
beads and ornaments, see prehistoric items
Beardsley, Monroe C. 193–4, 234
bears 69, 101
polar 79
prehistoric cave 67
beautiful, the 9–10
see also beauty; human beauty
beauty 19–21, 82, 103
in art 24, 203
and cooperation 111–15
as correlated with ﬁtness 13, 37–9, 72, 103,
109, 116, 198
as correlated with health and fertility 38–40,
103–5, 112–13, 144, 202, 212–13
as creating ﬁtness 39
as symmetry 13, 103, 144, 212
in artifacts 1–2, 212
see also beautiful, the; ﬁtness; human beauty;
peak shift effect
beavers 33, 282
Beck, Alan M. 206, 255
Bednarik, Robert 195, 234
Beethoven, Ludwig van 62, 75
Bekoff, Marc 219, 234
Benazzi, Stefano 190, 234
Benjamin, Jessica 215, 234
Beowulf 160
Berghaus, Günter 191, 234
Berleant, Arnold 194, 235
Berleant, Riva 189, 199, 201, 235
Berlyne, D. E. 191–2, 202, 221, 235
Bermúdez de Castro, Jose´ Marı´a 213, 235
Bertrand, Daisy 203, 245
Besson, Mireille 223, 228, 235
Bewick, Thomas 69
Biddle, Jeff E. 216, 252
biophilia 87–9, 207
birds 10, 14, 23, 58, 63, 67, 74–5, 77
alleged to display aesthetic appreciation 13
by Darwin 12, 38
alleged to be art creators 31–2
cockﬁghting 84
color sight in 15, 21, 193
“culture” in 32–3, 196
feathers 58–9
ﬂight in 58–9
as lacking in aesthetic appreciation 10, 12,
15, 39
see also Archaeopteryx; Bar-tailed Godwit,
birdsong; bowerbirds; corvids; cranes;
eagles; emus; falcons; nightingale;
owls; parrots; peafowl; penguins;
pigeons, fancy; quails; ravens; robins;
woodcock; woodpeckers; zebra
ﬁnches
birdsong 35
alleged to be appreciated aesthetically by
birds 12
alleged to be music 32, 196
by Darwin 32
in Beethoven’s sixth symphony 75
as not music 32–3, 196
variability in 32, 196
Bisphan, John C. 220, 235
Blacking, John 203, 235
Blackmore, Susan 197, 235
Bleakney, J. Sherman 196, 202, 206, 235
Blocker, H. Gene 195, 201, 235
Blombos cave, South Africa 2–3, 190, 280
Bloom, Paul 197, 201, 223, 235, 266
Boero, Daniela Lenti 220, 235
Bohannon, Laura 161, 224, 235
Bond, E. J. 195, 235
Bonner, John Tyler 100, 211, 235
Booker, Christopher 161, 203, 224–5, 235
Bordes, F. 210, 235
Bordo, Susan 211, 235
Bosch, Hieronymus 69, 283
Bottoni, Luciana 220, 235
Bouckaert, Andre 211, 235
Boulanger, Bruno 211, 235
Bourassa, Steven C. 202, 207–9, 235
bowerbirds 75, 192, 195–6, 282
alleged to be artists 31–3, 195
alleged to display aesthetic appreciation 12
as not artists 33
INDEX 287

Bowler, Peter J. 197, 235
Bown, Oliver 220, 235
Boyd, Brian 121, 126, 166, 169, 189–91, 193,
195, 197, 202–4, 206, 214, 216–21,
224–7, 235–6
Boyd, Robert 149, 189, 191, 197–201, 208,
210–11, 214–16, 222–3, 236, 267
Bradbury, Jack W. 198–9, 252
Brady, Emily 193–4, 204, 206, 236
Brandon, Robert N. 200, 236
Brattico, Elvira 220, 236
Bräuer, Günter 199, 236
Breidbach, Olaf 212, 236
Brewer, J. 212, 216, 236
Brochu, Christopher A. 204, 272
Bronte¨, Emily 202
Brook, Donald 197, 236
Brooks, Alison S. 190, 200, 210, 259
Brothwell, Don R. 189, 191, 236
Brown, Donald E. 195, 207, 211, 213, 236
Brown, Gillian R. 197–200, 210, 212, 257
Brown, James Cooke 197, 199, 204, 215, 236
Brown, Peter J. 106, 214, 237
Brown, Steven 177, 193, 202, 217, 219–21,
224, 226–8, 237
Brown, T. Jan 216, 277
Bruegel, Pieter, the elder 128
Buckner, Randy L. 227, 237
Budd, Malcolm 194, 237
Bull, Ray 216, 237
Buller, David J. 198–201, 210–11, 215, 223,
228, 237
Bullough, Edward 193, 237
bulls 67–70, 206, 283
see also cattle
Burghardt, Gordon M. 72–3, 77, 204,
206–7, 253
Burke, Edmund 25
Burley, Nancy 198, 237
Busch, Heather 195, 270
Buss, David M. 41, 198–9, 201, 211–13,
215, 237
butterﬂies 74–5, 77
Byers, John A. 219, 234
Byrne, Richard W. 227, 237
Byron, Tim 203, 243, 272
Callaghan, Tara 225, 237
camels 68, 205
Camire, Lori 213, 274
Carey, Peter 203
Carlson, Allen 18, 22–3, 193–4, 206, 237, 264
Carpenter, Bruce N. 216, 267
Carroll, Daniel C. 227, 237
Carroll, Joseph 126, 161, 165, 169, 195,
197–203, 209–11, 215–18, 221,
223–7, 237–8
Carroll, Lewis 203
Carroll, Noe¨l 167, 192, 194–5, 202, 216, 224,
226, 238
Carroll, Sean B. 189, 191, 197, 199, 210, 222, 238
Carruthers, Peter 200, 219, 227, 238
Caspari, Ernst 198–9, 238
C¸ atal Hüyük, Turkey 67, 283
cats 15, 47, 49, 66–9, 73, 76–7, 84, 101, 195,
205–6
cattle 23, 36, 67–8, 73, 205, 281
see also bulls
cave art, see art, prehistoric
caves, see Altamira cave, Spain; Blombos cave,
South Africa; Chauvet cave, France;
Cosquer cave, France; Cougnac cave,
France; Dar es Soltan I cave, Morocco;
Es Skhul shelter, Israel; Lascaux cave,
France; Pech Merle cave, France
Cervantes, Miguel de 175
Chaloupka, George 195, 238
Chamberlain, Andrew 200, 238
changelings 67, 69
Charlesworth, Brian 197, 239
Charlesworth, Deborah 197, 239
Chauvet cave, France 3, 62, 217, 280
Child, Irvin L. 201, 239
chimpanzees 2, 105, 199, 204, 208, 213, 223,
230, 282
aesthetic taste of 15, 193
as alleged artists 31, 195–6
as not artists 32, 196
see also primates
China 18, 68, 86, 107, 109, 205, 282
art of 29, 50, 56
Chippindale, Christopher 205, 239
Chodorow, Nancy 215, 239
Choi, Charles Q. 190, 239
Clack, Timothy 189, 197, 199, 201, 204–5, 208,
210–15, 223, 239
Clamp, Peter 208, 239
Clark, Kenneth 205, 239
Clark, Mary E. 189, 200, 210–11, 213, 239
Clegg, Helen 217, 239
clitoridectomy, see genital mutilation
Clottes, Jean 191, 214, 217, 239
Clutton-Brock, Juliet 197, 204–5, 239, 246
cochlea (of the ear) 134
cockroaches as environmental negative 76,
84, 206
Coe, Kathryn 28, 125, 189–91, 195, 210,
217, 239
Coetzee, J. M. 203
Cohen, Ted 202, 239
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor 128–9
Collins, D. 191, 205, 219, 239
Coltheart, Max 221, 265
Comfort, Alex 14, 192, 197, 217, 239
288
INDEX

Conard, Nicholas J. 190–2, 200, 239
Conger, Judith Cohen 215, 256
Conkey, Margaret W. 191, 240
Conrad, Janet 208, 240
Constable, John 165, 203, 225, 240
Constable, John (the artist) 92
Cooke, Brett 197, 203–4, 224, 226, 240
Cooper, David E. 209, 211, 240
Cooper, Sean 222
cooperation 40, 97–9, 101, 110–15, 127, 130,
142, 145, 177, 216
Coote, Jeremy 201, 240
Coppinger, Lorna 204–7, 240
Coppinger, Raymond 204–7, 240
Corazza, Leonardo 220, 224, 241
Corballis, Michael C. 191, 199–201, 208, 240
Corbett, Laurie 205, 240
Corbey, Raymond 189, 191, 195, 240
Coronation Street 129
corvids 33, 196
Cosmides, Leda 41–2, 142, 172–3, 195, 200,
204, 209, 215, 218–20, 222, 227–8,
240–1, 274
Cosquer cave, France 3
Coss, Richard G. 202, 204, 241
Costa, Marco 220, 224, 241
Cougnac cave, France 3, 280
Cowie, Roddy 193, 207, 211, 241
Cox, Gary 202, 224, 226, 241
cranes 33, 75
Crawford, M. A. 210, 241
Cronin, Helena 197–8, 241
Crook, John H. 211, 215, 241
Cross, Ian 155, 177–80, 203, 217–18, 220–1,
223, 227–8, 241
Crowley, Daniel J. 201, 241
crows, see corvids
crustaceans as lacking in aesthetic
appreciation 10, 14, 38
Cunningham, Michael R. 201, 211–12, 214,
232, 241–2
Currie, Gregory 1, 160, 189–91, 199, 204–5,
208, 219, 223–4, 226, 228, 242
cuteness 17–18, 23
Daly, Martin 199, 215, 278
dance 26, 30, 33, 51–5, 102, 121, 125, 133, 142,
166, 177, 179, 182, 185, 203, 215
Danto, Arthur C. 48, 194, 200–1, 242
Dar es Soltan I cave, Morocco 2
Darwin, Charles 15, 33, 43, 103–4, 192, 196–8,
203, 206, 212, 215, 217, 227–8, 242
on aesthetic taste in birds and insects 12
on birdsong as music 32
on evolution 35–9
on fancy pigeons (as model for sexual
selection) 73
on music 53, 138, 176
on perceptual pleasure as aesthetic 14
Da Soller, Claudio 201, 212, 242
Davenport, William H. 201, 242
Davidson, Iain 189–91, 195, 242
Davies, David 193–4, 242
Davies, Nicholas B. 198, 242
Davies, Stephen 194–5, 202–3, 207, 217, 219,
221, 226, 228, 243
da Vinci, Leonardo 25, 69, 159, 283
Davis, Whitney 191, 195–6, 243
Dawkins, Richard 192, 196–8, 227, 243
Deacon, Terrence 189–92, 195–7, 201, 210,
219–20, 243
decorative art 6, 45, 51, 130, 186
De Cruz, Helen 136–7, 189–91, 195, 203–4,
206, 209, 217–22, 224, 226, 244
deer 37, 67–9, 75–6, 80
canines of red 190
canines of reindeer 190
deer mice 99–100, 211
Dehaene, Stanislas 224, 243
Dean, Roger T. 227, 243
Deblieck, Choi 212, 278
Degas, Edgar 69, 283
Demoulin, Emmanuel 192, 243
Dennett, Daniel C. 59, 196–7, 200, 204, 243–4
DePryck, Koen 122, 192–3, 216, 244
D’errico, Francesco 190, 244, 253, 275, 279
Derry, Margaret E. 206, 244
De Smedt, Johan 136–7, 189–91, 195, 197,
200, 203–4, 206, 209, 217–22, 224,
226, 244
Defoe, Daniel 202, 227
De Sousa, Ronald 198, 218, 244
developmental systems theory 35–6, 197
DeVore, Irven 209–10, 223, 274
de Waal, Frans B. M. 14, 192–6, 227, 244
Dewey, John 18, 193, 244
Diamond, Jared 32–3, 191–2, 195–6, 199,
204–5, 210–11, 215, 217, 244
Dickens, Charles 51, 202
Dickie, George 31, 193–4, 196, 244
Dinka cattle herders, East Africa 23, 73, 281
Dinnerstein, Dorothy 215, 244
dinosaurs 49, 59
Dion, Karen K. 201, 244
Dire Straits 53
Dissanayake, Ellen 48, 58, 123–6, 129–32, 134,
186–9, 191–3, 195, 201–4, 209–10,
212, 216–20, 224–6, 228–9, 237, 244–5
Distin, Kate 197, 245
Dobres, Marcia-Anne 191, 245
dogs 15, 49, 66–70, 73, 84, 146–7, 204–6, 284
domestic art 6, 45, 51, 186
Domjan, Michael 193, 245
Donald, Merlin 191, 195, 218, 220, 245
INDEX 289

donkeys 68–9, 205
Dorﬂes, Gillo 193, 245
Dostoevsky, Fyodor 202
Draganski, Bogdan 228, 245
Drake, Carolyn 203, 245
drama 26, 29–30, 50–1, 54–5, 129, 134, 138,
160, 164, 175, 183, 185
Draper, Paul 193, 232
Driscoll, Carlos A. 205–6, 246
Druyan, Ann 207, 213, 215, 268
Dryden, John 202
dual inheritance theory, see gene-culture
coevolution
Ducasse, Curt J. 193, 246
Dumas, Alexandre 202
Dunbar, Robin I. M. 4, 91, 190–1, 197,
199–201, 208, 210, 215, 218, 220–1,
223, 225–6, 228, 246, 272
Dunn, Michael 197, 246
Dürer, Albert 69, 283
Dutton, Denis 26–8, 31, 48, 87, 90–1, 165,
168–9, 191, 193–6, 201–4, 207–9,
214, 216–17, 219–21, 225–7, 246
eagles 68–9, 206
Eagly, Alice H. 200, 211, 215–16, 246, 278
Easterlin, Nancy L. 202–3, 216, 224,
227, 246
Eaton, Marcia Muelder 193–4, 247
Edwards, Arthur M. 202, 208–9, 247
Egypt 67, 69
art of 27, 56, 69, 194, 282
Ehmann, James 195–6, 247
Eibl, Karl 219, 221–2, 226–7, 247
Eibl-Eibesfeldt, Irenäus 192–3, 196, 202, 206–9,
212, 217, 219–20, 224, 247
Einon, Dorothy 211, 213–14, 247
elephants 41, 68–9, 205
as alleged artists 31, 195–6
Eliot, George 202
Ellis, Bruce J. 211, 247
emotions, shared with higher animals 15
emus 58, 67, 69
Enquist, Magnus 198, 212, 247
environment of evolutionary adaptedness 41,
89, 200, 207–10
discussion 95–8, 101, 211
climate variability 96–7, 210
ignorance of social environment 41, 97–8,
210–11
empirical evidence allegedly in favor of 91–2,
208–9
reservations about 93, 210
and environmentally negative features 93–4,
206, 209
mystery alleged to be an environmental
positive 90–1, 208
signs of habitation alleged to be an
environmental positive 90, 208
see also biophilia; evolutionary psychology;
savanna hypothesis
Epic of Gilgamesh 129
Epstein, David 203, 247
Ericsson, K. Anders 202, 247
Erlewine, Michael 222, 247
Es Skhul shelter, Israel 2
Etcoff, Nancy 198, 211–14, 216, 247
Evans, Dylan 216, 247
evocriticism, see literary Darwinism
evolution 10, 35–40, 197, 282
“classical” theory of 35–6, 43
as driven by individual difference 108, 147
and ethics (morality) 110, 114, 215
as not always slow 36, 198
as ongoing 36, 134, 197–8, 218
and vestiges 45–6
art alleged to be 130–1, 200–2
see also Darwin, Charles; developmental
systems theory; evolutionary
psychology; ﬁtness; gene-culture
coevolution; multilevel selection
theory; selection; spandrel; Wallace,
Alfred Russel
evolutionary by-product, see spandrel
evolutionary psychology 40–3, 108–10, 200
on animals
neglected topic 65, 204
as part of ecological aesthetic 76–8, 80, 204
and mind like Swiss army knife 41, 152, 222
and modularity of mind 40–2, 137, 152, 172,
178–80, 200, 221–2, 228
discussion 43, 223, 228
and nature/landscape/environment
aesthetics 63, 76, 87–95, 207–11
discussion 95–9, 210
as not usually interested in individual
difference 108, 215
see also biophilia; environment of evolutionary
adaptedness; evolution; “Just So”
stories; reverse engineering; savanna
hypothesis; snakes; spiders
Eysenck, Hans J. 202, 247
Fagen, Robert 196, 219, 247
falcons 67–8, 206
Falk, Dean 201, 219, 221, 247
Falk, John H. 94, 208–10, 233
Faulkner, William 203
Feingold, Alan 216, 247
Feist, Gregory J. 221, 223, 247
Feldman, Marcus W. 200, 257–8
Fenk, August 219, 223, 228, 248
Fenk-Oczlon, Gertraud 219, 223, 228, 248
Fernandez, James W. 201, 248
290
INDEX

fertility 38–40, 76, 103–7, 109, 113, 126, 177,
211–13, 217, 227
see also Westermarck, Edward, Westermarck
effect
Fessler, Daniel M. T. 223, 248
Fielding, Henry 202
Fine Art 6, 25–6, 29, 57, 131, 201
Fine, Aubrey H. 206, 248
ﬁre 45, 90, 118, 223–4
compared to music 150–1, 155–7
Fireman, Gary D. 225, 248
Fischer, Edward F. 216, 255
Fisher, Elizabeth 191, 210, 214–15, 248
Fisher, Helen E. 210–13, 215–16, 248
Fisher, R. A. 39, 114, 198, 216, 248
Fitch, W. Tecumseh 195–7, 201, 203, 217, 219,
223, 227–8, 248, 252
ﬁtness (Glossary term) 28, 34–5, 37–8, 50, 60,
74, 79–81, 97, 124, 142, 149, 198,
218, 230
costly signaling of 13, 37–8, 50, 144–6,
185–6, 198, 222
as signaled by art behaviors 45, 50, 118–19,
126, 136, 141, 145–7, 165–6, 174,
185–6, 197, 217
as signaled by beauty 13, 37–9, 72, 103, 109,
116, 198
as signaled by health 38–40, 103, 109, 113,
144, 212
see also “good genes”; handicap principle;
human beauty
Fitness, Julie 200, 210–11, 272
Fitzgerald, F. Scott 203
Flaubert, Gustave 202
ﬂeas 78
as environmental negative 94, 206
Flesch, William 142–3, 198, 202–3, 216, 222,
225–6, 248
Fletcher, Garth J. O. 211–12, 216, 248
Flood, Josephine 195, 205, 248
Fodor, Jerry A. 223, 228, 248
Foley, Robert 97–8, 198, 200, 210–11, 215,
246, 248
folk art 45, 51, 186
food 13, 18–19, 36, 65–6, 76–7, 84, 89–90, 94,
98, 106–7, 116, 139–40, 156, 193,
207, 213–14
footbinding 109, 215
Ford, Clellan S. 211, 214, 248
Fox, Robin 202–3, 224, 248
foxes 67
canines 3, 190
Foy, Jeffrey E. 226, 248
Frank, Robert H. 216, 248
Frankenhuis, Willem E. 200, 248
Freeman, Walter 219, 249
Freud, Lucian 70, 284
Friederici, Angela D. 223, 228, 235
Frisch, Rose E. 214, 249
Fritz, Thomas 203, 249, 256
Frost, Robin 191, 200, 249
Fukui, Hajime 217, 220, 227–8, 249
Fuller, Peter 192, 195, 199, 219, 249
function, see aesthetic properties; artistry
complementing function
Füri, Sandra 193, 213, 276
Furnham, Adrian 200, 211–16, 272, 274
Gajdon, Gyula K. 196, 254
Gamble, Clive 189–90, 199–200, 223, 249
Gandhi, Mahatma 71
Gangestad, Steven W. 193, 198–9, 211–13, 215,
249, 273
Garcia, Jerry 176
Gardiner, Martin F. 219, 228, 249
Gardner, Howard 210, 249
Gatherer, Derek 197, 249
Gaut, Berys 27–8, 194–5, 249
Geissman, Thomas 197, 249
Geist, Valerius 189, 191, 197, 202, 205, 208,
210, 212–14, 216, 219, 249
gene-culture coevolution (Glossary term) 36,
110–11, 134, 149, 156, 197, 230
genital mutilation 109–10, 215
George, Hannah R. 201, 249
Gerrig, Richard J. 226, 248
Getty, Thomas 198, 249
gibbons 33, 176, 197
Gilliard, E. Thomas 196, 249
Gilligan, Ian 210, 249
Glausiusz, Josie 196, 217, 249
goats 68, 205
chamois 4, 191
ibex 4, 191
Go¨bekli Tepe, Turkey 67, 205, 283
Godfrey-Smith, Peter 197, 250, 256
Godlovitch, Stan 194, 250
Goldie, Peter 194, 215, 250
Goldman, Alan H. 192, 194, 221, 250
“good genes” 13, 37–8
Goodheart, Eugene 169, 202, 222, 226, 250
gorillas 2, 199, 230
see also primates
Gosden, Chris 189, 200, 208, 210–11, 216, 220,
228, 250
Gottschall, Jonathan 200, 202–3, 211, 215–16,
221, 224–6, 238, 250
Gould, Stephen Jay 136, 148, 197, 199–201,
204–6, 220–2, 250
Gow, Pete 201, 250
Goya, Francisco 70, 284
Gracyk, Theodore 192, 194, 202, 250–1
Grafen, Alan 198, 251
Grafton, Scott T. 223, 254
INDEX
291

Grammer, Karl 95, 210, 212, 251, 273, 284
Granit, Ragnar 219–21, 251
Gräslund, Bo 189, 191, 199–200, 204, 208,
210, 223, 251
Gray, Russell D. 196–7, 200–1, 215, 251,
264, 273
Greece 25, 53, 68–9, 93, 194
The Iliad 51, 68, 160, 202, 205
The Odyssey 51, 68, 202
Green, Christopher D. 202, 251
Greenberg, Jill 70, 284
Greenhood, William 197, 199, 204, 215, 236
Grewe, Oliver 220, 251
Grifﬁths, Paul E. 197, 200, 215, 218, 222,
251, 264, 272
Grinde, Bjorn 193, 202, 212, 251
Grodal, Torben 200, 221–2, 251
Groos, Karl 219, 251
Grosse, Ernst 17, 58, 191, 193, 195, 204, 219,
221, 227–8, 251
Guthrie, R. Dale 28, 106, 191–3, 195, 199,
204–5, 207, 209–17, 219, 251
Hadingham, Evan 96, 189–92, 205, 210, 214, 251
Hagen, Edward D. 220, 251
Haile-Selassie, Yohannes 208, 251
Halberstadt, Jamin 212, 251
Haldane, J. B. S. 197, 251
Hales, Steven D. 193, 251
Halverson, John, 191, 199, 251
Hamermesh, Daniel S. 216, 252
Hamilton, William D. 198, 252
Hammerstein, Peter 220, 251
Hampton, Simon 191, 197, 200–1, 208,
210–11, 214, 252
Han, Ke-Tsung 210, 252
hand axes 1–2, 5, 10, 46, 189, 280
handicap principle 37–8, 50, 198, 222
Hansell, Mike 196, 252
Hansen, Brian 203, 226, 252
Hansen, Kristi A. 213, 273
Happe´, Francesca G. E. 227, 252
Harcourt, A. H. 199, 252
Hardy, Thomas 203
Hare, Brian 205, 207, 252
hares 69, 75, 283
Harpham, Geoffrey Galt 225, 252
Harris, Marvin 190–1, 197, 199, 201, 205,
207, 210, 213–14, 217, 252
Hartshorne, Charles 12, 192, 196–7, 252
Harvey, Paul H. 198–9, 252
Haung, C. S. 215, 278
Hauser, Marc D. 32, 181, 196, 201, 203,
221–2, 228, 252, 260
health 13, 38–40, 55, 75, 92, 103–7, 109,
112–13, 126, 144, 176, 202, 206,
209, 212, 214–15
Heath, Shirley Brice 219, 252
He´bert, Sylvie 221, 265
Heerwagen, Judith H. 88, 204, 207–9, 252, 264
Hegel, G. W. F. 200, 252
Heinrich, Bernd 196, 252
Heller, Joseph 171
Hemingway, Ernest 203
Hendrix, Jimi 176
Henley, David R. 195, 252
Henrich, Joseph 211, 252
Henshilwood, Christopher S. 190, 200, 253
Hepburn, Ronald W. 194, 253
Hermere´n, Go¨ran 192, 253
Hernadi, Paul 164–5, 167, 203, 221, 225–6, 253
Herrington, Susan 208–9, 211, 253
Herzog Jr, Harold A. 72–3, 77, 204,
206–7, 253
Herzog, Thomas 208, 253
Heyd, Thomas 191, 253
Heyligers, Petrus C. 208, 253
Hiatt, L. R. 202, 224, 253
Higgins, Kathleen Marie 193, 203, 253
Hildebrand, Grant 61, 204, 208–9, 253
Hirn, Yrjo¨ 12, 192, 194, 196, 198, 213, 217,
219–20, 227, 253
Hirstein, William 202, 212, 214, 224, 266
Hobbs, Jerry R. 226, 253
Hockney, David 70, 284
Hoeg, Jerry 225–6, 253
Hogan, Patrick Colm 200, 203, 224, 254
Holcomb III, Harmon R. 200, 254
Holmes, Sherlock 164
Holmlund, Mikael 195, 264
Holocene (Glossary term) 87, 230
Homer
The Iliad 51, 68, 160, 202, 205
The Odyssey 51, 68, 202
Hominid (Glossary term) 230
see also Hominin
Hominin (Glossary term) 5, 11, 39, 42, 88, 94–6,
99–101, 111, 129, 156, 181, 189,
210, 213, 228, 230
aesthetic behaviors of 1–2, 11
and bipedalism 59, 89, 95–6, 208
and increasing brain size 95–6, 148, 156, 210
timeline 2, 280
see also Homo heidelbergensis; Homo
neanderthalensis; Homo sapiens; hunter-
gatherers
Homo heidelbergensis 2, 107, 189, 213–14
Homo neanderthalensis (Neanderthals) 2–3, 96,
190, 210
Homo sapiens 2, 31, 38, 41, 63, 199–200
and cooperation 40, 97–9, 101, 110–15,
142, 145, 216
and “cultural explosion” 41, 199–200
mate ﬁdelity 40, 109, 215
292
INDEX

mate selection 38–40, 102–5, 110, 113,
115, 211–15, 217
aesthetic component in 38–9, 103–5,
116, 199
as involving love 111, 215–16
and matchmaking 108–9, 215
in prehistoric times 105–7
sex differences in preferences for 102,
104, 211–12
monogamous mating strategy for 40, 199
“out of Africa” migration 91, 208
plasticity of behavior and cognitive
structures in 41, 100–1, 147, 152,
200, 221, 228
psychological modernity 3, 41, 190
symbolic behavior 3, 190
see also evolutionary psychology; human
nature
Hooker, Shirley D. 206, 254
Hooper, Paul L. 199, 254
horses 4, 67–9, 72, 131, 168, 190, 205, 283
Houston, Alasdair I. 200, 220, 254
Howe, Michael J. A. 202, 223, 254
Huber, Ludwig 196, 254
Hudson, Mark J. 214, 254
Hudson, Matthew 202, 272
Hugo, Victor 202
human beauty 8, 63–4, 115–16
and body weight 106–7, 213–14
as correlated with health and fertility 103–5,
112–13, 144, 202, 212–13
as correlated with symmetry 13, 103, 144, 212
as correlated sometimes with what is
unusual 103–4, 212
cross-cultural agreement on 49, 105, 201, 212
cultural variability concerning 106–8, 212–13
faking of 104–5
and “halo” effect 112, 114–15, 216
long-historical agreement on 103, 105,
107, 201
and mate selection 38–40, 102–5, 110, 113,
115, 211–15, 217
no clear border between physical and social
attractiveness 112–13, 216
and sexual attractiveness 5, 103–5, 110,
113, 116, 211, 214
and sexual selection 104, 114, 211–15
as signal of ﬁtness 103, 109, 116, 198
and social performance and self-
presentation 63, 113–15, 144,
188, 216
and women as depicted in art 104, 106,
213–14, 216, 284
universals in 6–7, 49, 103, 201, 212
see also beautiful, the; beauty; Homo sapiens;
peak shift effect; waist-to-hip ratio in
women favored by men
human nature 122, 185, 204
aesthetic response as part of 6, 10, 45, 60
artistic behaviors as part of 6, 58, 130, 188
consistent with individual difference and
cultural variability 84–5, 107,
146–7, 214
see also aesthetic response; art; art behaviors;
cooperation; evolution; evolutionary
psychology
humans, see Homo sapiens; human nature
Hume, David 25, 194, 254
humpback whales, as plausible artists 31, 33–4
see also whale song
Hunt, Sarah 193, 254
hunter-gatherers 5, 166, 195,
214, 225
modern-day 25, 42, 77, 97–8
as different from prehistoric 97–8, 211
mortality of 107, 214
prehistoric 77, 89, 91, 129
birth rates of 210–11
family size 213
group size 97, 210
mortality of 107, 210
see also Australian Aborigine art; Hominins
Hurford, James R. 201, 254
Huron, David 192, 203, 217–18, 220–1,
228, 254
Hutcheson, Francis 25
Hutchinson, William 203, 254
Hutsler, Jeffrey J. 181, 203, 216, 220–3,
228, 255
Huxley, Thomas Henry 215, 254
Hyman, John 214, 224, 254
Igbo of Africa 29
India 191, 193
art of 29, 50, 214
Mahabhrata 160
Indonesia
art of 30, 281
Bali 57, 116
art of 195, 203, 282
inﬁbulations, see genital mutilation
insects 63, 74, 76
alleged by Darwin to display aesthetic
appreciation 12
as food 84, 207
as lacking in aesthetic appreciation 10, 14, 38
see also butterﬂies; cockroaches; ﬂeas, lice;
mosquitoes; ticks
intentionality, levels of (Glossary term) 152, 161,
226, 231
Irvin, Sherri 193, 254
Iseminger, Gary 192, 194, 254
Islamic calligraphy 30, 282
Iwawaki, Saburo 201, 273
INDEX 293

Jagger, Mick 176
James, Henry 174, 203
Jan, Steven B. 197, 254
Janata, Petr 223, 254
Jankowiak, William. R. 216, 255
Jannidis, Fotis 194, 255
Japan 73, 173, 208–9
art of 29, 50, 214
paper folding 27, 281
tea ceremony 30, 282
Jeffares, Ben 189, 210, 255
Jobling, Ian 203, 255–6
Jones, Doug 198, 201, 211–13, 255
Joyce, Robert 14, 190–2, 196, 205, 207, 255
Joye, Yannick 207, 209, 255
“Just So” stories 41, 200
see also adaptation; evolutionary psychology;
reverse engineering; spandrel
Justus, Timothy 181, 203, 216, 220–3,
228, 255
kangaroos 67, 69, 206
Kant, Immanuel 15–21, 25, 47, 66, 79, 89,
193–4, 255
his theory of free beauty 16–17
see also aesthetic formalism
Kalin, Jesse 227, 255
Kamil, Alan C. 196, 233
Kaplan, Hillard 210, 216, 223, 255
Kaplan, Rachel 207–9, 255
Kaplan, Stephen 88, 90, 204, 207–9, 255
Katcher, Aaron Honori 206, 255
Keeley, Lawrence 189, 255
Kellert, Stephen R. 204, 206–7, 209, 255
Kelleter, Frank, 226, 255
Kenrick, Douglas T. 211–12, 255
Kernan, Alvin B. 226, 256
Kerner, Emily 212, 256
Kerr, Benjamin 197, 256
Khlopachev, Gennady A. 204, 268
Kipling, Rudyard 41
Kindy, Julia 212, 256
Kingsbury, Justine 204, 216, 222, 256
Kitcher, Philip S. 197, 199, 211, 256, 275
Klein, Richard G. 189–92, 195, 199, 204, 208,
210, 223, 253, 256
Knight, Chris 189, 256
Koch, Walter A. 128, 197, 218, 220, 256
Koelsch, Stefan 219–20, 223, 228, 249, 256, 260
Kohn, Marek 189, 212, 256
koi (carp) 73, 284
Komar, Vitaly 48, 55, 86, 201, 282
Konner, Melvin 224, 256
Korsmeyer, Carolyn 193, 212, 256
Kramnick, Jonathan 169, 173, 200, 204, 222,
224–7, 256
Krebs, John R. 192, 196, 198, 227, 243
Kriskovets, Yulia 193, 270
Krumhansl, Carol L. 203, 256
Kuehn, Glenn 193, 236
Kuhlenschmidt, Sally 216, 256
Kulka, Tomas 193, 257
Kulvicki, John 224, 257
Kunej, Drago 192, 257
Kurzban, Robert 200, 221–2, 234
Kuzmin, Y. V. 190, 257
Labeyrie, Laurent 210, 257
LaDuke, Thomas C. 223, 266
Laland, Kevin N. 197–200, 210, 212, 257
Lamarque, Peter 3–4, 191, 195, 201,
225–7, 257
Lancaster, Chet S. 210, 213, 257
Lancaster, Jane B. 210, 213, 255, 257
Landau, Mark J. 191, 195, 225, 257
Landau, Misia 225, 227
Langer, Susanne K. 179, 228, 257
Langlois, Judith H. 201, 212, 216, 257, 268
language(s) 36, 184, 197
as evolutionarily adaptive 48, 138–9, 149,
151, 153–4, 201, 221
alleged to be evolutionarily non-adaptive
148, 201
see also modularity of the brain
Lascaux cave, France 3, 62, 67, 280
Latto, Richard, 202, 212, 224, 257
Layton, Robert 195, 201, 204, 240, 257
Lazarus, Richard S. 215, 257
Le Corbusier (Charles-E´douard Jeanneret) 92
Leddy, Tom 193, 257
Lehmann, Christian 228, 258
Lenain, Thierry 32, 193, 196, 258
Lennon, John 176
Leonard, William R. 208, 258
Leslie, Alan M. 227, 258
Levinson, Jerrold 221, 258
Levitin, Daniel J. 196, 203, 217, 219–21, 223,
227–8, 258
Lewis, David 195, 205, 258
Lewis, Penelope A. 221, 228, 258
Lewis-Williams, J. David 190–1, 194, 200–1,
219, 228, 258
Lewontin, Richard C. 136, 200, 220, 250
lice as environmental negative 94, 101, 206
Liddle, Bethany 227, 258
Lintott, Sheila 194, 258
lions 23, 66–9, 173, 206
literary behaviors
alleged to be evolutionarily adaptive 162,
166, 171–2, 222, 225–7
discussion 161, 172–4, 176, 184, 226–7
for conveying knowledge of others and
world 169–70, 226–7
discussion 169–71, 226–7
294
INDEX

for groups 166–8, 226
via sexual selection 165–6, 222
alleged to be evolutionary spandrels
142–3, 222
competence in 53
heritability of 162, 165
see also literary Darwinism; literary ﬁction;
narrating; reasoning; Theory of Mind
literary Darwinism 51, 122, 202–3, 216
as evolutionary psychology applied to literary
interpretation 161–2, 224–5
the subject matter of 163–6
see also evolutionary psychology; literary
behaviors; literary ﬁction; narrating;
narratives
literary ﬁction 142, 163–5, 202–3, 216, 225, 227
archetypal themes in 55, 203, 216, 224
with the novel possibly as a special case
175, 227
as source of moral knowledge 174–5, 227
Swann’s Way 129
see also literary Darwinism; literary behaviors;
narrating; narratives
Little, Anthony C. 211, 258
Livingstone, Margaret 159, 224, 258
Livingstone, Steven 221, 258
Llaurens, V. 222, 258
Lloyd, Elisabeth A. 200, 258
Locher, Paul 212, 259
Lock, Andrew. 199, 201, 259
Lombard, Marlize 192, 259
Lopes, Dominic McIver 195, 224, 259
Lorenz, Konrad 196, 206–7, 259
love 111, 215–16
Lovejoy, C. Owen 208, 259
Low, Bobbi S. 201, 210–13, 215, 217, 259
Ludmany, Andras 195, 201–2, 218, 259
Lumley, Henry de 189–91, 205, 213, 223, 259
Lumsden, Charles J. 189, 193–5, 197–8, 202,
207, 210, 259
Lynch, Alejandro 196, 259
Lyons, Elizabeth 95, 208, 210, 259
McBrearty, Sally 189–90, 200, 210, 259
McBurney, Donald H. 213, 259
McCoid, Catherine Hodge 214, 259
McDermott, Josh 32, 181, 196, 203, 221–3,
228, 252, 260
McDermott, LeRoy D. 214, 259–60
McDougal, Ian 199, 260
McElreath, Richard 211, 252
Maˆche, Franc¸ois-Bernard 203, 260
Machery, Edouard 200, 210, 260
Mackie, Gerry 215, 260
McManus, I. C. 202, 260
Maess, Burkhard 223, 260
Mahabharata 129
Malamud, Bernard 203
Mameli, Matteo 197, 199–200, 223, 260
mammoths 67
ivory or bone 3–4, 67, 190, 192
Mar, Raymond A. 202–3, 225–6, 264
Marcus, Clare Cooper 209, 260
Marean, Curtis W. 190, 200, 253, 260
Mark, Robert 220, 260
Marler, Peter 196, 260
Marshack, Alexander 190–1, 199, 201, 205,
214, 260
Martindale, Colin 192–3, 212, 221, 260–1
Marwick, Ben 201, 261
mass art 45, 51, 202
Coronation Street 129
Ofﬁce, The 171
Sopranos, The 129
Massim culture, Trobriand Island, betel nut
paraphernalia 27, 281
mathematics 25, 128, 138, 228
as not an adaption 58, 122, 181, 216
Matthews, Patricia 194, 261
Mayer, Daniella E. Bar-Yosef 190, 205, 261
Mayr, Ernst 197–8, 261
Meindl, Richard S. 214, 261
Mekel-Bobrov, Nitzan 198, 261
Melamid, Alexander 48, 55, 86, 201, 282
Mellars, Paul 96, 189–91, 199–201, 207–8, 210,
214, 261
Mellmann, Katja 218–19, 221–2, 225, 227,
247, 261
memes 36, 197
Mende, Werner 219, 276
Menon, Vinod 223, 258
Merker, Bjo¨rn 182, 196, 219–21, 229, 261
Meyer, Leonard B. 203, 261
Miall, David S. 225, 261
Michelangelo 25, 69, 283
Mickey Mouse 73
Middle Eastern art 29–30, 50
see also Islamic calligraphy
Milinski, Manfred 193, 213, 262
Milius, S. 195, 262
Miller, Geoffrey F. 13, 40, 123–6, 130, 165,
176–7, 187–9, 192, 195–9, 201–2,
208, 210–17, 219, 225, 227,
254, 262
Miller, Joseph D. 203, 224, 262
Miller, Mara 209, 262
Mithen, Steven J. 126, 148–9, 189–92, 196–7,
199–200, 203, 205, 207–8, 210, 212,
218–20, 222–3, 228, 256, 262
modularity of brain (innate task-speciﬁc neural
circuits) 185
in music and language 152–4, 181–2, 220–1,
223, 228–9
modularity of mind, see evolutionary psychology
INDEX
295

Molino, Jean 219, 262
Monet, Claude 159
monkeys 49, 70, 192, 204
Monroe, Dave 193, 232
Montelle, Yann-Pierre 191, 262
Montero, Barbara 193, 262
Moore, Ronald 59–62, 194, 204, 262
Morales Jr, Reinaldo 191, 194–5, 262
Moravcsik, Julius M. 194–5, 262
Morley, Iain 192, 203, 218, 220, 227–8, 241, 263
Morphy, Howard 191, 201, 263
Morreall, John 17, 193, 206, 263
Morris, Desmond 15, 193, 195–6, 204,
212–13, 263
mosquitoes as environmental negative 76, 93,
101, 206
Mottron, Laurent 228, 263
Mozart, Leopold 223
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus 223
multilevel selection theory (Glossary
term) 35–6, 43–4, 167, 180, 197,
226, 231
Mundkur, Balaji 204–5, 263
Murnen, Sarah K. 200, 211, 271
music 25–6, 51, 54, 123, 158–9, 184, 218
alleged to be cultural technology 148–52
alleged to be evolutionarily adaptive, see music
behaviors
alleged to be evolutionary spandrel, see music
behaviors
and brain 152–3, 181–2, 220–1, 223, 228–9
compared to ﬁre 150–1, 155–7
compared to language 138–9, 151–5, 181
cross-cultural appreciation of 55, 203
and elephants 31
heritability of talent for 153–4, 202, 223
humpback whales 31, 33–4, 79, 197, 282
as multifunctional 132–3, 220, 228
origin of 62, 132–4, 179, 219–20, 228
universals in 57, 203
see also birdsong; modularity of brain; song;
singing
music behaviors 49
alleged to be evolutionarily adaptive 132,
138, 177–9, 227–8
discussion 179–81, 184, 228
via sexual selection 176–7, 217–18, 227
alleged to be evolutionary spandrel 118, 132,
137–9, 221
discussion 139–42, 183, 221
competence in 52–3
as not strongly heritable 153–4, 202, 223
as universal 53
see also singing; song
Nabokov, Vladimir 203
narrating 30, 165
see also literary behaviors; literary Darwinism;
literary ﬁction; narratives
narratives 26, 30, 163–5, 203, 225
Beowulf 160
Epic of Gilgamesh 129
universal themes in 55, 160–1, 169, 203, 224
see also literary behaviors, literary Darwinism;
literary ﬁction; narrating
Nasar, Jack L. 208–9, 263
nature, see aesthetic response; evolutionary
psychology
natural selection, see selection
Neanderthals, see Homo neanderthalensis
Nesse, Margaret H. 203, 224, 263
Nettl, Bruno 203, 263
Nettle, Daniel 202, 215, 224–5, 227, 239,
258, 263, 272
neuroaesthetics (applied to visual art) 49,
159–60, 202, 224, 284
Nevali C¸ ori, eastern Turkey 68, 283
nightingale 33, 75, 79
Niles, John D. 166, 203, 225–6, 263
Nordlund, Marcus 202, 224–5, 263
Novitz, David 202, 225, 263
Nussbaum, Charles O. 220–1, 264
Nussbaum, Martha 174–5, 227, 264
Oakley, Kenneth P. 189, 195, 264
Oatley, Keith 202–3, 225–6, 264
ochre 2–3, 189
Ofﬁce, The 171
Okasha, Samir 197, 264
Okin, Susan Moller 215, 264
Oleneostrovski Mogilnik cemetery,
Karelia 67, 283
Olsen, Stein Haugom 225, 227, 257
Ong, Walter J. 215, 264
Onians, J. 191, 205, 219, 239
Ono, Yoko 24
Orians, Gordon H. 88, 200, 204, 207–9,
252, 264
Orin˜a, Minda 199, 211–13, 270
O¨ stlund-Nilsson, Sara 195, 264
Overing, Joanna 193–4, 201, 264
owls 69, 72–3, 283
Oyama, Susan 197, 264
paintings, see pictures
Paleolithic (Glossary term) 3, 31, 89, 93, 105–7,
111, 125, 139, 145, 187, 192, 207,
213–14, 229, 231
see also Pleistocene
Paley, William 79, 207, 264
Panksepp, Jaap 219, 221, 264
Parncutt, Richard 219, 264
parrots 33, 196–7
Palm Cockatoo 195
296
INDEX

Parsons, Glenn 18, 22–3, 193–4, 204,
206–7, 264
Patel, Aniruddh D. 118, 149–57, 180, 188, 196,
201, 217, 220–3, 228, 264
Patterson, Colin 197, 265
Patzer, Gordon L. 216, 265
Paul, Andreas 198–9, 213, 265
Paulson, Ronald 209, 265
Payne, Katharine 34, 197, 265
peafowl 13–14, 33, 37–8, 40, 81, 186, 198, 219
peak shift effect 103–4, 212, 214
Pech Merle cave, France 3
Penton-Voak, Ian S. 211, 213, 258, 265
Pepperberg, Irene Maxine 196, 265
Peretz, Isabelle 221, 265
Perrett, David I. 107, 198–9, 201–2, 206,
211–14, 216, 258, 265
Perricone, Christopher 197, 217, 265
Petrie, Marion 198, 265
Pettigrew, “Jack,” Koerner 205, 265
Pfeiffer, John E. 189–93, 195, 199, 201, 223, 265
Phillipson, Laurel 192, 259
Picasso, Pablo 3, 70, 103, 282, 284
pictures 3–4, 9, 24, 30–1, 46, 48–51, 60, 62, 65,
67, 69, 79, 86, 92, 94–5, 128, 136,
145, 159–60, 187, 190–1, 202, 205,
207, 209–10, 212, 218, 229, 281–4
alleged to be evolutionary spandrels 137
Amerindian 56, 282
appreciation of 54–8
by chimpanzees 31–2, 195–6
Cubism 56
see also art; Australian Aborigine art; China;
Constable, John; da Vinci, Leonardo;
Egypt; Michelangelo; Monet, Claude;
neuroaesthetics; Picasso, Pablo;
picturing; Turner, J. M. W.
picturing 3, 26–7, 30, 123, 127, 183
see also pictures
pigeons, fancy 73, 284
pigs 67–9, 73, 83
Pinker, Steven 41, 118, 121, 127, 197–8, 200–3,
207, 211–12, 215–22, 225–6, 265–6
music and cheesecake 122, 138–42, 212
music and drugs 123, 138, 141
Plato 25
play 132, 219, 227
Pleistocene (Glossary term) 3, 41, 48–9, 60, 87,
89, 96–7, 105, 117, 130, 134, 190,
210–11, 231
see also Paleolithic
Ploeger, Annemie 200, 248
Plomin, Robert 202, 266
poetry 26–7, 51, 56, 128–9, 163–6
Polti, Georges 161, 203, 224, 266
Pope, Alexander 202
Popenoe, Rebecca 214, 266
Po¨ppel, Ernst 203, 275
popular art 45, 51, 186, 202
Coronation Street 129
Ofﬁce, The 171
Sopranos, The 129
Superman comics 129
Posner, Richard A. 227, 266
Potts, Richard 96–7, 100–1, 210–11, 266
Powell, Mary 208, 239
Power, Camilla 189–90, 198–9, 214, 217,
256, 266
Pratt, R. T. C. 223, 266
prehistoric items
beads and ornaments 2–3, 189–90
ﬂute 5, 192
hunting bow 5, 192
lamp 4, 191, 281
spear thrower 4, 191–2, 281
see also art; Venus ﬁgurines
Presley, Elvis 53
primates 2, 31, 67, 284
as possibly having aesthetic responses 10, 14
see also chimpanzees; gibbons; gorillas;
monkeys
Prinz, Jesse J. 193, 200, 213, 215–16, 266
Proust, Marcel 203
Swann’s Way 129
Pruetz, Jill D. 223, 266
quails 75, 193
Rabkin, Eric S. 203, 225–6, 266
Radcliffe, Anne 202
Raffaello 69, 283
Ralevski, Elizabeth 127, 192, 195, 198, 202,
214, 218–20, 266
Ramachandran, Vilayanur 202, 212, 214,
224, 266
Rancour-Laferriere, Daniel 197, 202, 224,
266–7
Rand, Austin L. 193, 267
rats 76, 84, 206
ravens, see corvids
Raza, Susan M. 216, 267
reading 134, 150, 155, 174–5, 220, 225
as not an adaptation 58, 122, 148, 216, 222
as not involving specialized brain
networks 160, 224
reasoning 42, 200
counterfactual 172–3, 227
practical 173, 227
Reid, Thomas 12, 192, 267
religion 17, 30, 108, 116, 121, 124, 130, 149,
188, 191, 206–7
art’s enhancement of 26, 56, 218
stories of understood as ﬁctions 164, 225
Renfrew, Colin 189, 191, 205, 208, 267
INDEX 297

Renfrew, Jane M. 190, 267
Rensch, Bernhard 195, 219, 267
reverse engineering 41–2, 89, 117, 200
see also evolutionary psychology
Rhodes, Gillian 201, 211–12, 251, 267
Richards, Janet Radcliffe 212, 267
Richards, Richard A. 197, 267
Richardson, Robert C. 59, 199–201, 204,
210–11, 267
Richardson, Samuel 202
Richerson, Peter J. Richards 149, 189, 191,
197–200, 208, 210–11, 214–16,
222–23, 267
Ridley, Mark 197, 267
Ridley, Matt 196, 198–9, 201, 211–13,
215, 267
Ritvo, Harriet 205–6, 211, 267
Robertson, Marcia L. 208, 258
robins 77, 206
Rockman, Hannah 215, 268
Roederer, Juan G. 203, 219–20, 228, 268
Roele, Marcel 192, 198, 201, 268
Rollins, Mark 224, 268
Rolls, Edmund T. 193, 198–9, 201, 207,
211–13, 216–17, 226, 268
Rolston III, Holmes 71, 192, 206, 268
Rosenblatt, Paul C. 107, 214–15, 268
Rosenfeld, Andre´e 191, 275
Ross, Stephanie 209, 268
Rubenstein, Adam J. 212, 257, 268
Rumsey, Nichola 216, 237
Ruso, Bernhart 207–9, 268
Russow, Lilly–Marlene 78, 207, 268
Ruxton, Graeme, D. 196, 252
Sablin, Mikhail V. 204, 268
Saffran, Jenny R. 223, 268
Sagan, Carl 204, 207, 213, 215, 268
Saito, Yuriko 193–4, 268
Salmon, Catherine 203, 224, 268
Sandars, P. 189, 191, 268
Saunders, Judith P. 203, 268
savanna hypothesis 41, 63, 94–5, 101, 209–10
reservations about 95, 210
see also environment of evolutionary
adaptedness; evolutionary psychology
Saxton, Tamsin K. 212, 268
Scalise Sugiyama, Michelle 166, 191, 200, 203,
214, 224–7, 268–9
Schacter, Daniel L. 227, 269
Schama, Simon 211, 269
Schellekens, Elisabeth 192, 194, 250, 269
Schellenberg, E. Glenn 228, 269, 273
Schlinger Jr, Henry D. 200, 269
Schmidt, Klaus 205, 269
Schmidt, Louis A. 219, 228, 274
Schoeninger, Margaret J. 223, 269
Schubert, Emory 220, 269
Schultz, Adolph H. 213, 269
Schwartz, Robin 70, 284
Scott, Isabel 201, 214, 269
Scott, Walter 202
seals 37, 197, 284
Sebeok, Thomas A. 195, 269
selection (Glossary term) 10, 231
genes as unit of 35, 60–1, 197
groups as units of 35, 197
individuals as units of 35, 197
natural 35
sexual 34, 37–40, 73, 104, 108, 114,
198–9, 211–15
and art 40, 50, 62, 123–6, 165–6, 176–7,
204, 217–18, 227
as plausibly distinct from natural
selection 39, 198
runaway 37, 198
subsumed under natural selection 37–8,
198, 231
see also sexual dimorphism
Semaw, Sileshi 189, 269, 272
Serpell, James A. 205, 270
sexual dimorphism 37, 40, 124, 199, 217
see also selection
sexual selection, see selection
Shackleton, Nicholas 210, 270
Shaftesbury, third Earl of 25
Shakespeare, William 25, 51, 103, 129,
160, 202
Hamlet 161
Shamblen, Stephen R. 201, 212, 214, 242
Shapiro, A. K. 216, 270
Sharpe, Kevin 191, 214, 217, 275
sheep 67–8, 73, 205
Shelley, James 193–4, 270
Shepard, Paul 206, 270
Shephard Jr, Glenn H. 201, 278
Shiner, Larry 25, 193–4, 270
Shusterman, Richard 18, 193, 270
Sibley, Frank 192–3, 270
Siebel, Walter A. 219–20, 223, 228, 256
Silk, Joan B. 191, 199, 201, 210–11, 236
Silver, Burton 195, 270
Silvers, Anita 212, 270
Simmons, Leigh W. 212, 267
Simpson, George Gaylord 38, 198, 270
Simpson, Jeffry A. 199, 211–13, 270
Singer, Dorothy G. 227, 270
Singer, Jerome L. 227, 270
Singh, Devendra 201–2, 213–14, 216, 270
singing 27, 32, 51–3, 125, 127, 142, 148, 155,
176–7, 180, 182, 223
see also song
Siroto, L. 201, 239
Skamel, Uta 198–9, 201, 211–13, 270
298
INDEX

skill 1, 10, 40, 55–6, 79, 83, 99, 113, 124, 132,
145, 165–6, 173, 185, 223, 228
art as product of 3, 27, 29–30, 46, 50–1, 118,
143, 154, 174, 203
and literary ﬁctions 169–71, 226–7
Slingerland, Edward, 226, 270
small “a” art 51, 163, 202
Smith, Gregory A. 208, 253
Smith, Peter K. 219, 270
Smolak, Linda 200, 211, 271
Smuts, Robert W. 214, 271
snakes 67, 76, 84, 101, 209
aesthetic admiration of 80, 207
as environmental negative 93, 206
natural aversion to 65, 204, 206
as totem 67, 205
Snoeyenbos, Milton H. 195, 271
sociobiology 40, 161, 199
see also Wilson, E. O.
Socrates 21, 194
Sollas, William J. 189, 191, 271
Solomon, Robert C. 193, 271
Solso, Robert L. 189–91, 200, 202, 210, 212,
220–1, 224, 271
song 9, 30, 47, 51, 53, 127, 155, 177, 179,
196, 227
music originated in 228
see also birdsong; gibbons; music; music
response; singing; whale song
Sophocles 202
Sopranos, The 129
Soressi, Marie 200, 271
Soucek, Brian 193, 271
spandrel (evolutionary by-product) (Glossary
term) 46, 59, 118, 136, 144–5,
220–1, 231
attracts as many “Just So” stories as
adaptationist accounts 42, 118, 138–9,
144, 200
distinguished from cultural
technologies 147–9
see also aesthetic response; art; music
spear thrower, see prehistoric items
Spencer, Herbert 112, 133, 139, 215–16,
219–21, 228, 271
Sperber, Dan 139, 197, 219, 221, 271
spiders 68, 101, 206
as environmental negative 76, 93, 206
natural aversion to 65, 204
tarantulas 84
Spolsky, Ellen 226, 271
Stapert, Dick 217, 271
Stecker, Robert 192, 194–5, 216, 227, 271
Steen, Francis F. 195, 203, 271
Steinbeck, John 203
Steiner, Gary 205–6, 271
Stenswick, Melissa 211–12, 216, 248
Sterelny, Kim 189–90, 196–201, 210–11,
223–4, 228, 271–2
Stevens, Catherine 203, 272
Stewart, John E. 216, 272
Stiller, James 202, 272
Stokes, Dustin R. 224, 272
Stolnitz, Jerome 193, 272
Storey, Robert F. 199, 203, 215, 224–6, 272
Storr, Anthony 219–20, 272
storytelling, see narrating
Stout, D. 189, 272
Streeter, Sybil A. 213, 259
Stringer, Chris 189–90, 200, 259, 275
Stubbs, George 69, 283
sublime, the (Glossary term) 9–10, 15, 17, 22,
46, 72, 76–7, 80, 98–9, 101, 230–1
Sugiyama, Lawrence 191, 203, 214,
225–6, 269
Sumida, Stuart S. 204, 272
Sungir burial, Russia 3, 190
Superman comics 129
Sütterlin, Christa 202, 207–8, 272
Swami, Viren 200, 202, 211–16, 249, 272
Swirski, Peter 203, 207, 216, 225–7, 272
Symons, Donald 41, 103, 198–201, 210–13,
215, 272
Synek, Erich 95, 210, 273, 284
Talbott, William J. 215, 273
Tanaka, Jiro 202, 273
Tang, Hua 199, 273
Tassinary, Louis G. 213, 273
Tatarkiewicz, Wladyslaw 194, 207, 273
Taylor, Alex H. 196, 273
Tedford, Richard H. 204–5, 276
Thakerar, Jitendra A. 201, 273
Theory of Mind (Glossary term) 139, 161,
169–71, 221, 226–7, 231
therianthropes 4, 67, 69–70, 205, 281, 283
Thiessen, Del 203, 227, 273
Thomas, Keith 205–6, 273
Thompson, Robert Farris 201, 273
Thompson, William Forde 203, 221, 228, 233,
258, 273
Thornhill, Randy 65, 184, 193, 198–200,
202, 204, 207–9, 211–13, 215,
229, 273
Thorpe, W. H. 192, 196–7, 273
ticks as environmental negative 76, 94, 206
tigers 69, 173, 206
saber-toothed 93
Tishkoff, Sarah A. 197–8, 261, 273–4
Todd, Cain 193, 274
Todd, Peter M. 227, 274–5
Tolstoy, Leo 51, 202
Tomasello, Michael 148, 190–1, 197, 199, 216,
222–3, 228, 252, 274
INDEX 299

Tooby, John 41–2, 142, 172–3, 195, 200, 204,
209–10, 215, 218–20, 222–3, 227–8,
240, 274
Tooke, William 213, 274
Tove´e, Martin J. 202, 214, 234, 249, 269, 274
Trainor, Laurel J. 219, 228, 274
Travis, Cheryl Brown 200, 274
Trehub, Sandra E. 155, 203, 219–20, 223,
228, 274
Trivers, Robert L. 198–9, 211–12, 215,
217, 275
Trout, Paul A. 88, 198, 203, 207, 214, 275
Tuan, Yi-Fu 211, 275
Turk, Ivan 192, 257
Turner, Frederick 110, 192, 198, 202–3, 213,
215, 218, 224, 275
Turner, J. M. W. 79, 92
Turner, Mark 195, 202, 225, 275
Ucko, Peter J. 191, 275
Ulrich, Roger S. 87, 204, 207–9, 275
Umezawa, Yoko 203, 227, 273
unicorns 68–9
utility, see aesthetic properties; artistry
complementing function
Van Damme, Wilfried 193–5, 201, 275
van den Broek, Eva M. P. 227, 275
Van Gelder, Leslie 191, 214, 217, 275
Vanhaeren, Marian 190, 199–200, 253,
275, 279
Veblen, Thorstein 215, 275
Velazquez, Diego 69, 283
Velo, Joseph 189, 275
Venus ﬁgurines (Glossary term) 4, 106, 191,
214, 231, 281
see also waist-to-hip ratio
Verdi, Giuseppe 125
Vermeule, Blakey 202–3, 225–6, 275
Vickers, A. Leah 211, 275
Vila`, Carles 204, 276
Vivaldi, Antonio 129
Voland, Eckart 198, 202, 217, 276
Vrba, Elisabeth S. 204, 221, 250
waist-to-hip ratio in women favored by men 49,
104, 107, 112, 201–2, 216
and body weight 106–7, 213–14
and Venus ﬁgurines 106, 214
Walker, Robert 222, 276
Wallace, Alfred Russel 35, 39, 138, 197–8,
221, 276
Wallaschek, Richard 196, 276
Walton, Kendall L. 192, 194, 276
Wang, Xiaoming 204–5, 276
Washburn, Dorothy 201, 276
Washburn, S. L. 189, 276
Watchman, Alan 195, 276
water buffalo 68, 205
Watts, Ian 189–90, 200, 276
Wecker, Stanley C. 211, 276
Wedekind, Claus 193, 213, 276
Wegman, William 70, 284
Weiner, Joseph S. 91, 191, 199, 208, 211,
213, 276
Wells, Jonathan C. K. 213, 276
Welsch, Wolfgang 13–14, 192–3, 195, 198,
201–2, 209, 212, 217, 276, 281
Wermke, Kathleen 219, 276
West, Stephen G. 216, 277
Westermarck, Edward 215, 277
Westermarck effect 104, 213
Westfahl, Gary 161, 203, 224, 277
whale song 31, 33–4, 79, 197, 282
Whaling, Carol 196, 277
Wharton, Edith 203
Whissel, Cynthia 203, 224, 277
White, Randall 189–91, 195, 199, 205,
211, 214, 277
White, Tim D. 199, 233, 259, 277
Whiten, Andrew 193, 195, 277
Whitley, David S. 191, 199, 277
Whitmeyer, Joseph M. 197, 277
Whitt, Laurie Anne, Roberts 205, 277
Wiggins, Geraint 220, 235
Wilde, Oscar 203
Wilson, David Sloan 197–8, 200, 210,
215, 277
Wilson, Edward O. 71, 87, 92–4, 191,
195–9, 203–10, 212–13,
216–17, 259, 278
Wilson, Margo 199, 215, 278
Wind, Jan 192, 198, 201, 268
Wittgenstein, Ludwig 66, 204, 278
Wobst, H. Martin 210, 278
Wolf, A. P. 215, 278
Wolf, Maryanne 224, 278
Wolloch, Nathaniel 205–6, 278
Wood, Bernard 199, 208, 278
Wood, Wendy 200, 211, 215, 246, 278
woodcock 74, 284
Woodcock, David M. 208–9, 278
woodpeckers 191, 195
Woolf, Virginia 203
Wrangham, Richard 156, 197, 199, 210,
213–14, 223–4, 278
Wright, Robert 199, 211–12, 215, 278
writing 134, 155, 163, 175, 183,
220, 222
as not an adaptation 58, 122, 148, 181,
216, 222
Wypijewski, JoAnn 201, 207, 278
Xenophon 21, 194
300
INDEX

Yamashita, Masako 228, 249
Yoruba of Africa 29
Yu, Douglas. W. 201, 278
Zahavi, Amotz 198, 278
Zahavi, Avishaq 198, 278
Zaidel, Dahlia 189, 191, 199, 208, 212, 217,
219, 278
Zangwill, Nick 79, 194, 207, 278
zebra ﬁnches 39, 198
zebras 69, 78
Zebrowitz, Leslie A. 201, 216, 267, 278
Zeki, Semir 137, 159, 202, 215, 218, 221,
224, 279
Zilhão, João 190, 244, 279
Zunshine, Lisa 202–3, 224–7, 279
INDEX
301

