
The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler Volume 9

 
Case Histories
Problems of Neurosis 
The Case of Mrs. A. 
The Case of Miss R. 
Alfred Adler
Edited by Henry T. Stein, Ph.D. 
Classical Adlerian Translation Project
© 2005 by Henry T. Stein, Ph.D.
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or
any information storage and retrieval system, without prior permission in writing
from the editor. All inquiries should be sent to Henry T. Stein, Ph.D., Classical
Adlerian Translation Project, 2565 Mayflower Lane, Bellingham, WA 98226.
Tel (360) 647-5670 or e-mail to HTStein@att.net .
Published 2005 by The Classical Adlerian Translation Project.
Printed in the United States of America
0-9715645-9-0
Table of Contents
Editor’s Preface 2005 ............................................................................. iii
Part 1: Problems of Neurosis .................................................................1 Chapter
I: Goals of Superiority.....................................................2 Boy 17: Fear of
Decisions ...............................................3 Man 35: Agoraphobia and Heart
Symptoms 
...................5 
Man 
40: 
Fear 
of 
Heights
..................................................6 Woman 27: Suffering from Obsessions
...........................6 
Chapter 
II: 
Not 
Meeting 
the 
Problems 
of
Life............................13 
Boy 
18: 
Schizophrenic
...................................................13
Elderly 
Woman: 
Depression 
..........................................15 
Woman 
46:
Domination with Depression .....................15
Chapter III: Deficient Social Feeling, Masculine Protest ..........20 
Boy with Obsessive Guilt Feelings ................................25 

Woman 26: Who Wanted to be a Man ..........................28 
Chapter IV: Problems in Love and Marriage .............................31 
Man 23: Dominating Through Drinking ........................34 
His Wife Takes Morphine .............................................35 Mistress with
Headaches and Palpitations .....................38 
Chapter V: Neurotic Style of Life and Psychotherapy ..............42 
Boy 15: Believed He Was a Prophet .............................45 
Man 40: Clairvoyant and Speechless .............................46 
Principles of Psychotherapy ..........................................46 Man 32: Escape
Through Drinking ...............................49 
Suicidal Medical Student ...............................................53 Chapter VI: Neurotic
Use of Emotion .......................................55 
Man 50: Depressed When All is Well ...........................55 
Man 36: Impotence and Polygamous Desires ...............56 
Man 50: Beggar as King ................................................58 
Man 53: Agoraphobia – Avoidance of People ..............60 
Chapter VII: The Family Constellation ....................................63 
Position of the First Child ..............................................63 
Effects of Dethronement ................................................64 First Child May Keep
Position ......................................65 
Attitude of Eldest Toward Authority .............................66 
Position of Second Child ...............................................67 Position of Youngest
Child 
............................................70 
Difficulties 
of 
an 
Only 
Child
.........................................72 
Case of Homosexual Development ...............................73 
Importance of Evaluation of Men and Women .............77
i Chapter VIII: Earliest Recollections ..........................................79 
Chapter IX: Further Useless Goals of Superiority .....................84 
Sadism 
and 
Masochism 
.................................................85 
Man 
32:
Erythrophobia ..................................................87 Man 45: Swallowing Air
...............................................88 
Man 40: Wanting to Marry His Cousin .........................89 
Woman 60: Jealousy ......................................................90 Woman: Neurotic
Heart and Jealousy ...........................91 
Man 38: Agoraphobia and Fear of Syphilis ...................92 
Boy 14: Shirking the Masculine Ideal ...........................92 
Woman 
20: 
Masochistic 
Fantasies 
................................93 
Chapter 
X:
Occupational Choices and Sleep Postures ..............96 
Body Postures and Sleep Postures ...............................100 

Chapter XI: Organ Dialect and Dreams....................................102 
Woman 25: Anxiety Neurosis .....................................102 Critical, Compulsive
Housewife 
..................................102 
Organ 
Dialect
...............................................................103 A Woman’s Revenge Against Her
Father ...................104 
Depression as Safeguard Against Marriage .................106 
Sleep and Hypnosis ......................................................106 
Antagonism to a Wife Awake and Dreaming ..............109 
Part 2: The Case of Mrs. A. ...............................................................112 
General Introductory Comments ............................................113 
The Case of Mrs. A. ................................................................116 
Part 3: The Case of Miss R. ...............................................................141 
Preface .....................................................................................142 Chapter I:
Early Childhood ......................................................150 
Chapter II: Adolescent Difficulties ..........................................160 
Chapter III: The Development of a Neurosis ..........................168 
Chapter IV: The Style of Life ..................................................178 
Chapter V: The Jealousy Mania ..............................................193 
Chapter VI: Sexual Development ............................................200 
Chapter VII: The Problem of Love ..........................................213 
Chapter VIII: The Shock of Sexual Knowledge ......................228 
Chapter IX: The Masculine Protest .........................................244 
Chapter X: A Lupus Phobia .....................................................260 
Chapter XI: Yes! But-- ............................................................282 
Chapter XII: The Goal of Superiority .....................................303
Index ........................................................................................321 Appendix:
“Basic Principles of 
Classical Adlerian Psychology” ..............................................339
ii
Editor’s Preface – 2005
Volume nine brings together three of Adler’s books on case histories:
Problems of Neurosis, The Case of Mrs. A., and The Case of Miss R. Although
these books were previously published in English, the text required substantial
editing for readability. Adler’s diagnostic brilliance now shines through without
the distractions of dated terminology and awkward phrasing.
Adler takes us on a fascinating journey of life style analysis through
progressive levels of understanding. In Problems of Neurosis, he offers us vivid
thumbnail sketches of thirty-three cases, spanning the symptoms of depression,
obsession, compulsion, alcoholism, schizophrenia, clairvoyance, agoraphobia,

impotence, sadism, masochism, and jealousy. He also discusses the general
topics of family constellation, earliest recollections, body postures, sleep
postures, organ dialect, and hypnosis.
In The Case of Mrs. A., Adler takes us further into a single style of life.
Working from the notes presented by another physician, he spontaneously
comments on each segment of information offered to him. Using the diagnostic
common in medicine, he gathers data, makes conjectures, then tests them until
he establishes a coherent theme. He even ventures to predict the consequences of
behavioral patterns. In a presentation of modest length, he achieves his goal of
clearly illustrating the unity of a style of life.
The Case of Miss R . takes us into deeper waters. In the mid1920’s, a
journalist presented The Diary of Claire Macht to Adler. After studying the
material, he offered his comments in a series of eight presentations to an
Individual Psychology Association. Originally titled The Technique of Individual
Psychology, Volume 1: The Art of Reading a Life-and-Case History, it was first
issued in Germany, then translated into English and published in 1929. In her
autobiographical narrative, a young working-class woman recalls her sexual
awakening in early twentieth-century Vienna with striking candor No doubt
shocking to a reader in the 1920’s, the sexually explicit material is commonplace
in psychological literature today. However, Adler’s artful construction of a
unified psychological portrait is compelling to follow, similar to watching an
artist like Rembrandt at work. He weaves early family influences and social
conditions into a unique tapestry.
iii
Volume nine is a “must read” for anyone interested in the art of life style
analysis. His remarkable theory springs to life in this series of richly varied case
histories.
For readers unfamiliar with Adler’s ideas, a brief overview, titled “Basic
Principles of Classical Adlerian Psychology,” is included in the appendix. Other
comprehensive articles, titled “Classical Adlerian Theory and Practice” and “A
Psychology of Democracy” have been published in Volumes 1 & 2 of The
Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler. A deeper appreciation of the
development of Adler’s theory can be achieved by studying Volumes 1-8.
iv Part 1

Problems of Neurosis1 2
A Book of Case Histories
1 First published in 1929 by Routleldge & Kegan Paul, Ltd., London.
Edited by P. Mairet. 
2 Additional editing by Henry T. Stein, Ph.D., 2005.

Chapter I Goals of Superiority
The problem of every neurosis is, for the patient, the difficult maintenance
of a style of acting, thinking and perceiving which distorts and denies the
demands of reality. Usually, only when this way of life has become arduous to
the verge of breakdown is the case brought to the physician, whose task is to find
the right method for its correction. Therefore, the common problem of both
patient and physician, and the basis of their cooperation, is to understand the
nature of the patient’s mistakes. This understanding demands not only an
accurate outline of his significant history, but also a perception of the dynamic
unity of that history as a continual striving toward an implied conception of
superiority.
As the work of Individual Psychologists has abundantly proved, an
individual goal of superiority is the determining factor in every neurosis, but the
goal itself always originates in, and is strictly conditioned by the actual
experiences of inferiority. The physician’s first line of approach is to identify the
real causes of the feelings of inferiority, which the patient disguises from himself
in various degrees and in his individual manner. Since the feeling of inferiority is
generally regarded as a sign of weakness and as something shameful, he
naturally has a strong tendency to conceal it. Indeed, the effort of concealment
may be so great that the person himself ceases to be aware of his inferiority as
such, being entirely preoccupied with the consequences of the feeling and with
all the objective details that serve its concealment. So efficiently may an
individual train his whole mentality for this task that the entire current of his
psychic life flowing ceaselessly from below to above--that is, from the feeling of
inferiority to that of superiority-occurs automatically and escapes his own notice.
It is not surprising, therefore, that we often receive a negative reply when
we ask a person whether he has a feeling of inferiority. It is better not to press
the point, but to observe his mental and psychic movements, in which the
attitude and individual aim can always be discerned. In this way we soon
perceive a greater or lesser degree of the feeling of inferiority in everyone,
together with a compensatory striving toward a goal of superiority. Such a
universal feeling is not in itself indictable; its meaning and value depend entirely
on how it is used. The most important discovery of Individual Psychology is that
the inferiority may be used as a stimulus to continue on the useful side of life.
Boy 17: Fear of Decisions
These general observations clearly apply to the case of a seventeen-year-old

boy, the second child in the family, who was brought to me because he suffered
from anxiety, and became extremely angry when confronted with difficulties. He
also had stomach trouble and diarrhea when he went mountaineering, a sport
which he sometimes shared with his comrades. His mother was intelligent and
liked him, but apparently preferred his elder brother who gave her less trouble.
This elder brother was much stronger, taller, and a good sportsman. The father
was a capable man and the patient esteemed him highly.
This boy was afraid of making any decisions because his feeling of
inferiority was too great for him to trust himself. He was unwilling, however, to
admit that this feeling was due to any cause within his control. He insisted that
he was born such as he was and his nature was not his responsibility.
The patient’s attitude toward life was one of hesitation. When confronted
with problems he created difficulties, but though he thus “slowed down,” he did
not stop altogether. He was a good pupil at school, but in constant fear of losing
even this advantage, and he could not decide at all what to do upon leaving high
school. He made no friends, did not like girls, and was afraid of sexual
experiences. He believed some of his difficulties resulted from masturbation and
nocturnal emissions. This behavior shows typical indecision and lack of
confidence in regard to the three problems of life: friendship, occupation, and
love. The response to all three problems was evaded or postponed. He disguised
his sense of general inadequacy by making various causes responsible, thus
reassuring and convincing himself of worth. It is notable, however, that the
patient went on in spite of difficulties. He studied well, and he climbed
mountains, which by the way, is a common activity of people who feel
overburdened with life, to give themselves feelings of superiority. To review and
emphasize the difficulties of life from the viewpoint of a superior feeling is the
next best thing to being able to boast that one has overcome them. It was in order
to escape from the consciousness of his inferiority feeling that this patient
blamed his weakness on natural difficulties and masturbation, and especially on
inherited deficiencies.
The theory of heredity must never be emphasized in education or in the
theory and practice of psychology. Except in cases of congenital mental
retardation, everyone can do everything necessary. This is not, of course, to deny
the differences of inherited physical and mental capacities, but what counts is the
use we make of them. Only in this way do we see the enormous significance of
education. Correct education develops the individual, with all his inherited
abilities and disabilities. With courage and training, disabilities may be so
compensated that they even become great abilities. When correctly encountered,
a disability becomes the stimulus for higher achievement. We are no longer

surprised to find that those who have attained remarkable successes in life have
often been handicapped in the beginning with disabilities and great feelings of
inferiority. On the other hand, we find that a person who believes himself the
victim of inherited deficiencies and disabilities, lessens his efforts with a feeling
of hopelessness, thus permanently hindering his development.
Teachers exaggerate the harmfulness of hereditary factors to excuse the
inefficiency of their own methods. It is interesting to read in Einhardt’s
biography of Charlemagne that this great Emperor could learn neither reading
nor writing, from sheer lack of talent for such things. Now, with the proper
development of educational methods, no normal child finds these tasks beyond
him. This and many other examples show that whenever authors, teachers or
parents fail to find a method to correct errors by education, they blame the
child’s inherited deficiencies. This superstition is one of the greatest difficulties
and the most commonly encountered in education and in handling “problem
children,” not to mention the treatment of criminals, neurotics, and psychotics.
Yet for the treatment of these conditions, the only reasonable assumption is the
one made by Individual Psychology: that everyone is equal to his lifetask. This
does not mean that the results are or can be equal, for of course, we must
consider inequalities of training, method, and above all the degree of courage
shown.
To return to the case in question, the ability of this boy’s father was an
additional reason for his feeling that he could not make good in life. It is well
known that the children of great men are often unsuccessful; they feel incapable
of ever attaining positions as high as their fathers held, and therefore do not
seriously attempt anything at all. In the case of this patient, the high
achievements of his elder brother also lengthened his distance from the goal of
superiority in the family circle. He felt himself hopelessly surpassed. The
neurosis which he developed was a protection from the painful consciousness of
this inferiority. It was the adoption of an attitude which signified to him: “If I
were not anxious, if I were not ill, I would be able to do as well as the others. If
my life were not full of terrible difficulties, I would be the first.” With this
attitude, a person can still feel superior, for the evaluation of his worth and value
is placed beyond proof, in the realm of possibilities. His chief occupation in life
is to look for difficulties, to find means of increasing them, or at least of
increasing his own sense of their gravity. He carefully collects and exhibits the
most ordinary difficulties of life, common to everybody. He does this more to
impress himself than others, but naturally other people take his burdens into
account and do not expect so much of him. Any success he may have, moreover,
is magnified by this heavily-advertised handicap, so that it becomes his most

useful possession. He uses it to win his way to a privileged life, judged by a
more lenient standard than others. At the same time, he pays the costs of it with
his neurosis.
Man 35: Agoraphobia and Heart Symptoms
Another case of anxiety neurosis, in the form of agoraphobia accompanied
by heart symptoms, occurred in a man of thirty-five. Anxiety neurosis is always
symptomatic of a timid attitude toward the three problems of life, and those who
suffer from it are invariably “spoiled” children.
This man dreamed, “I crossed the limit of the border between Austria and
Hungary, and they wanted to imprison me.” (Such short dreams, by the way, are
the best for analysis.) This dream indicated the man’s desire to come to a
standstill because of the fear that he would be defeated if he went on. Its
interpretation clearly confirms our understanding of anxiety neuroses. The man
wanted to limit the scope of his activity in life, to “mark time” in order to gain
time. He came to see me because he wished to marry, and the imminent prospect
of doing so had brought him to a halt. This fact itself, that he came to consult me
about his marriage, clearly indicated his attitude toward it. Similarly, the way he
would behave in marriage was mirrored in the dream, in which he commanded
himself, “Do not pass the limit!” The prison in the dream also reflected the
dreamer’s view of marriage. We often deceive ourselves by such images in
dreams. We use them to train ourselves to tackle the problems of the near future
in a manner consistent with our style of life, but not in accordance with the logic
of the situation
The style of life is established in the first four or five years of childhood.
This period closes with the full development of the ego and consequently a fixed
attitude toward life. From this time onward, the answers to the questions
presented by life are dictated, not by the truth of relationships in themselves, but
by certain automatized attitudes, which we call the style of the individual. Thus,
we explain how a certain mistake of adaptation, such as the desire to be the
center, to be overburdened, not to be forced, not to be curtailed, etc., may
persistently continue throughout a lifetime.
Man 40: Fear of Heights.
A very successful man, forty years old, complained that he could not go up
into a high building without having an impulse to jump out a window. He said he
had always been afraid of everything. The youngest of six children, he had been
very spoiled by his mother. This case reveals at a glance the wish to be thought
overburdened and in danger. The patient cannot avoid going upstairs, but he
colors this procedure with his desire to be in a dangerous situation, clinching the
danger by developing an impulse to jump.

In this case and the two previously cited, the goal of superiority is similar,
regarding the motive of being overburdened. But this man goes further. He has a
desire to jump from a window, but lo, ! he overcomes it and still lives. He is
even stronger than himself.
In support of this diagnosis, I will add a recollection from the patient’s
childhood. “I went to school when I was six years old. I was not very happy. The
very first day a boy attacked me. I was dreadfully afraid and trembled but . . . I
sprang at him and threw him down.” This fragment of memory records the two
typical motives of the man’s lifestyle. He trembles at first, but only to overcome.
And that little word, “but,” holds the rich meaning of his compensation for
feelings of inferiority.
Woman 27: Suffering From Obsessions
A woman of twenty-seven came to consult me after five years of suffering.
She said: “I have seen so many doctors that you are my last hope in life.” “No, I
answered, “not the last hope. Perhaps the last but one. There may be others who
can help you, too.” Her words were a challenge to me; she was daring me not to
cure her, in order to make me feel bound in duty to do so. This is the type of
patient who wishes to shift responsibility onto others, a common development of
spoiled children. We can assume that in childhood she constantly contrived to
keep another person occupied with her, and we may infer that it was probably
her mother. We need additional facts to verify this impression, but we can use
certain methods to do so even in the first interview.
It is important, by the way, to evade such a challenge as the one I have
recorded here. The patient may have worked up a high tension of feeling about
the idea that the doctor is his “last hope,” but we must accept no such distinction.
To do so would prepare the way for grave disappointment, or even suicide.
This woman was a second child, whose elder sister was more beautiful than
she, besides being very clever and popular, so that the patient’s life had been like
a breathless race to overtake her rival. The sister married happily. The patient
also developed well, especially intellectually, outdoing her elder sister in school
work. However, the sister was much more charming and attractive, and made
friends far more readily. The life of the older sister had been smoother and
pleasanter, giving her greater selfconfidence. The younger, from a sense of
insecurity, felt a need to assert herself against others, which inhibited their
friendship. Doubtless none of these two girls’ acquaintances recognized the true
nature and origin of this difference between them, but they all felt it
unconsciously, being attracted to the one and repelled by the other.
The patient had been in love at the age of fourteen, when she was ridiculed
for it, so ever since she had declined to play the part of a loving woman. When

her sister married, she fell in love with a married man. Such an attachment
cannot, in itself, be automatically judged. Nobody can be sure if such a love will
turn out well or not. But we cannot ignore that every girl in such a situation sees
the great difficulties involved as clearly as her parents or anybody else can see
them. And a woman going through such an experience tells herself, “This is
what love is like.” Her selection of such a troublesome love is obviously ground
for suspicion that she does not wish to see love and marriage through. In this
case we see the patient adopted toward this new life-problem of love, the same
hesitant, non-committal attitude she had exhibited in the past. She had reasons.
She was less attractive than her sister, and she had been ridiculed in her first love
affair. A woman of such a competitive nature, bent toward the goal of
superiority, is always in danger of losing courage and selfconfidence by
marriage. She will usually feel marriage as a menace to her sense of superiority.
The happy marriage of this girl’s sister fed these fears, so did the unhappy
marriage of her parents and her mother’s inferiority.
The woman’s hesitating attitude toward love and marriage came out during
frank discussion with her. She said: “I am sure my husband would leave me two
weeks after our marriage.” When I hinted at the deep feeling of inferiority which
was the cause of her evasion of marriage, she tried to retract this statement; but
the mere fact that such an idea could appear at all, even in a joke, showed that
her mind had been occupied with that specific problem.
Even when the man with whom she was in love wanted to kiss her, she ran
away from his caresses. In such ways, she established her distance from the
demands of love and marriage, and sacrificed everything to her neurotic goal of
superiority. “If this man were not married, I would marry him,” was her answer
to this problem of life.
“If” is usually the theme of neurotic drama. “If” is the last resort in every
neurotic dilemma, and one sure way of escape. For the will to escape has only
one reason, and that is fear of defeat, which is the hardest of all reasons to admit.
At this point, therefore, we frequently find some fictitious form of anxiety,
which the patient interprets to himself in various ways, but never as the simple
fear of being beaten. Agoraphobia, anxiety neurosis, and all the forms of phobia
may originate at this point, but whichever form it may take, the fear of defeat
fulfills its purpose of blocking the way to further activity. Thus, what was
desired is attained. The ordeal is evaded without disclosing, even to its owner,
the hated feeling of inferiority. All the other neurotic symptoms, such as
compulsion ideas, fits, fatigue, sleeplessness, functional disturbances such as
heart palpitations, headaches, and so on, develop out of the severe tension of this
very stressful concealment.

The organs most disturbed by this tension are those made susceptible by
some inherited weakness. Hence, where a whole family tends toward a particular
organic weakness, several members suffer from organic illnesses, and others
from neurotic symptoms of that same organ. In such cases, we must not overlook
the contributory factor of imitation. Unlike other psychologists, however, we
find that the only symptoms imitated are those conforming to the neurotic goal
of superiority.
This patient held a position in an office, where she played a leading role
and was much appreciated, but like all people with an excessive feeling of
inferiority, she had an insatiable appetite for appreciation. At the age of nineteen
she changed her position, and lost the admiration she had formerly enjoyed.
Reviewing her case, we note:
1. She felt she could not compete with her sister, either in making friends or
in making a successful marriage. 
2. She feared facing the problems of love and marriage. 
3. She had lost a favorable position in her work. 
In short, all the defeats she had feared had now befallen her; her intense feeling
of inferiority had been justified. She did not reason out the situation in this way,
but showed by the appropriate mood, that this was how she felt it. 
We may now note in passing a typical concentration on, and exaggeration of one
point in the life-problem, the fear of defeat. While occupied with the useful side
of life, we have to consider the possibilities of defeat, which we normally
minimize by regarding occasional reverses as incidental to every human
enterprise. But in such a case as we are now reviewing, the possibility of defeat
has become the focus of life. The patient subordinates his whole life to it, just as
a person with a cleaning mania makes her life revolve around the idea of dirt,
and the normal, useful act of washing becomes exaggerated into a ceaseless
search for dirt, either on her own person or on furniture, floors or elsewhere,
until it has no meaning or value for life. Such a mistaken focus of attention is
typical of neurosis in general, and in the case of this girl her earlier life-purpose
on the useless side, to surpass her sister, was developing into the still narrower
and more negative aim of escaping from any sort of defeat whatsoever. 
Neurotic symptoms develop at precisely such a critical point in a life-history.
The style of life with its characteristic hesitation at every possibility of defeat
does not change, but the individual now expresses this attitude by demanding
impossible securities. If he has no means of proving superiority on the useful
side, he becomes a problem child, or a criminal, or he may commit suicide. If he
has some activity, but an insufficient amount, and more hope, he deceives
himself that he is blocked by a fatal hindrance, such as an illness. He selects

certain symptoms and develops them until they impress him as real obstacles.
His state of tension readily provides the initial mental or bodily disturbances,
which vary according to the style of life and the native organic weaknesses.
Behind his barricade of symptoms, the patient feels hidden and secure. To the
question, “What use are you making of your talents?” he answers, “This thing
stops me; I cannot go ahead,” and points to his self-erected barricade. We must
never neglect the patient’s use of his symptoms. Not only does he use them in
this way, but, as happens still more in psychosis, they also modify his perception
of every vital life question. 
To be already overworked by grappling with his own neurotic difficulties is not
only an extenuating circumstance, it also provides a patient’s inner relief from
his striving for superiority; he really expects less of himself. Such a self-
protective style of life may also take the form of being overwhelmed with social
difficulties. 
The best way to understand a neurotic patient is to set aside all his neurotic
symptoms, and study his style of life and individual goal of superiority. Only by
a firm grasp of these two things can we come to a full understanding of the
neurosis itself, the development of which they entirely control. It is the fear of
defeat, real or imaginary, which triggers the outbreak of the socalled neurotic
symptoms. Life and custom drag the man along in apparent agreement, but in
reality a sense of utter abasement has separated him from life, and he is trying to
stop or escape. My experience proves that psychoses such as schizophrenia,
mania, depression, and paranoia, appear when the patient feels absolutely
checkmated, with no hope of going on, which means that he gives up all
attempts to answer any of the three questions of life. A neurotic person,
however, is willing to consider one or two of these questions, but has broken
down in face of some new and overwhelming difficulty. The cases I have been
describing exhibit such incomplete hesitation. In the one immediately under
consideration, the girl appeared to be quite healthy until she suffered the setback
in her occupation. Then, more deeply intimidated by the difficulty of life, she
began to shelve its problems more and more, and strove for a new kind of
superiority in the form of compulsionideas. 
One day she had a fear that her handbag had come open and that some coins,
covered with verdigris, had dropped into the basket of vegetables which she had
been carrying for another woman. She feared she had poisoned this woman’s
entire family. Another compulsionidea she had, was that the dust of the street
was on her hands and would soil her mother’s Bible if she touched it, which of
course she could not avoid doing from time to time. So after each imaginary
soiling of the Bible, she surreptitiously bought another and replaced it, until she

had bought a dozen of them. She attributed this exaggerated holiness to the
books in order that she might profane them, and wasted her money on them so
that she could be held irresponsible. Thus also, she became a martyr,
misunderstood, and a soul degraded by the fouling of sacred things. If the
woman’s sole ambition in life had been to become more conspicuous than her
sister, she was well on the way to realizing it. But this neurotic aim was
involving her in such practical defeats that it was clearly advisable for her to
renounce it for another. The goal of her striving was to escape the dreaded
decision: “My sister is superior to me.” 
Closely examined, this escape from a decision also reveals itself as a goal of
superiority. Because she will not mix with people, she cannot be defeated
socially. As long as she avoids love and marriage, she is not measured against
her sister’s happy marriage. Whatever happens, she can say, “But I am fully
occupied with my compulsionideas.” She must be occupied with something.
Time, the circumstances, and whatever logic her neurosis has not destroyed,
demand some occupation, so she busies herself on the useless side with this
compulsion-neurosis. Her activity is actually free from competition, and
fictitiously superior. This illusion of superiority is shown by her striving, in
compulsionideas, to make herself feel responsible for the lives of others, or for
their purity. This effort to show a superior conscientiousness is her occupation,
for she has not stopped. If she had, she would be in a state of stupor, as in
catatonia. 
Before referring to this patient’s dreams, a few general remarks are advisable. A
psychology which could not understand and interpret dreams would exclude a
great part of the mental life, and would therefore be a most imperfect
psychology. Thus, the Freudian conception of dreams is an important
contribution. Unfortunately, its author overlooked the most vital principles of
dream formation owing to his mistaken assumption of the dominance of the
sexual factor. This mistake prevented him from seeing that the sexual attitude in
life is determined by the goal of totality or superiority. We must interpret
abnormal sexual tendencies as expressions of the entire style of life, looking for
the deeper movements which underlie them. 
The understanding of dreams owes its furthest practical progress to a
contribution of Individual Psychology: the recognition that every dream creates
its mood to cope with a specific situation, in accordance with the goal of
superiority. This purpose of the dream explains the mysterious fact that people
do not understand their own dreams. Dreaming is a process of turning away, in
sleep, from reality and common sense toward the individual’s goal of
superiority. To relate our present problems to this goal by logical planning and

thinking is very difficult, but by using feelings it is easy, and their “short cut” is
the dream. As I have shown elsewhere, the dream is a dress rehearsal, a trial
performance of a step toward the fictive goal. In an automatic way, it produces
an illusory picture of how to succeed regardless of the logic of the situation.
This patient dreamed that she fell down. No one can deny that such a dream
connotes unpleasant feelings as of defeat, and we must assume that she was
diminishing her impulse to proceed. Presumably, she faced a question which she
wanted to answer in a discouraged manner. That question proved to be an
invitation to a rendezvous with the married man in the case. She responded by
giving herself, through the dream, the hopeless mood she wanted, the impulse to
denial and escape. 
In case the critical reader is unconvinced, I will cite another dream of the
patient’s on the same night. She was terrified by noticing some blue and red
spots on her skin. Was this good preparation for meeting with a lover? That the
spots signified the result of a syphilitic infection was not only obvious to me, but
also was suggested independently by the patient herself. In discussing this
matter, she expressed the opinion that all men were untrue and polygamous. “I
am sure,” she exclaimed (and this I have already quoted) “that my husband
would leave me a fortnight after the wedding. What is the good of marriage, if I
constantly expect to be deceived and also infected by my husband?” This
clinches the proof of her motive to escape. She added, “I should become less
than my sister, whose husband is faithful.” Thus, her goal has changed. She no
longer wishes directly to surpass her sister, but barricades that path, and looks
for another superiority, on the useless side. She was going to avoid all defeat,
and to be nobler than anyone else. 
Everyone’s goal is one of superiority, but in the case of those who lose their
courage and selfconfidence, it is diverted from the useful to the useless side of
life. This escape into a life of unrealities takes place in an automatic way; the
fear of defeat itself arranges the emotions, and through them the actions, until a
situation is reached which alleviates it. This escape is always felt as a relief, but
is not understood as such. If it were, the patient would enjoy it, which would
spoil the whole arrangement by removing the justification for his hesitation and
escape. He must pay the costs with suffering in order to be excusable. And the
neurotic symptoms, built upon the pattern of an illness, really resemble illness,
and efficiently safeguard the patient’s sense of superiority by enabling him to
think, “I could be the first, if only my suffering did not prevent it.” Such a style
of life automatically excludes happiness quite independently of any adjustment
to circumstances.
Chapter II Not Meeting Problems of Life 

Boy 18: Schizophrenic
Every development in an individual’s life is conditioned by his life-aim,
connecting all successive phases of his life. When the mother of a son who has
suddenly become schizophrenic at the age of eighteen, says that he was perfectly
normal until that age, we cannot agree with her. Investigating the boy’s past life,
we find that he was domineering and did not play with his schoolmates. Such a
childhood provides bad preparation for facing the real problems of life. In this
case it was a preparation for schizophrenia, which was not a sudden
development but the result of a life-attitude, and showed itself only when he had
to face a really difficult situation. At the age of eighteen, he was faced with the
three questions of friendship, occupation, and love, and felt unable to answer
them. A patient’s unpreparedness for life does not usually show itself in
favorable circumstances, or when he is shielded from the real demands of life
which are always of a social nature and demand social feeling. Normally a
sheltered period of life, childhood may be passed in a way that does not develop
social feeling, as in the case under consideration and also in the case previously
described where a girl competed with an elder sister. Because she felt her
prestige endangered all the time, she was preoccupied with herself. Such a
conception of her situation hinders a child’s development of social feeling.
The circumstances of early life, such as those of the nursery, kindergarten,
school, and companionship, offer the first training and test in social behavior.
When a neurosis is developed, we always find that the individual’s difficulties
were foreshadowed in these childhood relationships. He did not care to do things
with others, or he did so with some noticeable difference from others. A neurotic
generally remembers his peculiarities and difficulties of adaptation in early life
as a justification for keeping his distance from the present social environment.
When he is driven by necessity or by his own demands to approach an accepted
standard of behavior, the neurotic may apparently try to adapt himself, but in
reality he does nothing of the kind. He answers the new demands with automatic
responses and trained attitudes which cover his escape from any real contact. He
may mix with others superficially, in conversations and customary kinds of
cooperation, but he does so according to his own established mechanisms, and
behind this screen his psyche slips back into its own secret stronghold. In this
behavior of neurotics, psychotics, and problem-children, we must recognize a
certain inevitability, a necessary result of their past. The artificial attitudes they
have established are the logical consequence of faulty training, and we can do
very little good by trying to correct these consequences. We must make a change
in the deeper motive, in the underlying style of life, and then the patient will see
all his lifetasks in a new perspective.

Every human being must somehow solve the three problems of life which I
have already described, for the individual’s relationship with the world is three-
fold. No one can escape a definite answer to the question of friendship,
occupation, or love. Whoever can make friends, pursue a useful occupation with
faith and courage, and express his sexual life in accordance with social feeling,
is immune from neurotic infection. But when an individual fails to succeed in
one or more of these three inexorable demands of life, beware of feelings of
abasement, beware of the consequent neurosis. Schizophrenia is the result of
failure in all three directions at once.
The boy whose case we are considering was unprepared to grapple with
these inevitable problems. From our point of view, he evidently needed re-
education at this late stage of his development, a process which demands a
special method. The practitioner should realize at the outset that nothing can be
done by force. The patient must be appealed to in a friendly way, coaxed into a
receptive frame of mind. Indeed, the task of the physician or psychologist is to
give the patient the experience of contact with a fellow-man, and then to enable
him to transfer this awakened social feeling to others.
This method of winning the patient’s good will, and then transferring it to
his environment, is strictly analogous to the maternal function. The social duty
of motherhood is to interpret society to the individual, and if the mother fails in
this obligation, then the duty is likely to fall much later on the physician who is
heavily handicapped for the task. The mother has the enormous advantage of the
physical and psychic relationship; she provides the greatest experience of love
and fellowship the child will ever have. Her duty is to relate the growing child to
herself mentally, as he was related to her physically, nourishing the child’s
growing consciousness with true and normal conceptions of friendship, work,
and love. In this way, she gradually transforms the child’s love for her and
dependence upon her into a benevolent, confident, and responsible attitude
toward society and the whole environment. This is the two-fold function of
motherhood: to give the child the completest possible experience of human
fellowship, and then widen it into a life-attitude toward others.
Elderly Woman: Depression
What we call psychosis is liable to occur when the individual breaks down
before all three questions of life, and defies logic with every step he takes. By
“logical,” we mean that which is intelligible as an attempt to solve a real
problem of life. An example of psychotic development is shown in the life of an
elderly woman, excluded from occupation and love. She is offended because
society, her children and sons-in-law, do not take enough interest in her. If she
has not developed sufficient social feeling to take a keen interest in the lives of

others, her case is indeed a difficult one; for the goal of superiority still attracts
her as much as anyone, and keeps her striving without any definite objective.
But she finds it possible to impress others by exploiting her weakness. She can
become a focus of attention again, and once more an actress on the stage of life,
by playing the role of an entirely hopeless person. She will forestall the
destruction of her personality by identifying herself with a lost person, and rather
than allow others to make her miserable by neglect, she will plunge herself into
excessive gloom, giving her a little dismal power over other people’s feelings.
We find that the pride and ambition of neurotic individuals prohibits their
confessing that they feel neglected, so they are unable to directly accuse others.
Therefore, the anger and rage we would expect to find in this phase of life is
generally suppressed and hidden, though it may break out occasionally, and they
rationalize their hopeless attitude by turning their accusation against themselves.
In cases of depression, many actually kill themselves in an excess of self-
condemnation, while sometimes ostentatiously exonerating others.
Woman 46: Domination With Depression
A very intelligent woman, forty-six years of age, had suffered from
depression for three years, eight years before she came to me. She had been
married at the age of sixteen, and having no children for the first ten years of her
married life, she adopted a child, but did not tell the child that she was not its
real mother. This situation is one which usually leads to unhappiness for the
child later on. Afterward, the woman had two daughters of her own. She worked
in her husband’s office after marriage, so she knew all about his affairs, and after
some years, when he took a partner into his business, she did not want to be in
the office because of her diminished importance. She quarreled continually with
the partner until her father became ill, when she withdrew from the business to
nurse him, and as soon as the father’s health was restored, she developed
depression. She suspected her husband of concealing his business affairs from
her, and cried if he did not immediately tell her everything she wanted to know.
Wanting to dominate her husband, she sought to subdue him by crying. Crying is
usually an accusation against another person. Her husband’s business was
financially satisfactory, and it was not necessary for her to know all the details of
its working, but she felt herself excluded and inferior if she did not know all
about it.
This strong woman had married a weak man in order to rule him; of course,
the choice of an equal mate generally indicates a higher degree of courage.
Marriage is a constructive task for two individuals determined to live together in
order to help and enrich each other’s lives; when anyone chooses a weaker
partner, lower in the social scale, or with vices such as alcoholism, morphine

addiction, or laziness, in the hope of “saving” him, he betrays the hidden desire
for superiority.
This woman showed the principal signs of a true depression. She decreased
steadily in weight, was unable to sleep, and was routinely more depressed in the
morning than in the evening. She feared that the whole family would face
poverty and starvation. In treating the case, my first objective was to reconcile
her with her husband. I tried to show her that her husband was getting older, that
she should not be angry with him, but handle him more diplomatically. I
explained that there were better methods of making him subservient than crying;
that the weaker person puts up some kind of resistance, as no one can endure
constant domination, and that people must treat each other as equals if they are
to live together harmoniously.
I use the simplest and most direct method possible in the treatment of
neurotics, but it would be of no use to tell the patient in this case, “You are a
domineering woman, trying to rule by means of illness,” for she would be
offended. I must win her first, and take her part as far as possible. Every neurotic
is partly in the right. If this woman did not feel deprived of value by her
advancing age, a real hardship of women in our present culture, she would not
cling to her prestige in such unseemly ways. But I can only very gradually bring
her to face the truth about what she is doing.
At the same time, this patient developed a guilt complex which often
happens in such a situation. She remembered that she had deceived her husband
with another man some twenty-five years before, during which time this event
had played no further part in her life, but all at once she told her husband and
accused herself. This socalled guiltcomplex, which we would entirely
misunderstand with the Freudian interpretation, was clearly an attack upon the
husband who was no longer obedient. She could hurt him by confession and
selfaccusation. Who is so simple as to think it is a case of the majesty of the truth
vindicating itself after a quarter of a century? The truth is often a terrible weapon
of aggression. It is possible to lie, and even to murder, with the truth.
Nietzsche, with a most penetrating vision and from the same standpoint as
Individual Psychology, described the feeling of guilt as mere wickedness. In the
majority of neurotic cases, a guiltcomplex is used as a means to entrench its
maker on the useless side of life. We often see this behavior in a child who tells
a lie and gets a complex about it, so that he can play a role of distinguished
uselessness. Everyone will be struck by his honesty if he worries so much about
having told a fib.
To return to the indirect method of treatment, I recommend it especially
with depression. After establishing a sympathetic relationship, I give suggestions

for a change of conduct in two stages. In the first stage, my suggestion is, “Do
only what is agreeable to you.” The patient usually answers, “Nothing is
agreeable.” “Then at least,” I respond, “do not exert yourself to do what is
disagreeable.” The patient, who has usually been exhorted to do various
uncongenial things to remedy his condition, finds a rather flattering novelty in
my advice, and may improve in behavior. Later I insinuate the second rule of
conduct, saying, “It is much more difficult and I do not know if you can follow
it.” After saying this I am silent, and look doubtfully at the patient. In this way, I
excite his curiosity and ensure his attention, and then proceed. “If you could
follow this second rule, you would be cured in fourteen days. It is: to consider
from time to time how you can give another person pleasure. It would very soon
enable you to sleep and would chase away all your sad thoughts. You would feel
yourself to be useful and worth while.”
I receive various replies to my suggestion, but every patient thinks it is too
difficult to act upon. If the answer is, “How can I give pleasure to others when I
have none myself?” I relieve the prospect by saying, “Then you will need four
weeks.” The more transparent response, “Who gives me pleasure?” I counter
with what is probably the strongest move in the game, by saying, “Perhaps you
had better train yourself a little thus: do not actually do anything to please
anyone else, but merely think about how you could do it.”
Depressed subjects who reply, “Oh, that is quite easy. It is what I have
always done,” are to be suspected of dispensing favors in order to exploit others.
To them I say, “Do you think the people you favored were really pleased by it?”
I sometimes give in, admitting that it is too difficult at present because the
patient needs practice and training, so I suggest a milder compromise in these
terms: “Remember all the ideas you have in the night, and give me pleasure by
telling them to me the next day.”
The next day such a patient when asked for his midnight reflections, quite
probably replies, “I slept all night,” even though he had not previously slept for
many days. But let the physician beware lest he triumph too soon. He should
continue to collect industriously all the useful facts and reconstruct the patient’s
style of life.
In treating these cases, I have never had a suicide, the disaster which so
commonly occurs, and I believe this is because the indirect treatment reduces
acute tension. But all those who are in the patient’s environment must be made
to understand that they cannot scold, force, or criticize, but must assist the
patient into a more favorable situation. With depression, the people in the
environment suffer more than the patient, and at times the relatives can no longer
endure the strain. My advice is, “When you feel you can no longer control the

patient, call for medical help.” This is the phase in which the potential for
suicide is critical.
Mania, depression, and the severer neuroses are a barricade erected by the
patient to block his own approach to the real business of life, and they are
sometimes preliminary to the establishment of psychosis in the form of manic-
depressive insanity. The first formidable phase of mental disorder, as we have
seen, is invariably when some urgent problem presses for solution and the
patient has lost courage. In mania, we see an effort to overcome this cowardice
of the soul, and the patient pushes himself forward, exaggerates his actions, and
talks and laughs with needless excitement. He is high-spirited and irritable, has
great projects, is very superior and boastful of his power, and displays strong
sexual inclinations. These patients need watching or they may do damage, but
this phase of their illness is a sudden blaze which soon consumes its fuel. The
natural and usual sequel is a phase of depression in which the patient must on no
account be prevented from withdrawing. Individuals show alternations in manic-
depressive insanity who showed slight phases of the same pattern in their earlier
life. They begin with excitement which rapidly wanes into depression. This
tendency is shown even in their handwriting, in which the first letter of a word is
written very large, while the others decrease in size and droop below the line.
Brilliant beginnings and sudden anti-climaxes are repeated at intervals
throughout their life-histories.
Manic-depressive insanity, like a cyclothymia beginning late in life, may
appear so similar to general paralysis as to cause confusion in diagnosis. In such
a case, the clinical symptoms must be supplemented by an examination of the
spinal fluid. This is important, because we find many cases where only a single
attack of paralysis occurs; whereas cyclothymia is, of course, recurrent. I once
had a patient of this kind whose mania stopped very quickly. I was visiting him
at the asylum when he begged me to take him home because the attendants had
treated him roughly a few days before. He had begun to recover and his
condition was improving every hour, so I took him home. As we sat down at the
table, he remarked with satisfaction, “You see, it has always been like this in my
life. I have always gotten whatever I wanted.” While I was thinking only of the
hard knocks he had suffered, he was thinking of nothing but having gotten out of
the asylum. That is the difference between the objectivity of common sense and
the sort of “private logic” which is the basis of mania.
Chapter III Deficient Social Feeling, Masculine Protest
Individual Psychology views the conscious and the unconscious, not as
separate and conflicting entities, but as complementary and cooperating parts of
the same reality. Not of a physiological or biological nature, that reality eludes

any chemical or technical tests. For instance, the fact that anxiety affects the
sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves does not reveal the cause of an anxiety.
The origin of anxiety is in the psychic, not the somatic realm; we attribute it
neither to the suppression of sexuality, nor to the conditions of childhood,
although we have given all due importance to these factors. What appears most
important to us is that a child, for instance, will make use of anxiety in order to
achieve his goal of superiority by means of control over the mother. The most
exact physiological and neurological description of anger appears to be of almost
negligible practical value compared with our actual experience of how anger is
used to dominate a person or situation. In this respect, we claim to hold the only
position which is correctly and purely a psychological one; that is, we believe
the attribution of feelings, emotions and thoughts to bodily conditions and
inherited instincts, which is the basis of almost all other psychologies, always
leads to exaggerations and mistakes. We are far from disputing that every mental
and bodily function is necessarily conditioned by inherited material, but what we
see in all psychic activity is the individual’s use of this material to attain a
certain goal. In all the cases I have hitherto described, the feelings and emotions
were developed in the direction and to the degree required for the attainment of a
particular goal, which in these instances was of neurotic character. Anxiety,
sadness, and every other manifestation took the direction we could have
predicted from the style of life. We have seen how dreams also played their part
in arranging the feelings into conformity with the general striving, their action
giving us a remarkable insight into the workshop of the soul.
If sadness is necessary to the attainment of his goal, an individual is
naturally incapable of happiness, for he can be happy only when miserable. But
we notice that feelings appear and disappear as required. A person suffering
from agoraphobia loses the feeling of anxiety when at home, or when he
successfully subordinates another person to himself. The tendency of the
neurotic is to exclude from his experience the whole sphere of life except those
parts in which he has the sense of being a conqueror. By manufacturing certain
moods or emotions in himself, he finds he can repel and shut out the undesirable,
unconquerable remainder of his world. He even comes vainly to hide his head in
the moods themselves, like an ostrich.
Beneath all fluctuations of mood, however, and ruling them, lies the real,
relatively unchangeable character. A coward, for example, even though he
shows arrogance against a weaker person or courage in a shielded position, still
remains a coward; his freedom from anxiety, when surrounded by watchdogs,
guns and policemen, does not deceive us. The excessive protection he demands
reveals his character. The proud man may even be very gracious and yielding,

but he surrounds himself with inferiors. To estimate the true character of an
individual, we must give full significance to the environment he has chosen or
permitted for himself.
What we call social feeling in Individual Psychology is the true and
inevitable compensation for all our natural weaknesses. Even from the biological
standpoint, the human being is clearly a social creature, needing a much longer
period of dependence upon others before its maturity than any animal; the
human mother is also more dependent before, during, and after giving birth. The
high degree of cooperation and social culture which man needs for his very
existence demands spontaneous social effort, and the dominant purpose of
education is to evoke it. Social feeling is not inborn, but an innate potential
which must be consciously developed. We are unable to trust any socalled
“social instinct,” for its expression depends on the child’s conception or vision
of the environment. In the growth of this vision of society, the most vital factor
is the mother, because in his mother every child makes first contact with a
trustworthy fellow-man. In the four or five earliest years of life, the child builds
his own prototype by adjusting his inherited abilities to his earliest impressions,
and lays the irrevocable foundation of his style of life. This prototype develops
later into the more elaborate lifestyle, conditioning his answers to the three
questions of life. In the earliest period, the psychic soundness of the mother is
most essential; in the second period, her mentality and breadth of outlook are
very important.
The mother influences the first important and specifically human change in
the child’s behavior. Under her influence, the child first inhibits his desires and
organic impulses, introducing delays and circuitous methods into his striving for
what he wants. The goal of all striving, to overcome the difficulties of life and
gain superiority, is also the stimulus of childhood, which begins with a sense of
almost total, practical impotence. To the child, the attentive, benevolent mother
is the guardian of his goal, even the goal itself in concrete form. But such a goal
is not permanently possible, and the art of motherhood is to give the child
freedom and opportunity for success by his own efforts, so that he can establish
his style of life and seek his superiority in increasingly useful ways. Then, she
must gradually interest the child in other people and in the wider environment of
life. To the degree that she performs these two functions: bestowing
independence and imparting a true, initial understanding of the situation in the
home and in the world, the child will develop social feeling, independence, and
courage. To that same degree also will the child find his goal in being a fellow-
man and friend, a good worker and a true partner in love. Such an initiation into
life unites the ineradicable will to superiority with social feeling, in courageous

and optimistic activity on the useful side of life. All the feelings of an individual,
throughout his life, are modified by the amount of communal feeling involved in
his individual striving for prestige.
Every action on the useless side of life, such as the behavior of problem-
children, neurotics, criminals, sexual deviants, prostitutes, and suicides, can be
traced to the lack of social feeling, with the consequent loss of confidence. For
we must realize that every adaptation we have to make in life, from kindergarten
to business management, from school chums to marriage is, directly or
indirectly, a social action. From the earliest times, we face new thoughts and
events in a manner which is dominantly social or antisocial; it cannot be neutral.
Suppose, for instance, that a boy is terrified by illness and death in his
environment. He may allay his fears with the determination to be a doctor, and to
fight against death. This is obviously a more social idea than that of being a
grave-digger, the one who buries the others, a reaction I have also found in a boy
in that situation. When social feeling has been instilled from the beginning into
the upward striving of the psyche, it acts with automatic certainty, coloring every
thought and action, and where this automatized social feeling is deficient, the
individual’s interest is too self-centered, and he feels he is impotent or a nobody.
All his other feelings are connected with this feeling. They do not exist by
themselves, nor do they control action, although they are often used to do so—
and, of course, they influence our secondary decisions from time to time.
The sense of impotence, or the “feeling of inferiority,” is the root-
conception of Individual Psychology. Whatever form it may take, it can be
correctly estimated only from an adequate study of the individual’s actions. Its
accurate diagnosis is perhaps more difficult in early life, where we see many
efforts to circumvent the instincts and to conceal the feeling itself from its
possessor, but most of these early expressions are connected with the strength or
weakness of the organs and the friendliness or hostility of the environment. Yet
neither the inherited organism nor the environment is entirely responsible for the
sense of impotence, nor is it caused by both together. Both these factors, plus the
reaction of the child determine the degree to which it is felt. As a conscious
connection between its organism and environment, the child’s psyche seems to
have an indefinite causal power, so that, normal or abnormal, it never reacts with
anything like mathematical exactitude. Life, as opposed to dead material, always
reacts thus, in a more or less inaccurate, spontaneous manner.
However, for convenience, we may classify common variations of the sense
of impotence according to typical causes. Thus, we find three types of neurotic
children: those with defective organs, those who are spoiled, and those who are
hated. Physical defects, whether congenital or acquired, invariably cause feelings

of inferiority, and we can generally trace a special effort to compensate for the
specific defect. For example, many who are naturally lefthanded and who have
been trained to use the right hand exclusively, conceal their sense of manual
inadequacy by taking to the arts. Extreme dexterity and finesse of handling such
as that of an instrumentalist or a painter becomes an integral factor in their life-
goal. Many painters’ and poets’ choice of vocation was influenced by bad
eyesight. Milton and Homer are conspicuous examples of this latter
compensation. In the deafness of Beethoven and the stuttering of Demosthenes,
we also see the points upon which their strivings were concentrated.
Many people have resented the attention that my colleagues and I have
drawn to this compensatory factor in the work of artists of genius or high talent,
and they attempt to deny what our experience constantly confirms. But they
object because of a misunderstanding of Individual Psychology. We are not so
foolish as to suppose that organic imperfection is the actual cause of genius.
Many of the Freudians have indeed supposed that the sublimest works of human
genius were directly caused by sexual repressions, but we make no such
eccentric generalization. In our view, a man of genius is primarily a man of
supreme usefulness. If he is an artist, he is useful to culture, giving distinction
and value by his work to the recreative life of many thousands. And this value,
where it is genuine and not merely empty cleverness, depends on a high degree
of courage and communal intuition. The origin of genius lies neither in the
inherited organism nor in the environmental influences, but in that third sphere
of individual reaction to which I have already referred, which includes the
possibility of socially affirmative action. In the choice of its specialized
expression, however, the highest talent is conditioned by the organism with
which it is endowed, from the greatest defect of which it gains its particular
mode of concentration.
A knowledge of this principle, which can only be correctly gained by much
observation, is of the greatest service in the treatment of organically defective
children, as it enables us to protect them from many dangers of
overcompensation.
Receiving too much from others, the spoiled child never proves his own
powers to himself. Formed in accordance with his experience, his goal is to be
the center of the family, the focus of attention and care. The usual symptoms are:
anger, discontent, disorderliness, anxiety, enuresis, a struggle to avoid isolation,
and unwillingness to go to school. Treatment readily suggests itself; but we often
have to take into account an unusually intense feeling of insecurity.
The hated child is in the worse position of never having been spoiled by
anyone. His goal is to escape and get at a safe distance from others. Cruelty,

slyness, and cowardliness are some of the symptoms. Such a child often cannot
look a person straight in the eyes, cannot speak, and hides his feelings in fear of
abasement. In some instances, constant tendency to find fault may be developed
in the direction of useful criticism.
No soul develops in complete freedom. Each one is in mental, emotional,
and nutritive dependence upon his immediate environment on the earth and in
the cosmos, yet independent to the degree that he must deal with these
relationships consciously; he must answer them as the questions of life.
Everything he does is an answer; no doubt it is the best he can give. We are not
blessed with omniscience, and our greatest reasonable hope is not to answer with
a great mistake, so that we should test all views, including that of Individual
Psychology, and prove them carefully. Our best science must be applied with
common sense.
Hated children also take life as they find it, respond to it with the best
reactions they can devise, and gradually fix these reactions into a mechanical
pattern of life. The three life-problems, in whatever successive forms they
present themselves, will thenceforward be encountered by that fixed pattern of
behavior, however it may be elaborated by experience. The unusual tension of
their life makes these children postulate a higher goal of security and superiority
than that of the average child. All the impressions, perceptions, and attitudes are
conditioned by the perspective of their prejudiced situation, so that what they
learn from life is seldom any new point of view, but merely how to fill in the old
one with more detail.
In these three types of children, we encounter the three typical
accentuations of the feeling of inferiority. They all weaken the social contact,
and tend to isolate the individual in an ever-narrowing sphere of interest.
Unsocial types take on very deceptive appearances at times. I once called to see
an old lady I knew, who was well known for benevolent actions, and found her
crying while an old man, also in tears, stood before her. “What is the matter?” I
asked. “Look at this poor old man,” she sobbed. “He has five starving children,
and is to be turned out of his house if he doesn’t pay the ten shillings he owes,
and I have only five to give him!” “Don’t cry,” I replied, “Let me add to your
generous gift a little gift of five shillings.” She thanked me effusively, saying she
had always known me to be a good man. Now I knew that this old lady was not
only very rich, but also that she had no real social interest. She consorted only
with her own relatives, and even with them in a very dominating spirit. Her
charitable action did not contradict her character; her pity and sadness over this
poor man gave her the kind of feeling of superiority she lived for. It is of no use
to judge an isolated demonstration of feeling apart from the whole style of life.

For a psychological understanding, we must perceive the goal toward which all
the feelings lead.
Boy With Obsessive Guilt Feelings
I have already called attention to the use of guilty feeling in building up a
neurotic and imaginary superiority. One of the clearest examples in my
experience was the case of a boy, the second child in the family, whose father
and elder brother were both notable for honesty of character. As usual with
second children, this boy’s striving was largely concentrated on the effort to
surpass his elder brother. At the age of seven, he lied to his teacher, pretending
that a piece of work on which his brother had helped him was all his own. This
gave him a feeling of guilt which he concealed for three years, after which he
went to the teacher and confessed that he had lied. The teacher refused to take
the matter seriously, but only laughed, so the boy went and unburdened himself
to his father with great emotion and sadness. Gratified by what he took to be a
profound love of truth, the father consoled and praised his son. But the boy’s
depression did not vanish with this paternal absolution. He continued to think,
with a neurotic compulsion, that he was a liar. The high moral atmosphere of the
home, and the feeling that he was worse than his brother, both in school work
and in popularity, had combined to set him striving for excellence in the supreme
family virtue. He was secretly dedicated to proving, even by the life-long
expiation of a trifling transgression, that his integrity was greater than anyone’s.
The boy’s neurosis developed. He acquired other selfreproaches, for not
being entirely honest in work, and for masturbation. These behaviors became
most acute just before an examination. By amassing difficulties in this way, he
felt excused for not surpassing his brother. He planned a course of technical
training after leaving the university, but by that time his compulsion neurosis
had increased so much that most of his time was employed in prayer to God to
forgive him, of course, putting work out of the question. He was admitted to an
asylum, where they supposed him incurable, but his condition improved and he
left the asylum, asking to be re-admitted if he had a relapse. At this point, he
changed his occupation and began to study the history of art. Before sitting for
an examination in this subject, however, he put it beyond the bounds of
possibility with a piece of extraordinary behavior. He went to church on a
special festival day, when the building was crowded, and prostrated himself
publicly, crying out that he was the greatest of sinners.
In this striking achievement of a central position in a large public assembly,
we can detect the same pattern of ambition he had in childhood. To be the
greatest penitent among all the worshippers in a church is the same kind of
distinction as to have the softest conscience for a lie in a family of supreme

honesty. It is better than the best. He made another exhibition of himself when
he returned to the asylum, by coming to lunch one day entirely naked. He was a
well-built man and quite equal to the rest of his family in bodily appearance.
This patient’s escape from work and examinations was because of fear that
he would not shine in these normal situations. The guilty feeling, especially
intensified when required, must be regarded as an intentional exclusion of
activities in which he had no confidence of success. He also had a tendency to
score a cheap success of notoriety in keeping with his general aim, which
prompted him to appear naked at the meal and to engage in other eccentricities
of behavior.
The task of the physician is to enable such a patient to realize what he is
doing, and to transfer his egocentric interest to social life and useful activity.
This is an art, in which the Individual Psychologist must train himself by
practice and collaboration, for science and the knowledge of principles alone
will never enable him to win the complete confidence which is required. In the
case I have just described, for example, I had to recognize correctly, in the first
quarter of an hour of the patient’s visit, the kind of superiority for which this
style of life was designed. If I had failed to do so, I would certainly have
provoked prompt resistance. Step by step, I had to induce his correct statement
of his difficulties in childhood, to make him reveal, with less and less reluctance,
his deep feelings of worthlessness compared with his brother. Then, it was easier
for him to admit to himself how he impressed his father with his honesty and
how he had maneuvered himself into limelight positions.
The method of Individual Psychology, because it requires the admission
and correction of mistakes still dear to the patient, involves the utmost art and
craft of the practitioner. We are far from denying that other schools of psychiatry
have their successes in dealing with neuroses, but in our experience they do so
less by their methods than when they happen to give the patient a good human
relationship with the physician, or above all to give him encouragement. A
quack sometimes improves a person’s attitude toward life to a considerable
extent; so also may a visit to Lourdes. But we remain convinced that the cure of
all mental disorder lies in the simpler, if more laborious process of making the
patient understand his own mistakes.
As we have already seen, the style of life of most of our patients can be
traced to three typical positions of inferiority in childhood. Certain mistakes of
adaptation prevent the establishment of a normal style of life, and appear even
before the child faces his first social problems beyond the home. One of these
mistakes of childhood is a refusal to accept the sexual role, in which case a boy
grows up like a girl, or vice versa.

Such errors are very common, and indeed nearly everyone shows some
slight tendencies toward them. Perhaps every man has something in either body
or behavior which we feel to be feminine, and women often have masculine
traits of a physical character without a corresponding masculinity of mind. More
often, however, the wrong sexuality is in the mind and not the body.
The sex glands, it is true, have an extensive influence on the body. But they
have a very limited power to determine the individual’s conception of
superiority. This individual goal of supremacy is chiefly responsible for a
person’s confusion about his true sexual function. When we deal with the mental
symptoms of inverted sexuality, we must remember this and not blame too much
on the glands. It is probably equally true that the mental striving affects the
glands themselves in the long run. We must first see how the patient relates his
ideas of sexuality to his goal.
Woman 26: Who Wanted to be a Man
The goal of superiority is usually identified with the masculine role because
of the privileges, both real and imaginary, with which our present civilization
has invested the male. A girl’s feeling of inferiority may be markedly increased
when she realizes that she is a female, and a boy’s also when he doubts his
maleness. Both compensate with an exaggeration of what they imagine to be
masculine behavior. This form of compensation, which may have the most
varied and intricate consequences according to circumstances, is what I have
called the masculine protest. Its chief symptom both in mind and in outward
conduct is a needlessly domineering attitude toward the opposite sex. It is
noticeably connected with a very ambitious style of life, with a goal of super-
man or of an excessively pampered woman. The behavior is overexaggerated,
which may be veiled in favorable situations, but is revealed clearly in times of
defeat. The masculine protest is indicated to a certain degree in some of the
cases I have cited, but I will give a more typical instance.
A neurotic, twenty-six-year old woman who came to consult me, had lost
her mother at six, after which she lived with an indulgent father until she was
thirteen. Her earliest memory was: “I hated to play with dolls.” This was a sign
of her unwillingness to develop in a normal manner; she preferred to play with
toy railway-trains. She wanted to be wild in conduct, and played only with boys,
like a typical tomboy. If she did play with girls, she pulled their hair and
annoyed them in other ways. To my question, “What do you think about men
and women?” she replied, “Women are always scheming; men are
straightforward.” This is a still more definite sign of a will toward masculine
development.
In parenthesis, I would never forbid a girl to play with trains, climb trees, or

play any boys’ games, but I am fully convinced that much trouble would be
saved in the later life of children if they were brought up from the first with
knowledge and preparation for their correct sexual role. This training is
impossible, of course, in an atmosphere charged with suggestions of feminine
disability and masculine privilege, as we so often find. All those who depreciate
women as a sex incur inevitable punishment, because they develop an attitude
which contradicts truth and reality.
I asked my patient to tell me about her feelings toward men and women.
She said that when she was thirteen, she laughed when she heard that people fell
in love. She knew nothing of love until her twentieth year. Combined with her
vigorous athleticism, this refusal to acknowledge love confirmed the ostrich-like
flight from her sexual role; she wanted to laugh love out of the question and
deny her femininity by excelling in athletics. I expected to find difficulty in
menstruation, often experienced by girls who have a grudge against their
feminine nature, giving them great pain and tendencies toward anger, but this
was not the case with her. We would have expected her to show signs of anger at
the age of thirteen when her father married again, but she did not. She scorned to
do anything so womanly, but said she was glad her father was married so that
she could be free. However, trouble with her father began from that time, and
she fought in the home, saying that she wanted to be free to leave home and
become a social worker. She wanted to conquer her father by means of financial
independence. Her desire to be a social worker was colored by the thought of
ruling over her children.
We are familiar, of course, with the desire that patients often express not to
take any money from their families. When a patient tells me he does not intend
to take any more money from his family, I often say, “Better take it. It will be
cheaper for them in the end.”
This patient had many men friends, but was never in love. It is usual for
boys and girls to fall in love about twelve or thirteen, and not uncommon when
they are five or six. An individual who reaches the age of twenty-three without
any such experience is not prepared for it. Love is a necessary lifetask for which
an early preparation is needed, and training for love is an integral part of our
education for life. Both normal love and all its deviations such as homosexuality
are a matter of training and education. 
At the age of twenty-three, this girl had a feeling she thought was love; she liked
the man better than she had ever liked anyone before, and the affair led to
intercourse. This sexual relationship was part of her striving for independence,
expressing her opposition to her father, and her determination to be manlike. The
man’s feelings changed, and he disappeared for a time. Unable to bear this

defeat the girl tried to follow him, with the predictable result in our civilization,
where men are taught to think it beneath their dignity to be wooed, and are afraid
of surrendering easily. The man cooled off more and more, and she saw him at
last with another girl, for which she reproached him. In quarreling with her, the
man told her she was a common girl. After this, he disappeared entirely and
married the other one.
For some time after this incident, my patient kept up only her sporting and
athletic activities with men, and was frightened if they made any other advances;
she ran away when a man friend wanted to kiss her. Later on, she became the
mistress of a second man, but she was unhappy, fought with him constantly, and
would not consent to marry him. The man took a voyage to Africa, thinking it
would be better to absent himself for a while, but her unhappiness continued,
and was now fraught with memories of her first lover. In her continual quarrels
and her return to the image of the married and therefore unattainable lover, we
see her excuse for not marrying. A typical symptom was that sexual relations did
not satisfy her. She had not been prepared for marriage.
This girl associated being a woman with defeat. Thus, if she behaved like a
girl and considered the prospect of marriage, she could not endure it; it was
easier to continue playing at being a boy by keeping up her athletic pursuits. On
the other hand, she felt that marriage was a natural and logical social demand. In
this conflicting situation, she was further discouraged by two great defeats: by
her father, when he ceased to spoil her and married again, and second, by the
desertion of her first lover. To safeguard herself against another defeat, she put
love and marriage at the greatest possible distance. Then, to justify her halt
before this problem and to ensure it, she persuaded herself that it was impossible
for a girl to keep a man’s love. The fundamental difficulty in this case, as in
many others, was the idea that the feminine function is of definitely second-rate
importance, and therefore not really valuable. One of the chief causes of
unhappiness in love and marriage, this mistaken belief is the illusion which
forms the basis of the masculine protest.
Chapter IV Problems in Love and Marriage
At the end of my lectures, I have to reply to questions about love and
marriage. My questioners often seem to have been misled by some psychological
reading into believing that the sexual impulse is the central motive to which
every other activity is related. I have never seen the reason for placing this
unnatural emphasis on one single function of life. Of course, I admit its great,
although varying importance. But the detection of transposed and sublimated
sexual elements in a variety of manifestations is not practically useful, even if it
is possible; our experience is that the sexual components cannot even be

correctly interpreted except in relation to the individual style of life.
The erotic phases are functions of this individual lifestyle, and we can gain
insight into the erotic life, with all its waywardness, hesitation and elusive
subtleties, only so far as we grasp the individual’s style in the prototype. By the
prototype, I mean the original form of an individual’s adaptation to life. The
psychic prototype is a finished creation by the time the child is four years old. It
is the baby in the man or woman, which never grows up any further, but rules
the whole life to its end. It is no wonder that certain religions have worshipped
an infant, for this prototypical being is the greatest power in human life. The
prototype is the constant factor, although we may improve its later
manifestations to an indefinite extent when we come to recognize and
understand it.
This prototype in each individual is the baby Cupid who rules his behavior
as a lover. If the prototype is sociable and interested in others, the personality
into whom it develops will solve all love-problems with loyalty to the partner
and responsibility to society. If the prototype is struggling to attract notice and to
suppress others, its later manifestations will include the use of sexuality toward
the same ends; that person will establish sexual relationships in order to rule. A
prototype formed by attaining superiority in a limited sphere of activity which
excludes the opposite sex will later tend to produce homosexuality or other
deviations. The main outlines of the erotic life are thus strictly preconditioned.
Therefore, we can interpret the various sexual urges by the goal, especially
in its most prototypical form, while the converse is not true. The study of
instincts or urges will never enable us to understand the structure of an
individual psyche; and it is interesting to note that psychologists who endeavor
to explain the mind’s working from such observations instinctively presuppose a
style of life without noticing that they have done so.
From the standpoint of Individual Psychology, love and marriage are the
normal responses to the sexual question, one of the three vital questions of life,
and our task is to understand the special difficulties they present to individuals.
An individual who has been well prepared for social life in childhood will not
have great difficulties in his sexual life. Courage, an optimistic attitude, common
sense, and the feeling of being at home on the earth, will enable him to face
advantages and disadvantages with equal firmness. His goal of superiority will
be identified with ideas of serving humanity and of overcoming its difficulties
with his creative power. Deviations from the norm of sexual expression will be
instinctively excluded as unattractive. His useful goal will arrange all his
emotions and actions so that he approaches love in a feasible form, while
adolescent love-affairs and the experiences of his friends will train him for love

and strengthen his position. The literature of unhappy love and disastrous
marriage (a common source of mischief) will be unable to mislead him; and
even if he has disagreeable experiences with an unsuitable marriage-partner, it
will not corrupt his course of life. His ideals of social life, work, and beauty will
survive ordinary defeats, and the sense of beauty itself will be transferred to the
beauty of adaptation to life.
Those whose social contact is poor, who have lost real interest in the lives
of others, face an entirely different fate. They approach love without the right
preparation, for every love-problem is a social problem in the sense that it is a
question of behavior toward a sexually attractive person, and their unprepared
souls feel as if the difficulty is insurmountable when it comes to marriage, the
most intimately and intensely social of all situations. Such a person has been
educating himself for an isolated life, and does not really want to share life with
someone else, so he tends to shut his partner out from all but a few activities in
which partnership seems necessary or advantageous. He does not perceive
marriage as a complete human relationship. His difficulties are often increased
by having learned about love and marriage from parents who were not happily
united; and he gathers confirmation from his environment and literature. In
popular fiction, the marriage situations are usually portrayed as unhappy;
unhappy love stories are probably in a majority because of the use which readers
make of them.
One of the chief obstacles to marriage lies in the prevailing opinion that the
man is functionally superior, leading men into vain expectations of domination
and making girls rebel against their feminine function; they naturally act a role
of servitude in a “man-made world.” Much suspicion, jealousy, and quarrelling
spring directly from this antagonism, for if an individual feels victimized by love
or marriage, it disturbs every association of life. For instance, if a girl feels that
the feminine a position is worse or lower than the masculine, she will enter into
some sort of competition with the man in her striving to show superiority. If
either partner is looking for a weaker mate with the expectation of dominating,
disappointment is certain. It appears to be an immutable law of love and
marriage that it can succeed only where the attitude is one of giving. When an
individual’s attitude toward love and marriage is hesitant, halting, or expectant,
it indicates a general unpreparedness for social life, and we may safely infer a
tendency to exclude a large part of the potential of life. In such cases the
individual will always justify his actions, but his real purpose appears in the
result, which is that love and marriage are indefinitely postponed. In this goal of
evasion or exclusion, the means taken are interesting. They include all the
neurotic symptoms which are more or less connected with sexual functions. The

individual is like a stammerer in the sexual sphere. Ejaculatio praecox, lack of
sexual interest and satisfaction, vaginismus and frigidity, are all signs of a
determination to exclude actions which the individual claims he is willing to
perform.
Normally, of course, the sexual objective is in harmony with the life-goal,
is indeed one aspect of it, and as soon as approach to this objective becomes
possible, it produces the appropriate thoughts and feelings, excluding all
contradictions and conflicting tasks. But in the case of the neurotic, thoughts and
feelings are produced which belong to other duties or functions of life; irrelevant
considerations are admitted which inhibit, obstruct, or pervert normal conduct
along the sexual line. The impotence or other sexual disability thus produced is
dictated by a neurotic goal of superiority and a mistaken style of life.
Investigation always reveals a fixed intention to receive without giving, with a
lack of social feeling, courage and optimistic activity.
We can find other ways of excluding sexual partnership, of course, besides
functional disability. Exclusion is often contrived by an exaggerated and
unpractical ideal of marriage, and sometimes by a desire to mate with someone
obviously ineligible, much older, incurably diseased, or below the age of
consent. When the patient has postponed marriage for a long period, perhaps
attributing the indecision to polygamous tendencies, investigation will often
disclose the understructure of a perversion, which must not be mistaken for the
motive, but recognized as a coordinate of the hesitant attitude.
Man 23: Dominating Through Drinking
The efforts to exclude love and marriage, either before or after the contract,
are modeled on the prototypical or infantile pattern of adaptation, as shown in
the marriage-history of a young man who was twenty-three when he first came
to see me, without occupation and without friends. A year earlier, he had married
a girl with whom he had relations for two years. His attitude toward her was one
of continual jealousy, advice, and criticism. The girl appeared to be very docile
while she was hoping to be married, and the man enjoyed a sense of superiority
through her behavior and in the knowledge that the marriage would antagonize
his mother. After marriage, however, his wife was not so obedient, and he
occasionally showed high temper. He behaved as he had behaved in childhood to
his mother and his elder sister when they failed to gratify his wishes. Then he
had screamed, run away from lessons, broken toys, torn his clothes, and in every
possible way assailed his mother by attacks upon himself or his own toys. Now,
after scenes with his wife, he drank heavily and come home intoxicated.
This man was a spoiled child, who lost his father at the age of two years,
and was pampered by his mother. He became the tyrant of the family, as children

in such a position are likely to do, and from eight years old to thirteen he
suffered from fainting-fits.
The connection between fainting and anger may in certain cases have an
organic basis. I have found a type of patient who loses consciousness in a rage,
and suspect some peculiarities in the bloodcirculation of the brain. In such cases
it is possible that an epileptic fit occurs in varying degrees, petit mal, for
example. If an outlet presents itself, the fits may stop, and as it happened, this
patient was not obliged to repress his rages.
In accordance with the view of Individual Psychology, we can predict the
repetition of this childhood behavior and expect the patient to take the same
direction in any vital conflict with others, to hurt them by damaging himself. As
such behavior breeds callousness in the environment, the resentment and injury
are correspondingly increased. In this case, when drunkenness ceased to punish
the wife sufficiently, the man attempted suicide after a quarrel with her. He hurt
himself severely and recovered very slowly. The inheritance of a large fortune
from his father had lessened the patient’s necessity for self-control. He could
never keep a position in his occupation, a failure which he justified by
complaining of terrible working conditions.
This case clearly illustrates the inability of a pampered child to seize upon
the best means to become a conqueror. It also confirms the insufficiency of
treating such conditions as drunkenness without recognition of the psychic
prototype, which can assimilate any change of conditions to its individual kind
of striving. It is not interest in drink, but in himself and his own superiority that
misleads such a patient toward the useless side of life. The object of treatment
must be to increase the social interest in whatever way possible.
His Wife Who Takes Morphine
The use of love and marriage as a means of domination is, of course,
intolerable to the marriage partner, so this man’s wife gradually lost all interest
in him. He obtained a divorce and married again twice. He took as his third wife
a divorced woman who had attempted suicide during her first marriage, when
she was found to have been unfaithful to her first husband because of his
neglecting her. Her mother had been very critical and cold to her, failing in both
of the two maternal function; she had predictably turned to the kinder father, and
he had spoiled her. This woman seemed to be of a gentle disposition, but it did
not stand the test of unfavorable situations. At school she had constantly made
trouble in the class. She had only one friend, and was not sociable.
Her second husband was a youngest child, lefthanded, and with a
clumsiness which drew the constant derision of his elder brothers. However, he
was ambitious and anxious to outshine the brothers, who in childhood had

surpassed him because of his handicap, and this stimulated him to the acquisition
of wealth; he became rich and highly esteemed. Fear of defeat and escape from
derision made up his prototype, so that he liked and sought isolation. Women
who flattered him enticed him into his first two marriages. The second appeared
when he had lost a great part of his fortune, which to him stood for superiority
over his brothers. This woman tried to console him with morphine, which he
continued to take after she died.
The third wife, described above, married him with a determination to save
him from the drug habit, and her first efforts revealed her inability to do so. Like
the spoiled child she was, she was infuriated at her lack of power over him, and
began taking morphine herself in order to punish him. She had the idea that he
would reform himself if he saw the terrible consequences of his action; but as
nothing of the kind happened, both continued to abuse the drug, and soon each
one noticed that the other was looking about for another partner.
This couple tried several morphine cures without success, which is not
surprising when we review the complex of motives at work. One was the man’s
childish goal of superiority, to escape derision or disrespect. Another lay in his
attitude toward his business worries, from which he found not only partial relief
in morphine, but also a subjectively valid excuse. He could blame his diminished
success on the morphine, without which, he could believe, he would have
triumphed over everything. He sometimes spoke of the habit in both ways, as a
relief and as an excuse, without understanding the connection or the
contradiction between them. To recognize the connection would have been to
relate these manifestations to his style of life, to understand his exaggerated
demand for esteem, in which case he might have chosen better means to attain it.
His polygamous tendencies and his exclusion of friends showed a lack of social
adjustment; and he could not possibly have been cured by taking away the
morphine. The whole personality needed to be changed by the recognition of its
prototype. In lighter cases, a patient with varied symptoms may lose them before
he or the doctor grasp their coherence. When this happens, it is either because of
a favorable change in the patient’s situation or because the doctor, by
encouragement or by chance, renews the patient’s interest in others.
The wife was far from being cured of the drug. Feeling in danger of losing
her second husband, she gave up attempts to cure him. Indifferent to the
criticism of others, and courting the displeasure of her mother, she increased her
own doses of morphine to the most dangerous excesses. This was a repetition of
her conduct in her first marriage where she was neglected. This drug habit was a
kind of suicide. Because she was a youngest child and the father’s favorite, both
her desire for conquest and her feeling of inadequacy were intense; she lived

according to the neurotic formula: “All or nothing.” In these cases, when the
hope of gaining all begins to fade, nothing is left; and this must be expressed by
bad habits, suicide, or insanity. The feeling that suicide gives mastery over life
and death is the supreme expression of the goal of superiority on the useless side
of life. But we must note, of course, her father and husband began to watch the
patient with apprehension. Everybody became more tender toward her, giving
her a sense of augmented power and importance.
Such are the underlying difficulties which obstruct so many attempts to
cure drunkenness, drug-habits, and suicidal tendencies. There is a method for
everything in life; and to solve any problem we must find the right one. For
instance, we have two ways of trying to pass through a doorway only five feet
high. One of them is to walk erect, and the other is to bend one’s back. If I try
the first method, I not only bump my head on the lintel, but I also have to fall
back on the second method after all. I call this the law of the low doorway.
Nothing compels me to stoop, but if I do not realize the relationship between my
height and the aperture, I cannot possibly pass through it. We stand in an equally
definite relationship to the critical personal problems of life. If we do not realize
the fact and adapt our method accordingly, we collide with reality.
Every child confronts reality, and finds his method of coping, more or less
successfully, in his prototype. These individual responses to reality are so
wonderfully varied that the ancient poets and fablewriters compared them with
species of animals such as the hare, the tortoise, the ant, and the grasshopper.
Prototypes are indeed like animal souls, each moving toward its own goal, in its
own interest, and in its own characteristic manner.
The tension between the child and his environment, which is never entirely
absent, is not exactly calculable, for besides the many possibilities of variation in
the family constellation, each child has his individual sensitivity and an original
responsiveness. Thus, against a fairly typical position of inferiority, different
children will erect most diverse concrete goals of superiority. For example,
many children are at a similar disadvantage through weak muscles and poor
eyesight, but they may compensate in directions which could lead them to be
acrobats or artists or toward a hundred other developments, according to the
originality of their reaction, the degree of their courage, and their social feeling.
Moreover, the defects for which they have to compensate contain many subtle,
individual differences.
For this reason a child who has deviated from a normal line of life cannot
be re-educated by normal methods. The method must be specially adapted
because the child with an abnormal endowment or development will feel
suppressed in perfectly normal situations. A child with stomach trouble, for

example, may fail to gain weight, and develop poorly; and if the circumstances
are not carefully adapted, the usual consequences will ensue: a pessimistic and
hostile attitude, perhaps with pugnacity and irritability. Such a child is liable to
acquire an envious disposition by comparing himself with others. He may show
an abnormal interest in eating and food, and his tendency to collect and hoard
things may develop in later life into a concentration on moneymaking. We often
find troubles in early nutrition in families which produce successful money-
makers. As a rule, when a child displays exaggerated consciousness of his
stomach and a tendency to anxiety, we should do something about it, for it is a
common beginning of neurosis. He feels diminished and loses interest in others,
which bode ill for the child’s future.
Children with stomach troubles are a familiar source of concern to parents
and physicians, but the difficulties are due far more to imperfect methods of
child-rearing than to the constitutional deficiency. This is the case with other
physical disabilities; the better we understand their connection with the general
line of life, the better the methods we can devise. We cannot claim we have
found the universally perfect method, but the continued search for correct
methods according to the principles of Individual Psychology certainly enables
us to avoid many mistakes.
Mistress With Headaches and Palpitations
The following case exemplifies the dominance of the prototypical attitude
in love and marriage. As a girl, the patient was the second child of the family,
very weak, very pretty, spoiled by her mother and illused by a drunken father.
She lost the mother’s favoritism at the age of three when a baby sister was born,
and protested by becoming truculent and high-tempered. She was supposed to
inherit bad temper from her father, and some psychologists would uphold this
mistaken opinion, but any child might follow this line of development in such an
unfavorable turn of circumstances. Indeed, from the attitudes of aggressive,
disobedient, or domineering children, we are often able to guess correctly at
some salient feature of the home environment, such as displacement by a
younger child.
This girl became an actress and had many love affairs, which culminated in
her becoming the mistress of an elderly man. Such an obvious exploitation of
advantage indicates deep feelings of insecurity and cowardice. This relationship,
however, brought her trouble; her mother reproached her, and although the man
loved her, he cold not get a divorce. During this time, her younger sister became
engaged.
In the face of this competition, she began to suffer from headaches and
palpitations, and became very irritable toward the man. Her neurotic impatience

was the cause of her coming to consult me. In a certain type, we find that severe
tensions of anger regularly produce headaches. The emotion accumulates, so to
speak, during a period when the patient shows no symptoms. The emotional
tension may actually result in circulatory changes producing attacks of
trigeminal neuralgia, migraine and epileptiform seizures. The well known
respiratory spasms and sensations of choking induced by violent rage illustrate
such circulatory disturbance.
In those cases of trigeminal neuralgia with no organic basis, I have already
emphasized (1910) the importance of psychological factors. These may, of
course, act through vascular disturbances induced by emotion, and the frequent
repetition of such interferences with the blood supply may in the end cause
organic damage to the tissues of the nervous system.
The tendency to anger is related to excessive ambition both of which
originate in a competitive striving to escape from a sense of being overcome.
They occur in antisocial natures, who feel uncertain of attaining their goal by
patient striving, and often try to escape to the useless side with an outburst of
temper. Children use such explosions to conquer by terrifying, or at least to feel
superior; and in a similar way, they use the consequences, their headaches. The
scientific world did not know the neurotic origin of headaches when I first spoke
of it in 1910, but it must have been well known in antiquity. Horace, in an ode to
Maecenas, wrote of those ambitious people who do not want to alter themselves,
but merely to change others; and he refers to their headaches and sleeplessness.
To return to the case: the girl’s condition was the result of a neurotic, but
effective method of striving to hasten her marriage. The married man was
greatly worried by her continuous headaches, and tried to get a divorce, but he
was not very courageous and made slow progress against the opposition to it.
The girl then broke with him and wanted to marry another man; but she soon
discovered he was too uncultured, so she returned to her former lover. He (the
married man), then came to see me about my patient, saying that he would hurry
and divorce and marry her.
Treatment of the immediate illness was easy; in fact, it would have cleared
up without me, for the girl was powerful enough to succeed with the help of her
headaches. Her goal was to force the man to get a divorce quickly; it was the
goal of her childhood not to be surpassed by her younger sister, and as soon as
the divorce proceedings began, the headaches disappeared.
I explained to her the connection between her headaches and her
competitive attitude toward her sister. She felt incapable of attaining her goal of
superiority by normal means, for she was one of those children whose interest
has become focused on themselves, and who tremble for fear they will not

succeed. She admitted that she cared only for herself and did not like the man
she was about to marry.
Her palpitations were because she had twice been pregnant and both times
had resorted to abortion, when she justified herself to the doctor by saying that
her heart was too weak for her to bear children. It was true that her heart was
irritated by tense situations and suppressed anger, but she used this symptom
increasingly and exaggerated it to justify her intention never to have children.
Self-absorbed women generally show their lack of human and social interest by
an unwillingness to have children; but sometimes, of course, they desire children
for reasons of ambition or for fear of being considered inferior.
A dream of this patient is worth recording. She dreamed that she was well
dressed and held a naked baby in her arms. She said to the baby, which was of a
brown and jolly complexion, “I cannot take care of you; I must give you up.”
The baby answered, “Yes, you are right.” Then she began crying in her dream,
and a man passed her, but she turned her head to avoid being seen. The man,
however, wished to see her and looked at her.
By the nakedness of the baby, she meant that she was too poor to have
children. Her sister was to be married to a rich man, whereas she had merely
enough money for her own clothes, none to spare for a child. The baby’s brown
complexion meant that she could have a healthy child, but the dream-child
reassured her, by agreeing with her, that everyone could see it was impossible
for her to have children. The patient said at this time that she felt perfectly well,
but suffered form palpitations of the heart night and morning, which showed she
was clinging to the idea that her weak heart excused her from having children.
She was too egotistical and much too eager to stay in the center of the stage of
life to entertain the prospect of children; moreover, she saw the child as a
potential rival because the tragedy of her infantile life was one of rivalry with
her baby sister. The man who passed by her in the dream must have been me,
and her turning away was a sign that she did not wish to be entirely open with
me. She was afraid that I would blame her, and as she knew I wished to develop
her social feeling, she thought I would want her to have a child.
The decision whether a woman should or should not have a child should
rest entirely with the woman; such at least is my personal belief. I cannot see the
use of forcing a child on a woman who is without social interest or love for
children, for she is almost certain to bring it up badly. In such cases I prefer to
adjust the woman socially, and then, she may wish to have a baby without
suggestion or pressure from anyone else.
It is, or used to be, the frequent conclusion of Freudian psychologists that
the person who excludes love is repressing his libido, but it is a vast

improvement both in diagnosis and treatment when we relate this exclusion to
the individual’s goal of superiority. If the exclusion of normal possibilities of
mating is very persistent and obstinate, it is a sign that the person is neurotic in
other relationships also, and does not want to see marriage in the obvious light of
social necessity because of a more general exclusion of social behavior. We then
see a hesitating or evasive attitude before the love-problem, or an unnatural
tendency in the love relationship, both of which proceed from a mistake in
understanding the connection between the individual’s prototypical needs and
the possibilities of his situation. A better understanding would produce better
behavior. For individual goals are not unattainable, nor are they attainable in one
way only, but every method of attainment has its own sequence of necessary
obligations. The neurotic pays the price of taking the most difficult, lonely, and
impractical way to the summit of his ambitions, when much easier, better paths
are available. In a sense, the prototype never relinquishes its rule over the
individual’s life, but better ways of fulfilling its law can be found.
We must regard the love task as the most intimate and organically
determined form of social behavior, a view which tends to reveal a range of
mistakes. This view of Individual Psychology may not bless us with an absolute
truth; it may not enable us to foresee the future of a marriage as accurately as we
can calculate the path of a falling stone. But the stone lies in a world of truth,
whereas we live in the realm of human mistakes. Our method enables us to
replace the large mistakes with small ones, justifying our belief that we can often
help others approach their own goals with a method which, if perhaps not
infallible, is better than theirs in social direction. In the world of the psyche, no
principle of individual orientation exists beyond our individual beliefs. The
consequences of these beliefs are great. Big mistakes may produce neuroses, but
little mistakes make a nearly normal person.
Chapter V Neurotic Style of Life and Psychotherapy
Because it is natural for an individual to express himself with his whole
body, we can often learn more by watching a person’s movements--how he
walks, sits, smiles or fidgets--than by listening to what he says. We may go
further, and apply this principle to the evaluation of symptoms. Vomiting, for
example, commonly indicates that the person who vomits does not wish to agree.
It represents an attack on someone, or the rejection of an approach. Fainting may
also be the effective rejection of a situation in which a person feels entirely
powerless.
How could I cure a stutterer if I believed stuttering to be caused by some
subtle and unknown organic deficiencies? I have plenty of evidence that the
stutterer does not want to join with others, and he can generally talk quite well

when he is alone; he may even be able to read or recite excellently. Therefore, I
can interpret his stammer only as the expression of his attitude toward others.
However, the belief, common in America, that stuttering is caused by
training lefthanded children to use the right hand has some merit, although this is
merely because wrong educational methods are used, which give the child an
antisocial bias in reaction to unsympathetic criticism. A mechanical and
competitive method of teaching makes no proper allowance for the fact that the
lefthanded child has more actual difficulty in adapting itself, and the child
retaliates with an impediment which worries or irritates his teachers. We can
find no physical reason why children should not be taught to use the right hand.
Since we live in a right-handed culture, lefthandedness may sometimes be felt as
if it were an inferiority in later periods of life. In many technical and commercial
positions and even in social life, lefthandedness may be a noticeable disability or
hindrance. But the training of these people for a right-handed world should be
done with the correct method, for they are a large minority whose rights should
be protected. In early life the lefthanded child certainly has greater difficulties,
for often the peculiarity is not recognized, and the child is blamed for
clumsiness. Such a child connects his imperfect dexterity with all other
difficulties at home and at school, and suffers from depression which focuses his
interest too much on himself. Thus lefthanded children often acquire the feeling
that the world is a dangerous place, and become more vulnerable to neurosis
than others.
I believe about thirty-five per cent of all people are lefthanded, and most of
them do not know it. There are several ways of detecting the lefthanded: the best
known and simplest is to ask the person in question to clasp his hands together;
the lefthanded subject will instinctively do this so that the left thumb is over the
right thumb. The eyebrow on the left side is frequently higher in a lefthanded
person, and the whole symmetry of the body more developed on the left side.
Even in the cradle, we can see when a baby tends to use the left side of the body
more than the right. The adaptation to right-handedness is a rather severe test for
these children. Generally, when I see very bad handwriting, I know it is that of a
lefthanded person whose courage is below par. On the other hand, if I see
excellent handwriting I know it is also from a lefthanded person, but one who
has successfully grappled with his difficulties. The lefthanded who develop their
right hands tend to some artistic or craftsmanlike talents. We find many
lefthanded painters who paint equally well with either hand.
Few people realize that lefthanded children often have considerable
difficulty in learning to read because they spell in reverse from right to left; a
mistake they can correct if it is properly explained to them3.

Imperfections in the sense-organs limit the means which a child has of
sharing in the life of others. They impose necessary differences of behavior
which may be felt as a burden if we do not use wise measures of encouragement.
Children with imperfect sight walk cautiously because they are conscious of
danger in movement. They are more interested in seeing because it is difficult
for them, and if they compensate well, they will become visual types. Poor
hearing and handicaps in movement have corresponding compensations.
Gustow Freytag, for example, was very short-sighted and did not wear
glasses. Not being able to see much, his attention was focused on imagining
what his environment was like, and his great quality as a writer was the high
development of his imagination. Goethe, Schiller, Milton, and many other fine
poets were afflicted with poor sight, and also many of the greatest painters. A
child with perfectly normal sight is not likely to concentrate his attention on the
phenomena of visibility, but takes them for granted. We must never assume,
however, that defective visual powers will be necessarily compensated with
talent or brilliance, or indeed in any socially useful way. An individual will
compensate well only if he has courage or a favorable situation. Then we may
count on a special development, either relative to the same sense function, or to
another, such as hearing. If the child lacks courage or his situation is
unfavorable, he will compensate negatively, i.e. he will not want to see anything.
3 These and other facts are collected and discussed by Dr. Alice Friedman
in an article published in the International Journal of Individual Psychology, 5th
year: published by S. Herzl, Leipzig, 1927.
Those whose eyes are normal sometimes develop interests which depend on
visual powers, but not unless they have at some time been confronted with the
necessity of seeing. No advance is ever made without the consciousness of a
hindrance. The thing which appears to be a deterrent acts as the incentive
whenever we find a courageous struggle for success. I have already referred to
the aural difficulties of Beethoven, Smetana, Dvorak, and other musicians.
Our civilization is not only a right-handed but also a masculine one, so the
striving for superiority tends to elaborate an over-masculine attitude. Several
great philosophers have remarked on this, as Kant did when he said, “No man
ever wants to be a woman.” I do not entirely agree with this, for I have known
cases in which men wished to be women. A bow-legged man, for instance, told
me he wished he were a woman with skirts to cover his unshapely legs, and
some spoiled boys would like to be women in order to be indulged.
I would never oppose women for taking their place in the world on an equal
footing with men, but I have seen that it is better to bring up boys and girls from

the earliest age to be reconciled with their respective social roles. When a girl
believes that she may change into a boy, it is because the female role has not
been presented to her as fundamentally equal to the male. She rebels against
what she feels to be a prospect of permanent inferiority. The Freudians have
interpreted this fact as the socalled “castration complex,” because girls
frequently have the fantasy that the male organs have been surgically removed
from them; but this is to mistake the effect for the cause. Almost every girl
wishes at times to be a boy, even when she says that she prefers being a woman,
because the masculine position appears to be safer. She shows that she has
weighed the advantages and disadvantages of both. In Herder’s collection of
songs of brides, we cannot help being struck by the sadness of all the songs,
showing the girl’s apprehension that she will not be appreciated or esteemed in
marriage. In the crisis between girlhood and womanhood, she fears the loss of
virginity as if it were the loss of potential or dignity. This feeling accounts for
various manifestations in women, such as a suspicious attitude, desire to escape
from love and marriage, vaginismus, shyness before pregnancy, and also
perversions.
Girls often want to dress as boys, play like boys, and even be called by
boys’ names. I was once walking with a five-year-old girl, and she led me to a
store with boys’ clothing displayed in the window. She asked me to buy her a
boy’s suit. I resorted to artfulness and said, yes, I would buy it for her if she
wanted it, but no boy would want to wear a girl’s dress. She was silent for a
while and then pointed to a boy’s overcoat and said, “Please, won’t you at least
buy me that coat.”
In such a child, we may infer that at the age of two or three she had felt
some uncertainty about the unchangeable nature of the sexual role, and this
uncertainty had influenced the formation of the psychic prototype. If a girl is
stimulated to imitate boys by her environment or her education, it will increase
her difficulties later when she has to face the problems of life. Girls should be
educated, not as if for a lower function, but with a view and a sense of their
special social responsibilities and possibilities. Without this preparation, girls are
likely to show the need of it later, especially in adolescence, when they first
encounter a little freedom and independence; then they often like to exaggerate
masculine ways and manners, and especially to imitate the bad ones, such as
drinking and sexual liberties. At the present time, the masculine protest is
rampant and widely displayed by women of all ages, who smoke, wear short
skirts and short hair, doing everything possible to approximate masculine
behavior.
Boy 15: Believed He Was a Prophet

A boy of fifteen was brought to me from a sanatorium, after being treated
by many physicians for making unaccountable motions with his hands, contorted
facial expressions and abnormalities of speech; he often screamed without any
apparent reason. His symptoms resembled schizophrenia, but eventually he told
me his secret. “I know my behavior is rubbish,” he said, “but I believe I am a
prophet. No one must know my secret.” In a few days I was able to cure him. He
did not wish to associate with others, and he was isolating himself by his
extraordinary behavior. He had a younger sister, always a difficult position for
an older boy. Although his school record was a good one--in fact, he was the
best pupil in the school--his determination to play a unique part in life had made
him universally disliked. His flight into the world of unreality, where alone he
could feel a sufficient degree of superiority, was caused only by cowardice.
Finally it had become necessary for him to speak a different language from the
others, and to regard all his schoolmates together as one victorious and foreign
nation, for they had teased and beaten him. Meanwhile at home, he felt more and
more that his sister was advancing, so that for the second time he would lose his
superiority, and this upset him altogether. He had no courage to tell his parents
that he felt suppressed, and at school he escaped into fantasy. In his dream-
world, therefore, he made himself a prophet. The singular contortions and
grimaces he had begun to use were modeled on gestures he had originally
invented to attract his parents’ attention.
He was able to take an optimistic line with me, because he felt able to
reveal to me alone the secret of his greatness. On the basis of this mutual
confidence, he could discuss and reconsider his relationships with others, and
with the help of my explanation and encouragement, he recovered the natural
desire to adapt himself to life. I have had similar cases, in which spoiled children
have suffered greatly from the cruelty of their comrades.
Man 40: Clairvoyant and Speechless
Another case in which neurosis involved a prophetic role was that of a
merchant, forty years old, who came to me for help because he found himself
unable to speak to people. In social surroundings he was overcome by a tension
like stage-fright; he trembled, was abashed, and felt a sensation of choking. He
had married a widow twelve years his senior, who spoiled him very much as his
mother had done before. With her and with a few intimate friends, as well as
with his customers, he could converse without any difficulty, but his behavior
could not stand the test of any wider circle of society.
I could not find the clue to this strange situation until the man mentioned
that he had prophetic dreams. Then I suspected at once that his goal of
superiority was to be a prophet, in a privileged and unique relationship with

God. I cautiously hinted at this idea to him, beginning with a “perhaps,” and he
at once replied, “All my friends know that I am a clairvoyant, and so does my
wife. Many cases have proved it.” This, of course, was the cause of his
difficulty. If he spoke freely in society, he would be in danger of betraying some
error in his knowledge, which might ruin his fame as a clairvoyant. In the
tension of facing this possibility of defeat he choked, and his clairvoyance was
thus defended by a mysterious speechlessness.
Principles of Psychotherapy
In the first interviews with a patient, we have to make sure whether the case
is really one of neurosis. My own practice, after hearing the patient’s complaints,
is to proceed in one of two ways. If I suspect no real organic difficulty, I may
temporarily exclude that aspect of the case from consideration, and proceed to
investigate the circumstances and style of life. On the other hand, if organic
disturbance is evident, I consider whether the complaint and suffering are greater
than the illness itself would justify, i.e., whether organic and psychic illness are
combined. I have often found more pain than the illness warrants, for instance,
and also unaccountable excitement accompanying an injurious illness, which
may increase the course of the fever. In organic illness, the appetite also varies
according to the general outlook, and a serious illness may be prolonged or even
fatally influenced if the patient turns pessimistic or becomes psychically
lethargic.
In these cases the most urgent need is to find out whether the patient faces a
problem he feels unable to solve. Hardly ever, of course, can we get at this
directly. If possible, I discuss the course of the patient’s life with him from
earliest childhood, noting especially the incidents or phases which reveal or
conceal the most painful sense of weakness and impotence; and at the same time
I keep myself alert to the signs of organic inferiority. Wherever we can surely
detect a disposition to hesitate, halt, or escape, we also have a clue to the present
position. When the illness proves to be both organic and psychic, the treatment
must proceed along both lines at the same time. If the disturbance is dominantly
or entirely of a psychic nature, I explain to the patient what I have discovered
from the first conversation, but in such a way that it cannot be discouraging, and
taking the greatest care not to tell the patient anything he is not yet able to
understand.
To verify my findings, I check one indication against another, eliciting
information of various kinds. I ask, for instance, “What would you do if I cured
you immediately?” a question which I expect will draw a reference to some
present problem not hitherto discussed. I ask for the patient’s earliest
remembrance to get a hint of the dominant interest in life. I try to understand

what is happening by noting what activities, of a kind normally expected, the
patient is excluding. At the same time, I am careful to ask myself if I would have
been of the same type as I think I have before me, if I were in the same
circumstances and following the same style of life. As soon as I feel I have
grasped his circumstances, I inquire whether the patient’s thoughts, feelings,
actions, and characteristics are all working in the same direction, toward the
exclusion or at least the postponement of the present problem. The accumulated
experiences of Individual Psychology justify us in looking for this unity in the
lifeplan, and a wide knowledge of the literature and working tradition of
Individual Psychology are of great value in diagnosis, as they help us identify
the typical neurotic factors, such as the lack of social interest, failure in courage
and selfconfidence, and rejection of common sense. We can thus more easily
comprehend the style of life; and if we always check and verify each impression
with others, we will not be misled into mere generalizations.
The discussion invariably reveals an accented “ if.” “I would marry if”; “I
would resume my work if”; or “I would sit for my examination if”; and so on.
The neurotic collects some more or less plausible reasons to justify his escape
from the challenge of life, but he does not realize what he is doing. The patient
must be led very carefully, and the psychologist’s duty is to train his patient with
simple and direct explanation.
The psychotherapist must lose all thought of himself and all sensitiveness
about his position of dominance, and must never demand anything of the patient.
His is a belated assumption of the maternal function, and he must work with a
corresponding devotion to the patient’s needs. What the Freudians call
transference (as far as we can discuss it apart from sexual implications) is merely
social feeling. The patient’s social feeling, always present in some degree, finds
its best possible expression in the relationship with the psychologist. The
socalled “resistance” is merely lack of courage to return to the useful side of life
which causes the patient to put up a defense against treatment, for fear that his
relationship with the psychologist might force him into some useful activity in
which he will be defeated. For this reason we must never force a patient, but
guide him very gently toward his easiest approach to usefulness. If we apply
force, he is certain to escape. My own practice, also, is never to advise marriage
or casual sexual relationships. I find it invariably leads to bad results. A person
who is told that he should marry or seek sexual experience is quite likely to
develop impotence. The first rule in treatment is to win the patient; the second is
for the psychologist never to worry about his own success; if he does so, he
forfeits it.
The elimination of all constraint and the freest possible relationship are the

indispensable conditions between patient and physician. A cure depends on their
unity in understanding the patient’s goal which has been hitherto a heavily-
guarded secret. I have already alluded to this necessity for the truth underlying
the individual lifestyle in reference to the treatment of drunkenness, morphine
use, and similar habits. Merely to take away the poison and say some
encouraging words is useless. The patient must realize why he took to drink.
Insufficient also would be his recognition of the general principles of Individual
Psychology, that those who turn inebriate have lost social courage and interest,
or succumbed to fear of an imminent defeat. It is easy for the physician to say,
and even for the patient to believe, that he turned to drink because of a sense of
inferiority which originated in childhood, but nothing will come out of the mere
phraseology. The physician must grasp the special structure and development of
that individual life with such accuracy, and express it with such lucidity, that the
patient knows he is plainly understood and recognizes his own mistake. When
patients or practitioners come to me and say: “We have explained everything,”
or “We thoroughly understand, and yet we cannot succeed,” I consider their
statements ridiculous. If I take on such a case of failure, I find that neither
physician nor patient have understood the matter nor explained anything.
Sometimes the patient has felt inferior and suppressed by the physician, and
resisted all true explanation. Ocassionally the tables have been turned and the
patient has been treating the doctor! Often, an inexperienced practitioner teaches
the patient the theories of Individual Psychology, in such phrases as, “You lack
social courage, you are not interested in others, you feel inferior,” and so forth,
which may be worse than useless. A real explanation must be so clear that the
patient knows and feels his own experience in it instantly.
Man 32: Escape Through Drinking
I treated a case of drunkenness in a man thirty-two years of age, very
intelligent, welleducated and perfectly healthy, who had regular bouts of
drinking at intervals of four weeks. He had had many treatments and remedies,
including injections of the extracts of various glands. He had spent months in the
lock-up, but nothing had changed his habits.
The man was very shy, trembled, and smoked cigarettes incessantly. This
behavior confirmed the impression I had formed at the first glance, that he felt
me as a superior and an enemy; and he clung to his cigarette in order not to be
submerged by his feeling of comparative worthlessness. In answer to my
questions, he said he had no friends and did not go into society, had no
occupation, and was not in love. He preferred to remain alone, and if he was
urged to join in any social gathering, he became highly excited. He lived
extravagantly at the expense of his parents, paying the highest prices for more or

less useless things whenever he chose to do so. We can guess his answer to the
sexual problem: It was masturbation, which is the style of sexual life adapted to
confirm isolation and avoid love and marriage.
Such a way of living usually originates in the prototypical attitude of a
pampered child, who feels obliged to keep out of the firingline of life because he
is not prepared for it. This man made his escape by being a drunkard. When he
faced the problems of friendship, work, and love, unsupported by others, he
experienced strained situations and tense attitudes, so that uncontrollable bouts
of drunkenness were an appropriate solution of his problem on the useless side
of life.
The usual tensions of every day were not severe enough to drive him to
drink, and he was able to use his sober intervals to display good intentions of
giving up the habit altogether. He did not strive to make his environment
hopeless, as the fighting type of child often does, but was able to continue in his
own line of error by means of these intervals of remorse and repentance, which
always induced others to give him another chance and hope that “this time really
was the last.” The drunkenness would begin sometimes when he was expected to
go into society, and sometimes when actually in company with others or at a
party. It appeared with a demand of duty, or if he met a girl who regarded him as
a possible husband; when he was short of money and his parents did not wire a
remittance to him quickly enough, he also resorted immediately to drink. He was
partly conscious of the use he made of his indulgence, but he never understood
its general purpose as an escape, nor that he was ready to compromise himself
and make himself impossible.
His evident aim was to be relieved of every responsibility and be supported
for his own sake alone. Self-centered and wholly lacking in social adjustment, he
had nevertheless attained a position of superiority by the elimination of defeat.
He had no defeat in society for he did not enter it; no defeat in work, for he had
no occupation; no defeat in love-he avoided it. Subjectively, he triumphed over
life, lived it upon his own terms entirely; but objectively, of course, the terms he
obtained were almost the worst possible.
He proved to have been a spoiled child, who wanted to face every situation
by leaning on parental support. He was an only boy among three sisters. He was
carefully educated and succeeded at school because the parents persuaded the
teachers to pamper him. When he grew out of his sheltered years, life looked
impossible to him, so he made his escape. This patient’s father used to drink, and
he knew from an early age how this habit worried his mother, occupying her
thoughts with the father. One day before a school examination, he got drunk for
the first time. His mother was very worried, believing this was a hereditary

defect in his disposition, and took greater care of him in the hope of curing him.
Not to lose this success, the patient continued to drink.
His earliest memory referred to a time when his parents were away, and he
was left to the care of his grandmother. He did not feel well during this period.
Once, when his grandmother criticized him, he packed up some of his
belongings and ran away, and the grandmother had to follow him. He was four
years old at the time, and this recollection indicates his prototypical attitude to
life. Whenever he did not feel indulged, he escaped into drunkenness. All
neurotic persons who have developed from a pampered prototype expect to be
appreciated before they do anything of social value instead of after having done
it, thus expecting the natural course of things to be reversed in their own favor.
This patient had to be trained to feel at home in the wider environment of
the world, and encouraged until he could recognize its real and necessary
demands. As I have said before, this involves the assumption by the psychologist
of the two maternal functions: first, winning the patient’s trust as a fellow-man,
and then, directing this new confidence toward other people and toward the
advantages and disadvantages of real life. His mother had failed in the second
function, so it had transferred to me.
In the beginning of the treatment, he might possibly have hurt himself or
others with a more desperate escape into intoxication than ever, so steps had to
be taken to watch him. No rule can be given how best to do this, but whatever is
done must be arranged with the agreement of the patient. Otherwise, the patient
would fight the physician in the same way that he fought the parents, by
exploiting his own weakness: the drunkenness. If it is necessary to keep him
under supervision against his will--in an asylum, for instance--let someone else
place him there. The physician must in no way force him, then he will not be
hindered by the patient’s antagonism.
In relation to nature as a whole, man is in an inferior position, obliging him
to develop on the side of strategy and trickery. In our overintellectualized
civilization especially, practically everyone is wonderfully adept at the use of his
own individual tricks. The really important differences of conduct are not those
of individual cleverness, but of usefulness or uselessness. By useful, I mean in
the interests of mankind generally. The most sensible estimate of the value of
any activity is its helpfulness to all mankind, present and future, a criterion that
applies not only to what serves the immediate preservation of life, but also to
higher activities such as religion, science, and art. While we cannot always
decide what is strictly worthwhile from this point of view, we know when we are
guided by the impulse to act usefully, and the better a person’s social
adjustment, the nearer he approaches accurate perception of usefulness. A person

on the path of self-isolation and withdrawal may perhaps get to know or acquire
valuable potential, but even then society does not benefit by these new
possibilities until they are realized through the socially directed activity of
himself or others.
Whether a given line of life is really due to a social or an asocial impulse is
shown by contact with reality. A life may develop remarkably well or ill,
perhaps at a late stage, and people are astonished by it, and try to explain it by
chance, by inherited tendencies, or by destiny, when it is really due to the
inherent social or antisocial feeling in the goal of the individual. And the asocial
tendencies and mistakes which we can trace in the early life of a child can also
be seen in the behavior of a whole family or in certain national attitudes. The
only way we can hope to avoid these mistakes is by learning to increase our
social feeling, which alone can save us from worthless and injurious activities.
It is almost impossible to exaggerate the value of an increase in social
feeling. The mind improves, for intelligence is a communal function. The feeling
of worth and value is heightened, giving courage and an optimistic view, and we
gain a sense of acquiescence in the common advantages and drawbacks of our
lot. The individual feels at home in life and feels his existence to be valuable just
so far as he is useful to others and overcomes common instead of private feelings
of inferiority. Not only our ethical nature, but the right attitude in aesthetics, the
best understanding of the beautiful and the ugly will always be founded on the
truest social feeling.
While the child is embedded in the family group, it is not easy to be sure
whether he is developing social feeling and useful interest. This appears with
certainty only when he encounters his first new situation, generally the arrival of
a baby brother or sister, or the entrance into kindergarten. In one of these
situations, the child either passes or fails in his first examination in fitness for
life. A child who refuses to go to school, does not pay attention when he is there,
works badly or will not associate with his schoolfellows, shows the inadequacy
of his preparation. If allowed to develop such a plan of life, he will probably be
unable to take his place in society.
Neurosis invariably gives relief to the subject, not in the light of objectivity
and common sense of course, but according to his own private logic; it secures
some triumph or at least it allays the fear of defeat. Thus neurosis is the weapon
of the coward, and the weapon most used by the weak. We cannot ignore the
heavily-veiled aggressive or vindictive element in most neuroses.
Suicidal Medical Student
I had a case of a medical student who wanted to commit suicide, an
undersized man, who consequently wanted to be tall. He was greatly spoiled by

his mother, who was the wife of a physician, a tyrannical husband with whom
she was not happy. One day the cook came into the room screaming and crying
out that the father had assaulted her sexually. From this time, the mother became
depressed and cried continually. The boy could not understand her behavior, and
wanted me to explain it to him. He had already asked his mother how she could
be so much depressed by the unfaithfulness of a husband for whom she neither
had nor professed any affection; but she interrupted his question by screaming,
“You cannot possibly understand this!” The student said, in answer to my
inquiry whether the father’s behavior was as brutal or rough as before, that on
the contrary he was very quiet, calm, and considerate.
“Do you think?” I then asked, “that your mother will give up her only
means of taming this tyrant? She pays the price with her depression, but she
feels that she is the conqueror. You are doing something very similar. You used
to be your mother’s favorite, but now you are alone in a foreign city, deprived of
the attentions of your mother, who is busy taming your father. You are failing in
your work at the university, and are not prepared to be independent, so you wish
to impress your mother with your suicidal impulses just as your mother
impresses your father with her depression. You have been trained, as pampered
children often are, to succeed by a display of weakness.”
In the investigation of a neurotic style of life, we must suspect an opponent,
and note who suffers most because of the patient’s condition. Usually this is a
member of the family, and sometimes a person of the other sex, though in some
cases the illness is an attack on society as a whole. Neurosis contains this
element of concealed accusation, where the patient feels as though he were
deprived of his right--i.e., of the center of attention--and wants to fix the
responsibility and blame on someone. By such hidden vengeance and accusation,
by excluding social activity while fighting against people and rules, the problem-
child and the neurotic find some relief from their dissatisfaction. In some cases
the revenge-motive is fairly obvious, as it was with a neurotic woman I treated
whose marriage was entirely unhappy, and yet she would not divorce her
husband, preferring to remain as a continual accusation against him. However,
we must remember that neurotics generally, like perverts, drunkards, and
morphine-addicts, have not entirely denied their social feeling, which still keeps
them from crime and suicide.
Chapter VI Neurotic Use of Emotion 
Man 50: Depressed When All is Well
A curious case of depression I once treated clearly illustrates how sadness
may be used to heighten the feeling of superiority. A man of fifty said he felt
perfectly healthy except when he was in a notably comfortable situation. When

he was at a concert or theater with his family, however, a fit of melancholy
would descend upon him; in such depression, he always remembered an intimate
friend who had died when he was twenty-five. This friend had been his rival, not
only in business but also as a suitor for the hand of his wife—an unsuccessful
rival, however, for by the time he contracted his fatal illness, my patient already
had the advantage over him both in love and in business.
Success had been his lot, both before and after the friend’s death; he was
the favorite of his parents, unsurpassed by brothers and sisters, and prosperous in
the world. On the other hand, his wife was an ambitious character who strove to
solve every domestic problem by a personal triumph or conquest, moral or
otherwise; between two such persons, the struggle was naturally continuous and
severe. The wife sometimes gained the upper hand very cleverly, not by
quarreling or dominating in any way, but by becoming nervous in
disadvantageous situations, and conquering him by her painful condition. She
never expressed her excessive jealousies, but sought to shackle him as required
by her fits of anxiety. Thus, successful as he was in all but one relationship of
life, the man felt uncertain of having reached his goal of superiority, and his
excessive ambition demanded compensation.
I know that many psychologists would seek a “guilt complex” to explain
this depression. They would investigate the patient’s childhood to find an early
desire to kill someone, probably the father. This patient, however, had been the
favorite of his father. He had no reason to have desired his death because he had
always been able to manage him in his own interest. Such a mistaken search for
a “guilt complex” might also lead a psychologist to think that the patient had
secretly wished to murder his friend and rival, and that after having triumphed
over him and having had the death wish granted by fate, he remained still
unsatisfied. If that were so, the guilt complex might be developed by the striving
of the patient to see himself in a stronger light. He would want to express his
good feeling and liking for his former rival with the highest sincerity and
honesty; at the same time, he would be shaken by the memory of his rival’s fatal
end and the thoughts which he had been unable to entirely dismiss before it
happened. This would amount to the complicated state of selfaccusation and
repentance at the same time, which we call a guilt complex, a superiority-
striving on the useless side of life. As I have already observed, it means: “I have
reached the summit of error,” or “My virtue is so lofty that this slight stain on it
is killing me.”
However, in this case I found no indications of the kind, and the man’s
appraisal of honesty as a virtue was not abnormally developed. His depressions
were an attempt to show himself superior to his wife. To be depressed in

favorable situations called attention to his good fortune much more than if he
had allowed himself to enjoy them. Everyone was surprised at his depression,
and he constantly asked himself, “You happy person, why are you depressed
when you have everything you want?” The unmanageable wife was the one
sorrow in his comfortable life, for which he compensated by remembering his
victory in the most difficult phase of his history: when he outstripped his friend
and won the woman from him. Loyalty forbade him to rejoice in the memory of
his dead friend, but he could nevertheless feed upon this ancient triumph by
being depressed in the box of the theater. The more melancholy he was and the
brighter the occasion, the more he was able to think of his past conquest and
elevate the consciousness of his status. Deeper inquiries confirmed my
conclusion. His friend had died from paralysis after syphilis, a disease which
they had both contracted at the same time. My patient was cured, however; now,
surrounded by his healthy wife and six children, he could not recall, together
with the triumph over his friend, his conquest of the disease.
These were his consolations. In his marriage this man did not feel superior;
but at least his wife was the woman his friend had desired, and she had chosen
him instead. By contemplating his friend’s disaster in a discreet gloom, he
heightened the sense of victory. Consolation of this nature is on the useless side,
however, and tends, as we see, toward illness.
Man 36: Impotence and Polygamous Desires
A man of thirty-six came to me for advice about sexual impotence after
having tried various treatments. He was a self-made man, in a good career
position, and physically healthy. Not very welleducated himself, he had a love
relationship with a welleducated girl. He was a second child between two girls,
and had lost both parents at the age of five. He remembered that although his
family had been poor, he had been a spoiled child, pretty and quiet, to whom the
neighbors liked to give presents, and he exploited their generosity, behaving like
a beggar. One of his earliest remembrances was of walking the streets on
Christmas Eve and looking into the shop windows at the Christmas trees
destined for others. In the orphanage, to which he was transferred at the age of
five, he was strictly treated, but his habitual docility and the striving nature he
possessed as a second child enabled him to surpass others. His servility stood
him in good stead, for he was promoted to be the principal servant of the
institution. In this occupation, he sometimes had to wait a long time at an old,
deserted railway station in the country; and at these times, when only the
humming of the telegraph wires relieved the dead stillness of the night, he felt
utterly isolated and alone in a friendless world. He preserved strong memories of
this experience.

In later life, he often complained of buzzing in the ears, for which no
audiologist could find the cause. It proved, however, to be quite coherent with
his style of life. When he felt isolated, which happened frequently, the memory
of the humming wires returned with all the liveliness of a hallucination. After
this had been explained to him, and he had been a little more socially reconciled
and encouraged to marry his sweetheart, the humming ceased.
It is quite usual for children who are brought up in an orphanage to make
the strongest efforts to hide the fact, as though it were a disgrace. This man
justified his concealment by asserting that many orphans do not succeed in later
life. He regarded failure in life as the inexorable fate of orphans, which gave him
his tense, striving attitude in business. For the same reason, he halted before the
problem of love and marriage, and his neurotic impotence resulted from this
profound hesitation.
This man’s style of life was to be a beggar. In business, however (as
previously in the orphanage), begging had paved the way to domination. In
business he enjoyed nothing more than a begging attitude on the part of his
subordinates. He was a beggar only until he could be a conqueror; then he
played the second role as heartily as the first. I see no need to drag in the idea of
“ambivalent” characteristics, as some psychologists would do immediately.
Rightly understood, this entire mental process, working from below to above,
expressing an inferiority, but compensating with a superiority is not ambivalence
but a dynamic unity. Only if we do not understand it as a whole do we see it as
two contradictory and warring entities. In his business, we find the male with a
“superiority complex”; but if he were to lose his position and have to start again,
he would promptly go back to the expression of inferiority and make capital out
of it. In his love-problem he was, for the time being, following the submissive
line of action, begging for love, but trying to reach domination. His sweetheart
liked him and wanted to marry him, so she responded to his hesitancy by taking
up more and more of a begging attitude toward him! He was well on the way, in
fact, toward getting the upper hand with her and frequently did so in minor
matters.
He still had not overcome his hesitant attitude, but after having had his style
of life explained to him and having been encouraged, his state of mind improved
and his impotence disappeared. He then set up a second resistance which was
that every woman attracted him and these polygamous desires were an escape
from marriage. At this time he dreamed that he was lying on a couch in my
room, became sexually excited, and had an emission.
My consulting room has no couch. My patients sit, stand, or move about as
they please; but the couch in this dream was in the room of a doctor who had

formerly treated him for a few months. This dream extracted a confession which
he had never made before. He believed that both the other doctor and I belonged
to a secret society, the object of which was to cure patients such as himself by
providing sexual intercourse for them. For this reason he had been trying to find
out which of my women patients would be chosen for him. The fact that he
missed the couch in my room was like an accusation against me. I was not the
right doctor. He had come to me begging, expecting me to settle his difficulties,
take over his responsibilities, and assist him in escaping from marriage. My
collusion in stopping his marriage was supposed to include being his procurer, a
fantasy to which his fright, impotence, and polygamous tendencies all
contributed. Failing that, he would solve his sexual problem with emissions, as
others might resort to masturbation or perversion.
He married, but it was difficult to prevent him from developing a tyrannical
attitude toward his conciliatory wife.
Man 50: Beggar as King
Another case of the begging attitude was brought to me by a man fifty years
old, the youngest of a poor family. Indulged by his mother and the neighbors
because of an apparent weakness, he had developed a timid manner early in life.
He tried to lean on his mother and appeal to the sympathies of the weak,
especially in difficult times when he exhibited great depression and cried until
help came. We have already seen how both children and adults use crying. This
man’s earliest memory was that he had fallen down and hurt himself. The choice
of this incident to treasure in the memory out of all possible recollections is
explained only by his desire to impress himself with the danger of life. His
technique of life was to perfect himself in the role of a beggar, to attract support,
consolation, and favor by calling attention to his infirmities. He made every
incident into a matter for tears.
As a child, the man had been slow in learning to talk, and his mother, as
always happens in such cases, had to attend all the more carefully to him to find
out what he wanted. In this way, he was able to feel like a little king. As Lessing
said, “The real beggar is the only real king.” He became a master of the begging
art, expressing his inferiority in the power of his plight over others. “How can I
make the poor, weak child a king?” was the problem of life as he saw it, and he
answered it by elaborating his own individual and essentially mendicant style.
This is one way of living, and so early an apprentice becomes a master of
its technique. He will not change it, unless the cost becomes clearly too great,
when he may be brought to see that his childish method is inadequate for present
problems. Otherwise, change is impossible for him because all his life he has
ascribed every success to the begging art and every failure to lack of proficiency

in it. A goal like this is not predictable from inheritance or environmental
stimuli, for the child’s individual conception of the future is the dominant causal
factor, and this patient’s conception was such that whenever he wanted to attain
superiority he had to make a mistake or get himself into a mess of some kind.
All his feelings were appropriately directed toward the goal of thus getting
something for nothing.
After a few days’ treatment, this man was very impressed by what I told
him; he sent me a pamphlet he had written some years before. It was entitled
“An Association of Beggars.”

Habitual criticism, anger, and envy indicate useless striving for superiority;
they are motions toward the suppression of others, either in reality or fantasy, to
be supreme. Useful criticism of a constructive tendency is always in some
comprehensible relationship with social feeling, but where the motive is merely
relative self-evaluation by lowering or degrading others, the tendency is
neurotic. Neurotics often make use of the truth in order to undervalue others, and
it is important, when checking a neurotic criticism, not to overlook the element
of truth in the observation.
Anger usually indicates that the person who is angry feels at a
disadvantage, at least temporarily. Neurotics use` it freely as a weapon to
intimidate those responsible for them. Although occasional anger is an
understandable attitude in certain critical situations, when it is habitual it shows
anxiety, impatience, or feelings of helplessness or suppression. Patients with the
anger habit are often clever in the selection of vulnerable points to attack in
others, and are also great strategists in preparing situations so that they put others
slightly in the wrong before they begin a fight.
Envy is universally an expression of inferiority, though it may sometimes
be a stimulus to useful action. In neurosis, however, envy of another does not go
so far as practical emulation. It stops like a tram before the journey’s end,
leaving the patient irritable and depressed.
In a certain popular music-hall act, the “strong man” comes on and lifts an
enormous weight with care and immense difficulty, and then, during the hearty
applause of the audience, a child comes in and gives away the fraud by carrying
the dummy weight off with one hand. Plenty of neurotics swindle us with such
weights, adept in the art of appearing overburdened. They could really dance
with the load under which they stagger like Atlas bearing the world on his
shoulders. Yet it cannot be denied that neurotics suffer intensely from their
burden. They may be continually tired. They may sometimes perspire freely, and
their symptoms may suggest the possibility of tuberculosis. Every movement is
tiring, and they often suffer from palpitations of the heart. Usually depressed,
they continually demand more zealous care from others, and yet find it
continually insufficient.
Man 53: Agoraphobia – Avoidance of People
I had a case of agoraphobia in a man of fifty-three, who found that he could
not breathe properly when he was with others. He was living with his sister, and
had a son with characteristics like his own. When I investigated the cause of this
man’s unusual concentration of interest on himself, I found he had been
orphaned at ten and he had two elder brothers. When they quarreled, he had his
first attack. This indicates the tendency to meet a difficult situation with a

breakdown. The man was the youngest of a family of eight and educated by his
grandfather. A grandparent is usually a spoiling foster-parent. The patient’s
father and mother had been happily married; the father was superior and the
mother rather cold, so the boy was attracted to his father.
A child’s first good-fellowship in life is always with the mother if she is
present, so that if he inclines more toward the father, we may assume that the
mother does not give the child sufficient attention. She is probably unkind,
otherwise occupied, or more attentive to a younger child. In such circumstances,
the child turns to the father if possible, and in this case the resistance to the
mother was considerable.
People are often unable to correctly remember their earliest situations, but
experience enables us to reconstruct their circumstances from comparatively
slight indications. One man said he could only remember merely three incidents
from early childhood which had deeply impressed his memory. The first of these
occurred at the age of three, when his brother died. He was with his grandfather
on the day of the funeral, when his mother returned from the cemetery,
sorrowful and sobbing, and when the grandfather kissed her, whispering some
words of kindness and consolation, the boy saw that his mother smiled a little.
He was very upset by this, and for long afterward resented his mother’s smile on
the day that her child was buried. A second memory that he had preserved was
of a friendly reproof from his uncle, who had asked him, “Why are you always
so rough toward your mother?” A third remembrance from the same period of
his life related to a quarrel between his parents, after which he turned to his
father, saying, “You were brave, daddy, like a soldier!” He depended greatly on
his father, was pampered by him, and admired him more than his mother,
although he realized his mother’s character was of a better type.
All these memories, which appeared to date from his third or fourth year,
showed his fighting attitude toward his mother. The first and third remembrances
were clearly ruled by his goal, which was to criticize his mother and justify him
in turning toward his father. His reason for turning away from his mother is easy
to guess; he had been too spoiled by her to be able to put up with the younger
brother’s appearance on the scene, that same younger brother who figures in an
apparently innocent manner in the first recollection.
This patient had married at the age of twenty-four, and marriage had
disappointed him because of his wife’s demands. Marriage between two spoiled
children is always unhappy because both retain their expectant attitude and
neither begins to give. This man went through varied experiences and tried
different occupations without success. His wife was not sympathetic, and
complained that she would rather be the mistress of a rich man than the wife of a

poor one, so the union ended in divorce. Although the man was not really poor,
he was stingy toward his wife and she divorced him out of revenge.
After his divorce, he turned misogynistic and developed homosexual
tendencies; he had no actual relationships with men, but felt a desire to embrace
them. This homosexual trend was as usual a kind of cowardliness. Women had
defeated him twice, first his mother and afterward his wife, and now he was
trying to divert his sexuality toward men in order to evade women and further
possibilities of humiliation. To confirm himself in such a tendency, a man can
easily falsify the past by recollecting and magnifying the importance of certain
common experiences which he then interprets as proof of inborn homosexual
tendencies. Thus, this patient remembered that he had been in love with a
schoolmaster, and that in his youth a boy friend had seduced him into mutual
masturbation.
The determining factor in this man’s behavior was that he was a spoiled
child who wanted everything for nothing. His agoraphobia resulted from the fear
of meeting women on the one hand, while on the other hand it was also
dangerous to meet men because of possible erotic inclination toward them. In
this tension of feelings about going outside, he developed stomach and
respiratory troubles. Many nervous people begin to swallow air when they get
into a state of tension, which causes flatulence, stomach trouble, anxiety, and
palpitations, as well as affecting the breathing. When I made him realize that this
was his condition, he asked the usual question: “What shall I do not to swallow
air?” Sometimes I reply: “I can tell you how to mount a horse, but I can’t tell
you how not to mount a horse.” Or sometimes I advise: “If you want to go out,
and feel in conflict about it, swallow some air quickly.” Like other patients, this
man swallowed air even in sleep, but after my advice he began to control himself
and discontinued the habit. Air-swallowing at night and vomiting upon waking
occur in these patients who suffer from stomach trouble and anxiety when they
face a difficulty which must be confronted the following day. The patient in
question began to recuperate when he came to understand that, as a pampered
child, he expected to take continually without giving. He now realized that he
had first stopped his normal sexual life, looking for something easier, and
afterward adopted a fictitious homosexuality in which he also stopped short of
danger, the whole process being an elaborate way of coming to a standstill. The
last obstacle to be removed was his fear of mixing with strangers who did not
care for him, such as the people in the streets. This fear results from the deeper
motive of agoraphobia, which is to exclude all situations in which one is not the
center of attention.
Chapter VII The Family Constellation4

It is a common misconception that children of the same family experience
the same environment. Of course, children in the same home share certain
conditions, but the psychic situation of each child differs because of the order of
their birth.
My classification based on position in the family has been somewhat
misunderstood. The child’s number in the order of births does not influence his
character, but rather the situation into which he is born and the way he interprets
it. Thus, if the eldest child is feebleminded or suppressed, the second child may
acquire a style of life similar to that of an eldest child; and in a large family, if
two are born much later than the rest, and grow up together separated from the
older children, the elder of these may develop like a first child. This dynamic
also sometimes occurs with twins.
Position of the First Child
Having been the only one at the beginning of his life and thus the central
focus, the first child is generally spoiled. He resembles the only child in this
respect, and spoiling is almost inevitable in both cases. The first child, however,
usually suffers an important change of situation, being dethroned when the
second baby is born. Typically unprepared for this change, the firstborn feels he
has lost his position as the center of love and attention. Far from his goal, he
suffers great tension and begins striving to regain favor. He uses all the means
by which he has formerly attracted notice, of course, he would like to be beloved
for his goodness; but good behavior often goes unnoticed when the newcomer
keeps everyone busy. He is then likely to change his tactics and resort to old
activities which previously attracted attention, even if it was unfavorable
attention.
If intelligent, he acts intelligently, but not necessarily in harmony with the
family’s demands. Antagonism, disobedience, attacks on the baby, or even
attempts to play the part of a baby, compel the parents to give him renewed
attention. A spoiled child must have the spotlight on himself, even at the cost of
expressing weakness or imitating a return to babyhood. Thus, under the
influence of the past, he attains his goal in the present by unsuitable means: a
sudden inability to function alone, needing assistance in eating and excretion,
and requiring constant watching by flirting with danger and terrifying the
parents. The appearance of such characteristics as jealousy, envy, or egotism has
an obvious relation to the new circumstances, but he may also indulge in, or
prolong, illnesses such as asthma and whooping cough. The tension in certain
types (depending upon the bodily organization) may produce headache,
migraine, stomach trouble, petit mal, or hysterical spasms. The child may also
impress his parents with the slighter symptoms of a tired appearance and a

general change of behavior for the worse. Naturally, the later the rival baby is
born, the more intelligible and understandable will the methods appear which the
first child uses in his change of behavior. If dethroned very early, the eldest
child’s efforts are largely “instinctive” in character. The style of his striving will
in any case be conditioned by the reaction of others in the environment and his
evaluation of it. For instance, if the dethroned child finds that fighting does not
pay, he may lose hope, become depressed, and score a success by worrying and
frightening the parents. After succeeding with such methods, he will resort to
ever more subtle uses of misfortune to gain this end.
4 Published in the Int. J. Indiv. Psychol., Vol. 3, pages 211-227, 1937. Also
published in The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler, Volume 7, as chapter
25.
An example of the type of adult activity based on the childhood prototype
was shown in the case of a man who became afraid to swallow for fear of
choking. Why did he select this symptom instead of another? The patient had an
immediate social difficulty in the behavior of an intimate friend who attacked
him violently. Both the patient and his wife concluded that he must put up with it
no longer, but he did not feel strong enough to face the struggle. Inquiring about
his childhood, I learned that he had had a similar difficulty with swallowing
before. The eldest child, he had been surpassed by his younger brother, but by
means of difficulty in eating, he had made his father and mother watch over him.
Now faced with a personal defeat in later life and not knowing what to do about
it, he fell back upon his old line of defense, as though it might make someone
watch over him and help him.
Effects of Dethronement
The dethronement of the first child by another may make him turn away
from the mother toward the father, and adopt a critical attitude toward the
mother. Afraid of being “pushed back” all through life, a person of this type
likes to make one step forward and one backward in all his affairs, so that
nothing decisive can happen. He feels justified in fearing that a favorable
situation will change. He will face all three life tasks with a hesitating attitude
and neurotic tendencies. He will feel that problem behavior and symptoms are a
form of help and security. For example, he may approach society with a hostile
attitude; he may constantly change his occupation; and in his sexual life he may
experience failure in functioning, and show promiscuous tendencies; if he falls
in love with one person, he quickly falls in love with another. Skeptical and
indecisive, he becomes a great procrastinator. I met a perfect example of this
type once, and his earliest remembrance was this: “At three years of age I caught
scarlet fever. By mistake my mother gave me carbolic acid for a gargle, and I

nearly died.” He had a younger sister who was the favorite of his mother. Later
in life, this patient developed a curious fantasy of a young girl ruling and
bullying an older one. Sometimes he imagined her riding the old woman like a
horse.
First Child May Keep Position
By virtue of his native endowment and development, or because of the
second child’s inferiority, ugliness, organic handicap, or bad behavior, the eldest
child may be so firmly fixed in his parent’s favor that he cannot be supplanted.
Then, the second child becomes the problem, and the eldest may develop very
well as in the following case.
Of two brothers four years apart, the elder had been strongly attached to the
mother, and when the younger was born the father had been ill for some time.
The mother spent all her time and most of her attention caring for the father.
Trained in friendship and obedience to her, the elder boy tried to help her, and
the younger boy was cared for by a nurse who spoiled him. This situation lasted
for some years, leaving the younger child no reasonable chance to compete with
the elder for the love of the mother. Soon abandoning the useful side of life, he
became wild and disobedient. His behavior became still worse four years later,
when a little sister was born, to whom the mother was able to devote herself
because of the father’s death. Thus, twice excluded from his mother’s attention
and spoiled by the nurse, this second child turned out to be the worst pupil in his
class, while the elder boy was the best. Feeling hopelessly handicapped in
competition with his brother, unloved at home, and reproached at the school
(from which he was finally expelled), this second son could find no goal in life
but to dominate his mother by worrying her. Physically stronger than either his
brother or sister, he tyrannized them. Trifling away his time, at puberty he began
to waste money and incur debts. His honest and well-meaning mother provided a
strict tutor for him who did not, of course, grasp the situation, and dealt with it
superficially by punishments. The boy grew into a man who tried to get rich
quickly and easily. Easy prey to unscrupulous advisers, he followed them into
fruitless enterprises, and not only lost his money but involved his mother in his
dishonorable debts.
All the courage this man ever displayed resulted from his unsatisfied desire
to conquer. He occasionally played an odd game, especially when things went
against him. Now an old woman who earned her living in the family as a head
servant, the nurse still worshipped the second boy and interceded for him in his
numerous scrapes. The unusual sport in which he indulged was to lock her in a
room with him and make her play soldiers, commanding her to march, fall, and
jump up again at his orders; and sometimes he quickened her obedience by

beating her with a stick. Although she screamed and resisted, she obeyed.
This singular sport revealed what he really wanted, the completest
domination in the easiest way. Some writers would describe this as sadistic
conduct, but I demur5 at the use of a word which implies a sexual interest, for I
could discover nothing of the kind in it. In sexual matters the man was
practically normal, except that he changed his partners too frequently and always
chose inferiors. Genuine sadism is a domineering tendency expressed sexually,
owing to the discouragement of the individual in other spheres.
This man ended in very bad circumstances, while the elder brother became
successful and highly respected.
Attitude of Eldest Toward Authority
The eldest child, partly because he often acts as the representative of
parental authority, usually believes strongly in power and the law. The ancient
and persistent custom of primogeniture shows an intuitive perception of this fact.
It is often observable in literature. Thus Theodore Fontane wrote of his
perplexity at his father’s pleasure in hearing that ten thousand Poles had defeated
twenty thousand Russians. His father was a French emigrant who had sided with
the Poles, but to the writer it was inconceivable that the stronger could be
beaten; he felt that the status quo should be preserved and that might must, and
ought to, succeed. This was because Theodore Fontane was a first child. The
lives of scientists, politicians, artists, and others show that the eldest is readier
than most to recognize power, and likes to support it. Even revolutionaries
harbor a conservative tendency, like Robespierre.
5 The contemporary use of “sadism” differs from Adler’s. Today, it does
not necessarily imply sexual interest, but refers primarily to the enjoyment of
inflicting pain on others.
Position of Second Child
Never having had the experience of being the only one, the second child is
in a very different situation. Though at first, he is never the sole center of
attention. From the beginning, life for him is more or less a race; the first child
sets the pace, and the second tries to surpass him. What results from competition
between two such children depends on their courage and selfconfidence. If the
elder becomes discouraged, he will be in a serious situation, especially if the
younger is really strong and outstrips him.
If the second child loses hope of equality, he will try to shine more rather
than be more. That is, if the elder proves too strong for him, the younger will
tend to escape to the useless side of life. In many cases of problem children,
laziness, lying, or stealing begin to pave the way toward neurosis, crime, and

self-destruction.
As a rule, however, the second child is in a better position than the first. His
pacemaker stimulates him to greater effort. Also, the first child often hastens his
dethronement by fighting it with envy, jealousy, and belligerence, which lower
him in parental favor. A brilliant child puts the second child in the worst
situation.
Even when dethroned, however, the elder child does not always suffer
most. I say this in the case of a girl who had been the center of attention and
extremely spoiled until she reached the age of three, when a sister was born.
After the birth of her sister, she became jealous and developed into a problem-
child. With sweet and charming manners, the younger sister grew up the more
beloved of the two. But when this younger sister went to school, she was no
longer spoiled and being unprepared to encounter difficulties, was frightened
and tried to withdraw. To escape defeat both in fact and in appearance, she
adopted a common device among the discouraged, she never finished anything
she started, escaping final judgment, and wasting as much time as possible. Time
is the great enemy of discouraged people because under the pressure of the
requirements of social living, they feel as if time continually persecutes them
with the question, “How will you use me?” Hence their strange efforts to “kill
time” with silly activities. This girl habitually came late and postponed every
action. She did not antagonize anyone, even if reproved, but her charm and
sweetness, maintained as before, did not prevent her from being a greater worry
and burden than her aggressive sister.
When the elder sister became engaged to be married, the younger sister was
desperately unhappy. Though she had won the first stage of the race with her
rival by gentleness and obedience, she had given up in the later stages of school
and social life. Feeling her sister’s marriage as a defeat, her only hope of
regaining ground would be to also marry. However, she lacked enough courage
to choose a suitable partner and automatically sought a second-best. First, she
fell in love with a man suffering seriously from tuberculosis. Can we regard this
action as a step forward? Does it contradict her preestablished custom of leaving
every task unfinished? Not at all. The poor health of her lover and her parents’
natural resistance to the match provided sure causes of delay and frustration. She
preferred an element of impossibility in her choice. Another scarcely eligible
partner appeared later, in a man thirty years older than she was. He was senile,
but did not die as the previous one had, and the marriage took place. However, it
was not a great success for her because the attitude of hopelessness in which she
had trained herself did not allow her any useful activity. It also inhibited her
sexual life, which she considered disgusting, feeling humiliated and soiled by it.

She used her usual methods to avoid love and postpone relations at the
appropriate times. Not quite successful in these evasive maneuvers, however,
she became pregnant, which she regarded as another hopeless state. From that
time on, she not only rejected caresses but also complained that she felt soiled,
and began to wash and clean all day long. She not only washed herself, but
cleaned everything that had been touched by her husband, the maid servant, or
the visitors, including furniture, linen, and shoes. Soon she allowed no one to
touch any of the objects in her room, and lived under the stress of a neurosis, a
washingcompulsion. Thus, she was excused from the solution of her problems,
and attained a lofty goal of superiority, she felt more fastidiously clean than
anyone else.
The neurosis of a “washingcompulsion” vividly expresses the exaggerated
striving for an exalted goal of high distinctiveness. A person who feels that sex
is “dirty” uses illness as a means of avoiding sexual relations. Invariably, it gives
the fantastic compensation of feeling cleaner than everybody else.
However, because he feels life is a race, the second child usually trains
himself more rigorously and, if his courage holds, is well on the way to
overcoming the eldest on his own ground. If he has a little less courage, he will
choose to surpass the eldest in another field, and if still less, he will become
more critical and antagonistic than usual, not in an objective but in a personal
manner. In childhood, this attitude appears in relation to trifles: he will want the
window shut when the elder opens it, turn on the light when the other wants it
extinguished, and be consistently contrary.
The story of Esau and Jacob describes this sibling situation clearly when
Jacob succeeds in usurping the privileges of the eldest. The second child lives in
a condition similar to an engine under a constantly excessive head of steam. A
little boy of four expressed it well when he cried out, weeping, “I am so unhappy
because I can never be as old as my brother.”
Some writers attribute children’s repetition of the psychic behavior of older
siblings and parents to an imitation “instinct” or “identification” of the self with
another; but it is explained better when we see that a child imitates only that
behavior which offers him a successful way of asserting an equality denied to
him on other grounds. Psychic resemblances to the conduct of ancestors or even
of savages do not signify that the pattern of psychic reaction is hereditary, but
rather that individuals use the same means of offense and defense in similar
situations. When we find so much resemblance between all first children, all
second, and all youngest children, we may well ask what part remains for
heredity to play in determining those similarities. Thus, as psychologists we lack
sufficient evidence to accept that the mental development of the individual ought

to repeat the development of the race of mankind in successive stages.
In later life, the second child is rarely able to endure the strict leadership of
others or to accept the idea of “eternal laws.” He will be much more inclined to
believe, rightly or wrongly, that no power in the world is invincible. Beware of
his revolutionary subtleties! I have known many cases in which the second child
used the strangest means to undermine the power of ruling persons or traditions.
Not everybody, certainly not these rebels themselves, would easily agree with
my views of their behavior. For though it is possible to endanger a ruling power
with slander, more insidious ways exist. For example, excessive praise may
idealize and glorify someone until the reality cannot stand up to it, as illustrated
in Mark Anthony’s oration in Julius Caesar. Dostoyevsky also successfully used
these methods, perhaps unconsciously, to undermine the pillars of old Russia.
Those who remember Father Zosima in The Brothers Karamazov, and also recall
that he was a second son, will have little difficulty accepting the influence
played by position in the family.
Of course, the style of life of a second child, like that of the first, may also
appear in a child in a different chronological position, if the situation involves a
similar pattern.
Position of Youngest Child
The baby of the family, the youngest child, has never known the tragedy of
being dispossessed by a younger, the fate shared by most other children. In this
respect, he finds himself in a favored situation and often better educated, as the
economic position of the family generally improves in later years. The older
children frequently join the parents in spoiling the youngest, who thus becomes
too indulged. On the other hand, the youngest may also be too stimulated by his
elders. In the former case of overindulgence, the child will strive throughout life
to be supported by others. In the latter case, the child will instead resemble a
second child, competitively striving to overtake those setting the pace for him,
and in many cases failing to do so. Therefore, he often looks for a field of
activity remote from the other members of the family, revealing a sign of hidden
cowardice. If the family is business-oriented, for instance, the youngest often
inclines to art or poetry; if scientific, he wants to be a salesman. Many of the
most successful men of our time were youngest children, and I am convinced
this is also the case in other ages. In Biblical history, we find a remarkable
number of youngest children among the leading characters, such as David, Saul,
and Joseph. A particularly good example, the story of Joseph illustrates many of
the views we have presented. Because his younger brother, Benjamin, was
seventeen years his junior, he played little part in Joseph’s development.
Joseph’s psychological position, therefore, was that of a youngest child.

Interestingly, Joseph’s brothers fully understood his dreams. More
precisely, they understood the emotion of the dreamer. The purpose of a dream
is not to be understood, but to create a mood and a feeling.
In the fairy tales of all cultures, the youngest child plays the role of a
conqueror. I infer that in earlier times, when both circumstances and men’s
apprehension of them were simpler, it was easier to collect experiences and to
understand the coherent pattern of the life of the latest-born. This traditional
grasp of character survives in folklore, although the actual experiences have
been forgotten.
I found a strange type of spoiled youngest child in the case of a physician
with a “begging” style of life. Difficulties with his mouth had made him fearful
of cancer. Unable to swallow normally for twenty years, he could take only
liquid food. He had recently had a dental plate made for him, which he
continually pushed up and down with his tongue, causing pain and soreness of
the tongue, so that he feared he was developing cancer.
The youngest of a family of three with two older sisters, he had been sickly
and much indulged. At the age of forty, he could eat only alone or with his
sisters. Every approach to society had been difficult for him. He had no friends,
and merely a few associates whom he met weekly in a restaurant. Because he
faced the tasks of life with an attitude of fear and trembling, the presence of
other people created tension which made him unable to swallow food. Living in
a kind of stage fright, he feared not making a sufficiently good impression.
This man responded to the life task of occupation with tolerable
competence, because his parents had been poor and he could not live without
earning, but he suffered exceedingly in his profession and nearly fainted during
his examinations. His ambition as a general practitioner was to obtain a position
with a fixed salary and later, a pension. This great attraction to a safe official
position reveals a feeling of insecurity. People with a deep sense of inadequacy
often aspire to a “safe job.” For years, he surrendered to his symptoms. When he
became older and lost some of his teeth, he decided to have a plate made, which
led to the development of his latest symptom.
When he came to me, the patient was sixty years old and still living in the
care of his two sisters. Both suffered from their advanced years, and this aging
man, spoiled by two unmarried and much older women, faced a new situation.
He feared his sisters would die. Needing to be continually watched over, what
would he do in that case? Unable to find a woman whom he could trust with his
fragile happiness, he had never been in love. How could he believe that anyone
would spoil him as his mother and older sisters had done? It was easy to guess
the form of his sexuality, masturbation, and some petting affairs with girls. But

recently an older woman had wanted to marry him, so he wished to appear more
pleasant and attractive in behavior. The beginning of a struggle seemed
imminent, but his new dental plate came to the rescue. In the nick of time, he
became anxious about contracting cancer of the tongue.
As a doctor, he doubted the reality of this cancer. The many surgeons and
physicians he consulted all tried to dissuade him from belief in it; but he
persisted in his uncertainty, continued to press his tongue against the plate until
it hurt, then consulted another doctor.
Such preoccupations, “overvalued ideas” as Eernicke calls them, are
carefully cherished in a neurosis. The patient shies away from the right objective
by fixing his glances more and more firmly upon a point some distance from a
good, productive course. He does this in order to swerve away from a direction
beginning to be required by logical necessity. The correct solution of his
problem contradicts his style of life, and because the style of life rules (as the
only approach to life he has learned), he has to establish emotions and feelings
which will support his lifestyle and will insure his escape.
In spite of this man being sixty years old, the only logical solution was to
find a trustworthy substitute for his spoiling sisters before their departure. His
distrustful mind could not hope to achieve this possibility; nor could logic dispel
his doubts, because throughout his life he had built up appearance, the dental
plate should have been a help, but he turned it into an insuperable impediment.
In treating this case, it was useless to attack his belief in the cancer. When
he understood the coherence of his behavior, the patient’s symptoms were
greatly alleviated. The next day he told me of a dream: “I was sitting in the
house of a third sister at a birthday celebration of her thirteen-year-old son. I was
entirely healthy, felt no pain, and could swallow anything.” But this dream was
related to an episode in his life which took place fifteen years before. Its
meaning is very obvious: “If only I were fifteen years younger.” Thus, the
lifestyle is maintained.
Difficulties of an Only Child
The only child also has his typical difficulties. Retaining the center of the
stage without effort and generally pampered, he forms a style of life based on
being supported by others and at the same time ruling them. Very often, he
grows up in a sheltered environment. The parents may be fearful people and
afraid to have more children. Sometimes the mother, neurotic before his birth,
does not feel equal to rearing more children, and develops such behavior that
everyone must feel, “It is a blessing that this woman has no more children.”
Birth control may absorb much of the family’s attention, leading to tension and
anxiety for both parents. The care then devoted to the only child never ceases,

and often impresses him with a belief that not being watched or guarded is a
mortal danger. Such children often grow up cautious, and sooner or later may
become successful, gaining the esteem and attention they desire. But if they
confront different conditions where life is difficult for them, the may show
striking insufficiency.
Only children are often sweet and affectionate, and later in life may develop
charming manners in order to appeal to others, because they have trained
themselves this way. Usually closer to the more indulgent parent, generally the
mother, they sometimes develop a hostile attitude toward the other parent.
While the proper upbringing of an only child is not easy, parents can
conceivably understand the problem and solve it correctly. Although we do not
regard the only child’s situation as dangerous, without the best educational
methods, bad results frequently occur which having brothers and sisters would
have avoided.
Case of Homosexual Development6
I now present a case of the development of an only child, a boy attached
entirely to his mother. Although the father contributed materially, he was of no
importance in the family, and obviously without interest in the child. The mother
was a dressmaker who worked at home, and the little boy spent all his time with
her, sitting or playing beside her. He played at sewing, imitating his mother’s
activity, and ultimately became extremely proficient at it, but he never took part
in any boy’s games. The mother left the house each day at five p.m. to deliver
her work, returning punctually at six. During that time, the boy was left with an
older girl cousin and played with sewing materials. Always looking for his
mother’s return, he became interested in timepieces. He could tell the time when
he was merely three years old.
The cousin played games with him in which she was the bridegroom and he
was the bride, and he looked significantly more like a girl than she did. He came
to school unprepared to associate with boys, but he established himself as a
favored exception because others liked his mild, courteous disposition. He began
to approach his goal of superiority by being attractive, especially to boys and
men. At fourteen, he acted the part of a girl in a school play. The audience had
not the slightest doubt that he was a girl; a young fellow began to flirt with him
and he was very pleased to have excited such admiration.
He had worn girlish clothes during his first four years, and until the age of
ten he did not know whether he was a boy or a girl. When he learned his gender,
he began to masturbate, and in his fantasy he soon connected sexual desire with
what he had felt when boys touched or kissed him. To be admired and wooed
became his goal in life; to this end he used all his capacities in such a way that

he might be admired especially by boys. The only girl he had known, his older
cousin was gentle and sweet, but she had played the man’s role in their games
and otherwise had ruled him like his mother. His mother’s overindulgent,
excessive care led to his great feeling of inferiority. Married late at the age of
thirty-eight, she did not wish to have more children by the husband she disliked.
Her anxiety, undoubtedly of earlier origin, and her late marriage indicate a
hesitant attitude toward life. Strict in sexual matters, she wanted her child to be
educated in ignorance of sex.
6 Whereas Adler’s views on the equality of women were ahead of his time,
his criticism of homosexuality here (and elsewhere) reflects the common bias of
his time and place. These opinions, coming out of the early 1900’s in Vienna, do
not represent contemporary Classical Adlerian psychotherapy. While we respect
every individual’s sexual choice, we apply the same psychological criteria to all
relationships, promoting increased cooperation, respect, equality, mutual benefit
and empathy, and working to eliminate domination, subordination, depreciation,
exploitation, or abuse. Adler’s comments have been retained in the text in the
interest of scholarship and historical accuracy.
At the age of sixteen this patient looked and walked like a flirtatious girl,
and soon fell into the snare of homosexuality. In order to comprehend this
development, we must remember that he had had, in a psychological sense, the
education of a girl, and that the difference between the sexes had been made
clear to him much too late in his development. He had experienced his triumphs
in the feminine role, with no certainty of gaining as much by playing a man.
Clearly he saw the open road to his goal of superiority in the imitation of girlish
behavior.
In my experience, boys with this type of upbringing look like girls. The
growth of the organs and probably the glands is partially ruled by the
environment and the child’s attitude toward it; and they adapt to them. Thus, if
early environmental training toward femininity is succeeded by a personal goal
of the same tendency, the wish to be a favored girl will influence not only the
mind, but also the carriage and even the body.
This process clearly illustrates how a homosexual trains himself mentally
for his abnormal attitude toward sex. We do not need to postulate an inborn or
hereditary, organic deviation.
When the boy in question came to me, he had a relationship with another
boy who was the neglected second child of a domineering mother. This other
boy’s striving was to overcome men by his personal charm, which he used
successfully to rule his weak father. When he reached the age of sexual
expression, he was shocked. He had based his notion of women on his

domineering mother, who had neglected him. Although he felt the need to
control, he entertained no hope of ruling women because, in accordance with his
early experience of a strong and aggressive mother, he felt that a woman was too
powerful to control. His only chance to be the victor was in a relationship with
men, so he became homosexual. Consider then the hopeless situation of my
patient! He wanted to conquer by female means, with the charm of a girl, but his
friend wanted to conquer men.
I helped my patient realize that, whatever he thought or felt in this liaison,
his friend considered himself a conquering man-charmer. Therefore, my patient
could not be sure that his was the real conquest, so his homosexuality was
accordingly checked. By this means I was able to break off the relationship, for
he saw that it was stupid to enter into such a fruitless competition. This also
made it easier for him to understand that his abnormality was due to lack of
interest in others, and that his feeling of inadequacy, the result of being
pampered, had led him to measure everything in terms of personal triumph. He
then left me for some months; when he visited me again he had had sexual
relations with a girl, but had tried to play a masochistic role with her. In order to
prove to himself that his original view of the world was correct, he obviously
wished to experience with her the same inferiority that he had felt with his
mother and cousin. This masochistic attitude showed when his goal of
superiority required the girl to do to him what he commanded. He then wished to
complete the act at this point without achieving sexual intercourse, so that the
normal was still excluded.
The great difficulty of changing a homosexual lies not only in his lack of
general social adjustment, but also in the invariable absence of correct training in
the sexual role, which must begin in early childhood. The attitude toward the
other sex is strained in a mistaken direction almost from the beginning of life. In
order to realize this fact, we must note the kind of intelligence, behavior, and
expectations such a case exhibits. Compare normal persons walking in the street
or mixing in society with a homosexual in the same situations. The normal
majority are interested primarily in the opposite sex, the homosexuals only in
their own. The latter evade normal sexuality also in dreams. The patient I have
just described used to dream frequently that he was climbing a mountain by a
serpentine road. The dream expresses his discouraged, circuitous approach to
life. (He moved rather like a snake, bending his head and shoulders at every
step.)
In conclusion, I will summarize some of the most disastrous cases I have
known among only children. A woman asked me to help her and her husband in
the case of their only boy, who tyrannized them terribly. He was then sixteen, a

very good pupil at school, but quarrelsome and insulting. He was especially
combative toward his father, who had been stricter with him than his mother.
Antagonizing both parents, if he could not get what he wanted he attacked,
sometimes wrestling with his father, spitting at him, and using bad language.
Such development is possible with a pampered only child who is trained to give
nothing but to expect everything, until the indulgence can continue no longer. In
such cases, treating the patient in his old environment is difficult, because it
revives too many old recollections which disturb the harmony of the family.
In another case, a boy of eighteen had been accused of murdering his father.
An only spoiled child, he had stopped his education and was wasting, in bad
company, all the money he could extort from his parents. One day when his
father refused to give him money, the boy killed him by hitting him on the head
with a hammer. No one but the lawyer defending him knew that he had killed
another person several months before. Consequently, he felt perfectly sure of
escaping discovery this second time.
In yet another case of criminal development, an only boy was brought up by
a very welleducated woman who wanted him to be a genius. At her death,
another experienced woman continued nurturing him in the same way, until she
became aware of his tyrannical tendencies. Believing sexual repression to be the
cause of his aggressiveness, she had him analyzed. His tyrannical attitude did not
cease, however, so she then wished to be rid of him. But he broke into her house
one night intending to rob her, and strangled her.
The characteristics typical of certain positions in the family can, of course,
be modified by circumstances. Despite the many possibilities of variation,
however, the outlines of these patterns will remain substantially correct. Among
the possibilities, we may include the position of a boy growing up among girls.
If he is older than they are, he develops the same as an elder brother close to a
younger sister. The individual pattern of behavior will reflect differences in age,
in the affection of the parents, and in the preparation for life.
Where a female majority and feminine influence dominate the environment,
a single boy is likely to have a goal of superiority and a style of life directed
toward femininity. This dynamic occurs in various degrees and ways: in a
humble devotion to and worship of women, in an attitude imitating women, in a
tendency toward homosexuality, or in a tyrannical attitude toward women.
People usually avoid educating boys in an overly feminine environment because
such children develop toward one of two extremes: either exaggerated vanity or
aggressiveness. In the story of Achilles, many points reveal that the latter case
was well understood in antiquity.
Importance of Evaluation of Men and Women

We find the same contradictory possibilities in the cases of only girls who
grow up among boys or in an entirely masculine environment. In such
circumstances a girl may, of course, be spoiled with too much attention and
affection, but she may also adopt boys’ attitudes and wish to avoid looking like a
girl. In any case, the result largely depends on how men and women are valued
in the environment. Every environment has a prevailing attitude in regard to this
issue. Therefore, the child will wish to assume the role of a man or a woman in
accordance with the relative value given to men and women in that attitude.
Other views of life prevailing in the family may also influence the pattern
of a child’s behavior, or lead to difficulties, as for example the superstition about
character being inherited, and the belief in fanatical methods of education. Any
exaggerated method of education will probably harm the child, as we can often
trace in the children of teachers, psychologists, doctors, and people engaged in
the administration of laws: policemen, lawyers, officers, and clergymen.
Educational exaggerations surface in the life-histories of many problem children,
delinquents, and neurotics. The influence of both the superstition regarding
heredity and a fanatical mode of training appear in the following case.
A woman came to me with a daughter of nine, both of them in tears and
desperation. The mother told me that the girl had only recently come to live with
her, after spending years with foster parents in the country. Because she had
completed the third grade of her schooling there, she entered the fourth grade in
the city school, but her work became so bad that her teacher had her put back
into the third grade. Soon afterwards her work became still worse, so she was
demoted again and put in the second grade. Thoroughly upset, the mother was
obsessed with the idea that her daughter’s deficiency was inherited from the
father.
From the beginning, I could see that the mother treated the child with
exaggerated educational insistence, which was particularly unfortunate because
the girl had been brought up in a congenial environment and expected still
greater kindness from the mother. But in her eagerness that her child should not
fail the mother was overstrict, keenly disappointing the girl. She developed a
great emotional tension, blocking her progress both at school and at home.
Exhortation, reproaches, criticism, and spanking only intensified the emotion,
with consequent hopelessness on both sides. To confirm my impression, I spoke
with the girl alone about her foster parents. She told me how happy her life with
them had been. Then, bursting into tears, she also told me how she had enjoyed
being with her mother at first.
I had to make the mother understand her mistakes. The girl could not be
expected to put up with such harsh training. Putting myself in her place, I could

perfectly understand her conduct as an intelligent reaction, that is, as a form of
accusation and revenge. In a situation of this type, with less social feeling, a
child may easily become delinquent, neurotic, or even suicidal. But in this case, I
was sure the girl could improve if the mother were convinced of the truth, and
impressed the child with a sufficient change of attitude. Therefore, I explained to
the mother that the belief in inheritance was nothing but a nuisance, after which I
helped her realize what her daughter had reasonably expected when she came to
live with her, and how she must have been disappointed and shaken by such
disciplinary treatment, to the point of utter inability to do what was expected of
her. I wanted the mother to confess to the child that she had been mistaken and
would like to reform her method, so I told her I did not really believe she could
bring herself to do it, but that it was what I would do in the circumstances. She
answered decidedly, “I will do it.” In my presence and with my help, she
explained her mistake to the child. They kissed, embraced, and cried together.
Two weeks later they both visited me, smiling and well satisfied. The mother
brought me a message from the third-grade teacher: “a miracle must have
happened. The girl is the best pupil in the class.”
Chapter VIII Early Recollections7
The discovery of the significance of early recollections is one of the most
important findings of Individual Psychology. It has demonstrated the
purposiveness in the choice of what is remembered longest, though the memory
itself is quite conscious or the recollection is easily elicited upon inquiry.
Correctly understood, these conscious memories give us glimpses of depths just
as profound as those more or less suddenly recalled during treatment.
Of course, we do not believe that all early recollections are accurate records
of actual facts. Many are even imagined; perhaps most are changed to a time
later than that in which the events are supposed to have occurred; but this does
not diminish their significance. What is altered or imagined also expresses the
patient’s goal, and although the effect of fantasy and memory differs, we can
relate both to the total style of life of the individual, and recognize their unity
with his main line of striving toward a goal of superiority.
In recollections from the first four or five years of life, we find primarily
fragments of the prototype of the individual’s lifestyle, or useful hints as to why
his lifeplan was elaborated into its own particular form. Here we may also gather
the surest indications of self-training to overcome the organic difficulties or
deficiencies felt in the early environment. In many cases, the early recollections
reveal signs of the person’s degree of activity, courage, and social feeling.
Because of the great number of spoiled children who seek treatment, we find the
mother rarely absent from the earliest remembrance; indeed, if the lifestyle is

one of a pampered child, the guess that the patient will recall something about
his mother is usually correct. If the mother does not appear in his early
recollections, that may also have a certain significance; it may indicate his
feeling of having been neglected by her. However, he has never understood the
meaning of his early remembrances. In answer to my question, he may simply
say, “I was sitting in a room playing with a toy, and my mother was sitting close
to me.” He regards a recollection as a thing by itself with no significance; he
never thinks of its coherence in the whole structure of his psychic life.
Unfortunately, many psychologists do the same.
7 Published in English in the Int. J. Indiv. Psychol., No. 3, pages 283-287,
1937. Also published in The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler, Volume 7,
as chapter 26.
To estimate its meaning, we have to relate the early pattern of perception to
all we can discover of the individual’s present attitude, until we find how one
clearly mirrors the other. In the example just given, we begin to see this
correlation when we learn that the patient suffers from anxiety when alone. The
interest in being connected with the mother may appear even in the form of
fictitious remembrances, as in the case of the patient who said to me, “You will
not believe me, but I can remember being born, and my mother holding me in
her arms.”
Very often the earliest memory of a spoiled child refers to its dispossession
by the birth of a younger brother or sister. These recollections of feeling
dispossessed vary from slight and innocent reminiscences, such as, “I recollect
when my younger sister was born,” to instances highly indicative of the
particular attitude of the patient. A woman once told me, “I remember having to
watch my younger sister, who was lying on a table. She was restless and threw
off the coverlets. I wanted to adjust them and I pulled them away from her,
whereupon she fell and was hurt.” This woman was forty-five when she came to
me; at school, in marriage, and throughout life she had felt disregarded, just as in
childhood when she had felt dethroned. A similar attitude, even more expressive
of suspicion and mistrust, was expressed by a man who said, “I was going to
market with my mother and little brother. Suddenly it began to rain, and my
mother took me up in her arms, and then remembering that I was the elder, she
put me down and took up my younger brother.” Successful as he was in his life,
this man distrusted everybody, especially women.
A student thirty years of age came to me in trouble because he could not
face his examinations. He was in such a state of strain that he could neither sleep
nor concentrate. The symptoms indicated his lack of preparation and courage,
and his age showed the distance at which he stood from the solution of the

problem of occupation. Because of his lack of social adjustment, he had no
friends and had never fallen in love. He expressed his sexuality in masturbation
and nocturnal emissions. His earliest memory was of lying in a cot, looking at
the wallpaper and curtains. This recollection reflects the isolation of his later life,
and also his interest in visual activity. Astigmatic, he was striving to compensate
for this organic deficiency. We must remember, however, that any strongly
developed function related to a strong degree of social interest may disturb the
harmony of life. For instance, to watch is worthwhile, but when the patient
barricades himself against all other activities and wants merely to gratify his
eyes all day, watching may become a compulsion-neurosis. Some people are
interested primarily in seeing. But few positions merely require an interest in
seeing. Even those positions cannot be found by a person who is socially
maladjusted. As we have seen, this patient had not been a real fellow man to
anyone, so he found no practical use for his peculiar interest.
Earliest remembrances frequently reveal an interest in movement, such as:
traveling, running, motoring, or jumping. This movement is often characteristic
of individuals who encounter difficulties when they are required to work in
sedentary occupations. For example, a man of twenty-five, the oldest son of a
very religious family, was brought to me because of misbehavior. Disobedient,
idle, and deceitful, he had accumulated debts and stolen. His sister, three years
younger, was a familiar type: striving, capable, and welleducated, an easy
winner in the race with him. His misconduct began in his adolescence, which
many psychologists would ascribe to an emotional “flare-up” caused by the
growth of the sexual glands, a theory which might seem all the more plausible in
this case because of premature and mischievous sexual relations, often found in
similar cases. But we ask: Why should the perfectly natural period of puberty
cause a crisis and moral disaster in this case but not in another; not in the sister’s
case, for example? We answer: Because the sister was in a more favorable
position. From the experience of many cases, we know the brother’s situation to
be one of special danger. Furthermore, when we go more deeply into his history,
we find that he wanted to be first in every situation; adolescence did not change
this young man’s style of life. Before that time the boy had gradually been losing
hope of being “first” in a life of social usefulness, and the more hopeless that
direction appeared, the more he wandered into the easier path of useless
compensation.
This young man’s earliest remembrance gives a clear hint of his great
interest in motor activity and movement in general. It was: “I was running round
the whole day in a kiddy car.” After treatment, when he improved, he was taken
back into his father’s office, but he did not like the sedentary routine there. He

finally adapted himself to life as a traveling salesman.
Many first remembrances concern dangerous situations, and they are
usually told by persons with whom the use of fear is an important factor in the
style of life. A married woman once came to ask me why she was terrified
whenever she passed a pharmacy. Some years previously she had spent a long
time in a sanatorium undergoing treatment for tuberculosis, and a few months
before I say her a specialist had pronounced her cured, entirely healthy, and fit to
have children. Shortly after this complete absolution by the doctor, she began to
suffer from her obsession. The connection is obvious. The pharmacy was a
warning reminder of her illness, an employment of the past in order to make the
future seem ominous. She was connecting the possibility of having a child with
danger to her health. Though she and her husband had agreed that they wanted a
child, her behavior clearly showed her secret opposition. Her secret objection
was stronger than any reasonable and common sense logic which said that for
her bearing children was no longer dangerous. As a medical expert, the doctor
could minimize the danger to her health, but he could not remove the symptom
of fear. In this as in many similar cases, we know in advance that the real
reasons for the symptoms are deeply rooted, and can be found only if we
discover the main line of striving in the style of life.
Resistance to having children is seldom based on objective fears of
childbirth or illness. In this case, the woman had been a pampered child who
wanted to be in the center of the stage. Such women do not wish to bring a little
rival onto the scene, so they argue against it with every variety of reason and
unreason. This woman had trained herself perfectly to be on the lookout for
danger, and to perceive opportunities for taking the center of attention. Asked for
her earliest recollections, she said, “I was playing before our little house on the
outskirts of the town, and my mother was terrified when she saw me jumping on
the boards that covered the well.”
A student of philosophy came to consult me about his fear of blushing.
From earliest childhood, he had been teased because he blushed so easily, and
for the past two months this had increased so much that he was afraid to go to a
restaurant, attend lectures, or even leave his room. I found that he was about to
take an examination. Fainthearted, timid, and bashful, whether he was visiting in
society, working, or with a girl, in all situations he suffered from feelings of
tension. Because his blushing had recently worried him more, he began to use it
as a pretext for retreating from life. From childhood, this man had had a strong
antipathy toward his mother, who he felt was partial to his younger brother.
Living in the greatest competition with his brother, he now no longer believed
that he could achieve any success. Here is the earliest remembrance: “When I

was five years old, I went out with my three-year-old brother. My parents were
very excited when they found we had left the house, because there was a lake
nearby, and they were afraid that we had fallen into it. When we returned, I was
slapped.” I understood this to mean that he did not like his home, where he felt
that he was slighted, and my opinion was corroborated when he added, “I was
slapped, but not my brother.” But the discovery that he had been in a dangerous
situation had still impressed him, as reflected in his present behavior, which was
dominated by his guiding idea: not to go out, not to venture too far. Such persons
often feel as though life were a trap.
We can easily imagine this patient’s painful experience in the company of a
girl. We can understand how he put his blushing between himself and women,
thus preventing a relationship with any of them. In this way, he avoided the risk
of losing out to another man. He always feared other men would be preferred to
him, as he felt his mother had preferred his brother.
When correctly understood in relation to the rest of an individual’s life,
early recollections contain the central interests of that person. They give us
valuable hints and clues in finding the direction of a person’s striving. They help
reveal values to be aimed for and dangers to be avoided. They help us see the
kind of world a particular person feels he lives in, and the early ways he found of
dealing with that world. They illuminate the origins of the style of life. The basic
attitudes guiding an individual since childhood and in his present situation are
reflected in those fragments he selects to epitomize his feeling about life, and to
cherish in his memory as reminders. He has preserved these as his early
recollections.
Chapter IX Further Useless Goals of Superiority
The loftiest goals are found in the most pathological cases, the psychoses.
In cases of schizophrenia we often find the desire to be Jesus Christ. In manic-
depressive cases also, in the manic phases, the patient frequently wishes to be
the savior of mankind, while in the depressive phases he often complains of
being the greatest evil on earth. In paranoia the patient not only strives to be the
center of attention, but actually believes he is that already. Individual
Psychology has shown that the goal of superiority can be fixed at such altitudes
only when the individual has, by losing all interest in others, also lost interest in
his own reason and understanding. Moreover the height of the goal now
confronts the individual with such difficulties that common sense has become
useless to him in solving them.
This goal of personal supremacy blocks the approach to reality. The more
reality presents him with real, or even alluring possibilities of action, the greater
the effort a maladjusted person will make to avoid it because his feeling of

supremacy is proportionately increased thereby. The end result and logical
culmination of such a life-line is, of course, total isolation in an asylum.
Perhaps the most audacious goals of superiority are found in cases of
general paralysis, which generally exhibit the most marked loss of social feeling
and mental control. But all cases of Caesarian madness show the same goal of
godlikeness with an absence of social feeling; moreover—and this is consistent
with all our findings—there is always a high degree of cowardice. Similarly,
whenever we find a marked insensibility to the pain of others, or undervaluation
of others’ lives, as with murderers and other criminals, we can trace the
preparation for their development; they do it by deliberately breaking through
the limits of social feeling, impelled by cowardice to seek relief on the useless
side of life. Every murderer is a coward intoxicated with the idea of being a
hero. The true psychology of these tendencies ought to be explained to everyone
because such instruction would do much to prevent “crime waves.” For
criminals derive some incentive from the prevalent superstition that crime is at
least courageous; whereas in truth, even the most audacious crime is deeply
motivated by fear.
The development of a criminal tendency has something in common with the
fascination of useless sports; the desire to break a record is sometimes apparent,
and one of the greatest inducements to crime is the sense of overcoming the law
and the police. This considerable gratification on the useless side can give the
individual a feeling of having beaten the world single-handed. And as according
to statistics, about forty per cent of all punishable crimes pass without detection
of the perpetrator, nearly every criminal has had the experience of committing a
crime without being found out. The chance of “thumbing one’s nose” at the
police is very alluring to a cowardly soul.
The goal of personal superiority invariably magnifies one of the three
questions of life out of all proportion. We find that a person’s ideal of success
becomes unnaturally limited to social notoriety, business success, or sexual
conquest. Thus we see the social careerist fighting and jealous; the business
magnate extending his interests at the expense of all others; and the amorous
intriguer, the would-be Don Juan, collecting his sexual conquests. Each disturbs
the harmony of his life by leaving many necessary demands unsatisfied, and then
tries to compensate with still more frantic striving in his narrowed sphere of
action.
Sadism and Masochism
In the realm of sexual perversion, we find the goal expressed in a purely
fictitious form. This is especially evident in the sadistic type, by which I mean
the type whose will to dominate is connected with sexual irritation. We made a

notable advance in the understanding of the psychic structure of perversion when
we could prove that the symptoms of masochistic cases are also governed by a
personal goal of superiority. In the fantasies of masochists as well as in their
actions, the egotistic tendency has been clearly diagnosed. The masochistic
attitude signifies: “I am not governed by your power of attraction; you must do
what I want you to do.” Although the tendency implied here is more fully
expressed in sadism, the demands of the sadist are obviously harder for him to
enforce than the masochist’s “demand to be bullied.” But we find individuals
who exhibit a mixture of masochistic and sadistic behavior.
I have found that the purpose of most masochistic subjects is to escape love
and marriage because they do not feel strong enough to risk a defeat. They
regard the avoidance of defeat, even through ignominious escape, exactly as if it
were a goal of superiority. By means of their masochistic tendencies, they
exclude all the really eligible members of the other sex. In the case of a man
whom I cured of homosexuality, the patient went so far as to have a masochistic
relationship with a prostitute. By means of homosexuality, he excluded all
women, and in his periods of masochism he excluded all worthwhile women.
Similarly, among girls who indulge in masochistic fantasies, we often note
that the superior goal toward which they strive takes the form of celibacy. They
can imagine love and marriage only as torture, and this fantasy of celibacy is
itself gratification consistent with their masochistic tendencies. In masturbation,
whether physical or mental, a certain consistency is always apparent; it is the
sexual attitude appropriate to the isolated individual. Correctly interpreted, it is
the wish to exclude sexual partnership. In such cases, the patient tends to regard
a partner as the author of his or her humiliation; and this idea, although avoided
in reality, will be expressed in fantasy.
One way of attaining a feeling of superiority is by the irritation of others.
Parents or teachers, husbands or wives, as the case may be, will be subtly
exasperated until they burst into a rage and begin to attack or punish. To many
children, this proof of their power over others is a great satisfaction, and they
often desist when they have produced the desired reaction. Still more antisocial
is the goal of superiority through the injury of another. In its service, every trifle
of evidence against another person will be collected with malicious intent, such
as difference in nationality, standard of living, advancing age in the case of
women, and any unusual features such as red hair or prominent nose or teeth. On
all these disadvantages of another, real or imputed, the neurotic feeling of
inferiority feeds voraciously, as if it could fill its own emptiness by the
contemplation of yet greater vacuity elsewhere. And by such activity, of course,
feelings of inferiority may be induced in the person who is attacked.

The height of the goal is freely revealed in waking fantasies, where the
desire to be the richest man, an emperor, or a pioneer finds imaginary
gratification, always an image of supremacy in the subject’s own line of life,
whatever it may be.
The degree of social interest also finds expression in these imaginings. For
instance, fantasies of saving life, of stopping runaway horses and rescuing the
drowning indicate a more social tendency than images of torturing or being
tortured. Children have the common fantasy that they do not really belong to
their parents. It indicates dissatisfaction with their own parents for some reason
or other, and enables them to believe they are the secret offspring of noble
parents. This particular tendency of the fantasy is demonstrated in mass-
psychology, by the belief in myths and legends where the heroes are invariably
the sons and daughters of gods or demi-gods, or at least, while no one knows it,
they are of royal parentage and the heirs to great power and estates.
Man 32: Erythrophobia8
Daydreams of a true sadistic or masochistic nature occur in which the
dreamer participates merely as an observer and not as an actor, enjoying the
sight of the conqueror’s power, or identifying his own feelings with the weaker
person. This dreaming of vicarious satisfaction is, of course, a double remove
from reality, indicating a still greater lack of courage. Such was the case of a
man of thirty-two who suffered from erythrophobia. Believing that people could
not help looking at him wherever he went, he blushed continually. He was short,
cross-eyed, and suffered from lameness, one leg being shorter than the other. He
had been spoiled by his mother, but his brothers and sisters had disliked and
repressed him. Thus, when he went to school, he assumed a wrong attitude
toward his schoolmates, but tried to maintain his personal dominance by
becoming an excellent gymnast. Even this achievement, however, did not
maintain him sufficiently in the center of general attention, so he tried to
supplement it by exciting the compassion of others; when this also failed to
satisfy him, he drew attention to himself by clowning and playing the fool.
Finally, despairing of winning the high esteem he wanted, he gave up and tried
to escape from both society and love. Wherever he met people, in the street, in
restaurants, or in theaters, he experienced acute mental tension, and being the
nervous type, he expressed it by blushing and feeling afraid. At the same time,
he acquired a paranoid fear that every policeman was watching him as a suspect.
The effect of all these symptoms was to make him isolate himself to a great
extent and continue merely the lightest and most occasional occupations.
His daydreams, which are the point of his narrative, were largely sexual
fantasies. His sexual life was, naturally, one of masturbation, but in these

fantasies his great distance from the solution of the sex-problem was expressed
by visualizing boys beating each other, while he himself was merely a “smiling
third.”
As a last resort he tried a career in business, but again finding that he was
not appreciated, he developed another paranoid fantasy, that all his comrades
conspired against him. He went from his office into a sanatorium, where he met
a woman who showed great sympathy for him. Although up to this point he had
retreated from every problem of life, he now felt the urge to go forward in the
matter of love. But the old feeling of hopelessness and lack of courage persisted.
He had long ago fixed his position as an observer of the struggle of life, and now
a situation had arisen which challenged this position. And so, one day, he shot
himself.
8 Editor’s note: Erythrophobia is the fear of blushing.
Man 45: Swallowing Air
Red hair is sometimes taken as sufficient basis for a feeling of inferiority,
and the part it may play in building up a neurosis is illustrated in the following
case. A man of forty-five complained of heart trouble, which had been first
diagnosed as organic and later as a neurotic disturbance. As a child he had been
greatly pampered by his mother, and because of his efforts to rule over his
comrades he had been unpopular with them; they had always teased him about
his “copper nob.” He was too unsociable to make friends, but very successful in
his school work.
Later on, he was treated psychoanalytically for two years and the doctor
who treated him advised him to marry another of his patients. Naturally, with
such a lack of social interest, he could not make a success of marriage. He tried
to rule his wife in an absurd manner, and when she resisted him in any way, he
became so tense that his pulse increased to a hundred and fifty a minute.
Such heart troubles may often be observed as the result of swallowing air.
This habit is also connected with asthma, stomach trouble, peritonitis, and even
pseudo-pregnancy. Usually the patient knows nothing about it, and my
experience leads me to believe that it often takes place in sleep. It is suspected in
cases of morning sickness and particularly in hysterical vomiting. The air-
swallowing habit is caused by a great psychic tension, due to exaggerated
feelings of inadequacy. It is probably due to some tendency deeply laid in human
nature since it so commonly appears in times of crisis, such as during an
examination, and while courting.
Air-swallowing was the trouble in this case, also. After the psychic
mechanism of it had been explained to him, the man had a dream. He said: “I
saw a red frog, bloated with air.” It is interesting to see how easily the attention

of a patient is diverted from the real coherence of the case. He treated this dream
as if it were a mystery which he could not understand. I interpreted it to him,
explaining that while he was asleep, he understood perfectly what he was doing,
and that his dream was a way of saying: “I am like that red frog, suffering from
my abnormal coloring and trying to blow myself up into a bigger being than I
am.” In his criticism of my explanation, however, the patient evidently did not
wish to understand.
Man 40: Wanting to Marry His Cousin
The masculine protest is often apparent in the loftiest goals of personal
supremacy. A man of forty came to me in a state of nervous irritation because he
felt impelled, as if in a fit of irresponsibility, to marry a cousin. Marriage with a
near relative, either in reality or in fantasy, generally indicates fear of the
opposite sex, for incest is opposed to common sense, which demands a
courageous mixing of blood. We can trace incestuous inclinations to cowardice
and a sense of social inadequacy. This patient had resisted impulses toward love
and marriage. He denied himself various gratifications, such as play-going and
eating meat—he had lately become a vegetarian—attached the highest
importance to chastity, and became greatly disturbed if he had to do business
with a lady client in his own office. He was an eldest son who had resented his
dethronement by a younger brother, and had also felt that he was slighted and
pushed into the background by his mother, for which reason he had leaned more
toward his father. His criticism of his mother, and later of all women, was very
bitter. His earliest memory was this: “When I was four years old we moved. I
met a strange woman near the new apartment whom I tried to push into a ditch.”
He also remembered that his feeling for his grandmother had been very hostile.
This man had now come to an age at which it was natural for him to marry,
and he felt the urge to do so, but not in a normal way, so he sought a near
relative as a sort of half measure. At the same time, his irresponsibility and
sudden regret disclose something deeper in the whole arrangement. What he
really wanted was to give himself a deep warning never again to approach a girl
as long as he lived. So he staged this little warning interlude, in which, of course,
I was cast for the part of the sage counselor who was to tell him not to marry,
and that his desire to do so was only a neurotic manifestation.
Jealousy is often employed in order to establish a relationship of
superiority. The jealous partner lays down rules for the behavior of the other,
and enforces them with reproaches and in terms of moral reprobation. The
person against whom such conduct is directed is thereby degraded from the
position of a partner to that of a dishonorable servant, which gives the jealous
one a sense of relative superiority. Jealousy is also found in connection with

paranoia and alcoholism, where its use is fundamentally similar. In either case an
acute lack of selfconfidence drives the patient to strive for superiority by the
fictitious method of torturing the sexual partner. It is not true, as often stated,
that alcoholism causes impotence in these cases. In these manifestations the
alcoholism, the impotence, and the jealousy are coordinated in the useless
striving to compensate for the absence of social adjustment, courage, and
selfconfidence; and, as a whole, they indicate a progressively egotistic attitude.
Woman 60: Jealousy
Paranoia of the truest type, originating later in life, sometimes yields a case
of jealousy which is really a hallucination, created to compensate for the state of
helplessness. A case in point was that of a woman who had once been wealthy
and had had every luxury, but afterward became poor. Her two married
daughters supported her and her husband, and kept them in the luxury to which
they had been accustomed. She felt deserted, however, and unable to adapt
herself to her new limitations, for she had been too accustomed to extravagance
and power. Occupied with their families, her daughters paid her little attention.
All that was left to her was her husband, in whom she tried to find compensation
for everything she had lost. Naturally, it was impossible for him to succeed in
such a position; nothing short of his entire obedience and servitude would have
maintained the sense of personal superiority that she required, and his
submission to her fell far short of her demands. This situation intensified her
already wounded dignity, and in the effort to enforce her dominance, she
accused her husband of unfaithfulness, although he was seventy years of age and
she was sixty. A young maid lived in the house, and the wife interpreted her
husband’s kindness to this girl as a sign of intimacy. Thenceforth, she imagined
that every sound she heard in the house by day or night was a confirmation of
her belief. The servant finally left and took a position in another city, but the
patient was convinced that she was still in the neighborhood, believed that she
heard her knock at the door at night, and suspected that she was still
communicating with her husband through advertisements in the newspapers.
It is not difficult to understand why she needed her jealousy. Her husband’s
and her daughters’ attitude toward her had changed since the time when she had
lived in the focus of their attention. She now despaired of reality, but she still
had the same goal of supremacy. This jealousy enabled her, by an attitude of
accusation, to still keep the circumstances revolving around the question of her
personal privilege.
Woman: Neurotic Heart and Jealousy
In many cases, patients indulge in jealousy without for a moment admitting
the fact to themselves. This denial is probably because jealousy is considered an

inferior feeling, and so conflicts with their conscious self-evaluation.
A particular patient complained of pains in the heart which recurred from
time to time, especially when she felt discontented. She had been married for
nearly twenty years and the marriage was supposed to be a happy one. The
husband was a kind man, although weak; they had an accomplished daughter as
their only child and lived in good circumstances. For a year the patient had been
suffering from these pains, which radiated from the breasts into both arms, and
angina pectoris had been suspected. But as no organic symptoms could be
discovered, and as the pains always occurred after a mental disturbance, the
diagnosis of a neurosis (pseudo-angina) was justifiable. Some time before the
appearance of these symptoms, she had had a peculiar feeling in the legs, as
though they were tied and she was unable to move them. The later symptoms she
described as very painful, lasting for several minutes and ending with vomiting.
Closer inquiry revealed that the pains reached the throat from the sternal region,
and were associated with frequent vomiting, flatulence, and occasional
peritonitis. Where we find such complications of symptoms, I recommend that
the practitioner look for xerophagia1, a condition which, in the present case, I
could observe while I spoke to the patient.
This patient had come to me from abroad, and after arriving in Vienna her
husband left her to spend some time in Berlin. On the night of his departure, she
could not sleep, and when I asked her what thoughts passed through her mind
while she lay awake, she answered: “I kept figuring out how far my husband was
from Berlin.” This remark convinced me that the woman was constantly thinking
about where her husband was and wondering what he was doing. That her
marriage was a fortunate one made it all the more likely that she kept a sharp
lookout. Such conditions are fertile ground for jealous fears, especially in the
case of a woman as ambitious as this one proved to be.
After the second night, she related the following dream: “Someone showed
me a calf which was lame and unable to walk. This person commanded me to
slaughter it.” The inability to walk was reminiscent of some of her own
symptoms, so it was justifiable to suppose that she identified herself with the
calf. In this connection, the slaughter of the calf represented suicide, probably in
this case by cutting the throat, but the lameness held more meaning. She helped
me a great deal in this interpretation by telling me that a friend of her husband
suffered from ankylosis2 of the knees as a result of gonorrheal arthritis.
1 Editor’s note: Xerophagia is a condition of dry eating.
Man 38: Agoraphobia and Fear of Syphilis
How wounded jealousy may be used in the service of the neurotic goal is

illustrated in the case of a man of thirty-eight who suffered from agoraphobia.
He was fairly intelligent, but this weakness precluded both work and social
relations. The neurosis followed a disappointment, when the girl to whom he
was engaged became unfaithful to him. He was then advised to take a good
position in another part of the country so that he might forget his calamity, and
he did so, but after a few days’ work he had his first fit of anxiety, was scared to
death, and hurried back to his mother, with whom he lived from that time until I
saw him. He told me that for some days before the first fit of anxiety, he had
been thinking continually of syphilis and of how easily he could become infected
with it. This behavior must be understood as a self-preparation, by the
appropriate meditation, to keep at a distance from all women and to live only
under the care of his mother. His behavior was that of a pampered child, readily
fleeing from the world and sure of safety only with his mother. His earliest
recollection was an epitome of his lifeplan: “When I was four years old, I was in
a room with my mother; and I remember looking out the window at people
working in the street.” This fragment of memory conveys his abnormal need of a
sheltered position and his interest in watching (he was nearsighted) “how others
work.” To be with his mother and observe others working was his sole idea of
escape from tension and anxiety. When he was cured, he started in business as
an interior decorator.
Boy 14: Shirking the Masculine Ideal
Early memories often furnish significant hints of the way in which the
sexual attitude has been built up, as well illustrated in the case of a pampered
boy of fourteen with a very expectant attitude toward life. He was a bad sport
who made great difficulties in learning to swim and was disinclined to work or
learn anything, especially mathematics. Mathematics is often the chief difficulty
with this type, probably because it demands independent work. He confessed to
his mother, his best companion, that for some time he had the tendency to feel
sexual excitement at the sight of a man’s muscles in the swimming pool or
elsewhere. The earliest experience he could recall was of walking with his
mother, when people often said, looking at his fair and curly hair, “What a pretty
girl!” When asked if he would like to be a girl, however, he denied it
emphatically. In his conscious opinion, it was better to be a man than a woman,
but since he really wanted to have everything more easily, he instinctively
shirked the necessary preparation for a masculine role, and his goal was to be
wooed and receive attention as though he were a girl. This appeared possible
because he was pretty to look at, but in all other ways success looked difficult
and doubtful, so he took refuge in laziness or incapacity. Such a style of life, it
must be clearly understood, actually gives the patient a sense of relative power

or control. It goes with a great aversion to all situations which one is unable to
dominate, so that we need not be surprised at this boy’s exaggerated fear of
thunderstorms. A thunderstorm is a supreme example of a thing which we
cannot manage or control. With the lofty ambition of a second and youngest
child, this boy’s obvious defeats had made him incapable of conceiving of
adequate success as a man, hence the attempt to form a homosexual goal, to
govern passively by being loved and worshipped.
2 Editor’s note: Ankylosis is the consolidation of two or more bones or tissues
into one.
Woman 20: Masochistic Fantasies
In many cases a fragment of the prototype is revealed when in a dream,
fantasy, or early recollection, the patient discloses some notion of a high
superiority. Thus, a girl of twenty once said to me: “I had an old and, of course,
imaginary memory of having once been high up in a cloud.” She had been a
pretty child, spoiled by her father who had committed suicide when she was
fourteen. As we know, to lean upon the father is a second-best alternative and
indicates discontent with the mother, so that as I expected the patient had a
younger sister. She changed in appearance at the father’s death, losing her good
looks. The younger sister was now more attractive than she, and the mother was
focusing all her care on an elder brother who had been ill for some time. Left
with no one to spoil her, this pampered girl began to fight for attention,
especially because her brother was hostile to her. About this time she
experienced a nasty shock; returning from school one day, she passed a man who
exhibited himself, and she ran home screaming with fear.
Such experiences with exhibitionists occur much more often than is
generally known. Many men are too cowardly to strive for a real solution to the
life problem of sex. Looking for a relief or substitute, they stop short at some
partial manifestation of sexuality. If they are visual types, and their vision is not
transferred to other objects, they become voyeurs or exhibitionists. They confirm
their cowardice by usually approaching children.
My patient’s shock from the exhibitionist marked the beginning of
agoraphobia. We must recognize, however, that she was training herself to attain
the foremost position along a non-sexual line of life as in the earlier relation with
her father. The height of her ambition is indicated by the early recollection, and
it had become still more neurotically exalted because the sister had surpassed
her, the brother had repressed her, and the mother had neglected her. Such a goal
of personal superiority was in danger from love and marriage, so she was
naturally trying to exclude these possibilities. She made the most of this first
experience of actual sexuality in order to justify herself in an overt rejection of

sexual life altogether. I found that she was training herself in this attitude by
means of certain daydreams, calculated to intoxicate her with the same idea. In
one of these which recurred often, especially when she had a sexual feeling, she
imagined that a man resembling her brother threw her down and spat upon her,
which she found gratifying.
In my experience, girls commonly indulge in such masochistic fantasies,
assumed to indicate an inclination to be subdued, which is supposed to be a
female characteristic. On the contrary, however, such a fantasy is a complex
fulfillment of a desire which is fundamentally quite simple, but the reverse of
submissive, namely, the desire to exclude a realistic sexual objective with its
possibilities of defeat and humiliation. We see the fantasy building up the
daydreamer’s resistance to love at the same time as it gratifies the sensational
need; first, because to be satisfied in a fantasy is to teach oneself, “It is not
necessary to have a real relationship,” and second, because satisfaction mixed
with the imagination of a defeat (in this case degradation by a brother who
disliked her) teaches one to feel that a real experience would be highly
objectionable. Thus, the fantasy is an appropriate meditation like a sort of
prayer, in which the individual trains herself to lose interest in others, and to
ardently desire escape from marriage. Where masochism is actually expressed in
attempts to form masochistic relationships, the aim is fundamentally the same: to
establish a great distance from normal behavior and natural conditions.
Nothing, then, could be further from the truth than the idea that masochistic
fancies indicate a desire for submission. This patient of mine had been looking
for someone whom she could rule, had fastened on her younger sister to be her
obedient slave, and had finally prevailed on her to accompany her in everything.
Her breakdown revealed her intolerance of the slightest real control over her; she
was given a job, and when her employer told her to write something at his
dictation, she could not do it.
Chapter X Occupational Choices and Sleep Postures
Earliest recollections often involve ideas of danger, illness, and death. We
can easily understand how the first experiences of these early events, especially
if connected with danger and fear, may oppress a child with inferior feelings.
Probably, only we humans are aware that death is part of life, and this awareness
alone is enough to give us a sense of being terribly overpowered by nature. If a
child experiences a brusque contact with death at an early age, his whole style of
life may be largely molded by that single impression. In such a case the
importance of death is invariably exaggerated, and we can often perceive how
the child directs his actions and reactions in order to find relief from the
oppressive idea, or compensation for it. Children adopt various tricks in their

struggle against death. Some take an ostrich’s refuge, avoiding every possible
reminder of the subject, some develop other anxieties which keep the real terror
out of consciousness, and others, more actively disposed, strive to protect and
arm themselves, and to overcome death. In all these types, the socalled instinct
of self-preservation is unusually evident.
We have two methods of fighting death with some certainty of victory. The
first is to preserve the race by producing and raising children. In so struggling to
conquer the destiny of the individual, the strongest instincts may be allies, and
our interest may be intensified toward society and the future of mankind. This
commonsense compensation for the fear of death naturally involves the
healthiest conceptions of love and the exclusion of all perversions. The second
method, suited to more individual ambitions, is to live in a way that will
influence the future. This has been the ruling motive of many great men who
have done enduring work in art and science; this purpose is also clearly visible in
the lives of poets. Both in the procreation of the race and in the progress of its
culture, this psychic striving to conquer death plays a leading part.
The fact that the work of many poets and philosophers has been largely
motivated by the desire to overcome death is shown by the power of death in
their reflections. We see it in Horace’s “Exegi monumentum aere pernnius,” and
in Heine’s “Nicht in Dilsseldorf am Rheim will ich stelin auf taubem Steim.”
And Tolstoy writes: “If I do not know how to act in any situation, I imagine—
what would I do if I were going to die tomorrow?”
However, the early fear of death may also provoke a striving worse than
useless, even though efficient. I have already made passing reference to the case
of a boy of fifteen who had been deeply impressed by the death of an older
sister, and often talked about death. When I asked him what he wanted to be, I
thought he would say, “A doctor.” But he answered: “A grave-digger, because I
don’t want to be the one who is buried. I want to bury others.” And he did so, in
his own way, for he became a merchant, a hard man of business who “buried”
his competitors.
Children who have had some painful experience with death often choose
another way of life. They form an early desire to become physicians and master
all medical knowledge in order to survive. In a discussion I once opened in a
medical society, nearly everyone present recounted memories of the death,
mortal danger, or illness of some member of the family. A professional
psychoanalyst who was present objected to my interpretation of this similarity of
their experiences, which I could relate to many other cases of the earliest
memories of physicians; he insisted that his own first recollection was of quite a
different character. He remembered saying to his sick mother, when he was four

years old, “Wait a little, and when I am grown up I will buy you all the best and
most expensive medicines.”
For the individual who fails to find relief in any of these compensations, the
fear of death may be relieved by means of religious faith in the immortality of
the soul. This faith may appear in complicated forms such as reincarnation, or
more directly, as in spiritualism. The latter is founded on the possibility that the
spirits of the dead can still move, act, and speak, a possibility which some
acknowledge in the absence of more realistic hopes of conquering mortality.
Not only in physicians, but in all workers, the choice of occupation is
foreshadowed by some dominant interest of the psychic prototype. The
development of this interest into the concrete realization of work is often a
lengthy process of self-training in which we can see the same idea adapting itself
successively to various material possibilities. Thus, a great interest in playing
with toy soldiers, a possible preparation for military life, may also be the prelude
to success as the director of a department store. To play at sewing with needle
and thread need not reveal a future tailor; it may just as well be the first step
toward the career of a surgeon. Playing with dolls indicates an interest which
may well develop into marriage and family life, but it may also be the sign of a
future nurse or teacher.
Both marriage and occupation demand power of independent action, and
readiness to accept the division of labor. These qualities cannot exist without
some degree of social feeling and adaptation, and it is often at the time when the
choice of an occupation becomes necessary that the lack of social adjustment
appears. I believe the attention of children should be drawn fairly early in their
schooldays toward the question: “What do I want to do later in life, and why do I
want it?” The ideas thus elicited, combined with our knowledge of students’
organic deficiencies or peculiarities, can help us greatly in guiding them
vocationally. We should look not only for the most highly trained interest, but
also seek to understand its root in the psychic prototype. Wherever we find an
ability, it is the result of an interest in which the child has trained himself,
stimulated by the totality of his circumstances. So clearly does this self-training
appear, that we are justified in believing that anyone could accomplish anything,
given the right training and the correct method.
By the way the child thinks and behaves and by his characteristic
perceptions, his interest is specialized for his future occupation. The interest as a
whole, however, is increased or decreased by his sense of the attainability of his
goal of superiority. In the course of his development, the child will concretize
his goal in various unattainable forms, which he must be able to abandon without
any fundamental discouragement. Therefore, our task is to support the child in

spirit, but correct his mistaken ideas. The more we educate the child in the
direction of social interest, the more commonsense conceptions of superiority he
will develop.
A child’s idea of superiority is, of course, often influenced by a desire to
surpass the father in his occupation. Thus, if his father is a public-school teacher,
a boy may want to be a university professor. Usually, we find that the more the
choice of profession changes, the more the child understands reality; but in each
choice we can detect the impulse toward domination, the determination to attain
a goal of importance or of security, or at least to escape difficulty or defeat. The
child paints a new picture of his future action from time to time, but always
conditioned by the same prototypical motive. When the actual choice of
professions has to be made, the child confronts the reality he has long been
approaching, and that reality may come in circumstances either hostile or
friendly to his own striving. The goal of his working life now has to be
established, however, and the youth strikes his bargain with reality by taking up
work in an individual manner. Whatever latitude of choice may present itself, he
decides how he will confront this necessity for action in accordance with all the
facts as he understands them. We cannot expect his conclusions to be perfectly
correct. Some degree of individual mistake is invariably involved in his choice.
The conception of his function, in its ideal final form, is distorted by irrelevant
factors. Money is one of these factors, which in our present civilization has an
altogether exaggerated importance. This final form may also be obscured by an
interest in long life and health, security, or social ambition, or be warped by
dominating and critical tendencies.
Discouraged children generally have a doubtful or despairing attitude, and
every struggle reveals movement toward escape from the necessity of a decision.
This negative attitude is often shown in the selection of various and inconsistent
professions, preference for no profession at all, empty ideals, lack of adventure,
or delinquent tendencies.
If we compare all the professions a child chooses in the course of his
development, taken as a whole, they disclose the line of action, and the degree of
social interest and courage. We should not ignore the oddest and most unrealistic
choices because they connect in a metaphorical way to the attitude a child is
preparing to assume toward the demands of reality. One boy, for instance, when
I asked what he wanted to be later in life, replied, “A horse.” He constantly tried
to imitate both the movements and the speed of a horse. In his babyhood, he had
suffered from endocarditis1 and had to lie very still in bed for a long time. Later
on, he expressed his choice of a profession more realistically by becoming an
automobile engineer. Another boy seven years old also symbolized his ambition

by wanting to be a horse. When asked for the reason, he said, “My father is ill,
and because I am the eldest I will have to support the family.”
In either of these cases, it would be ridiculous to look for the cause of the
fantasy in hereditary influences of sexual motives. The first boy was interested
in movement because the confinement of his illness had given him a specific
feeling of inferiority. The second boy’s use of the idea of the horse was entirely
different. Considering how best to replace and surpass his father, he believed the
horse was the symbol of his future as the bearer of a heavy burden. I found
another of these animal-fantasies in a boy of ten, who waned to be a buffalo, and
used to charge home from school in a posture imitative of an advancing bull. He
developed into a bully and his ideal character in history was Achilles.
1 Editor’s note: Endocarditis is inflammation of the endocardium membrane
lining the heart.
Body Postures and Sleep Positions
Body postures and attitudes indicate the manner in which an individual
approaches his goal. A person who faces life directly shows courage, whereas an
adult who is anxious and hesitant has a style of life that prohibits direct action,
and something of a detour appears in every action. The way an individual gives
his hand in a handshake reveals whether he has social feeling and likes to be
connected with others. A perfectly normal handshake is rather rare; it is usually
overdone, underdone, or betrays a pushing-off or pulling-to tendency. In a
streetcar, some people lean sideways; they wish to be supported and are quite
oblivious of others’ inconvenience. The same social insensitivity is seen in those
who cough in front of others, quite thoughtless of infecting them. When entering
a room, some seem to keep instinctively at the greatest possible distance from
everyone else. All these things reveal, more directly than their conversation, the
attitudes that individuals hold toward life.
The attitudes adopted in sleep are as significant as the postures and
movements of daily life. Very little children sleep on their backs, with the arms
raised; when we see a child sleeping in this position, we may assume he is
healthy. If the child changes this position and sleeps with the arms down, for
example, we can suspect some illness. Similarly, if an adult is accustomed to
sleeping in a certain position and suddenly changes it, we may assume that
something is altered in his mental attitude. Organic defects play their part, of
course, in conditioning the sleeping posture. A person suffering from pneumonia
or pleurisy will always sleep on the defective side, sometimes without knowing
why he does so. He does it unconsciously because it eases his breathing. Some
people who have heart trouble, or think they have, believe `they cannot sleep on
the left side. There is no organic reason for this, but they feel they must be

careful on the weaker side.
When we see a person sleeping on his back stretched out like a soldier at
attention, it indicates that he wishes to appear as great as possible. One who lies
curled up like a hedgehog with the sheet drawn over his head is not likely to be a
striving or courageous character, but is probably cowardly. We should be careful
not to assign him a difficult task until we have found out how to give him
courage. A person who sleeps on his stomach betrays stubbornness and
negativity. By comparing the sleeping postures of patients in various hospitals
with the reports of their daily life, I have concluded that the mental attitude is
consistently expressed in both modes of life, sleeping and waking.
Some people turn a gradual somersault in sleep, awaking with their heads at
the bottom of the bed and their feet on the pillow. Such people psychically
express an unusually strong opposition to the world, with the neurotic attitude of
often answering, “No,” before having understood the question. Also, some
patients make a half-turn and sleep with their heads hanging down over the edge
of the mattress. They develop headaches from this practice, which are generally
used to escape the demands of the following day.
I was considerably puzzled by the discovery that some children sleep in a
crouching position, resting their knees and elbows like animals; but I finally
found out this is the best position for hearing what is happening in the next
room. Children who adopt this position have more than the normal desire to keep
in contact with others, even in sleep, and they generally want to go to bed with
the door open.
Thus, all postures have a purposive nature. I once treated a man who had
become blind, and since then had always wanted to hold his wife’s hand while
he slept, which prevented her from moving. This desire was a pathetic disguise
for a tyrannical tendency. When she resisted it, he developed hallucinations at
night, imagining that burglars had caught her and carried her off. This
hallucination was a development of the same line of action, to keep her in his
power.
Restless sleepers, who keep moving all night, show they are dissatisfied and
want to be doing something more. It may also be a sign that they want to be
watched by another person, usually by the mother. When children cry in sleep, it
is for the same reason; they do not want to be alone but would like to insure
notice and protection. The quietest sleepers are those who are most settled in
their attitude toward the problems of life. Because their lives are well organized
and productive by day, they can use the night for its proper purpose of rest and
recreation, and their sleep is generally free from dreaming.
Chapter XI Organ Dialect and Dreams 

Woman 25: Anxiety Neurosis
In cases where the patient begins with a feeling that treatment will of itself
endanger the goal of superiority, it is often difficult to make a start. I had such a
case in a married woman of twenty-five who suffered from an anxiety-neurosis.
At the first interview, when I asked her to take a chair beside me, she went and
sat down on the other side of the room.
Her violent attacks of anxiety occurred when her husband was delayed in
coming home. She had felt deprived in her life with her family, and her husband
was the first person who overindulged her, but now his business obligations
made it impossible for him to devote himself so much to her. Wanting to be
connected only with her husband and to exclude everyone else, she was
hindering her husband’s business by the development of an anxiety-neurosis. No
one else could demand anything from her, and her husband had to obey. But she
paid for this success with painful anxieties, and her husband persuaded her to see
me.
Naturally, the situation was an impasse. She felt before coming that I was a
danger to her, and symbolized her attitude in her behavior over the chair. If I
freed her from her neurosis, she would have no weapon to use against her
husband.
Critical, Compulsive Housewife
A similar case was that of a married woman who had been the youngest of
a very competitive family. Reproached and teased as the inferior member of the
family, as a girl she had found no way of compensating for this unfortunate
position, except to prove that other people were wrong. This habit won her the
nickname of “the judge.”
She married merely to get even with her married sisters. She was not in
love with her husband, but was afraid of being despised if she did not prove
herself capable of a happy marriage. But although she had three children, she
could never feel equal to others, so she defended herself against society with
aggression, arrogance, and criticism. Such behavior is often nothing but a
neurotic safeguard against disappointment, not the result of inherited
psychopathic conditions.
She felt sure that she could not equal her eldest sister in the art of
housekeeping, and her husband made a mistake when they were first married by
asking her if she would be as orderly as her sister. This question touched her on
the sensitive spot, and from that time on she wanted to avoid housekeeping, or at
least to fail under extenuating circumstances. A type of compulsion-neurosis
followed, which took the form of devoting herself to the linen and laundry work
until her care and accuracy were a nuisance and a waste of time. As this left her

no time for anything else, she had an excuse if the marriage developed
unhappily.
She had another device by which to defend herself which is commonly used
by neurotics; she used to judge other people by their likeness or unlikeness to
Jesus Christ. Thus, after setting anyone on a pedestal for admiration, she easily
discovered faults in him, to prove that he was not a Christ-like character, and
then cast him off. She used this defense against the many doctors to whom she
went for treatment, and frustrated their efforts because of her prototypical feeling
that if she were understood, she would be “put back” to her inferior position of
the youngest. Therefore, she had to prove the doctors wrong, tried to forestall
their opinions, and constantly worried and reproached, so that they were unable
to speak, and the time of the consultations passed ineffectually.
Organ Dialect
As we have seen in a variety of cases, the style of life dominates the organic
functions. This relationship is especially noticeable with the lungs, the heart, the
stomach, the organs of excretion, and the sexual organs. The disturbance of these
functions expresses the direction an individual takes to attain his goal. I have
called these disturbances the “organ dialect,” or “organ jargon,” since the organs
reveal in their own most expressive language the intention of the individual
totality.
The dialect of the sexual organs is especially expressive, often leading the
patient to the doctor. Each case has its peculiarities, but in practically every one
the patient expresses by a disorder of the sexual functioning, a stoppage,
hesitation, or escape in the face of the three life problems. Whatever partial
sexual satisfactions the patient may provide for himself are an escape from the
real problem, and the remainder which is left over for a normal expression has to
be excluded. In this way the various forms of impotence are traceable to a
common root in a disinclination and lack of training for relationships with other
people. We can see this common root when we leave the sexual symptoms
temporarily out of the picture, and study the nature of the patient’s social
contacts. Most of the cases I have known, of this specific functional failure,
concerned patients faced with the problem of marriage. Ejaculatio praecox varies
greatly in its individual meaning, but I have found it a sign of an egotistical
character and a feeling of impotence, invariably combined with very poor social
adjustment. Failure to ejaculate occurs in egotistical men who are afraid of
having children, generally because of their possible rivalry.
Nobody who has understood anything about Individual Psychology would
attempt to cure such cases as these by upbraiding the patients with the words I
have used, as if we could do good by taking a moralistic attitude. A patient has

to be gradually led into wanting to listen and understand. Only then can he be
influenced to live what he has understood.
In women the same dialect appears as vaginismus. This condition
represents an avoidance of man, accompanied by other mental symptoms
signifying the woman’s aversion either to a certain man or to men in general.
Besides this active avoidance, we may find the passive forms of sexual rejection:
frigidity and a display of passivity. This lack of function mirrors an idea in the
woman’s mind of not being present in intercourse, as though the event were
merely the man’s affair. In all cases of frigidity, I have found that the woman felt
the female role as one of humiliation and degradation. It is important to verify
this precisely, apart from the sexual life.
A Woman’s Revenge Against Her Father
Ambitious girls who have been too spoiled may easily lose confidence in
regard to sexual relations. This was the case with a beautiful girl whom I treated,
the youngest of the family and spoiled by everyone, especially by the father until
he married a second time. His remarriage undermined her selfconfidence. It is
very difficult for a stepmother to take her place in relation to her husband’s
children without provoking their antagonism. I do not know if others have the
same experience, but I have found that girls make the most trouble in these cases
and if an opportunity arises, they begin casual sexual relations as if in revenge.
When they are intelligent and sensitive enough to feel the full difficulty of the
situation, they are conscious of a lack of love from both sides, often becoming
frigid and eluding` marriage, which was the case with my patient. We might well
ask why this girl continued to enter into sexual relations at all, if we consider
how much she had against it. She had the memory of being deserted by her
father, the experience of a lover who did not pamper her as her father did, and in
addition, she had the gruesome experiences of undesired pregnancy and artificial
abortion without physical gratification in love. To balance against all these
disadvantages, she had nothing but a secret sense of having revenge against her
father.
An individual can never settle down into such an unsatisfactory style of life,
which excludes marriage but is adapted to social relationships or to work. A state
of continual tension results, which becomes acute in the face of every real
problem that may present itself, often appearing as headaches and fatigue.
My patient dreamed: “Jesus Christ appeared to me and invited me to go to
Heaven with Him, where my task would be to amuse all the other people. If I did
not choose to do this, I would go to Hell. Then I found myself in Heaven and
saw many angels who looked like the penguins in Anatole France’s satire, and I
also saw God, shaving His beard and looking and moving like the man in the

advertisements in the chemist’s shop-windows. I felt a great despair and wanted
to go away.” This dream is difficult to interpret unless we relate it to the general
line of the girl’s development; indeed, we would not make any sense of it if we
could not estimate, from her history and its related line of action, what emotional
idea she was continually trying to intoxicate herself with. This idea of rejecting
virtue and embracing vice was motivated by revenge against her father, who
wanted virtue of her. Having grasped this fundamental agreement of the dream
with everything else the patient does, we can proceed to interpret: “To amuse the
other people” corresponds to her notion of the humiliation of the female role,
which she conceives as merely an amusement for men. Jesus Christ is her
supreme symbol of a man of earnest and unselfish character who proposed to
marry her; He had said to her, “I want to sacrifice myself to make you happy.”
Heaven, therefore, is the heaven He promised her in marriage. But as we have
seen, she fears defeat in marriage, so that married life cannot be allowed to seem
attractive, on the same principle that the grapes which are too high to reach must
be suspected of being sour. So in her dream, this man in his little village
appeared to her in the contemplative mood of the Viennese satirist, Nestroy,
when he wrote: “What is a man? Getting up, shaving, and going to sleep again!”
Depression as a Safeguard Against Marriage
An extremely spoiled girl, the youngest of eleven sisters and brothers, and
correspondingly ambitious, had another way of making the grapes of marriage
sour. She had a few sexual intimacies, but only with married men. I am always
suspicious if a girl begins with married men, because the difficulties are
obviously so much greater, and an impractical choice cannot be simply
explained away by insisting upon the uncontrollable power of love. It was easy
in this case to find out that the patient had been intimidated by her pampered
upbringing, and was especially nervous about marriage because two older sisters
had been happily married and feared she would fail to surpass them. Although
conscious of this fear, she was not so well aware of what she was doing in her
successive liaisons. If one of her lovers waned to get a divorce and marry her,
she left him, depressed and crying a little, of course, but firm because of the poor
wife, usually a personal friend of hers. The depression soon ceased with the
beginning of another affair, but finally, after breaking off an intimacy in these
circumstances, she went into a depression that lasted for months.
At that time, she came to me. She was thirty-six years old and living with a
brother who was a widower and pampered her. But in their first months together,
he had spoken of marrying again and suggested that she should marry, too.
Faced with this undesirable prospect and in the act of breaking off a relationship,
she used her illness as a device to “kill two birds with one stone!” It gave the

brother a warning to take care of her, and herself a lesson not to begin again with
another man because of new and more dangerous consequences.
Sleep and Hypnosis
Sleeping is another kind of waking. Of course, we could be equally justified
in saying that waking is a variant of sleeping, the truth being that in order to
understand them, whether psychologically or biologically, we must give up the
idea that they are contradictory states. Biologically considered, sleep is merely a
partial termination of the organism’s contact with its environment, a decrease of
its functional activity. In sleep our attention retains some contact with reality
through feeling, hearing, and thinking, but we exclude the greater part of the
connections among them. We observe the limits of our movements in bed and do
not fall out. We select some noises as important enough to awaken us and
neglect others; we can even wake ourselves up at stated hours. All these
activities which sleep does not exclude are also carried on in the waking state,
often hardly any more consciously.
Hypnotism is also a variety of waking, but it differs from sleep by
excluding a different class of activities. The hypnotized subject excludes
whatever the hypnotist wishes him to exclude, having first agreed (whether he
admits it or not) to accept only the hypnotist’s commands. Thus, hypnotism may
be called sleeping to order. Apart from hypnotism, this sleeping to order is not
uncommon, especially among children. Thus, hypnotism is proof of great
obedience. It is often regarded as a justifiable method of medical or psychic
treatment, but Individual Psychologists naturally avoid it, knowing that the
essence of successful treatment is increased courage and self-control. A patient
must prove these qualities by using them himself, not by relinquishing control to
someone else. The frequent failures which follow hypnotic methods of treatment
are the patient’s revenge for having been unexpectedly attacked by suggestion
during the hypnosis.
We should not be surprised that hypnosis can remove or mitigate
symptoms, though without permanent benefit. The same is true of many
suggestive methods, which the patient regards in a magical or semireligious
light, but these things do not of themselves teach a better adaptation to life.
Thus, they give temporary relief and seem to be most effective in reducing the
neurotic symptoms accompanying particular organic diseases, such as apoplexy,
aftereffects of syphilis, and multiple sclerosis. As Ludwig Stein has shown,
nearly all organic illnesses produce more symptoms than necessary. These
nervous complications are best treated by the method of Individual Psychology,
which, though it cannot cure pneumonia or heart disease, may significantly
relieve these conditions by encouraging the patient.

Our distinctive method of dream interpretation is based on this recognition
of the unity of the waking and sleeping life. This premise improves on the
valuable discoveries of Lichtenberg and Freud, that dreams contain signs of vital
problems which the dreamer never recognizes in his waking life, discoveries
which our work amply confirms. But the dream is not merely the substitute
satisfaction of wishes unfulfilled in waking, especially not of Freud’s “infantile
sexual desires;” rather it is a function of the entire style of life, more
dynamically related to the future than to the past, a fact intuitively known in
antiquity when dreams were regarded as prophetic, not historical. The dreamer is
engaged in molding his attitude and disposition to the coming events of his life,
storing up a reserve of feeling and emotion which could not be acquired in the
daytime by contact with reality or logical thinking. He thus accumulates an
irrational force to sustain him in the pursuit of his goal of superiority in the
problems he anticipates, to solve them in his own way or against the demands of
common sense.
In dreams, therefore, we never find any other tendencies or movements than
those manifested in the style of the waking life when the latter is coherently
grasped. We cannot oppose “consciousness” to “unconsciousness” as if they
were two antagonistic halves of an individual’s existence. The conscious life
becomes unconscious as soon as we fail to understand it; and as soon as we
understand an unconscious tendency, it has already become conscious.
The dream strives to pave the way toward solving a problem with a
metaphorical expression of it, and in itself is a sign that the dreamer feels
inadequate to solve it with common sense. A metaphorical conception of one’s
situation is a way of escaping from common sense, as metaphors may be used to
support almost any kind of concrete action. The dreams creating the feelings and
emotions of success best illustrate this dynamic, as they produce a kind of
intoxication which perfectly resists the logic of communal life. Naturally, the
dreamer does not recognize his own metaphor for what it is. If he understood it,
it would be ineffective for its purpose. It is essentially a selfdeception in the
interest of his individual goal. We should expect, therefore, that the more the
individual goal agrees with reality, the less a person dreams, and we find this is
true. Courageous people rarely dream, for they deal adequately with their
situation in the daytime.
There are problematic cases, of course. The claimed absence of dreams may
prove to be merely a lack of awareness of their contents, which are entirely
forgotten so that only the emotion remains. That is but a further step in the
selfdeceptive process which dreaming serves, and its purpose is to prevent the
individual from getting insight into his dreams. Or the absence of dreams may be

a sign that the patient has come to a point of rest in his neurosis and established a
neurotic situation which he does not wish to change. Short dreams indicate that
the present problems are such that the dreamer desires to find a “shortcut”
between them and the individual style of life. Long or very complicated dreams
are dreamed by patients seeking excessive security in their lives; they generally
indicate hesitation and the patient’s desire to postpone even his own
selfdeception in case it does not work out correctly. The style of life is best
shown by frequently recurring dreams which have remained in the memory for
many years.
The methods of selfdeception we use in dreams can be seen not only in the
abuse of comparisons, metaphors, and symbols, but also in a tendency to narrow
or distort a present problem until merely a part of it is visible, a part which
cannot be judged by the same standards as the whole. The urgent and necessary
solution of a vital problem, for example, may be dreamed of in the form of an
unimportant school examination.
Antagonism to a Wife Awake and Dreaming
Dreams played an important part in the case of a man who had been
married eight years and had two children, but was disappointed in his wife. His
great complaint against her was that she did not take sufficient care of the
children. Emphasis on the duty to the children in marriage indicates a deeper-
lying disagreement with the partner. Whether this man was right or wrong about
his wife’s neglect of the children, he used his criticism of her to express a deeper
reproach and held it as a weapon against her. This was evident from other details
of his behavior, which showed that he worried about her management of matters
other than the children, such as her housekeeping. The real source of his
antagonism was his belief that she had not married him for love and he found
confirmation in his wife’s frigidity. I have always found that persistent frigidity
offends the husband in the highest degree, irritating both partners. In order to
have a powerful proof of his wife’s guilt, instead of the real and humiliating
reason for his condemnation of her, he developed this exaggerated fear for the
children and subsequently came to me because of headaches and a distaste for
work. He was not courageous enough to get a divorce or to seek another woman,
having grown up with the feeling that in childhood he had been dominated by his
mother.
This man became very jealous, losing all faith in women. One night he
dreamed, “I was in a battle in the streets of a city, and in the midst of the
shooting and burning many women were thrown into the air as if by an
explosion.” Afterward, he felt great pity in remembering this picture, until my
treatment enabled him to understand it. It reinforced his attitude toward his

marriage problem, for in this dream he gratified his rage by picturing a general
extermination of women, which he was compelled to repudiate because he was
not without social feeling and compassion. We can see how this pitying
afterthought enabled him to maintain the daily attitude he assumed toward his
wife; he was not at all angry with her, but merely solicitous for the children. I
analyze the structure of this dream as follows: He selected some terrible pictures
from his memories of the war (we call this: the selection of an adapted thought)
and then compared the relationships` between the sexes to such warfare. In this
way, he reduced the whole problem of the sexes to a small part of it, a battle
leaving out all the more important factors. When he recovered from his fright,
and when, after my explanation he understood his selfdeception and self-
intoxication, he became quieter and the headaches stopped, but he did not wish
to be reconciled with his wife. He then had another dream: “The youngest of my
three children got lost and could not be found.” As we know he had only two
children, but he was very frightened both in the dream and after awakening from
it.
The line of reproach this patient had always taken against his wife was the
accusation of neglecting the children. So if he imagined a third child lost, it was
a warning not to have more children and thus increase the danger. With this
detour, he could avoid resuming relations with his wife. Again, we see how the
selection of an adapted thought enables him to work up a comparison which
reduces the whole problem of educating and protecting children to one detail of
it. Nevertheless, an astute psychologist may detect, in the selection of the fiction
of a third child, the beginning of a movement toward reconciliation. For it is as
though the patient glimpsed the possibility of another child, but withdrew,
saying, “She may be careful enough for two, but surely not for three.”
The selfdeception practiced in dreams is often traceable in the waking state,
for which I once had interesting proof. I was about to leave Vienna, when a
former patient telephoned, asking me to see his sick wife. He had consulted two
physicians and neither could decide what was the cause of her fever. Because I
was in a hurry, I tried to excuse myself, saying that I was not a specialist in
organic illnesses, but I finally yielded to his insistence. I found the patient
suffering from typhus, and recommended a consultant skillful in such cases. He
still resisted, saying that no physician could tell him more than I could, and I had
difficulty in getting away with a promise that I would visit him as a friend as
soon as I returned to Vienna. He kept on saying, “But he could not tell me more
than you have told me.” At last, I persuaded him to call in the expert and left.
When I returned to visit him a few weeks later, his wife was recovering and he
told me he was well satisfied with the doctor I had recommended. Then, in a

positive tone, he observed, “Of course, you told me when you came that Dr. W.
had died that morning.”
I had told him nothing of the kind, so I denied it. I had only read the news
myself on my vacation the day after leaving Vienna. He would not believe this,
however, and stoutly maintained that I had spoken of Dr. W.’s death. When I
asked him what made him think that I had told him, he answered, “Why, you
must have done so. For when the consultant came to see my wife the next day,
he had no sooner greeted everyone present than he turned to the doctors and
said, ‘Do you know my friend, Dr. W., is dead?’ ‘Yes,’ I interposed, ‘Dr. Adler
told me so yesterday.’ The specialist looked surprised and said, ‘I know Dr.
Adler very well, but I did not know he was blessed with the gift of prophecy.’
There must be some mistake, and I wonder if you can explain it.”
It was not so difficult to explain. This man had almost unlimited faith in me
and when I saw him before my departure, he had repeatedly said, “The specialist
cannot tell me anything that you haven’t said.” He had intoxicated himself with
this idea, so that he received the new doctor with an emotional determination
that whatever he said would be something I had already told him. Thus, he
spontaneously took the first piece of information the specialist uttered and
firmly, with perfect selfdeception, ascribed it to me.

Part 2
The Case of Mrs. A.1 2
1 First published in the Indiv. Psych. Pamphl., No. 1, 15-46. F.G.
Crookshank was the editor of a series of papers. 
2 Additional editing by Henry T. Stein, Ph.D., 2005.
The Case of Mrs. A.
Alfred Adler
[1931]
From the Foreward by F. G. Crookshank1
In January 1931, Dr. Adler visited London and gave a series of lectures. At
a special meeting of the Medical Society of Individual Psychology, it was felt
that a demonstration by Dr. Adler of his own methods of reading a “life style”
would be of greatest interest. Therefore, Dr. Adler requested that at the last
moment, case notes by a practicing physician be presented to him for his
extemporaneous consideration and impromptu interpretation.
To this end, Dr. Hilda Weber was good enough to transcribe and bring to
the meeting, notes taken by her some time previously on the case of one “Mrs.
A.” who had been under her care. The nature of the case was known to no one
other than Dr. Weber until the moment when the notes were handed to Dr. Adler
on the platform, in the fashion of what undergraduate examinees call an
“unseen.” When she first took these notes, Dr. Weber was not personally
interested in Individual Psychology, and she made no alteration in them for the
purposes of the meeting.

GENERAL INTRODUCTORY STATEMENTS
First, I thank you all for your interest in the process of Individual
Psychology. Because you are partly trained as doctors, I asked to receive an
analysis of a sick, neurotic, or psychotic person, knowing nothing about the case.
So you see that in Individual Psychology, we proceed in the same way as in the
general field of medicine. We know that in general medicine we have to use all
of our diagnostic tools because otherwise we would not feel justified in going on
to treatment.
1 Although in his original Foreward F.G. Crookshank suggests publishing a
verbatim transcript of Adler’s exact words, this editor believes that the
contemporary reader will gain a better, deeper understanding of Adler’s ideas
and methods from judicious editing for readability.
In this case we have to deal with psychological conditions and we must
have an idea, a diagnostic conception. If a human life can be understood, we will
find a psychological development toward an ideal final goal.
Accepting the premise of a final goal means we have to consider at least
two points. One is the point from which the symptom expression arises.
Wherever we discover a complaint, we will find a feeling of deficiency. The
second point is a striving toward an ideal form in order to overcome this felt
deficiency. We say that wherever there is life, there is a striving for an ideal final
form.
Today, I cannot explain all the details and characteristics of this striving to
overcome. It is enough for me to emphasize that in Individual Psychology we
look for the problem or difficulty which a person does not feel able to overcome.
Therefore, we have to look for the wrong direction in which this person is
striving, one that is incompatible with a solution of the problem.
In this direction we find a million variations, which can be evaluated if we
have an idea of what cooperation and social interest. We are usually able to
determine how far away from a sufficient degree of cooperation we find a
patient striving. Thus, it is necessary--and every astute analysis has to bring this
out--to discover at what point a person is not adequately prepared for the
solution of social problems, not properly prepared because he cannot mobilize
what is expected of him: sufficient degrees of courage, selfconfidence, social
adjustment, and the right type of cooperation. These qualities must be
understood because we see how the patient cannot function, how he declares
himself unable to solve his problem, and how he shows what I call the hesitating

attitude, or the stopping attitude. He begins to evade and wants to insulate
himself from a solution of the necessary problem.
On this point we find him in the state of mind that I have described as the
inferiority complex. Because of that complex, he constantly strives to advance,
feel superior, and overcome his difficulties in the present situation. We must
look for the point where the patient feels satisfied with simply feeling superior.
He cannot feel superior in regard to a socially useful solution of his present
problem, so his superiority is directed in a socially useless direction. In his own
imagination, he has reached his goal of superiority and perhaps satisfied himself,
but it cannot be validated as a useful goal to anyone else.
This is the initial general diagnosis in each analysis of a psychological case.
Again, along the line of general diagnosis, we have to find some explanation of
why this person has not been prepared. This is difficult to understand and
recognize. We have to delve back into the past of this person, find out in what
circumstances he has grown up, how he has behaved toward his family, and ask
questions resembling those we ask in general medicine, such as: “What were
your parents like?” The patient does not know that in his answers he expresses
his general attitude--if he felt pampered and the center of attention, or if he
resented one of his parents--but we see it. Always give “open” questions; be sure
that you do not insinuate or give a hint to the patient so that he gives you an
answer you are seeking.
At this point in the interview, we see the origin of the lack of preparation
for the present problem, which is like a test examination. Why the patient has not
been prepared for it must be seen and explained in the case history.
After determining a general diagnosis, we must not believe this is sufficient
for understanding the patient. The special diagnosis now begins where we must
learn by testing our series of guesses. We do the same kind of testing in internal
medicine. We must note what the patient says but, as in general medicine, we
must not trust our early guesses or conclusions. We must prove them, and not
believe--if we find, for example, a certain frequency of palpitations of the heart--
that it necessarily means a particular cause. In medicine and surgery, as in
Individual Psychology, we have to guess, but have to support our assumptions
with other verifying evidence. If the other information does not agree with our
guess, we have to be tough and critical enough with ourselves to look for another
explanation.
Today, I want to do an analysis the way we might do it in a clinic. The
doctor does an analysis of a patient he has not seen before and tries to explain
the symptoms. We can also work in this way, for then the whole audience is
stimulated, willingly or unwillingly, to think it over.

Individual Psychology expects us to prove every conclusion we make about
a case. We must scrutinize each of our assumptions and try to understand the
coherence of a case. Our general views may be reflected, but we must be careful
not to bias our conclusions by trying to prove a theory. As in other sciences, we
must stay open to a wide range of potential influences. This perspective is very
valuable, because it keeps us open to intuitive, free guessing and discovery. This
freedom will be tempered by the progressive refinement and correction of our
thinking about cases, a skill that improves with experience. In this respect,
Individual Psychology fully agrees with the fundamental diagnostic procedures
of medicine.
THE CASE OF MRS. A.
Here is the case of Mrs. A. We can see that she is a married woman--
perhaps a widow--we do not know more. We must focus on each word and turn
it over in our mind, so that we get everything possible out of it.
The patient A., who forms the subject of this paper, was thirtyone years old at
the time she came for treatment.
Thirtyone years old and a married woman. We know the circumstances in
which a woman, thirtyone years old and married, might find herself. There could
be a problem with marriage or with children, perhaps also a problem with
income. We are very careful. We would not presuppose anything, but we feel
sure that--unless we are surprised later--there is something wrong in one of these
areas. Now we go ahead.
She had been married eight years . . .
That carries us further: she had married at twenty-three years of age.
. . . and had two children, both boys, now age eight and four respectively.
She had a child very soon. Eight years married and the child eight years
old! What you think about that is your own affair. You see the sharp eye of
Individual Psychology!
Her husband was an elevator operator in a store.
Then they are probably in poor circumstances.
An ambitious man, he suffered considerable humiliation from the fact that,
unlike his brother, he was prevented, he felt, from obtaining a better type of
employment because during the war his right arm had been disabled.
If we can trust this description that he is an ambitious man and does not feel
happy in his employment, this discontent must reflect in his married life. He
cannot satisfy his ambition outside the family. Perhaps he tries to satisfy it
inside, tries to rule his wife and children and to “boss” them. We are not sure and
we must be careful not to believe it and be convinced, but we have a hypothesis.
Perhaps we will find something to confirm it. An ambitious husband.

His wife, however, had little sympathy with his trouble . . .
If we are right that this man wants to prove himself superior in his family
life and his wife does not agree and give in, if she has little sympathy with his
style of life, there will probably be some dissension in the family. This man
wants to rule; his wife does not agree and does not give him a chance. Therefore,
there must be trouble in the family.
. . . being far too occupied with the compulsive thoughts and fears of death from
which she suffered.
Compulsive thoughts and fears of death! It does not look like a compulsion
neurosis; it looks more like an anxiety neurosis. On this point I would like to
give you a rule from our experience which can be used. I like to ask: What
happens in these cases? What are the results if a married woman suffers from
fears of death and perhaps from other fears? What would it mean? She is
preoccupied with it, as we can see, and so many of her necessary tasks would not
be fulfilled. We see that she is much more occupied with her own person. She is
not interested, as we have heard, in the troubles of the man.
Therefore, we are in agreement on these points, but we are not far ahead.
We can understand that such a person cannot cooperate properly if she is
interested in the fear of death and other fears, and we understand there must be
many quarrels in this family.
These fears, indeed, occupied her mind to such an extent that at the time
she came for treatment, she had difficulty thinking of anything else.
At this point we are justified in answering our question as to what happens:
She cannot think of anything else. This is what we will always find and, if in
some cases it appears not to be so for a time, we will find confirmation later in
the description. This shows that our guesses are worthwhile, and encourages us
because we know that even if our guesses are not reflected in the present
circumstances, they predict what will probably happen later.
We read that she is thinking only of her fears.
A careful housewife, she had previously been governed by an almost obsessional
hatred of dirt and love of tidiness . . .
This gives another picture, a compulsion neurosis in regard to cleanliness,
probably a wash-compulsion neurosis. Because she was afraid of dirt, she must
always keep everything clean. She must wash and clean everything and herself.
In the same way, she suffers from a fear of death. There must be a mixed
neurosis, which is really very rare. In our general experience, the wash-
compulsion neurotics do not suffer from a fear of death. They may combine the
two ideas and say: “If I do not wash this desk, or these shoes and so on, my
husband will die,” or whatever it may be. But that is not the fear of death as we

find it in many anxiety neuroses. As I explained in a lecture in this room on
“Obsessions and Compulsion in the Compulsion Neuroses,” there is always an
underlying idea. Here the idea is that of cleaning away the dirt.
Now we understand more on this point. This woman is occupied in another
way than she is expected to be. She does not cooperate; she is interested only in
her own suffering, making everything clean, and perhaps the wash-compulsion.
Therefore, we conclude: This is a type that cannot solve the social problems of
life; she is not prepared for cooperation, but much more prepared for thinking of
herself. We know from our general experience that we find such a style of life
mostly in children suffering from imperfect organs, and in the great majority of
pampered, dependent children. More rarely we find it in neglected children,
because probably a child entirely neglected would die. The great majority of
these neurotic children have been pampered, made dependent, and given such an
idea of themselves that they are more interested in themselves than in others.
This woman is striving for a high ideal: to be cleaner than all the others. We
can understand that she does not agree with normal life; she wants it to be much
cleaner. Cleanliness is a pleasant characteristic and we like it very much. But if a
person focuses life on cleanliness, she is not able to live a normal life, because if
we have really inquired into cases of wash-compulsion neurosis, we will be
convinced that it is not possible to achieve the ideal of cleanliness these people
strive for. We will always find some dirt and dust. We cannot carry on life by
pointing merely to one part--cleanliness, for instance--because it disturbs the
harmony of life.
As far as I can see, only one part of life can never be overemphasized and
that is social interest. We cannot overemphasize it to the degree that it disturbs
the harmony of life. If we point to health and think only of it, we ruin our life; if
we think only of money, we ruin our life, in spite of the fact that, as we know, it
is unfortunately necessary to think of it. If we turn to family life and exclude all
other relationships, we ruin our life. It seems an unwritten law that we can turn
only to social interest without risking any damage.
Now we will see more.
. . . hatred of dirt and love of tidiness, both with regard to her home and to her
own person. She now began to neglect both of these.
This woman’s initial focus was on cleanliness and avoidance of dirt, but
now, she was broken down, so she gives up. We do not know why she appears
now in this state of mind, but she probably did not succeed in her imagination
with this compulsion neurosis and, therefore, she has made one step forward,
coming--if I have read and understood correctly--to a state in which she begins
to neglect herself and be dirty.

Here is an interesting point. I have never seen individuals as dirty as those
suffering from a wash-compulsion neurosis. If we enter the home of such a
person, there is a terrible smell. We find papers lying about, and dirt everywhere.
The hands and the whole body are dirty, all the clothes are dirty, and the person
does not touch anything. I do not know if it is so here, but this is the usual
condition among people with a wash-compulsion neurosis, and it is odd that all
these people experience some adventures that others never experience. Where
there is dirt, they are mixed in it. Probably it is because they look for dirt and are
not as clever as others in avoiding it. I have had a strange experience with people
who are always soiled when others can avoid it. It is like a fate hanging over
them; they continually find their way to dirt.
We do not know what the breakdown means in this case, perhaps a step
nearer to psychosis. That happens sometimes with people suffering from
compulsion neurosis.
Her fear of death referred to above was related to a definite knife phobia . . .
We can also call a knife phobia a compulsion idea, a frequent one people
suffer from if they see a knife. They feel they could kill someone. But they never
do. They stop at the idea. The meaning behind such an idea is hidden; we must
find out its whole coherence and meaning. It is similar to a person who is cursing
and says “I could kill you.”
We spoke before of disagreements. The husband is ambitious. As we know
from our general diagnosis of neurotic individuals, she is also ambitious. She
wants to rule, to be the head. She wants to be the cleanest person, so we can
understand how she avoids her husband, his personal approach, his sexual
approach, because of his lack of cleanliness. She calls everything dirty. She can
call a kiss dirty. We must find how far she is going to look for this dirt. She has
two children, but we believe this had not been her wish. Here we see the lack of
cooperation. If we look a little closer, we will surely find this woman is frigid.
Do you see why? She thinks merely of herself, and the sexual functions between
men and women can be correct only if they are fulfilled as a task for two people.
If a person is interested only in herself, the sexual feelings are not right. Thus,
we have frigidity. More rarely, we may have vaginismus, but it is usually
frigidity, and we can be sure that this woman does not cooperate. We can see her
lack of cooperation in the form of her sexuality. Therefore, we can be sure and
can predict-though we must not allow ourselves to do so, but should wait and be
patient--that she resents sexual intercourse.
We next read that this knife phobia was
. . . connected with both suicidal and homicidal tendencies.
Suicide is always a sign of someone not trained in cooperation. Because

this type of individual thinks merely of herself, when she faces a social problem
for which she is not prepared, she has such a feeling of her own worth and value
that she feels sure that, in killing herself, she hurts another person. If you have
seen similar cases, then you understand them. Therefore, we can say that suicide
represents an accusation and a revenge, an attacking attitude. We must look for
the person against whom this phobia is directed. Undoubtedly, it is her husband,
with whom, as we have seen, she must be in conflict. He wants to rule and she is
interested only in herself, so her revenge, attack, or aggression against somebody
must be against the husband. We can guess it, but let us wait to see if we can
prove it.
Her aggressive thoughts and feelings toward other people were shown in other
ways.
We do not know who these “other people” are, but in a way this contradicts our
view that she aims her aggression at the husband.
At times, she experienced an impulsive wish to hit her husband.
That is what I said before. As in general medicine, if we have guessed
something, we may find proof to confirm it. If we have rapidly diagnosed
pneumonia, for instance, we may find signs later that will prove it and which we
can predict; when we find such proof, we feel we are on terra firma.
. . . her husband or . . .
We know what must follow: her husband or the children. There is no one
else she could accuse. She would not like children. If you asked her: “Do you
like children?” she would say, “Yes; my children are my life!” In Individual
Psychology, we learn from experience that if we want to understand someone,
we have to close our ears. We need merely to look. In this way, we can see as in
a pantomime. Perhaps there are other people. Perhaps there is a motherin-law. It
is possible. We would not be astonished. But, as far as we know the situation, we
expect the children to follow.
. . . her husband or anybody else who happened to have annoyed her.
Who else can annoy her? We can see this woman is hypersensitive, and in
general diagnosis, hypersensitivity means a feeling of being in a hostile country
and attacked from all sides. That is the style of life of the person who does not
cooperate and feel at home, who constantly experiences and senses enmity in the
environment; therefore, we can understand that she reacts with such strong
emotion.
If I felt I were in a hostile country and expected attacks, to be annoyed and
humiliated, I would behave in the same way. I would be sensitive too. This is an
interesting point. We cannot explain these individuals merely by looking at their
emotion; we must look at their mistaken meaning of life and their early

childhood. She really believes she lives in a hostile country and expects to be
attacked and humiliated. She thinks only of herself and her own salvation, her
own superiority in overcoming the difficulties of life. These emotional people
must be understood from this point of view. If I believe an abyss is in front of
me, whether there is an abyss or not, it is all the same; I suffer from my
interpretation, not from reality. If I believe there is a lion in the next room, it is
all the same to me whether there is one or not. I shall behave in the same way.
Therefore, we must look for the individual’s interpretation. It is “I must be safe”:
a selfish meaning of life.
Now we read:
These characteristics had recently extended in two directions. On one hand,
at times she experienced a strong desire to hit any casual stranger she happened
to pass in the street.
Is it not as I have described? She lives in a hostile country where everybody
is an enemy. To want to hit any stranger she meets in the street means to be
impossible, to compromise herself. It means: “I must be watched; someone must
take care of me.” She forces other people, or one other person, to take care of
her. Whether she says it in words or not, she speaks with her attitude in life and
forces other people to take care of her when she behaves in this way. But we
must also look for the husband’s impression. His wife wants to hit every stranger
in the street and he lives with her in a social relationship. Therefore, whatever
she does affects him. He must do something. What can he do in such a case? We
suppose this husband is not a fool or feebleminded, and we can predict what he
has to do. He has to take care of her as far as possible, watch her, accompany
her, and so on. She gives him the rules for his behavior in doing so. This
ambitious woman, with an ambitious husband, has conquered. He must do what
she wants and commands. She behaves in such a way that other people must feel
responsible. She exploits him and is the commander; on this point, she rules.
Now let us see more:
On the other hand, she entertained homicidal feelings toward her younger son, a
child of four . . .
This we have not seen before, but we have guessed it: that the attacks
would be against the children. Here we have the second child specially pointed
out, giving us a chance to guess that she wanted to avoid this child, that he was
an unwanted child; it finds expression in her fear that she will kill him, that she
does not treat him properly. These feelings are sometimes so intense that the
husband must watch her. The husband now becomes a slave, and probably this
woman imagined long ago that she could make him a prisoner and slave. She
would have been satisfied if her husband had submitted in a general way, as

husbands sometimes do. But this husband was ambitious; he wanted her to
submit, wanted to subjugate her. He has lost and she has conquered. She could
not conquer in a usual way, convincing him, or perhaps taking part in all his
interests; therefore, she came to a point we can understand. She is right; she acts
intelligently. If her goal is to be conqueror, to subjugate her husband, she has
acted absolutely correctly. She has accomplished a creative work, a masterpiece
of art; we have to admire this woman.
I want to tell you how I handle such cases. I explain in short words. I say: “I
admire you; you have created a masterpiece of art. You have conquered.” I put it
pleasantly.
Now we want to establish a coherence. This woman looks for a fear that she
will kill somebody. We have to look for the internal unity. She leans on one
point and does not look for others. Other psychologists will say she is surprised,
but she is not surprised. I see it clearly. She does not want to see it, because if
she did, her remainder of social interest would rise up and contradict it. No
person who is not feebleminded or crazy would agree that she wanted to rule
other people in such a way; therefore, she is not permitted to look. But we must
make her look, so I prefer to have a pleasant talk and praise her for her
cleverness: “You have done correctly.”
Then there is the question whether, even before marriage, her goal was to
rule everybody. On this point we have to find out whether in childhood she was
also “bossy” and wanted to command everybody. If we can prove it as the next
step in our understanding, what shall we say of all the skepticism, all the
criticism that we do not know anything about this woman and how she was as a
child? If we can show that as a child she was “bossy,” in what other science can
we be so sure that we can postulate something which happened twenty-five or
twenty-eight years before? If we ask her for her earliest recollections, I am sure
she will tell us something in which we will find a “bossy” attitude, because we
will soon grasp the whole style of life of this woman. She is a “bossy” woman
who had the handicap of poverty, an ambitious husband, two children very early,
and no training in cooperation. She would be defeated in any normal situation,
and she is looking for a conquest in a way we could not call socially useful.
Sometimes the idea of killing the boy was so intense that she feared she might
carry the intention into execution.
The more she was afraid she would execute it, the more her husband must watch
her.
She stated that these symptoms had been in existence for oneand-a-half years.
If this is correct, we would be interested to find out what happened one-
and-a-half years ago, when this child was two-and-a-half years old. I would

understand it better if it had happened before the second child came, but if the
symptoms originated one-and-a-half years ago, then we must know what
situation the woman was in at that time and what affected her. We will find that
she had to offer cooperation and could not; because she was afraid she would be
subjugated, she resisted and wanted to conquer. But we must know.
More careful examination, however, seemed to show that definite neurotic
traits had been in existence many years, and had been accentuated since
marriage. Indeed, she volunteered the information that she “had not been the
girl she was since she had been married.”
“Since marriage.” This is very interesting, because from our general
experience we know three situations are like test examinations to show whether
a person is socially interested or not: friendship--how to behave with others;
occupation--how to be useful in work; and marriage
-how to cooperate with a person of the other sex. These are the test examinations
for how far a person is prepared for social relationships. If her symptoms have
been worse since marriage, this indicates that she was not prepared for marriage
because she was too interested in herself.
What of the family history? Many family histories do not say much. We
Individual Psychologists are used to hearing of some situations and facts
involving the child in a way we can understand, but we reject all descriptions
referring only to heredity, such as that an aunt was crazy or a grandmother a
drunkard. These do not say anything. They do not contribute to our
understanding. We are especially interested in imperfect organs, if we are to
grasp a case, because we often find children in a family tree where relatives have
suffered in some organs, and we may suspect that the children suffer from lack
of strength in those organs; but mostly we do not get much information from
these descriptions.
The family history showed signs of neurosis on both sides.
This is valuable because we can see that the family history of the child had
been a bad one. Neurotic means that the parents were fighting for things, to boss,
to rule, to subjugate others, to utilize and exploit others, so that the children in
such an atmosphere are really endangered. On this point, however, I have to say
that although they are endangered, we are not sure they really suffer. They can
overcome these dangers, find success, and gain some advantage from them. But
probability gives us the right to expect that the danger is that the whole make-up
and style of life will in some way be selfish.
At the same time, we must remember that the informant on this matter was
the patient, whose attitude toward her parents, at least, was not without personal
bias.

We want to see what her attitude was. This probably means it was a hostile
attitude toward the parents; she has struggled against them.
For example, she felt wronged that both her father and mother were only
children. As she pointed out, this meant she had no uncles or aunts and could
not receive presents as other children did.
This is a woman who constantly expects presents, thus betraying a good
deal of her style of life. She wants to receive, not to give. We understand that
this type has many difficulties in life, especially if she meets an ambitious man.
The father was a laborer. The mother was a hard-working woman who did
everything to keep the home together. She avoided responsibility, however, in
one important particular. If her children needed correction, she preferred to
leave that matter to her husband.
This means she did not feel strong enough, and utilized her husband for
punishments, as often happens in families. It is bad for the children because they
begin to disrespect and ridicule the mother, making a joke out of her because
they see her express herself as a weak person who cannot do the right thing.
This fact was unfortunate, since the latter was very sadistic.
I do not think “sadistic” means that he felt sexual satisfaction when he
slapped the children, but rather that he was rough and dominating, and
subjugated the children. Now we can understand how she has chosen the goal of
subjugating others. I have known many cases where the child gets the idea:
“When I am grown up, I will do the same with others: rule them and boss them.”
In his roughness, the father has given this child a goal. What does superiority
mean? What does it mean to be the most powerful person in the world? This
poor girl, who was always suppressed and mistreated as a child, could have no
idea that it is much better to be above and not down, to mistreat others and not
be mistreated. Now we see her from this point of view and on this level.
When we learned from his wife that his children had misbehaved in any
way, especially with reference to anything that related to money, for instance, if
they wore out the soles of their boots quickly, he would beat them almost
unmercifully.
On this point, we can learn something in regard to corporal punishment.
The consequence was that the children lived in dread of their father, at the
same time that for obvious reasons they did not confide in their mother.
Where should they learn cooperation, if neither from the father nor the
mother? Some small degree of cooperation must have been in this girl’s mind
because she was able to get married. She may have learned it from other
children, friends perhaps, but not from her father or mother.
Nevertheless, she maintained that he was a good father, except on Saturday

nights, when he frequently came home drunk.
This means that she preferred the father. When I read this, I am impressed
with the idea that she was the oldest child. Usually the oldest child, whether boy
or girl, turns toward the father. When another child comes, relations with the
mother are interrupted and the throne is vacant, which gives the father his
chance. But this is only a guess and we have to prove it.
He would then strike his wife as well as his children and openly threaten to cut
their throats.
She imitates the father in her compulsion idea: to kill somebody with the
knife--child, or husband. Did I not say that the father gave her the chance to
form her goal of superiority in this way?
Notice that the father merely cursed; he did not cut the throats of his
children. Therefore, I believe I am right in thinking that when she says she could
kill somebody, it is just a curse, an idea: “I could kill you!”
This latter point is possibly of interest in view of a similar symptom
exhibited by A. Indeed, in many respects her neurotic symptoms tended to imitate
her father’s characteristics.
The writer, a doctor, goes on to say:
Similar to the father, she was apt to hit her own children without adequate
provocation.
We do not agree with this point. She has a provocation. She wants to be
superior, as the father wanted to be superior. That is a provocation. “If I want to
dominate, I will use my children because they are the weaker ones and cannot hit
back.”
Though it is true she later regretted her cruelty . . .
Although we often hear about regret and the feeling of guilt, we Individual
Psychologists are skeptical in this matter. We do not judge this regret and feeling
of guilt very highly. We say it is absolutely empty and useless. After a child is
beaten hard, the regret does not matter. It is too much. Either one of these two
things would be enough: the regret or the hit, but not both. I would resent it very
much if somebody hit me and then regretted it. I have seen the feeling of guilt
used as a trick to mask a cruel attitude in bossing others. It means: “I am a noble
woman and I regret it.” I believe modern society should be warned not to take
regret seriously. We often find it among problem children. They commit some
act, cry, and ask forgiveness, then do it again. Why? Because if they did not
express regret, but only continued doing it, they would be rejected. Nobody
could bear it. By making a sort of safety zone where people will not confront
them, they feel that they outsmart others. So this woman is cruel and regrets it,
but what does that matter? The facts are all the same.

. . . this feeling had little or no power to prevent similar outbursts on a
subsequent occasion.
We expected that because the feeling of guilt is often used as a trick in cases of
depression. We are not deceived. We guessed correctly.
A. was the second child and girl of a family of eight: four girls followed by four
boys.
We know second children generally try much harder, though there are no
rules, and we speak only of majorities. They see life like a race, and they want to
overcome the first child. The reason I believed she was a first child was that she
turned to the father, but in some circumstances the second child may do so,
especially if she has been pampered, a third child comes, and she is in a situation
which draws her toward him.
We find second children striving to be first, as in the Bible story of Jacob
and Esau. It is also interesting to see from statistics that among juvenile
delinquents in America, second children are in the majority. Individual
Psychologists have begun a study of children of one and two years and younger,
which can be used for some understanding of their whole style of life. There will
be something good or something wrong about second children. It is like a race;
they try to overcome the first. Perhaps it was so in this case, but we do not want
to say more yet.
As a child, she said, she had been on the whole happy-go-lucky, cheerful, and
healthy . . .
If so, she was in the center of the stage and favored. She was perhaps the
favorite.
. . . very different from her oldest sister, whom she described as being silent
and withdrawn, characteristics which A. interpreted as selfishness.
Surely, it is selfish to be withdrawn because it means to think of oneself.
We can see that she was lucky in her striving because the older girl had the
aspect of a defeated child who had been overcome. We find this focus on
overcoming in A.’s whole make-up. She is easily able to succeed in her goal of
being mother and father and of being the boss, because the older sister has given
up and been conquered.
The parents seemed to have held a somewhat similar opinion, and treated their
oldest child with special severity.
The parents help her in her race by suppressing the oldest child.
She was frequently in trouble, and the severe beatings which she received from
her father filled A. with terror.
She was scared because the oldest child had been beaten so severely.
The rest of the family A. regarded with considerable affection, with the

exception, significantly enough, of her oldest brother.
That is, the first boy, who when he came was probably worshipped and
appreciated in a way she did not like; therefore, we can conclude (though we
must really prove it) that her position in the family was endangered by this boy.
As with her sister, so with him, she considered that he was selfish and
inconsiderate, “so different from the rest of us, except of course, T.” (the oldest
sister).
That she agreed with the other children means that she could rule them;
they did not make difficulties. This boy and the oldest sister made difficulties, so
she did not agree with them.
Medical History: As already mentioned, A. had been a healthy child and
prided herself on her robust health. From the age of fourteen to seventeen
inclusive, however, she had some degree of goiter from which she subsequently
recovered.
We see here a particular imperfection, as we often find among neurotic
patients. How far this influenced her we could learn only from the first child,
about whom we have little information.
Though she had no return of the trouble, form time to time in the course of
treatment she had considerable difficulty in times of stress in getting her breath,
a symptom which caused her considerable anxiety.
This symptom was probably not due to pressure of the thyroid, or it would
have been recognized and treated. It was most likely a psychological problem;
perhaps she could not breathe when she became emotional during the treatment,
or when she wished to pretend, or felt she was unjustly treated. All this may
have affected her breathing, but it could have been seen clearly if the thyroid
was causing pressure.
Her school achievements were quite good and at that time she had no difficulty
in making friends.
Do not forget that such people, selfish from the beginning and striving to be
in a favorable situation, do not lack all degrees of cooperation. Therefore, we are
not surprised that she probably succeeded in the beginning, wanted to be ahead
and lead the school, and found it easier to make friends. They may have been
friends who were willing to submit to her, but that is a point we could verify in
an interview.
She left school at the age of fourteen, but continued to live at home for some
months, going from there to daily work which she enjoyed.
In that case she probably had a good job, where she could express her opinion
and perhaps also rule others.
But as soon as she entered domestic service away from home, new troubles

began.
Domestic service means to submit, and this woman cannot submit. She
cannot submit in any way that can be accepted as cooperation. She must rule and
here we have new proof. She is not prepared for a situation in which others are
ruling. We find many girls who have to do domestic work and cannot submit.
For instance, I remember a governess who, when her female employer asked her
to clean the parrot’s cage, said: “You should ask what I want to do this
afternoon, and I will say that I would like to clean the cage of the parrot.” Thus,
it appeared to be her own idea; she was commanding. You meet the same thing
in army training, where the soldier, after he is commanded, must repeat the
command in such a way as if it were his own. We can see the wisdom of that
procedure.
Within a week of her arrival, she was attacked by such bad carbuncles on her
back that the doctor ordered her home again.
I do not go so far as to say that those carbuncles were the result of her
dislike, but it is a fact that if a person does not feel well in a particular place,
something may happen. My daughter, who is a psychiatrist and has made
researches into accidents, found that half of them occur among people who do
not like their job. When people hurt themselves at work, it is as though they say:
“It is because my father forced me to take this job, and I wanted another job.”
Half of all the accidents! Therefore, I am quite sure that things like carbuncles
can occur if a person does not like a certain situation.
She returned home with considerable trepidation because she knew that her
eldest sister, who had once similarly returned because of illness, had had a very
bad reception.
She had learned how not to behave.
For a time, however, everything went well. But soon her father became
openly dissatisfied at having to keep his daughter “eating her head off” as he
put it. Matters came to a climax when, one morning as A. entered the kitchen to
have breakfast, her father, without a word of warning, rushed at her with a
shovel, obviously intending to hit her over the head.
It was in the morning, so he was not drunk.
She rushed from the house in terror and hid from the family for the rest of
the day. It is possibly of significance, in view of her later fear of coffins,
undertakers, and all matters relating to the subject of death, that she spent most
of this time in the churchyard.
Now a new idea appears. In a way, we can see that this woman’s illness and
neurotic symptoms are an accusation against the father whether she knows it or
not. We are studying the natural history, the biology, of behavior. If we find one

bone, such as this neurotic symptom represents, we can relate it to the father.
The father is guilty and her symptom is an accusation against him. She might put
it in these words: “My father has tortured me so much that it is because of his
treatment that I am as I am.” The father had been wrong, but does it follow that
the daughter must also be wrong? Is it really like cause and effect? Is she forced
to be sick and make mistakes because the father made a mistake? This is a very
important question because that is what this woman, if we read her correctly, is
really saying: that because the father made a mistake, she must also do so. But
there is no real causality here, only the causality she has created. She has made
something into a reason which is not a reason. I have seen other children who
have been tortured by their parents go through this compulsion neurosis. It is not
like the causality we find in non-living things; even among non-living things,
causality is now beginning to be doubted.
In the evening, she was found by her mother who persuaded her to return
home. Her father treated the incident as a joke, laughing at her for “being such
a silly.” His daughter, however, did not treat the matter so lightly and vowed she
would never again return home to live, a resolution she kept for a long time.
Another resolution she had made, as I said before: “I must never be in a
situation where another person can rule me.” In the childish fashion we always
find in neurotic patients, she knows only contradiction and antithesis: to rule or
be ruled. Among all the failures in life, and not merely among neurotic
individuals, we find that they know only contradiction. They sometimes call it
“ambivalence” or “polarity,” but they constantly form judgments of
contradiction: down, above; good, bad; normal, not normal; and so on. In
children and neurotics, and in the old Greek philosophy, we find this looking for
contradiction.
In this way, she has vowed never to be ruled.
After this affair, she went once more into domestic service and appears to
have worked hard and diligently. However, she showed a preference for rough
work. Her dislike for doing “fiddle work,” such as dusting, she distinctly stated
to be due to her dread of breaking ornaments and so on.
She is a girl of robust health, who values strength and does not like
housekeeping. We remember her resentment of the oldest boy because he had
been preferred; she probably did not want to be a woman at all. She disliked
being occupied with dusting and such little matters. This would explain why she
was not prepared to be a married woman. This would be what I have called “the
masculine protest.” In such a case, if we force a person to do things she does not
like, she tries to exaggerate. We see anger, rage, and exaggeration.
This fact is of interest as the possible forerunner of her later openly

destructive wishes and feelings. At the age of eighteen she was engaged to a
young man whom she appears to have dominated.
We find the writer of this case history has been on the same track as we
have, she describes this domineering symptom when she points out that the
patient dominated this man.
In time, however, she came to dislike him for what she considered his
“stingy ways” and, after two or three years, dramatically broke off the
engagement by throwing the ring in his face.
That is not what we expect from a girl; we expect more polite behavior.
She related with pride, however, that he still maintained a somewhat
doglike devotion to her, and even at the time she came for treatment still
continued to ask after her. In spite of his manifestation of devotion, she never
showed any regret about her behavior in the whole matter.
She does not regret because she has no reason to do so.
During the war, she worked in a munitions factory in a provincial town, and
there she met the man who is now her husband.
We now remember this man. He is a cripple, and sometimes men and
women who want to dominate are fond of cripples and people who are weak in
some way, alcoholics whom they want to save, and people of a lower social
status than their own. I would warn girls especially, but also men, against
choosing in this way because in love or marriage no person can safely be looked
down on. They will revolt, as this man revolted.
He was hospitalized at the time, disabled from the war. He fulfilled her
ideal of a possible husband in two most important respects: he was tall and he
was not an alcoholic.
The father had been strong with his drunkenness, and the reason many
people, especially girls, fear alcoholics is that they cannot rule them. They fear
alcoholics and creeping things, like mice and insects, because they cannot rule
them and can be surprised by them. We understand why she would resent an
alcoholic, but why she preferred a tall man we do not know. It may have been
the remains of her admiration of her father, or she may have been tall, or have
thought it was more worthwhile to rule a tall man than a short one. We could
find this out only by asking her.
It is also possible that his injuries appealed to her love of power; her wish
to assume the dominant role was a notable trait in her character.
The writer has taken the point of view which I explained. We would
underline this and say her style of life was characterized by a very domineering,
bossy attitude.
For a time all went well. But when her Lance went to London, he then, for

reasons best known to himself, wrote letters well calculated to provoke her
jealousy.
If we understand that she wanted to rule him, to be alone with him and the
center of his attention, we know that jealousy is near at hand. She has to avoid
being dethroned as she was when the other children came in the family, and
when the boy came.
Unhappy and suspicious, A. followed him to London, obtained work as a
waitress in a restaurant, and did all in her power to hold onto her Lance.
We see how she strives to keep him.
At this point, the attitude of the two lovers toward each other seems to have
undergone a change. Not only did the woman assume the more active part in
their relationship . . .
Taking the more active part is further proof of her desire to dominate.
. . . but the man, formerly attentive and kindly, now became careless and
inconsiderate.
We saw in the beginning that she had forced him to be careful. At this point, we
read that he had become careless.
They made appointments for which he either came late, or not at all. A.
became suspicious, tearful, and “quite different from her former bright self.”
She was afraid of losing her former ruling position.
Matters came to a head when he failed for a second time to keep an
appointment with her, after she had waited for him for hours in the cold and fog
of a November night.
This is a difficult situation, and undoubtedly the man was also not adapted
for such a marriage. Any girl would be right to look on such negligence as an
injury. This girl could end no other way than with the creation of a compulsion
idea which she could use to conquer him again.
When she learned from him the next day that he had not kept his
appointment because he had gone out with some friends, she angrily told him
she did not wish to see him again.
She felt defeated. Perhaps we would be glad to get rid of such a partner, but she
does not want to be defeated. She wants to keep him.
She did not follow through on breaking off the engagement, however, a fact
for which she felt thankful when, three weeks later, she discovered that she was
pregnant.
Here is a good chance to speak of sexual relations before marriage.
Although it may seem in some cases to be an advantage, I have found that it is
primarily a disadvantage and as doctors, we should advise people to wait. It
always causes trouble.

She felt desperate about the pregnancy and for the first time had definite
suicidal feelings. Her Lance endeavored to comfort her, promising to marry her
as soon as possible--which he did three or four weeks later. The question of her
residence for the next few months now arose. She dreaded returning home
because her father had said he would have nothing to with any of his daughters
if they got into trouble. Though his threat proved to be unfounded, and she was
allowed by her parents to return home, she felt very unhappy during this time.
Actually, she felt defeated.
Her misery was accentuated by the birth of a son; both she and her husband had
hoped for a daughter.
This is something we would not expect. We would expect them to hope for
a son. Why they wanted a daughter could be explained only by these two people.
But perhaps if they had had a daughter, the new mother would still have been
disappointed.
It may be pointed out in passing that A.’s desire for a daughter and
subsequent disappointment were connected with her later hostility toward her
sons.
As we cannot verify her statements without asking her, we must assume she
disliked the men in her environment: her father, then her brother. Probably, by
wanting a daughter and disliking men, she wanted to prove the dramatic contrast
between male and female because these neurotic people look on men and women
as opposite sexes. You know the widespread notion: the opposite sex. If you
exaggerate it, you get antagonism toward the opposite sex, which is often found
both in men and women, especially among neurotic individuals.
After the birth, she returned to London to live in two rooms with her
husband. However, the situation soon got worse. Initially, she got on well with
her neighbors, but soon feelings of inferiority began to assert themselves. These
feelings seem to have been connected with jealousy of her husband, who was
popular and well-liked generally. She interpreted passing words and looks of
those around her as criticisms directed against herself.
She probably looked on the neighbors as subjects she could rule; therefore, good
relations never existed.
As a conscious reaction against the sensation that she was despised, she not
only avoided making friendships, “keeping herself to herself” as she described
it, but she also used to sing hymns in a loud voice to show her neighbors first,
that she was not afraid, and second, that she at least had been well brought up.
Unfortunately, her criticisms of her neighbors were not without justification, as
quarrels and drunken brawls were frequent. In addition, she and her husband
found constant cause for disagreement. The methods she employed to gain his

sympathy were characteristic. Thus, after a quarrel, she would retire to bed and
threaten to kill herself and the child unless the situation improved.
We see how she wanted to use force.
So matters continued, going from bad to worse until A.’s neurotic symptoms
became so manifest that her husband took her to see a doctor. He diagnosed her
condition as nervous indigestion, and recommended that all her teeth should be
extracted.
I presume this was meant as a punishment, not as medical treatment!
After some hesitation she decided to take this advice, and with this end in
view went to the hospital accompanied by a friend. The latter was then
considerably annoyed when A., after an hysterical outburst in front of the doctor
and nurses, refused to have her mouth touched.
This suggests that she really understood the situation better than anyone
expected.
Naturally, this same friend refused to accompany her a second time to the
hospital. Therefore, on the second occasion A. went alone, when it is noteworthy
that, though nervous, she was able to have three or four teeth extracted without
trouble. On the next occasion, however, matters did not go so smoothly. She had
an hysterical outburst following the extraction of twelve teeth, due, she
maintained, to the fact that she saw and felt the whole operation although under
an anesthetic. The fantastic nature of these “memories” was obvious. In
accordance also with her sadistic tendencies, it is hardly surprising that these
“remembrances,” to which she frequently referred, made a deep impression on
her.
Now, imagine this woman: thirty years of age! They extracted, as far as I
can count, sixteen teeth! I think a woman who had no “sadistic tendencies”
would not look on this fact in a humorous spirit! It makes a deep impression. If
you know what it means to a woman or a man to lose the first teeth, you will
appreciate that this woman has lost sixteen. And she is jealous of her husband!
She explained how she had suffered. I hope I am explaining it correctly, but her
“memories” about the operation may have another explanation. This woman
likes to explain how much she has suffered. She probably had some dreams, as
happens in narcosis, so she tells these “memories” to impress others with how
she has suffered.
I do not think we should speak of sadistic tendencies in the way that has
become common in our time, because they refer to sexual gratification. All
forms of attack are not “sadism.”
Shortly after this, her second child was born.
We see that it was a time of distress, when she fought hard for her superior

position.
The fact that he was a boy caused her great disappointment; she had been
quite certain that the infant would be a girl. The impotence of her wishes in the
face of reality severely wounded her vanity. From now on, her neurotic tendency
became more and more evident. The resentment she felt toward her infant was
the obvious prelude to her later consciously felt wish to kill the child.
You will remember that in speaking of the first symptoms and when they
occurred, I said I could have understood it if it had been when the second child
came, because her importance would weaken and become less since she now has
to share with two children, and she wants herself to be the center, not the
children. She will feel resentment more strongly, and a desire to kill.
At the same time, a drunken neighbor with a knife in his hand threatened to
take her life, giving her a reason for an exacerbation of her symptoms. It also
gave her a reasonable excuse for refusing to stay in the house where they were
living, although it was impossible to obtain any other room in the neighborhood
at the moment.
This house really was not well-suited for a bossy woman. Even the
neighbors did not like her. In this case we also find that a paranoid symptom
appears; in a way the manner in which this woman behaves is similar to
paranoia--as if others would pursue her, be interested in her, and look at her. But
even a compulsion neurosis reaches further and touches some symptoms
generally described under another title. There are mixtures in this way.
In addition, by this means she was able to leave her husband for a time, she
and her children finding a temporary home with her motherin-law, her husband
remaining in London. The arrangement, however, did not prove happy.
The motherin-law probably did not submit.
This unhappiness was partly because of the critical attitude of the
motherin-law toward her daughter-in-law, and partly because A. felt hostile
toward her motherin-law from the start, owing to the unfavorable comparisons
her husband frequently drew between her and his mother.
The usual situation.
By mutual consent, therefore, the arrangement was terminated and A. and
her children went to stay with her parents. From there she was recalled to
London because her husband had had a “nervous breakdown” in her absence
and wanted her to nurse him.
We do not know the husband. Perhaps he also wanted to dominate somebody.
It seems improbable that it was merely a coincidence that at the same time he
had been able to find rooms for the family.
He probably used nervous symptoms, wanting to impress her in this way with a

“nervous breakdown.”
Shortly after her return to London, she was overcome by obsessive thoughts
and feelings which gradually came to occupy her attention more and more, to
the exclusion of almost everything else. She dated this phase of her illness back
to a terrifying dream of angels surrounding a coffin.
This is the thought of death, but we see what it means. It affects the
husband. She has a dream of angels surrounding a coffin, so he has to take care
of her.
Significantly, she constantly associates this dream with a picture of her old
home, at which she frequently gazed when pregnant with her first child.
We understand that at this time she played with the idea of suicide. While
looking at the picture, she imagined family members being impressed and fearful
at the possibility of her suicide. With this threat, she felt she was “the master of
the game.”
The rest of the case notes deal with treatment, which is not part of my lecture. I
simply wanted to show you the coherence of a life style. Part 3

The Case of Miss R.1 2
The Interpretation of a Life Story
By Alfred Adler
Translated by
Eleanor and Friedrich Jensen, M.D.
[1929]
1 Originally titled Die Technik der Individualpsychologie, Volume 1, Die
Kunst, eine Lebens und Krankengeschichte zu lessen. Published by Bergman,
Munich, 1928. Translated into English by Eleanor and Friedrich Jensen and
published by Greenberg, Publisher, Inc., New York, 1929. 
2 Additional editing by Henry T. Stein, Ph.D., 2005.
Translator’s Preface

I
Every human problem is a social problem. Every human problem concerns
not only one individual, but also the society in which that individual lives. Every
person is tied by intangible threads to his community. There exists, or rather,
should exist, a mutual give and take between him and the community which
lives through him and through which he lives. The community makes possible
his early upbringing, his education, and the development of his abilities. The
community enables him to live. As a result, he inevitably faces a set of social
problems the solution of which is vitally important for establishing his physical
and mental balance which, in turn, the community values highly. Out of the
infinite number of social problems we can form three main groups: (1) social
relationships (attitude toward fellow men, friends); (2) work (occupation or
profession in the case of an adult, school in the case of child); (3) sex (love and
marriage).
Probably no one has ever solved these great, general problems completely.
Such a solution would require perfect objectivity and unbreakable courage, two
of the rarest and most precious of human qualities. But a complete solution of
these problems is not important. What is important is the honest effort an
individual makes to meet and solve his problems, the sincerity with which he
tackles them, and the courage with which he faces them. Those who draw back
afraid, who make exclusively individual problems out of general social ones to
satisfy their secret lust for power, act absolutely against the community, against
what Adler terms “social feeling.” When that happens, we speak of a neurosis.
This book tells the story of the development of a neurosis. A young girl
relates the fascinating story of her unhappy life; the psychologist comments on
her remarks, leading the reader to an understanding of the mistakes which have
made her life so full of suffering. Dr. Adler originally presented the Individual
Psychological interpretation of this autobiography to a group of psychiatrists and
educators in Vienna.
Publication of this study in book form makes it available to a larger circle
of readers. The interest in Individual Psychology, expressed not only by our
professional contemporaries, but by the general public as well, is steadily
growing and the radius of its influence is increasing from day to day. Yet many
who have heard of this great intellectual movement are not familiar with it; and
not all those who will want to read this book will be sufficiently familiar with
the system of Individual Psychology to be able to follow its contents with full

understanding. With the intention of submitting this extraordinary life story to as
extensive a circle of readers as possible, I give a concise survey of the theory and
practice of Individual Psychology for those who have little or no acquaintance
with it.
The theoretical system of Individual Psychology was founded by the
Viennese psychiatrist, Dr. Alfred Adler. Adler’s conception of the structure and
function of the mind in relation to the body, of the striving of all psychic
expressions and activities toward a goal, and of the mutual relationship between
the individual psyche and the community is so illuminating and clarifying that it
has quickly brought his ideas to the forefront of modern psychology.
Adler proceeds from the fact that bodily defects should not only be
considered as signs of physical weakness, but also frequently lead to attempts at
compensation and overcompensation. As soon as there is a physical disturbance,
the body attempts to compensate for it. Since every bodily disturbance makes an
impression on the mind, a mental striving occurs concurrently with the
compensatory efforts of the body, with the aim of overcoming or, at least,
making up for this defect in some way. For instance, the body may not be able to
make a physical compensation for defective vision, but there may be a mental
compensation in the form of greater clarity in thought or improved inner
visualization (that is, recapturing with greater accuracy the details of things
seen). The bodily defect, recording itself on the psyche as well, may direct the
mind to an interest in the visible side of life, as it were; just as a defective ear
may increase interest in and perfect the comprehension of sound. This would be
a mental or psychic compensation. If there is no possibility of compensating for
the physical defects by physical means, there still remains a purely psychical
compensation in the form of greater clarity of thought, or an ability to recapture
the outer world in correct detail before one’s inner eye. This can frequently be
observed among those whose vision has become weak. In most cases, however,
a bodily as well as mental compensation takes place.
The biological law of compensation, as a phenomenon of all living matter,
plays just as important a role on purely psychical as on physical ground. It is the
power behind psychic preservation and development; the propelling force of the
power is life itself.
Adler has termed such defects “organ inferiorities.” According to him,
every inferiority produces an urge for improvement, for an adjustment to the
demands of the environment which will compensate for the inferiority. However,
some inferiorities found in a healthy body and normal mind arise solely because
of a particular body and mind are comparatively less developed than the majority
of human beings. Every child faces this situation in early life.

Because of his limited abilities, every healthy child feels inferior,
consciously or unconsciously, in a world of gigantic and apparently
selfsufficient adults. This relative feeling of inferiority is compensated under
favorable conditions by a striving for recognition on the “useful side of life.”
The feeling of inferiority or insecurity, like every unpleasant feeling, requires a
quick, compensatory balancing. A feeling of superiority or security obviously
compensates for a feeling of inferiority. The child learns this process by
experience, gradually establishing a fixed, but fictive goal of superiority or
security which, according to his own unconscious interpretation or evaluation of
his position and faculties, lies more or less close to reality.
We must not assume that the child thinks of such a goal in conscious,
logical terms as we do when we race to win a prize or struggle to attain
distinction. In only a fraction of cases is the goal ever verbalized in a childish
way by expressing the wish to become like the father, or a king or a policeman,
which in the child’s world, are always dominating positions. We can merely
draw the conclusion from the child’s actions that he is striving for a perfection
which will compensate for his inferiorities. He may never have spoken of these
inferiorities and may not even be conscious of them, but he feels them as surely
as we can observe them through the mechanism he sets up to compensate for
them. Conscious inferiority thoughts are on an entirely different level from the
unconscious feeling of inferiority, and serve an entirely different purpose.
When this feeling of inferiority is aroused, he begins to train for the
attainment of his fictive goal by employing his psychic qualities, such as
sensitivity, volition, perception, memory, and so on, as useful instruments, and
develops them in conformity with his interpretation of his situation. The sum
total of all forms of an individual’s expression is called his character; his method
of approaching his personal goal of superiority when confronted with life’s tasks
is termed his style of life. When we discover the goal of an individual, we are
then able to understand his character and style of life, and modify them.
The most satisfactory compensation for the feeling of inferiority is the
development of courage, common sense, and social feeling. An individual
compensating satisfactorily approaches life in a sincere and fearless manner,
tries to solve his problems and accomplish his tasks as they come along, and
adapts himself to the community in which he lives. He trains in an upward
direction, toward a superiority concerned with progress, improvement,
adjustment to the world, in short, with useful things. Adler calls this “the striving
on the useful side of life.” What is useful? The shortest definition I can frame is:
Everything is useful that promotes life; everything is useless that inhibits life.
However, life is not only the living of a single individual; life means the living

of all with whom an individual comes in contact, physically and mentally.
Striving for useful superiority, that is, for the promotion of life, therefore, means
the promotion of all living things or, in other words, the development of social
feeling. Just as courage grows out of the successful accomplishment of tasks,
social feeling grows out of devotion to others, assisting others, out of firm belief
in and appreciation of others. An attitude so oriented cannot be egocentric; it
simply has to be othercentered and task-centered. In approaching the great
problems of life: work, social relationships, and love, we develop common
sense, courage, and social feeling..
However, if the child has a heavier burden to bear as a result of physical
defects (“organ inferiorities”) or unfavorable social and environmental
circumstances, the normal, relative inferiority feeling increases to an absolute
one. Again compensation sets in, this time, however, the longer and more deeply
the child senses the feeling of inferiority, the greater the drive toward
compensation. The visible result of this compensation is an increasingly intense
striving for that feeling believed by the individual to be the only sure remedy for
the inferiority sting. Such a person will either accomplish something
extraordinary, provided he has sufficient courage to direct his intense drive into
useful channels (great artists, scientists, and explorers); or he will accomplish
little or nothing, by avoiding in a cowardly fashion the difficult road of a useful
striving for recognition, and choosing the seemingly easier path to power at any
price. These individuals strive with all their might for the illusion of superiority,
for triumphs over and the suppression of their fellow human beings because of
purely egocentric reasons, in order to elevate their own shattered self-esteem,
regardless of how much pain and trouble their antisocial behavior costs them. If
all the energy and skill spent in attaining that sort of goal were employed in
useful ways, neurotic individuals would achieve far beyond the average of their
more courageous and more social contemporaries.
In an organized civilization, an attempt to overcome all assumed
competitors by a fictitious superiority has to fail, except perhaps in the small,
restricted circle of a family. Thus, its results are uselessness in a generally social
sense, and instead of the development of courage, common sense, and social
feeling, a constantly increasing discouragement, egocentricity, and asocial or
antisocial feelings (criminals) accompanied by feelings of inadequacy,
insufficiency, dissatisfaction, and disgust. The futility of all neurotic efforts to
master the world in which we live, without appropriate justification, induces
such individuals to retreat farther and farther until they reach the vast region
where responsibility for their activities is no longer required: the region of
disease.

The sick are exempted from duties; they are irresponsible, especially when
they are considered mentally ill. To use the cloak of disease as a means to attain
one’s goal is a dangerous deception, for the patient himself, who does it
unconsciously, as well as for everyone who is deceived by it.
This evasion and deception characterizes all neuroses (including nervous
breakdowns, neurasthenia, hysteria, delinquency, perversions, addiction to
drugs, etc.) and psychoses. Individual Psychology offers understanding,
prevention, and treatment of all these neurotic and psychotic conditions. No one
is compelled to follow one road or the other. According to Adler, it is
unnecessary to believe in inherited character traits. Everyone can achieve
everything necessary in life, including his own misfortune. For the neurotic,
disease is nothing but the price which the cowardly, asocial egotist has to pay for
offending the “logic of life.”

II
To make more easily comprehensible the neurotic life scheme and the
particular form of nervous disorder discussed in this book, Adler’s conceptions
of the construction of neuroses in general will be delineated in somewhat more
detail in the following paragraphs. What happens in a nervous disorder?
The feeling of inferiority, when compensation takes a neurotic direction,
drives the patient to achieve as absolute a domination as possible over his
surroundings. The disorder with all its arrangements serves different purposes:
(1) to be used as an alibi for evading the problems of life and as an excuse for
refusing to assume responsibility; (2) to serve as a cloak when life withholds the
desired triumphs; (3) to be able to postpone decisions; and (4) to emphasize
achieved ambition because it has been attained despite the disorder.
The neurotic thus has the fictive goal to strive for in order to safeguard his
ostensible superiority. His actions are directed from this point and maintain a
typical pattern. The compulsion to achieve superiority is so powerful that every
psychic phenomenon constitutes, aside from its outward appearance, an attempt
to get rid of the feeling of weakness or inadequacy, to rise from below to above.
In order to create the desired arrangement and safety from defeat in
overcautiously preparing to experience and comprehend the world’s events, the
neurotic uses a number of rules and formulas in life which, in accordance with
his infantile attitude, form a primitive, antithetical “private logic.” He perceives
only those qualities which correspond to the “below” and “above” in his scheme,
and usually tries to relate these qualities to the more easily comprehensible
contrast of masculine-feminine. He endeavors to force violently onto a
masculine track traits in his character condemned as feminine, such as
obedience, cowardice, tenderheartedness, passive behavior, and all sorts of
incapacities. He develops hate, cruelty, stubbornness, egotism and other
tendencies which are supposed to secure him triumphs (“masculine protest”).
This is an aggressive protest, but the aggression may also be expressed by
passive means when the neurotic attempts to conquer by his weakness, forcing
his environment to be subservient to him. Moreover, this strategy enables him to
escape dreaded decisions with ostensibly sufficient reasons.
When an individual feels that the development of “masculine” qualities in
life is necessary but impossible for him, he will avoid the struggles and problems
of life, fearing he may be accused of appearing “feminine.” “In such a case, we
find a striving that deviates from the direct road and, because of constant fear of

mistakes and defeat, tries to make safe detours.” (Adler)
Neurotic purposiveness is based on two unconscious premises: (1) all
human relationships are struggles for supremacy; (2) the female sex is
subordinate and inferior, its weakness serving as a measure of masculine
strength. These two premises can be found in men as well as in women and
distort all human relationships. Useful communication is replaced by constant
dissatisfaction. The neurotic symptom represents the excessive greed for
superiority; it produces a semblance of victory over the environment. According
to Adler, to understand the language of symptoms is one of the chief tasks of
psychotherapy.
The neurotic’s style of life and the arrangement of his particular neurosis
are closely connected. The feeling of inferiority, arising from actual facts, then
inflated and later maintained, drives the patient to set his goal in early childhood
far beyond all human proportions. In order to establish this goal, he surrounds
himself with a wide net of precautions in order to maintain his superiority. In a
case of washing compulsion, the goal in view is to be the cleanest human being
on earth, an entirely useless enterprise, of course. What really happens is that
this extraordinarily clean person neglects the simplest duties of life (including
cleanliness), avoids responsibilities, exerts pressure on others, retreats from
reality with many excuses, but still retains an illusion of superiority (“No one is
as immaculately clean as I am …”)--at least in the small circle of the family.
The neurotic scheme of life is rigid and compulsive, and can be traced only
when we succeed in comprehending the general goals of the patient. For
example, somebody will use a fear of leaving his house (agoraphobia) in order to
raise his own prestige in his family and so force his environment to obey him, by
unconsciously connecting the thought of being left alone or going out alone,
with fear-producing images of personal misfortunes or accidents to others. Every
possible defeat is anticipated and exaggerated by connecting it with thoughts of
death, illness, or all sorts of mischief. Thus, the neurotic manages to escape a
useful life by establishing pessimistic trains of thought.
On the other hand, the neurotic frequently displays extreme expectations.
Followed by just as extreme disappointments, these expectations are designed to
justify the patient in producing all kinds of demonstrative emotions, such as hate,
grief, sullenness, etc. Disappointed expectations are most frequently seen in
cases where the patient wants to avoid his sexual problems. Some men, to use a
frequent example, divide all women into two classes: madonnas and prostitutes
(private logic). The madonnas are unattainably high, the prostitutes despicably
low. If such a man becomes acquainted with one of the unattainably high
madonnas, his illusions are soon demolished since women are human beings and

not madonnas. The disappointment, following such an unwarranted assumption,
proves him ostensibly right and permits him merely to keep on wishing. “As
long as someone merely wishes, nothing is going to happen,” says Adler.
Someone may take the greatest pains imaginable to attain the alleged goal
of his wishes. That is his justification. But since he is a victim of his
subconscious, fictive goal of superiority, the arrangements he makes to approach
the rational goal of normal sexual relations will prove impossible for that
purpose, for these arrangements really tend to preserve the fictitious goal of
superiority. Normal love relationships, however, are impossible as long as one
person believes he must be or is superior or inferior to another. Thus, he is
excused and his unconscious goal of superiority is not endangered. Adler has
illustrated the neurotic contradiction in the following way: The pretense of
desiring a normal goal is expressed by a patient’s saying “Yes,” the actual goal
expressed by an excusing “But.” The sequence of “yes-but” typifies the pattern
of the neurotic. Example: A man wants to marry, but he does not find a girl. He
tries to meet the “right” girl, but does not succeed. That is possible, for a while at
least. However, for twenty years he does not succeed in finding a woman to
marry, and is “safe.” Adler calls the “yes-but” attitude the shortest and most
cogent definition of a neurosis.
A third means of escaping defeat and inferiority feelings consists of
anticipatory sensations, emotions, and perceptions, ominous “identifications
which, in relation to dangerous situations, have a preparing, warning or
stimulating effect and which occur in dreams and all forms of neurotic
delusions” (Adler). The girl in this book anticipates in graphic fashion a whole
string of misfortunes in order to escape the dreaded problems of life and to
maintain her dominating position in an imprudent pampering family, no matter
how high the price of suffering was for all concerned.
Psychic treatment, therefore, has three essential tasks: (1) the disclosure of
the neurotic system or style of life; (2) gradual encouragement in facing reality;
and (3) redirecting toward useful goals in social life as described above. The
success of the treatment depends as well on the cooperation and sincere efforts
of the patient. The tendency to assume the role of the superior induces him to try
to defeat his physician at every opportunity. In order not to have to change his
goal, the neurotic will do everything possible to forestall a cure by arranging
disturbing emotions, falling in love with the physician, or exhibiting a hostile
attitude toward him. The physician has to continually investigate and explain the
arrangements and constructions of the neurotic style of life until the patient, his
position made untenable, gives them up. Frequently, to be sure, he substitutes
new mechanisms, still better concealed. Step by step, the patient’s unattainably

high goal and its purposive, constraining consequences have to be unveiled. The
sincere, sensible, and courageous attempt to approach the three main problems
(social relationships, work, and love) leads to a useful, harmonious life.

Chapter I Early Childhood
We usually learn from books, whether we want to or not. At least we hope
to discover in them some answer to our own questions and some solution to our
own difficulties. This is especially true when we pick up a book about the
problems of our psychic life. What other purpose can the study of psychology
have if it does not give us some practical help with our difficulties, or at least
make it possible to help ourselves?
In this book I attempt to give the reader an insight into the principles and
techniques of Individual Psychology. This art of treating the human mind is
demonstrable and open to everyone who believes in the connective unity of
human life. We must know the handwriting symbols of our speech in order to
read the language we speak. Just as with this knowledge we can read an
otherwise strange language, so must we know the symbols of the soul in order to
read a life.
We often read biographies; many are filled with dramatic and exciting life
stories. Most of them concern individuals whose life or achievement was in
some way unusual or dramatic. The activity of the individual or the literary form
usually makes the biography interesting. Here I take a life story, vivid and
colorful, nevertheless the story of a girl of ordinary station and no particular
accomplishment. I believe this story will illustrate that the psychological side of
biography may well be the most fascinating.
The art of Individual Psychology is based on knowledge and common
sense. Only to those laboring under psychological prejudices will it appear odd
or tricky. In this book I proceed as I do in my office when I listen to a patient’s
story for the first time. The comments on the story are based on no more
knowledge of the facts than are available to the reader. With intention, I proceed
extemporaneously and tell the story as it was given to me, reading it for the first
time as I give my interpretation. With every sentence, with every word of the
patient, I consider: What is the real meaning of what she is saying? What is her
attitude toward life? What do her words mean in light of her deeds? How does
she meet the demands life makes of her? How does she behave toward her
fellow human beings? How does she perform her duties (or fail to perform
them)? Does she move toward reality or illusion?
Provided with the limited information of this story, the gaps in which we
gradually fill from our own experiences, we observe this girl endeavoring to
achieve a complete expression of her personality and to master the problems of

living. We go back to early childhood because I believe the development of a
human being is largely determined in the first four or five years.
I now begin the story of Miss R. It is as unknown to me as it is to you, and I
comment as I read.
I remember that father frequently asked me . . .
It is worthwhile inquiring: Why not the mother? “Father” has a special
significance. This child, a girl, was much more strongly attached to her father
than to her mother. What does that mean? Because the child prefers her father,
we can conclude that he must be a tenderhearted man. A child is first attached to
her mother. That is natural and easily understood. The mother represents to the
child her first connection with the world. The mother helps her and usually
pampers her. The second phase begins later when the child has become
somewhat more independent. She seeks to attach herself to those who treat her
best; that is to say, she either remains attached to her mother or turns to others.
Here the mother had started to pamper the child, but apparently could not
compete with the father in the child’s attention.
Do you feel well? Does anything hurt you?
The girl begins her story with a childhood remembrance. Psychological
experience has shown us that childhood remembrances are not as meaningless as
we had formerly supposed. From the endless store of childhood memories each
of us has, only a few are carried over to maturity, emphasizing the importance of
these remembered impressions. So when an adult tells us of an early
remembrance which is particularly clear to him (it matters little whether it is the
first), we are able to interpret from it the speaker’s personal attitude toward life.
This is, in essence, the attitude he has retained up to the moment of telling, even
if that is twenty, thirty, or forty years later. If his attitude toward life changes
with time, the childhood memories which occur to him before and after such a
change will differ.
A concrete example may clarify this point. Suppose you are in a strange
city for the first time and are being taken over a long road from the train station
to the house of your host. Of course, you will see a great many things on the
way. On arriving home, you are asked what you remember and you may answer:
a monument in the park, some flowers in a window, a delicatessen store, a horse
being whipped, the shrill whistle of a factory, the severe jolting of the taxi and so
on. But because you were being led and at the same time had confidence in your
leader, you would pay little attention to the route. On the other hand, were you
alone in the city and forced to find your own way on foot, you would notice
landmarks, guides, and direction and be able to describe in exact detail the way
you had come.

A child is alone in a strange city depending for guidance on his mother,
father, or whoever the preferred person is. He will remember only those things
which make a sharp impression because they fit into an already established
scheme of perception or attitude toward life.
Therefore, we endeavor to draw some conclusions from the early
remembrances of this girl. These conclusions are further corroborated in that the
girl thought the facts of sufficient importance to put them at the beginning of her
story.
Her father must have been an extraordinarily soft, weak man, and the girl
must have been a very spoiled child. We infer that this girl will always see to it
that she is pampered. She will want to be the center of attention, constantly
trying to draw everyone’s focus to herself. Difficulties arise as soon as such a
child comes in contact with other people who do not give her the same attention
she receives from the person who pampers her. In such a case we find a strong
tendency to reject, an aversion to strangers, a critical attitude toward and lack of
interest in others, and a reluctance to adjust to new situations. This pampering
may be based on her father’s nature, or she may be in an exceptional position.
She is either an only child, growing up under especially unfavorable
circumstances, or she may be the only girl among boys, or the youngest child.
One of her organs may be deficient in functioning.
I never felt quite well.
We cannot accept literally the statements of our patients. Such statements
must not influence us as they influence the patients themselves. What this girl
means to say is: I was a sickly child.
I always had some temperature . . .
That is hard to believe.
. . . and my hands were so hot and dry that I had to moisten them with my
tongue.
We know there are better ways of moistening the hands; moreover, in a
case of fever the tongue is also dry. She may have used her tongue to moisten
her hands for quite another purpose than the one she mentions. We can
frequently observe children using their tongues for purposes which those around
them disapprove of. Her father probably did not like it and the girl has thus
drawn her father’s attention to herself. We are therefore able to note another
trait: The girl has a strong inclination to secure and strengthen her central
position by misbehaving.
My father told me later that my life had hung by a thread.
Many healthy people have been told this. At one time, I was also told that
my life “hung by a thread.” Later, I saw this was not true. In most cases such a

remark is an exaggeration which serves to make the speaker or writer more
important. He who feels it necessary to exaggerate must feel inferior. The girl
does not tell what ailed her. We learn merely that she was a fragile child who did
not eat very well, but apparently only because she had been spoiled. We know
the practice among children of refusing to eat; it serves the purpose of drawing
attention to themselves.
I never had any appetite, never liked to eat anything. I could not stand the
taste of food and I chewed the morsels as if they were paper or grass. I
remember vaguely that my parents complained about me to our physician. The
only thing that had any taste was mother’s milk; I am said to have fought
desperately every attempt to wean me.
She writes extremely well.
Thus I remained a nursing infant for an extraordinarily long time, in fact, for
five years.
That is quite improbable. But even if it were for only two years, we can
assume this girl was deeply attached to her mother. This confirms our previous
statement; namely, that the attachment to her father represents the second phase.
Perhaps incorrect treatment in the child’s infancy was one of the reasons for
withdrawing from her mother. It is a tragedy for a child as old as two to need
weaning.
I can still see my mother’s beautiful white breast in front of me.
It is not so certain that the child has remembered this; someone can form
such images subsequently. Again we have to bear in mind that such an image
serves certain purposes which seem to have nothing to do with the image. We
have found up to the present that this girl has been spoiled and, as a
consequence, makes other people serve her. Her interest is directed toward the
devotion of others to herself. It is painful to her to have to relinquish her
mother’s breast since much tenderness and attention accompany such an easy
method of nourishment. This girl still thinks there was nothing wrong with her
upbringing.
I felt ashamed. When we had visitors, I used to whisper in mother’s ear,
“Come, let me drink.” Then she had to seat herself where no one could see us.
The child therefore knew that it was a disgrace.
When mother went to visit the relatives of her dead first husband, she did
not know what to do with me. My older sister was willing to take me on her
breast, but I said: “It is not the same as when mother takes me. You are blond
and mother is dark. I don’t like blond hair.”
We can observe from this remark what trifles and superficialities play a part
in preference for or rejection of a person. Someone is agreeable to us because he

has eyes like one of our friends; another we spurn because he speaks like a
teacher whom we hated. We like a girl because her hair is the same color, her
complexion or her figure the same as our mother’s. Often we do not know by
what delicate, undetectable mechanisms our sympathies are aroused. Even those
persons whom we select to love and marry have, in many cases, appealed to us
so strongly merely because they seem to bear a superficial, usually physical
resemblance to the former recipient of our affection. In such cases, the
connection can remain completely obscured, and usually does.
As we now know, this girl was very much attached to her mother in early
childhood and stresses distinguishing characteristics which are of no importance
to us.
I myself had dark hair.
She speaks about hair for the second time. She places an odd emphasis on hair.
My father had my hair cut low on my forehead. At that time I wore a blue
cape with red lining and I wanted to have a hat. Every time we passed a store, I
cried, “Hat! Cape!”
Vanity and a great penchant for externals developed early. There was a strong
emphasis on beauty.
They could not get me away from the stores. Finally, my mother had to make a
detour around those shop windows.
The child has an influence over her mother strong enough to compel her to use
tricks.
Before mother took me out, she would ask my father what dress she should put
on me.
The mother is likewise interested in the child’s appearance; we can easily
understand how vanity is instilled in the girl.
I was very happy about my first shoes; they were hardly put on my feet when I
opened the door and tried to run away with them.
That is an attempt to ensure their possession. Her father is a tailor; the
whole family is prone to appreciate the external. This is therefore not an
inherited trait, but part of the atmosphere of the house.
There were many buttons in the house; I played games with them which I
invented myself. They were my money.
The child is prematurely interested in work and money.
Furthermore, I liked to play with silk pads. I used to cut holes in them through
which I put the arms of my doll.
Preparation for the occupation of dressmaking.
I liked still more to play with a beer bottle.
We know that children would rather employ their own fantasy than play

with mechanical toys. The child learns by imitation. However, she can do that
only when she identifies herself with others, when she plays a role which she has
assumed from her father and mother. She imitates her father when she patterns a
dress.
I rummaged in the drawers, busying with locks.
The child has had great freedom in playing with what she wanted.
My favorite occupation was talking to myself. I could imitate somebody for
hours.
She imitates tailoring and talking. For a child who trains at an early age to
identify with others or with a role, a logical profession is that of an actress.
Many people are unconsciously prepared for certain professions which they
never choose because they do not know anything about their early preparation.
I also imitated the baker. My bakery shop was a drawer with remains of bread
which I took to bed with me at night.
Intense desire to imitate; the child wants to be a baker even at night when she
should be asleep.
Later on I played teacher, using eyeglasses just as my teacher did in school.
I cut glasses for myself from red paper. Father’s catalogues and notebooks
represented schoolbooks and the backrest of the sofa was the blackboard.
We see the stage of Shakespeare.
I threatened the disobedient children and shouted so loudly that my father told
me not to get so excited.
Another method of securing her father’s attention.
I played merchant with the coffee grinder.
Imagination and imitation strongly developed.
There were two people in our house who sold coal. I piled up wood in their
store and sometimes ate dinner with them. The food I ate there I would not have
touched at home; for instance, sauerkraut, and meatballs. But at their house, I
liked to eat everything.
Refusing to eat is an attempt to draw attention to oneself by protesting
against an ostensibly important function. When one is hungry, one eats again. As
soon as a child notices that she can secure no attention through such useless
maneuvers and that she harms only herself in not receiving any attention, she
will abandon this trick.
The coal dealer asked me whom I wanted to marry. I always answered, “My
father.”
This might be thought an incestuous wish. When we consider, however,
that this child does not know anything about sexual relations, it is highly
probable that the girl’s desire to marry her father is possible only because her

relationship with him is completely asexual.
I loved my father very much. I was even jealous of him.
If jealousy were always an expression of sexual love, then we would be
wrong. But a type of jealousy exists that originates in a striving for power. It is
quite possible that all jealousy really springs from a striving for superiority.
Someone can be jealous only if he feels inferior to the one of whom he is jealous
-- weaker, less intelligent, insufficient. He believes that his abilities and
mentality are not adequate to compete honestly with a rival, so he attempts to
exert pressure through jealousy; that is to say, to demonstrate his power. The fact
that we find jealousy so frequently in love relationships does not justify its being
viewed exclusively as an expression of sexual love. Jealousy is often a matter of
prestige.
When my mother caressed my father, I frequently interfered, stroked his hair,
rolled up his shirt sleeves, and kissed his arms.
I do not believe that this is an expression of sexual love. Any explanation based
on sexuality is false.
When I was naughty, my mother would threaten to order a brother or sister from
the stork, and I would cry, “I’ll throw him out.”
Here the jealousy caused by a striving for superiority is plainly evident.
I held the storks in great respect, although I could not understand how they
brought the babies. I heard later on in school that babies came out of the belly.
How they started, I did not know. I thought we simply ordered them when we
married.
The girl has not the slightest idea about the origin of human beings.
When father traveled, he always brought me a present, a toy or a book.
Then he took me on his lap and read to me. After twenty-one years, I can
remember how my father read to me. I impressed the words on my memory.
When I noticed that people read in the café, I took my book with me and
memorized the paragraphs aloud. Two women wondered how such a little child
could read. Father sent postcards; I always received two and they were always
prettier than the others. However, I could not rest until everyone had given me
his or her card.
She wants to have everything, a phenomenon of the increased inferiority feeling.
Because of my sickly constitution, everybody was submissive to me.
This girl will put her sickliness into the service of her striving for superiority by
the way she behaves.
I was sick very often, suffering frequently from tonsillitis.
She will “make a mountain out of a molehill.”
I remember being brought to the children’s hospital. I disliked having

someone look into my throat and I was afraid of the tongue depressor.
There is a tendency to reject the doctor. The pampered child is anxious to be an
object of pity.
I was afraid I would suffocate.
We can imagine how this girl will behave in later life.

Chapter II Adolescent Difficulties
For one year I had whooping cough. For the first six months it grew steadily
worse and it was a year before I was over it.
Whooping cough does not last twelve months. When no lung complications
or other illnesses set in afterward, whooping cough is over in three to four
months at the most. Since no mention is made of such complications, the only
conclusion to be drawn is that the child voluntarily retained the symptoms of
whooping cough for her own purposes. What could be the reason? Sick people
demand and usually receive much more attention, care and tenderness than those
who are healthy. Sick people are helpless, in need of protection, and nursing. It
does not matter what their age is; they often act like children again.
As we know, the small child lives an egotistically happy existence, without
responsibility, and at the cost of his fellow human beings. We might believe this
condition desirable for everybody. That is not the case, or we would probably all
be sick, or pretend to be. The normal human being is much too attracted by
diverse interests and pleasures to like being taken care of and ordered about
longer than necessary. On the other hand, some individuals anticipate great
difficulties in life and consequently do not develop themselves from healthy
human beings to useful ones. Such people frequently regard illness as a suitable
means to achieve without effort the semblance of superiority. This use of illness
represents ruling through weakness. These people obviously feel inadequate or
too weak to compete with their healthy fellow creatures. (Individuals with
inferiority feelings tend to look at life as a fight in which they must always be
ahead of the others.) Driven by this feeling of inferiority or insufficiency in
comparison to others, they seek a way out which will procure for them the
triumph of being first, at least in the small circle of their intimates. They seize
upon sickness as a welcome means to attain such tinsel triumphs. While they are
training their symptoms, they are also training for an ostensible superiority. That
goes on until they find the cost of their cowardly attitude becoming too high, and
they simply discard their symptoms. Frequently the termination of one symptom
is merely the signal for the acquisition of a new one. Or they have arrived at the
point where, hopelessly lost in the mazes of their various strivings and
completely discouraged, they appear before the doctor.
Even if we knew nothing else about this girl, we might infer from the
assertion that the whooping cough lasted twelve months that she felt sufficiently
inferior to drag out a sickness as long as she could. We understand this girl’s

inferiority feeling very well since we learned from some former remarks that she
had been badly spoiled. Pampered children always suffer from a strong feeling
of inferiority because they grow up like hot-house plants, therefore dreading the
raw reality of life as soon as they encounter it. But not only that. In order to
retain their favorable position of security, they will purposely exaggerate the
harshness and difficulties of life and thereby lessen their courage. Their feeling
of inferiority, the result of a wrong interpretation, becomes absolute and the urge
to rule, as compensation for the inferiority sting, intensifies in direct ratio to the
deepening feeling of inferiority. Thus the deplorable retreat of the neurotic
develops out of cowardice and excessive lust for power.
One night I had such a choking fit that I wanted to climb out of the window in my
stupor.
Exaggeration.
I was so weak that I could hardly walk; I was brought into the open air in a
wheelchair. The people avoided me.
A pampered child does not care about that.
The children were hurried away from me.
Children are typically removed from such a sight.
Since the doctor had recommended humid air, we made excursions to the
old Danube. I often vomited when coughing. After each fit, I fell back in my
chair, as if dead.
The pampered child seizes every opportunity to make a strong impression
with her coughing spells. The more the child is pampered, the more severe the
disease seems to be. The child does not want to give up her whooping cough.
At times I heard my father say that he would commit suicide if anything were to
happen to me.
Her father is a dreamer. This girl knows that her father has a great affection for
her. She is conscious of her power over him.
His eyes were always resting on me with an expression of sorrow. At night my
father also washed me.
The spoiled child does not do anything herself. Everyone around her is
employed.
I was afraid of water and always struggled against being washed.
That is not innate. This child makes herself important with everything.
Washing becomes a rite. She shows her father that he has to make an effort with
her.
The worst was cutting my toe nails.
The same tendency as refusing to eat. Children who make trouble are spoiled
children.

Then I started to whine as if my toes were being cut off. I also hated having my
hair washed.
All children act alike when something does not suit them or when they face
situations that are strange or disagreeable to them. They brush them aside; they
revolt. Either they ridicule the new situation or struggle against it. Many even
have temper tantrums. The supposition that such bad behavior lies hidden in the
collective unconscious of mankind (Jung) is quite unnecessary. Just as
superfluous is Freud’s assumption that conduct deviations prove that the
development of mankind is repeated in every single human being.
When Lina (my sister) washed her feet, I crept to her on all fours and lifted her
skirts to see what was beneath them.
Early sexual curiosity.
From the time I outgrew the baby carriage, I slept in my parents’ bed. I went to
bed every night in the following way:
A spoiled child makes trouble when going to sleep, especially when she is
no longer attached to the mother. Going to bed is painstakingly described.
First my father had to take me in his arms, dance around with me and sing
a song which ran: “None of the fairies is as pretty and fine as you, dear little
darling of mine.”
Her father appreciates her prettiness.
He had to shake the pillows, arrange them correctly, and cover me.
Pampered child.
I lay beside my mother; when she was away, I lay beside Father. He gave
me a little bell like one used on Christmas Eve so that I could ring it when I
wanted my mother. I rang the little bell, Father turned on the light, Lina rushed
to my bed. Then I fell asleep again.
The anxiety that children have during the night is called pavor nocturnus.
This anxiety is a purposeful symptom, like the ringing of the little bell her father
gave her. What happens when the bell tinkles?
Her devotees are awakened and must hurry to her side. She assures herself
of the attention and obedience of her servants. Feeling her power and satisfied,
she falls asleep again. A child neglects certain functions (such as that which
leads to bedwetting) to attract attention. Attention-getting behavior like selective
neglect or ringing the little bell is continued as long as its real purpose has not
been detected.
Psychoanalysts regard pavor nocturnus as the result of a child’s having
witnessed sexual intercourse between his parents. That is ridiculous.
The anxiety state appears in many forms of varying severity. Often it is
merely a slight disturbance in sleep, sometimes a paroxysm of fear, according to

the strength of the child’s striving for superiority. The intensity of the
symptom’s manifestation is irrelevant. What matters is that the symptom always
follows the same rigid scheme: to attract notice by disturbing others.
We had two boarders. One of them was a Hungarian barber by the name of
Nagy. He limped. I was afraid of him. He wanted to hug me, but I ran away and
hid myself.
She shows an early instilled fear of physical defects. That is understandable
considering that she has attached herself to one person. Such a fear is sometimes
nourished by the environment. Parents frequently pull their children away from
the sight of a beggar. Thus, they create fear and aversion instead of sympathy.
Our civilization is cruel.
One day I was sitting on the couch with my doll. The barber came into the
room and stroked me. I became frightened, fell down and remained as stiff as if I
were having a titanic fit. Father and Lina were in agony.
She seems to have fainted which becomes understandable when we
remember that the girl resents every person except her father, especially if the
other person looks strange. I knew a child, a year and a half old, who cried
bitterly when he saw a homely or poorly dressed person. In this case not only is
the overestimation of beauty a factor, but also the unaccustomed sight of a
disability. Spoiled children are more prone to be upset by abnormalities.
Once in a while, a man with a clubfoot came to the café where we sat. I
trembled, tried to hide myself, and buried my face in my father’s lap. Sometimes
he had to take me home.
Always making trouble. While the parents sit quietly in a café, this girl
gives them something to do. She forces them to go away with her.
Every now and then we visited a restaurant where a military band played.
As soon as the conductor raised his baton and the music suddenly began, I got a
shock. My father had to leave the restaurant with me.
She keeps her father busy with her. It is the same pattern. We can gather
something else from these examples. Her memories are primarily visual
impressions. She mentions once or twice remembering audible impressions
when she tells how her father had to sing to her, and again in her last remark
about the military band. She probably belongs to the visual as well as the
auditory type. What do these classifications mean?
We know that many people are especially and preferably interested in
visible things. They remember what they have seen far better than what they
have heard, and they are better able to retain visually striking impressions. We
call this the visual type.
On the other hand, another type uses its sense of hearing for the perception

of the outside world and remembers primarily things heard. That is the auditory
type.
Most people belong to both types with a slightly greater emphasis placed on
one or the other. A third type is what we call the motor type. People of this type
seem to have a noticeably strong preference for bodily movement.
We have learned from long observation and considerable study that the type
to which an individual belongs is not mere chance. In many cases, we can prove
that the type to which a person has elected to train himself represents a
compensation for a defect in the functioning of one of the five senses, or a
deficiency in the organs of motion (limbs). A congenital or acquired inferiority
of the eyes, for example, leads to a compensatory endeavor to overcome the
inferiority, thereby starting permanent training in the direction of the visual.
Even if the original organic inferiority vanishes completely in later years, the
individual still pursues the same training pattern. The difficulties in surmounting
the inferiority must have made an ineradicable impression to be able to
determine the kind of memories carried over to adulthood.
What I have just said regarding the visual type holds just as well for the
auditory and motor types, where disturbances of the respective organs form the
foundation for the different training patterns.
I was also terribly frightened when I found a feather in my bed. Then I yelled as
if it were a monster.
Anxiety is well known in the history of the pampered child. We notice how
she arranges for this mood in advance by being interested in everything which
can arouse anxiety. Other psychological schools explain the phenomenon of
anxiety differently. For instance, the psychoanalysts claim that anxiety is
induced by repressed sexual desire. Fear may result from such repression, but
perhaps it is just the other way around and the anxiety is the repressed emotion.
The advanced psychoanalysts attempted to take this into account by asserting
that every anxiety springs from the original anxiety accompanying the act of
birth. However, we believe that a function as intelligent as anxiety cannot take
place at birth. Our method of tracing the purpose and effect of an emotional
expression has led us to notice that anxiety is a first-rate method of ruling others.
This girl summons her father to help her overcome her anxiety. In this life story
we hear continually about anxious moments. She uses everyone and everything
in her constant mania to dominate.
When I was five years old, the following happened. While I was playing
with my doll, I felt myself forced mentally to call my parents and God bad
names, such as dirty slut, lousy dog, and so on.
How does this reaction of hate arise in a child? The psychoanalysts would

say that it is an outburst of innate sadism. 
When we consider this more carefully, we conclude that the girl is a spoiled
child who fights desperately against the demolition of her system. This
destruction begins when, as she believes (whether or not it is correct is
immaterial), she was weaned at the age of five. She feels as if she had been
thrown out of the Garden of Eden. Is it not understandable that she rebels with
all her might? She suddenly feels herself forced to call God and her parents bad
names. (The fact that she does not know why she does it protects her and permits
her to continue doing it.) Her behavior is a distinct act of revenge. Given a
similar set of circumstances, we can produce the same reaction in every child.
She behaves intelligently throughout. The guilt lies with those who arranged for
her a paradise of pampering and permitted her to remain in it too long.
I was furious with those whom I liked best.
As we now know, they are the ones to blame.
It was as if the devil had whispered it into my ear. The harder I tried to restrain
myself, the more violently I swore.
This is a pattern every patient produces. Our answer is: Then don’t try to
restrain yourself. Let us see what happens psychically. Exactly this: My thoughts
are so strong and I am innocent. Here lies the complete justification of the
neurotic who complains that she feels forced to perform certain acts (compulsion
neurosis). Why does she have to do this? Because she has no other means. She
would rather force her mother to continue to nurse her, but her mother refuses.
She could easily force her father, if he could assume the role of wet-nurse. “But I
wanted to become healthy,” says the patient. The wish is the proof that she is
sick; we therefore advise renouncing the wish. Individual Psychologists are
skeptical about wishes, in contrast to other psychologists. As long as somebody
wishes, she is sure that nothing will happen. The assumption that volition
precedes a deed is contradictory to psychology in general. When we hear of
wanting, we know that nothing will happen. On the other hand, when something
happens, we hear nothing of a wish.
My face often became deeply flushed from the effort I made to repress my
thoughts, but the thoughts did not vanish. In order to apologize to myself, I said
“The boarder is a dog, not father.”
She cultivates useless, compulsive thoughts.
Chapter III The Development of a Neurosis
Neurotic cases resemble one another to some extent. The burden of a
neurosis is always the same: anxiety in anticipation of a defeat in communal life.
As a result of such anxiety, the neurosis appears in the exonerating form of an
illness, detaching all responsibility from the sufferer and justifying flight from

the expected danger. To give a picture corresponding to the viewpoint of a
neurotic: The neurotic views life as a battle in which he is constantly in danger
(the lives of others being unimportant to him). The closer he comes to the
battlefront of life, the greater his nervousness and apprehension concerning his
own safety. When his anxiety finally overcomes him, he flees, or attempts to
gain some guarantee of safety by burying himself in trenches as far from life’s
battlefront as possible.
The form a person chooses for his neurosis depends on his behavior pattern
and fictive goal. However, the various forms of neuroses do not differ much
from each other, and individuals completely unlike in type, but having the same
sort of neurosis, frequently choose the same form for the neurotic manifestation.
This similarity is especially true of compulsion neuroses. Neurotics are not very
original in the expression of their symptoms.
Nevertheless, I suffered from deep remorse. I looked at my parents and
thought, “If you knew what abusive remarks I make about you!”
Anyone not knowing the principles of Individual Psychology might
conclude from such a remark that the girl pities her parents. Her conscience
pricks her because of her wretched behavior. Speaking of remorse reminds us of
an error in the Freudian school of psychoanalysis. The Freudians emphasize the
feeling of guilt, but they misunderstand it. The feeling of guilt is an inferiority
feeling in disguise. It makes itself apparent when someone breaks the laws of
social life, indicating at the same time that the lawbreaker recognizes these social
laws as intrinsically correct. Nevertheless, the feeling of guilt shows neither the
intention nor any other indication that the delinquent will thereafter obey the
laws, making his life conform to or harmonize with social life. Indeed, we
believe that what Nietzche says is true: Remorse is indecent. If remorse really
meant what naïve philosophers assume, the feeling would be followed by a
change in behavior. Such a feeling, however, is usually the continuation of a
useless activity (always remembering that remorse as here used is in connection
with a neurosis).
Therefore, we do not interpret the girl’s statement as showing pity. We have
seen that she wanted to be the center of attention. We do not believe she has
given up her constant desire to be first. She now feels superior, for when she
says, “If you knew what things I say about you,” it means, “I am more than you.
You are blind. You understand nothing.” Saying, “Father is a dog,” means, “I am
better than Father.” Thus we can see more clearly how the girl attempts to
elevate herself above others. Her feeling of remorse does not alter her striving
for superiority; on the contrary, the remorse proves that she has endeavored to
continue the tendency to degrade her parents. (We find the tendency to degrade

others only in those people who feel inferior.) An individual can compensate for
his feeling of inferiority by elevating himself over others, or by degrading them.
In either case, he has gained a certain height over them. In other words, he can
create this distance by elevation of oneself or lowering the others. The
degradation of others and elevation of oneself are not in the least diminished by
an unquiet conscience. Quite the reverse, for such a person is then given an
additional excuse to pity himself, or to elevate himself still more.
Some neurotics feel compelled to demonstrate their superiority to their
fellow men. Others are satisfied if their neurotic striving creates a mood which
permits them merely to feel superior.
I wanted to escape these thoughts, but they seized me over and over again.
They even disturbed me when I prayed at night; then I had to repeat my prayer.
It was horrible.
This hammering, this underlining, this absolutely useless emphasis in
description are part of the nature of a neurosis; that is, to make something out of
nothing. It brings the neurotic closer to his goal of godlikeness.
It stopped only when I went to school.
We observe quite often that school life is able to change conditions. The
situation has probably become more favorable. She is no longer confronted as
seriously with the problem: Am I more than Father or not? Perhaps her father
has begun to spoil her a little more again.
I suffered from sleeplessness very early in life, at the age of six or seven.
Sleeplessness will obviously be noticed; it relates to the environment. If the
child cannot sleep, the father and mother are directly involved and participate in
a poor night. Nighttime disturbances are the customary methods of children who
want special attention. It makes no difference whether they make trouble going
to bed or falling asleep, whether they sleep poorly, suffer from pavor nocturnus
(fear of the night) or bedwetting, whether they talk in their sleep or walk in their
sleep. It always means: Someone has to take care of me. The night is used to
keep the people around her busy.
It was very hard for me to fall asleep, and in the morning I was the first to
awaken.
The night and sleep are the greatest enemies of all spoiled children.
Nervous adults are also furious when others sleep. This disturbance is in the
forefront of many neuroses.
At this point, I will make a few observations on nervous insomnia in
general. Sleeping, as well as eating, seems of far greater importance than it really
is. Certainly we need sleep in order to renew ourselves. But sleeping is like
breathing; nature usually compels us to take the amount we need.

Nervous sleeplessness, like all nervous symptoms, serves different
purposes. It may be a vital connecting link in the chain of a nervous life style.
We have frequently seen that a nervous person thinks constantly of how he can
make himself superior. Because sleep is generally considered so important, the
inability to sleep can be used as an effective protest against the environment. It
usually provides a way to penalize or complain about certain members of one’s
household. If a patient complains of sleeplessness during psychotherapeutic
treatment, he holds the doctor responsible for it as if he were indicating to him
the uselessness of his therapeutic efforts. Or the sleeplessness will be used to
prove illness as soon as that seems to be the most effective way to the
establishment of superiority, and of one’s own will. This will is usually directed
toward finding a good alibi, in order to plead inability to work or face a problem,
and to make rules for others: I am nervous and can’t sleep, so everyone in the
house must be quiet; doors must be closed gently; voices must be lowered;
everyone must be home early, and so on.
The sufferer from sleeplessness emphasizes his symptoms so strongly that
we can infer he demands recognition of his difficult situation. This recognition
frees him from all responsibility for whatever blunders he may make in life, and
as a further consequence, will place twice as much value on whatever success he
may have, since he has been successful in spite of his handicap. The neurotic
realizes the expediency of this method from his own experience or from having
seen the effect of someone else’s illness on the environment and on himself. So
long as the psychic significance of the situation has not been understood, we are
not surprised when the doctor, or whatever remedies may have been tried,
obtains for the patient merely a confirmation of his alleged illness.
Thus, nervous sleeplessness serves as shield and weapon to protect the
threatened self-esteem. Nervous people who choose the symptom of
sleeplessness generally have other characteristic indications of the nervous
character. Excessively ambitious, most lack confidence in their ability to attain
their end. They place too great a value on success and exaggerate the difficulties
of life; cowardly and afraid to make decisions, they love to rule. The thoughts of
such a patient during the time when he should be dozing off are either a means
of keeping him awake, or they contain the kernel of the psychic difficulty
provoking the sleeplessness.
The patient wants to construct a broad chasm between himself and his
pernicious, neurotically unattainable goal, which will absolve him of failure and
give him a good excuse to cease struggling. The symptom disappears as soon as
the patient realizes that his inability to sleep is a way of avoiding responsibility
for the solution of life’s problems. When he ceases to consider his sleeplessness

an inexplicable fate, he abandons this symptom.
My father was so concerned about my poor sleep that he himself could not sleep
any more.
The confirmation follows on the heels of our interpretation.
Then I pretended to be asleep, and when Father quietly tiptoed into the room, I
breathed slowly and deeply as if I were sleeping.
This sounds loving and considerate. The child, of course, has some feeling
of tenderness for her father; she sometimes gives in when she thinks she has
gone too far. However, this girl has every reason to feel she needs to be quiet as
she notices her father’s apprehensiveness. After seeing her father prowling in the
dark and then not sleeping for the rest of the night, she may have made the
compromise: Since I have gone so far as to force Father out of bed, I am
satisfied.
On our floor lived another tailor who had many children, four girls and two
boys. One of the boys, Poldi, was my age; I played with him. He was a little
roughneck, dirty and barefooted. I imitated him.
Imitating a boy looks innocent and harmless. However, if we could uncover
more of what went on in her mind, we would find a wish to change into a boy. It
is the small remainder of a common trait, the protest against being a woman in a
world where men are generally considered superior; where they have the more
advantageous positions, more freedom, and apparently greater physical strength.
I have termed this manifestation “the masculine protest.”
Our studies have shown that the masculine protest assumes a central
position in every neurosis. It originates with the child’s natural feeling of
weakness in comparison to adults. When this sense of weakness is exaggerated,
it grows into a feeling of dependence and a longing for tenderness, a
psychological and physiological dependency and subordination. It becomes a
branch of the general struggle for supremacy stemming from the exaggerated
feeling of inferiority. The name, masculine protest, contains a special
connotation.
Because of his intense longing for security, the nervous person tends to
divide the world into contrasting parts, live according to extremes, and treat his
problems in the same way: all or nothing, victory or defeat, above or below, and
so on. The many steps in between might prove perplexing, so they are
eliminated.
Two such extremes are found in the term, masculine-feminine. From
careless or tactless remarks made by adults, and from his own prejudiced
observation of the world in which he grows up, a child quickly learns that in our
civilization men are considered superior to women. The man’s role seems

generally to be more advantageous and better suited to help relieve the feeling of
inferiority. The wish consequently develops, “I want to be a man.” A boy can
fulfill this wish in his behavior, because he can act according to his idea of how
a man should conduct himself. A girl cannot do this.
For a boy, however, the wish, “I want to be a man,” has a somewhat
different meaning than for a girl. He feels obliged to fulfill the ideal of man
which our culture has set; whereas, the masculine protest in a girl does not
express anything but the wish to enjoy the advantages and privileges of men.
When children are already disposed to nervousness because of an
aggravated feeling of inferiority, both boys and girls will interpret this man-
woman conception as antagonistic extremes and purposively exaggerate this
interpretation. Children will attach to the word “man” all that means superiority
(in their own belief), and will associate with the word “woman” everything that
points to inferiority. They sense their own feeling of inferiority as strongly
feminine and make a desperate attempt to compensate for the imagined
deficiency by assuming masculine characteristics. That is the verbal diagram of
the masculine protest.
In the strict apperceptive scheme of the neurotic, all qualities considered
passive are stamped as feminine, such as docility, mildness, kindness,
subordination, cowardice, patience, etc.; while active character traits such as
aggressiveness, stubbornness, obstinacy, impudence, insubordination and the
desire for power and freedom are accepted as masculine. The goal is to rule, to
be superior. Where it seems impossible to reach this goal by direct aggression,
the nervous person chooses the variation of a “masculine protest with feminine
means;” he tries to attain the dominating state of masculinity through a display
of weakness, exaggerated malleability, or through the arrangement of sickness.
We can therefore conclude that this girl’s wish, always to be the first, does
not agree with the unhesitating acceptance of the feminine role. “Wouldn’t it be
easier if I were a boy?”
There was a big heap of sand in the courtyard. There we played grocers. The
sand represented the food.
She describes their games. At this point I want to comment on the
significance of children’s games. Groos points out very clearly in his book, The
Play of Children, how we must not interpret playing. I cannot comprehend how
anyone can speak of a play instinct after reading this book.
The socalled play instinct is a child’s attempt to prepare himself for the
future by using the limited means at his disposal. He trains himself for the role of
an adult with games that seem nothing more than playful to us. The imitation of
adults is very significant and obvious, especially the imitation of those adults (or

their conduct) who appear worthwhile to the child. The games are never
senseless, but a step toward the future goal of the developing human being. It is
all the same whether the child plays with a toy railroad or builds houses, or plays
“husband and wife” or “Indian and princess.” The child takes his play as
seriously as an adult takes his work. Adults should therefore regard such games
seriously and not interfere in a dominant, superior fashion. A child learns
through play. Dostoevsky once remarked that the games of children have an
artistic quality. We Individual Psychologists understand this train of thought
very well. Children do not have the strength adults have with which to tackle a
piece of work. Their greatest yearning, however, is to do as adults do. So they
use tricks in order to make believe they are grown up.
There was a dog in our house named Bello which belonged to a box
manufacturer.
Children and dogs generally have a close relationship because dogs comply
with the children’s striving for recognition; they obey, they let themselves be
mastered. Children who have an excessive striving for recognition are strongly
attracted to dogs. On the other hand, if all a child wants is to be watched
continually by his mother, then he may be afraid of dogs. He will use the fear of
dogs to compel his mother to always be present. Such children are more
discouraged than those who make friends with dogs. Nevertheless, as the
example clearly shows, the two methods grow out of the same root, the feeling
of inferiority. Only the varying intensity of the feeling elicits different reactions.
This dog pulled a little carriage. It got lots of horsemeat sausages which lay
by its hut. Poldi always wanted to steal one of the sausages, but the dog didn’t
like Poldi. One day Poldi crept carefully to the hut, grabbed a sausage and
devoured it in an instant. That delighted him tremendously, I said to him, “The
sausage lay next to the dog’s feces and now you are eating it.”
Again we see the tendency to degrade; the sausage lay next to the dog’s feces.
The wish to elevate herself over others never leaves her.
He did not care. The box manufacturer had a large, covered wagon. He
sometimes took it with him. We were happy when we sat in the wagon.
She seems to like the company of boys.
Two old women lived on the second floor, and each of them kept several
prostitutes. These prostitutes did not get up before noon or afternoon.
Children are often attracted to people wearing beautiful clothes. When their
own circumstances are quite meager, when they have shabby clothes and are
forced to suffer the bitterness and numerous discomforts of poverty, the contrast
strikes them sharply. Limited by their childish judgment, they conclude that
better clothes mean a better life, which they would also like to have. The purely

social inferiority stings them, so they seek a simple, quick and sure
compensation. We can understand how some children are thus drawn to the road
of misery, and we shall not be surprised to see these girls playfully prepare for
the profession of a prostitute when they believe they can reach the goal of
superiority in this direction.
The prostitutes often threw money from their windows down to the street for
us to buy them cigarettes and beer. Although I never saw more than the foyer of
their apartment, I liked to be there. The furniture appeared very fashionable to
me.
Prostitutes are not held in as much contempt by simple people as by the
welleducated middle class. So we can see how the ranks of prostitutes are
continually replenished.
I could watch them dress themselves from the hall window. I felt sorry for
one of them who looked as if she were tubercular. But when she was dressed and
had painted her face, she looked quite different than from the window. Some of
the women were very vulgar and yelled through the house; it was bedlam.
That shows a distinct aversion. We do not suppose she will ever go the way of
prostitution.
I remember a few things about Lina. We subscribed to “The Book for
Everybody.” Lina read the serial in it and was eager to get the installment each
week. She always asked for the periodical. Father did not like to have her read
the novel and we agreed to conceal the magazine when it came. I, too, promised
not to say anything. However, when Lina came into the room, I cried, “The
magazine is here.”
She could not obey; she rebelled.
One evening Lina copied a love letter from a book. Father and Mother were
in the kitchen; Lina was called out. I jumped out of bed, made a blot on the
letter, went back to bed and pulled the blanket over my head.
Malice. She triumphs because she knows something the others do not
know. Also, she feels powerful since she can obstruct her sister’s plans, spoil her
mood, and perhaps prevent her from making an important decision. Children
resort to tricks and bad habits as a lever by which to raise themselves above the
more powerful members of their environment. They usually damage, spoil, or
destroy the property of others. Their hatred directs attention to their feeling of
insignificance. We see their tricks as distinct acts of revenge produced by a
feeling of inadequacy.
When Lina saw the ink spot, she cried. After a while she went out of the
room again and I repeated my nasty trick. She scolded me. I imitated her in
every way. She was nine years older and like a second mother to me.

She can imagine a kind woman only in the form of her mother. That is
characteristic of spoiled children.
I tried hard to imitate Lina’s handwriting. I liked her triangular flourishes.
Father wanted me to write naturally.
There is no such thing as an imitative instinct. We imitate something
because it pleases us, because it seems effective in our attempt to achieve
superiority. Therefore, imitation is part of the striving for recognition and must
be so understood. The imitation of her older sister indicates that she imitates
only what fits into her style of life.
As a small child I would run up and down the steps in front of the church
like one possessed. My mother had to drag me home with her by force.
Perhaps this shows pleasure in motion, or she runs away so her mother has to run
after her.
Father was very religious; he taught me at an early age to make a cross
when I passed a church and he gave me religious pictures. I began to collect
religious pictures.
We believe that children collect things because it makes them feel strong.
Some collections are absolutely senseless. This child collects in order to satisfy
her striving for recognition.
I had a lot of pictures. In the evening I spread them in two rows under my
pillow and on top I put a guardian angel. Otherwise, I could not have fallen
asleep. I prayed until I was short of breath. I prayed for everyone I liked, for my
grandmother, uncles and aunts.
It is not difficult to train a child for such behavior. What does, “I prayed for
everyone,” mean? The fate of this person is in my hand. Such a child feels
superior. This form of praying, so incompatible with reality, is often a symptom
of a compulsion neurosis.
(A rich man had to support his three poor sisters and this annoyed him a
great deal. He prayed to God that He might protect them and prevent them from
being burned to death. If he did not pray, he could not fall asleep for fear they
might eventually be burned. Every day he rejoiced that they had not perished by
fire. “I have their lives in my hand; I am responsible for their welfare.”)
Christmas was a great event. Father sent me to the café “so that in the meantime
Santa Claus could bring the presents.”

Chapter IV The Style of Life
Wherever a psychologist begins the study of a life story, he will find the
particular life he is investigating directed toward a specific goal. In order to
understand a person’s life, we must discover the thread running through all his
symptoms which can be traced directly to his goal. We call this thread the
individual’s style of life. The style of life is the special manner in which a person
faces life and answers the challenge of existence; how he feels, thinks, wants,
acts; how he perceives and uses his perceptions. The style of life is formed by
early childhood influences, developed in early childhood, and guided by the goal
of the person who follows it unquestionably.
A gloomy mood prevailed at home. My parents had quarreled again. I do not
remember about what.
Children who are constantly the center of attraction, like this one, cannot
bear having their parents quarrel. Not because they want peace, but because they
feel excluded when the others are busy with each other. For that reason, they
frequently try to prevent quarrels in the family. She does not remember what her
parents quarreled about, only that they did quarrel.
Father asked me to stay in my room and turn my face to the wall because
Santa Claus was just passing the window. So I turned around. Lina took my
hand. Then a bell rang and we went into the Christmas room.
It is interesting for the Individual Psychologist to consider whether or not
children should be told such fairy tales. We must not be too cautious. Those who
insist on explaining everything in the light of sexual or other problems miss the
point. Children do not care very much whether these tales are true or not; they
take them as conventional nonsense, as a way of speaking. I have never seen a
child as excited at the discovery that Santa Claus does not exist as those who
were eager to explain the matter. We know that we tell our children too many
fables; the question remains open as to how far we can go. However, in raising
children, this issue is not a major problem, certainly not as serious as the
tendency to impose excessive restrictions.
All restrictions not based on common sense have the effect of diminishing a
child’s courage and making him believe that the reality of life is much more
dangerous than it is. What results is an attempt to evade the realities of life by
resorting to neurotic alibis. Questions such as what fairy tales we should tell a
child and up to what age answer themselves according to the law of common
sense. We must not forget that children are initially not as stupid as many adults

have unfortunately become.
A large Christmas tree stood on the table with candles burning. In front of
it, I saw a big slate on a stand and beside it, a doll. I think I also got a picture
book. I rushed to my presents, admired them, and immediately started to scribble
on the slate with chalk. I could not write at that time.
Let us recall what we have said about her increasing interest in all visible
things. Perhaps we shall find a verification. This scene, remembered for so many
years, shows that she paid a great deal of attention to visible objects, even if it
turns out later that the details remembered are not true. The extremes of beauty
and ugliness attracted her notice.
Lina received a picture album and a red hat. I prepared a bed on the couch
for my doll. Before falling asleep, I got up and looked to see whether it lay
comfortably.
“I looked” confirms our assumption about her attraction to visual detail.
Next Christmas, Milli, a friend of mine, advised me to surprise my parents
and Lina with written greetings. I bought stationary used for this purpose,
trimmed with gold and angels.
We perceive this girl’s qualifications for the decorative arts. Asked for what
profession she should be trained, we would answer that she has trained in the
direction of drawing. A vocational guidance advisor would have to keep this fact
in mind. (Dressmaker or fashion designer.)
“Which profession would you advise?” is a question often put to
psychologists. Many young people know very well what they would like to do;
they have consciously or unconsciously prepared themselves for some
occupation. The relatives like to assume that this is an instinctive choice. That is
not correct. The choice of a vocation arises out of childhood influences,
sometimes influences felt in infancy, and the socalled instinct is a manifest
training for the future calling.
We have to deal with more difficulties in cases where the individual has no
predominant inclination and obviously no talent. First, such people are probably
much further away from and considerably more hostile to the question of work
than those who have in some way prepared themselves. They have avoided
coming to any decision on the problem of work, (one of the great social
problems, as we know). They have shoved it aside for the time being as if it
could be disposed of once and for all by such a maneuver. These tactics remind
us somewhat of the ostrich which sticks its head in the sand when in danger,
believing that no one sees it because it can see no one.
In order to decide for what profession a young person is best suited, we
must draw the necessary conclusions from his life story, his remembrances, the

statements of various family members, and his own behavior. From these
factors, we can determine the type of environment from which he comes, and his
sensory type (visual, auditory, motor) and so on. When a clear picture of the
youth’s character traits and compensatory striving has been formed, it is usually
easy, with the help of our Individual Psychological experience, to find the
occupation which best suits the pattern of his personality.
Milli had had a little book of Christmas wishes. She picked out three of the
shortest for me and prepared to help me copy them.
This girl is capable of social contact.
Though she spelled every single word out for me, I spoiled a great many
sheets. Again and again, I had to run downstairs to fetch fresh paper. I exerted
myself to the utmost and was glad when I finished my letter at last. It was
crammed with mistakes, but my parents and Lina enjoyed it immensely.
You see how others are induced to help this child, how well she is liked.
She is accustomed to being favored. We can predict that when she is finally
faced with a difficult situation, she will react acutely; she will bear misfortune
less bravely than her step-sister, Lina. She is like a hot-house plant. When she is
in a less sheltered position and faces a situation where she has to give and cannot
take, she will break down.
As soon as I could write correctly, I composed long letters to Santa Claus, a
whole list of things I wanted, written in a very affectionate manner.
Our assumption of the expectant attitude is confirmed. Her attitude in life is
to expect things from others and give as little in return as possible.
I imagined that Santa Claus descended from heaven on a long ladder
placed at the end of the world, in order to buy presents in the Christmas shops. I
pictured him in detail.
Visual type.
Corpus Christi Day was almost as important a festival as Christmas Day.
Father once gave a donation so that I could walk under a little canopy dressed
up like an angel.
A sense for festivities.
The night before that day I could hardly sleep.
The anxiety which precedes decisions or unusual events is increasing.
I was awake at about five o’clock and peeked through the window to see if
the weather was good. When I heard the hammering which accompanied the
fastening of the little trees and saw flowers spread over the walks, I was
overjoyed. At half-past eight, Father brought me to the gathering place of the
procession. I wore an angel costume with a crown and wings. Then I was placed
under my little canopy and permitted to carry an image of the Holy Virgin.

These recollections show the girl’s interest in external beauty.
We had to wait quite a while. It was pretty cool, so Father brought me hot
tea from a neighboring coffee house. My wings, made from goose feathers,
became so heavy that Father had to take them off. Thus I trotted along, with a
crown on my head, under the red canopy which was carried by four girls in
white dresses. When we came near our house, I was too proud to look up to our
windows. I imagined that I was almost an angel.
The child identifies herself with an angel to such an extent that she feels
humiliated having to live in such a poor house.
Father followed along on the sidewalk, carrying the wings in his hand.
The girl’s relation to her father signifies that she dominates him.
I liked to go to church and never omitted making the sign of the cross when
I passed one. But when I passed a church in a trolley car or just happened to be
with other girls who I knew would not make the cross, I was afraid to display my
piety and fought with myself as to whether I should make the cross or not.
Children are naturally dependent upon the opinions of other and older
people. They learn from their parents the latter’s interpretation of the world and
must believe it until they can or want to think sufficiently for themselves to
correct it. Mass suggestion also operates somewhat along this line. An individual
in a mass no longer acts as he would act if he were quite alone; he falls back into
a childlike state where he credulously accepts and follows the declarations of
supposedly more experienced, more learned people. In a mass, each individual
tries to make himself a part of a unified whole.
The concept of a “mass” implies that everyone does not do what he wants,
that he removes what separates and looks for at what unites. He who produces a
slogan to which others are susceptible creates unity. We have to consider mass
suggestion. An individual in a mass does not act according to his own opinion;
all the individuals form a stream attempting to flow in one channel. It becomes
the supreme task of a mass to act homogenously and without detailed
investigation.
If I neglected to make the cross, I was conscience-stricken. I was afraid I would
be punished by accidents.
She fights for what is instilled in her by tradition, namely, the preservation
of her individual personality. The conscience pangs are an attempt to fight off
mass suggestion.
I was painfully exact with my confessions. I searched through Father’s old
prayer books and wrote down a great many sins which I had never committed,
and then explored my memory for more sins.
We find that frequently. She wants to boast of many sins.

Then I asked Father whether he knew a few more sins and if it was a sin to
be troubled with flatulence. I had much trouble with the list of sins to be handed
to the priest, which grew tremendously long. Since I was ashamed of having so
many sins in front of the other children, I began to write such small, compressed
letters that when I was in the confession chair, I could hardly decipher my own
writing.
In reality such boasts tend to correct themselves. She boasts a great deal, but
cannot make use of it.
At Easter, when I was in the fourth grade, I took Communion for the first
time. I felt so peculiar that day, quite different from other days, so holy, I might
say. I almost did not dare move around because I had eaten of Christ. I thought
my friend, Olga, unworthy because she had not taken it as seriously as I.
She wants to be in the ranks of the highest.
I enjoyed the tales from the Arabian Nights immensely. Father and Lina
read them to me before I could read. When I heard the story of the merchant and
the ghost, in which the merchant slays the ghost with a date pit, I asked Father
for some money and bought dates. Then I seated myself in a corner, threw pits
into the air, and imagined that I had killed a lot of ghosts.
Such things happen when a child is about eight years old. A boy once
thought that someone wanted to kill and devour him. Some people had made
stupid remarks. The boy believed it still more when he was sent to a house to be
“fed;” he thought he would be put to death there.
I never liked to eat. . .
Pampered, struggling child. The people around her overemphasize eating.
When cleanliness is emphasized, a child becomes dirty; when the digestive
function is emphasized, difficulties in the choice of food or defecation arise. We
recommend that no overemphasis of natural functions ever becomes apparent to
children.
I stimulated my appetite by the thought of fairy tales where sumptuous
feasts were served. Or when I had to eat rice, for instance, I imagined a wicked
witch who, in the shape of a beautiful woman, would eat only a few grains, but
who secretly devoured corpses in the graves at night. In this way I consumed the
rice grain by grain.
Notice how this girl identifies herself with every figure in the fairy tales. She
could eventually have become an actress.
When we had cutlet, I imagined that was my own invention -- that the fork
was a woman and the morsel on it her hat; then I let the hatmorsel on the fork-
woman walk around the plate several times and ate it afterward.
This is the common foolishness of children. They constantly have to listen

to, “Eat now; otherwise, you won’t grow up!” They see clearly how important it
is to the adults that they (the children) eat well. Only a child who feels inferior or
oppressed gets the idea of protesting. He cannot find a better way to manifest an
apparent superiority than by not yielding to the demands of the adults, or as here,
by laughing at them. Especially when the protest appears so skillfully veiled, as
in the play of this child with her food, the parents are quite powerless when they
do not see through the trick. The child triumphs and proceeds to new strategies.
When I drank I often fancied that I was in a desert. All the others were dying of
thirst and were sucking one another’s blood.
She speaks on several occasions of things which might be called cruel.
Children are often cruel without thinking anything of it. Who, as a child, has
never tormented an animal? Not for the sake of tormenting, but out of pure
curiosity. What will a fly do when I tear its wings off? How do the wings really
look? It does not usually occur to children that they inflict pain on the fly; they
themselves don’t feel any pain.
Where the cruelty is conscious and deliberated, it serves, as in the case of
the masculine protest, as a means of achieving one’s objective by force or of
giving oneself the impression of peculiar power. A child may train himself for
cruelty or barbarity in order to harden himself and thereby feel manly, or he may
use this hard-heartedness as a threat or instrument for oppression, always,
however, with the same goal of selfelevation at another’s expense. Daydreams of
savagery are either a mental preparation, training, as it were, for the deed, or a
weak substitute for cowardice. This is not to be understood as praise of cruelty.
Courageous people need no cruel fantasies.
Sometimes fantasies of cruel acts are connected with sexual excitement, but
we believe it a blunder to generalize by concluding that cruelty has a sexual
origin. Children in whom fear is connected with sexual emotion belong to a
special type, but not every child is capable of producing a sexual impulse with
fear.
I imagined I was the only one who had some water left. Then I thoroughly
relished drinking a whole bottle, sip by sip.
She fulfills the customary requirements of social life only under certain
conditions.
In order to make my food taste better, I also liked to think that a famine had
arisen and I was the only one who still had provisions.
We would not be astonished to hear that the Great Flood had come and she
was the only human being saved. The legend of the Great Flood probably had its
origin in a similar conceit.
I loved figs because they are mentioned in “The Arabian Nights.”

This is a false causality. She deliberately makes something the cause and
lets those consequences follow which serve her purpose, that is, to eat the figs.
I never liked potatoes.
We would not be surprised if she were to write, “because they are not spoken of
in The Arabian Nights.”
When we learned at school how potatoes had been discovered and how they
had been wrongly prepared at first--it was not known then that only the roots
were edible--I asked mother to boil a few for me and imagined that I had
discovered them and nobody else knew how to prepare them.
Striving to be unique.
Mother made some sandwiches for me to take to school; sometimes I had
chocolate, too. But I rarely touched my breakfast. I either gave my sandwiches
away or took them home with me again. I felt a dislike for other children, for
their hair and for their smell.
We expect such behavior from this type of spoiled child. In the parks we
often see children who make gestures warding off others. That means the
exclusion of others. Such a gesture indicates a pampered child who rejects
strangers and wants to be only with the familiar, yielding members of her family.
And I often wondered how they could eat anything in that smelly atmosphere.
Her superciliousness increases.
Following Father’s example, I acquired the habit of reading while I ate.
She dislikes her feminine role. She imitates her father’s manners, expressing that
she would prefer to be a man like him.
I enjoyed most reading some fairy tale, such as “Strong Hans,” who has to
eat through a mountain of delicious food for seven years. Even now my food
tastes much better to me when I read with my meals.
In consideration of her ability to identify with someone else, we may say that she
identifies with “Strong Hans.” Again a boy.
Father told me one day that his former fiancé, Genevieve, had drunk her
coffee without sugar. So I did the same. Mother took a lump of sugar in her
mouth when she drank her coffee. I also imitated that.
She has not yet decided. She still hesitates. This will be a significant point
in her development. She knows that she is a girl and cannot become a boy.
Though her remembrances reveal her longing to be like a man, they also show a
struggle to repress this longing, to reconcile herself to the feminine role and
adjust to it.
My coffee had to be quite dark; milk horrified me.
This loathing of milk comes from the time when children begin to protest
against the monotonous nourishment. All children are overfed with milk; they

want to free themselves from a hated restriction. The food given to children
should be varied; they should not be fed only with milk.
If we were served with sweet, milky coffee at a children’s party, I felt as if I
wanted to vomit.
We hear a good deal about eating which permits the assumption of an organ
inferiority of the digestive apparatus. Experience has taught us that those
memories retained over a period of many years and remaining particularly clear
frequently point to bodily deficiencies either acquired or congenital. In a former
chapter, we mentioned that those remembrances are significantly clear which fit
in the individual’s style of life and, because of that, they permit the therapist to
make certain deductions from them about the style of life. But when we are told
remembrances which, directly or indirectly, recurringly call attention to a
particular organ of the body, we can conclude that this organ either is not now or
did not, at some former time, function normally. When recollections concern
themselves principally with eating or food, they indicate a weakness of the
digestive apparatus. Sometimes that can be factually proven; sometimes
compensation started at a time when the young child could not yet form words
and sentences by which to remember pictures or impressions; or the defect in the
functioning was very slight and the compensation begun by the body progressed
so quickly and efficiently that only indirect associations remained in the
memory. But they have been impressed on the memory and can be traced back
in the purposive remembrances of our patients.
My digestion gave me much trouble. I was constantly bothered with
constipation. Most of all I hated enemas and suppositories.
Spoiled children frequently experience difficulties with the simplest functions.
Sometimes I sat on the toilet for an hour and could not defecate. And when
there finally was some result, Father used to be very glad. One day I was going
to have an enema. Some friends of my parents were visiting us just then, among
them a friend of Father’s, a retired captain. I simply refused to have the rubber
tube inserted. Mother didn’t know what to do. The captain, who knew everything
better, came in and said to my mother, “You aren’t managing that well; you
have to do it this way,” . . . and suddenly the rubber tube slipped and the water
went right into his face. Once in a while, I found red spots in mother’s bed or on
her nightshirt.
Interest in what is visible.
Then I asked her, “Mama, why do you bleed from your back?” She replied
that she had hemorrhoids from which she suffered at times. Then I crept to the
seat where mother had sat and sniffed around it. Very soon I knew this smell so
well that I could detect it on every woman.

A good sense of smell may signify an organ inferiority, but we would be
wrong to assume that only the underfunctioning of an organ indicates a defect.
Overfunctioning is just as much an inferiority and can lead to exactly the same
difficulties as when the organ operates badly. Normal functioning means neither
too much nor too little. A hyperfunctioning of the sense of smell would, in our
present culture, certainly lead to the same disastrous results as four hands instead
of two hands and two feet.
I also tried to smell my own body so hard that I often got a headache from
it. My main pleasure was to rub patches of silk against each other until they
were hot and gave forth a peculiar odor. I sometimes called my friend, Olga,
over to help me with this. We would sit down somewhere in a corner, rubbing
and sniffing.
Pronounced faculty for smelling. The same tendency she has in regard to
investigating spiritual matters.
I went to the theatre for the first time when I was four to see “Puss in
Boots.” The other children roared with laughter. I sat there and looked and
listened with a serious expression. My parents asked me whether I liked it or not.
Apparently they would rather have seen me laugh just as loudly as the others.
They seemed disappointed because I did not move a muscle of my face and gave
no sign of pleasure or displeasure.
The future grande dame! Setting herself apart.
Their inquisitiveness annoyed me. On the way home they insisted on my
telling them why I had looked on as morosely as if I were seeing a tragedy. I did
not answer. The next day, however, I recited the contents of the entire play. They
were all startled. Only then did they realize what a deep impression the play had
made on me.
We have said that this girl may be on her way to becoming an actress. The play
made an indelible impression on her.
A poor, Swedish baron came to our house. He had been compelled to leave
his country because of a duel in which he had killed his adversary. He had
become the operator of a moving picture projector in a theatre. Once a week he
invited us to the movies. We waited for him after the performances and then had
supper together. Father ordered veal cutlet with fried potatoes and red wine. In
a restaurant I could eat with great appetite.
The fussiest people consume everything in a restaurant. Our supposition is
correct. Trouble while eating springs from the wish to make trouble.
Every week I looked forward with pleasure to that evening.
We could have foreseen that this child would be interested in the cinema.
When the baron received money from his people, he would treat all of us.

Everybody drank a great deal of wine and the whole party was drunk. Only I
remained sober which made me feel so lonely that I cried.
Everyone was occupied with his own happiness, not with her.
Later we used to frequently visit a restaurant in a building where there was
also vaudeville. We always sat in the dining room. I could not stand it there very
long so I stole away by myself to the vaudeville show, stood beside the band and
listened. When the waiters drove me away, I went out through one door and
came in again through another. And if there was no chance of getting in, I
peeked through a crack in the door. During the intermissions, I would sneak in
and take one of the empty seats.
I would like to comment on children visiting such performances. When I
was two years old, my parents took me to hear some singers of popular songs. I
heard good and bad things. I saw some operettas at the age of five or six. These
things are not as harmful as they seem; the anxiety of parents is exaggerated. We
should not take children to horrifying performances. But it is not justifiable to
prohibit their seeing a funny piece. One of my oldest remembrances is this: My
parents had to go away and leave me and my older brother in the care of our
governess. When my father returned, he was greeted by a strange sight. I was
standing on the table, roaring out a popular song dealing with a woman who was
anguished by the sight of a slaughtered chicken; she even emphasized the fact
that her heart was bleeding. The chorus of this song, however, told how this
woman, in spite of her pity for slaughtered animals, threw pots at her poor
husband. I find in this childhood remembrance an early interest in discovering
how even contradictions can be united in one pattern.
I found great pleasure in the performances. My cheeks burned. I listened
attentively to every word. But I could not stand comedians.
We would not be surprised if she became a movie actress.
I always loved animals.
That is a common trait among children who want to rule. Hardly anything
in the world is more obedient than a dog or a rabbit. Even such children who
avoid social contact because they feel their superiority endangered can be gentle
to animals. We should not deny children an acquaintance with animals. The real
motive of this preference, however, is the feeling of superiority.
I never tormented them. Only once, I cut a bedbug in half. Then I ran to my
father to ask him whether it was a sin.
She wants to be the most pious of all.
I had a little rabbit. I trained him so that he hopped over to me when I
called him. Once he bit me. I spanked him a little and decided not to look at him
for the whole day.

Cruel punishment.
But no sooner had I taken him off my lap then I called him back, pardoned
and kissed him, crying to think that he had forgotten himself so far as to bite me.
Feeling of grandeur.
I liked to play with his little tail, or I sat down with him on the couch, played the
piano with his paws and sang a song.
What rabbits are good for!
No one else was allowed to come near him. I loved to scratch his nose softly
with two fingers. He kept quite still. It seemed to do him good. After a while, I
had scratched off all the hair around his nose.
If in complicated cases a question arises as to how someone gets the idea to
rule by fear, the answer is that the person does not have the idea consciously, but
he acts accordingly. At some time, he has observed and retained a strong,
unconscious impression that it is possible to rule by fear. In much the same
fashion, this girl finds out accidentally that we must scratch rabbits on the nose
in order to please them and make them obedient. The origin of nervous
symptoms is no more ridiculous than her discovery.
I was presented with a mouse by our boarder.
Fond of animals.
Later on the boarder gave me a hedgehog which spread its quills when I
came near it. I thought: that animal is nasty; it only stings me. I don’t like it.
All animals are not obedient.
One day a little bird flew in through our window. It was a canary and it had
a sore foot. We bought a cage for her and took care of her. Then she laid an egg
and sat on it, a phenomenon quite puzzling to me. I was greatly delighted with
the tiny, bare little bird. But the old bird let the young one die of hunger. I put
the little corpse in a box and the box under the couch. When it started to smell, I
buried it in the courtyard.
She makes a pompous ceremony of everything.
I was immensely fond of ladybugs. When I found one, I took a box, pierced
some holes through it, covered the bottom with cotton, put a fresh leaf over it
and carefully put the lady bug on top of the leaf. I could play with it for hours
and hours. And when it flew away, I began to cry and nobody could console me.
This girl searches for a way in which she can feel her superiority to the full.

Chapter V The Jealousy Mania
Our boarder used to accompany us when we went on an outing. One day he
stayed at home. Mother was quite angry; Father noticed it immediately. On our
way to the trolley station, they began to quarrel.
At an early age, this girl is made aware of jealousy in the family. She feels
that her father does not like it when her mother shows interest in other men.
Jealousy shows a lack of selfconfidence, representing an attempt to win power
over a significant person. The victim of jealousy never realizes that by resorting
to such means, he establishes at best only a semblance of power and more
frequently, exercises an intolerable tyranny which backfires on the tyrant as
surely as two and two make four. We commonly consider jealousy an instinctive
feeling, but we are mistaken to believe that a feeling as complicated as jealousy
is inborn. To accept such traits as inborn, inherited, or instinctive characteristics
relieves us of personal responsibility for consequences resulting from their
manifestation. In other words, such a stupid act can be more readily justified
when we can blame this character trait on inheritance. Otherwise, we would have
to assume full responsibility for what we have done. Severely neurotic cases of
jealousy have clearly shown us that jealousy is nothing more than a combative
mechanism to preserve prestige. It is combat assisted by feeling, and we
reiterate: Feelings are not arguments.
In consideration of the prevalence of this disturbing trait, I will devote a
few more words to the subject. A jealous person constantly searches for proofs
of his influence, experimenting with every possible situation to prove this
influence. The impossible demands with which a jealous person tests another
person points clearly to his own lack of selfconfidence, his minimal self-esteem,
and his insecurity. We can easily see how his striving serves to thrust himself in
the foreground, to attract attention to himself, and to increase his value in his
own eyes.
A jealous individual is always ready to believe that he has been thwarted or
shoved to one side. Such an unfortunate person reverts at once to his childish
state of wanting everything. He makes the mistake of attempting to recover his
superior position in relation to his partner. Some individuals cannot bear having
a fraction of attention withdrawn from them, and cannot suffer their partner’s
reading a book or newspaper in their presence. A glance, a conversation in
company, a word of thanks for a courtesy, an expression of interest in another’s
picture, in a writer, or even in a relative, can lead, in serious cases, to violent

outbursts of jealousy. It seems ridiculous for a wife to become indignant when
her husband walks ahead with another woman, or talks to someone else at a
party instead of devoting himself exclusively to her. Such cases are frequent.
Other people cannot tolerate their partner’s praising another person. The
customary remark is, “How can you bother with such an idiot?”
In many cases it seems as if the unfortunate victim of jealousy can find no
peace because he is not sufficiently secure personally to trust a peaceful
happiness. He seizes every possible chance for new outbursts of jealousy
designed to bind his partner more closely to him, to arouse pity, to punish the
other, or to lay down rules. In such cases, what we consider ordinary jealousy is
aggravated to the point where it becomes a severe neurosis, and finally becomes
what we might call a jealous mania. The principle is always the same; the sole
difference in various cases is quantitative.
Jealous rages are occasionally accompanied by hysterical weeping, nervous
anxiety, or depression, which all become transparent as soon as we observe the
effect. Or the jealousy is expressed in swearing, or condemnation of the other
sex in its entirety, indicating the further progress of the effect of jealousy;
namely, a preparation for the complete degradation of the opposite sex.
Frequently, pride prevents the conscious realization of jealousy, but the behavior
remains the same.
In many cases, jealousy is aggravated because the partner reacts to the
helplessness of the jealous one with an unconscious aloofness, or indifference.
The indifferent person in turn bases her feeling of superiority on the evident
weakness of her jealous partner and, as a result, does not employ the right tone
of voice or assume an attitude tactful enough to inhibit the growing feeling of
jealousy in the other. Such a common character trait and its developments
dramatically show how we poison our lives and relationships with others on the
most trivial grounds, and how all this would be unnecessary if we were willing
to assume responsibility for our actions more than we are currently taught to do.
To resume our story.
“You are annoyed because the boarder is not with us.”
Here a marital fight seems to be commencing.
“Be quiet!”
It sounds like a modest request and most people who ask for nothing but
quietness believe that they demand little. But they fail to realize that, in fact,
they demand a great deal. Life means activity and noise. When I demand
quietness, it means that I make laws for the behavior of others. It may sound
modest, but it is a battle cry.
“Go and get him! Or stay home if you want to. You can live with him; I’m

not going to stop you! If the child weren’t alive, I’d have left you long ago.”
We see the child standing in the midst of a matrimonial scene. She knows
what it is all about. She receives impressions of married life. As you will
remember, we found some traits in this girl which made us anxious about her
future. Such scenes certainly influence a child by giving her as graphic a picture
of marriage as possible. Unfortunately, we become acquainted with the problem
of marriage through our parents. Consequently, children frequently want to
avoid marriage because it appears to them as a difficult problem, or they resolve
to have a model marriage. Both resolutions lead to countless difficulties.
“What can you offer me? Not even a pair of stockings! You skinflint! What a life!
You should have remained with your Genevieve!”
Genevieve had been an important person in the man’s past life.
And they started yelling at each other.
A pampered child is made an involuntary witness of a quarrel between her
parents. She is used to occupying the center of the stage. What does she do when
she feels excluded? She interferes.
I cried and tried to reconcile Father and Mother. The quarrel was horrible for
me.
That sounds well-meant. But it was horrible for her because she did not play a
role in the argument, because she was a pure nobody.
Trembling all over (one cannot do enough in such a situation) I entered the
streetcar with them. Father made a sullen face; Mother was furious.
We can deduce from this scene alone that her father must have been a timid
man. A tyrant does not act like that. Her mother was a woman who did not seem
weak in any way. She knew how to dominate her husband.
Mother wore a large straw hat which, according to the fashion in those
days, sat pretty high on her head. We were sitting in an open car and while the
trolley was going fast, a wind came along suddenly and tore her hat off, carrying
it out of the car. Still boiling with rage, Father jumped from the car in the wrong
direction and fell down full length. Mother and I were terrified; the passengers
sprang from their seats; the conductor signaled; the car stopped. Some people
on the street helped Father up and asked him whether he had hurt himself. He
was deathly pale and could hardly answer. The conductor swore. Mother kept on
saying, “My God, what do I care for that silly hat? How can you do such a
thing?”
When someone is boiling with rage, he should not jump from a moving
street car. He can easily have an accident if he is preoccupied with something
else. We are not trained to do more than one thing at a time; two are too many.
I knew very well that Father would have not fallen headlong if he had not

quarreled. But I was glad that he escaped with only a few bruises.
Now comes a remark which can be understood solely by applying the Individual
Psychological method.
The sensation we created was very painful to me. All the people looked at us.
In light of our knowledge of the girl’s personality, we understand that she
dislikes that kind of situation. That seems to contradict our statement that she
continually tries to be the center of attention. She wants to be the focus of all
eyes, of course, only when she is sure of making a favorable impression. As
intensely as neurotics want to make a good impression, they also fear any
situation in which they may appear to unfavorable advantage. One of the
important problems of most neurotics is: How do I look? What do they think of
me?
We come to this conclusion because after so many years, she still
remembers her feelings in the humiliating situation into which she believed she
had fallen. How painful the emotion aroused by the general attention focused on
her must have been. But still, it was attention.
A policeman came along and wrote down Father’s name and address.
When we were seated again in the trolley, I hooked my arm on his and did not
leave his side again.
She is in the pleasant center again.
I was raving-mad at the boarder. “Because of this damn fool,” I exclaimed,
“there are always quarrels. The devil take him!”
We have learned from former incidents in her history that, even in a state
which can be regarded as normal, she does not flinch from strong incentives.
Therefore, we will not be surprised if she uses abusive language when she is in a
severely neurotic state.
I never cared to go on outings with my parents from that time on. I was
always afraid Father would contrive to do something which could not be
rectified.
We see that the disagreeable sensation and the fact that she was in the
background had a prejudicial effect on her.
As far as I can think back in my life, my parents always quarreled.
That is not quite correct, but since it is so strongly emphasized in her
memory, we suspect she will have difficulties in her own future love
relationships. She will hesitate, retreat, or try to escape. I want to expand on the
idea of escaping. We believe a neurosis is a mistaken way of living, not a
disease. Therefore, we cannot take refuge in what does not exist. I have no
objection to using the terms illness or disease as figurative expressions, but the
dynamics are different. We must remember that while a human being is not

responsible for an infectious disease of which he is the innocent victim (such as
pneumonia, diphtheria, typhoid, etc.), he is responsible for a neurosis. Disease
causes damage to parts or the whole of the organism; neurosis in itself does not.
When certain organs become ill or are kept in a weak condition because of a
neurosis, they were either defective or ill before. Such defects have nothing to do
with the neurosis as such. Definite relationships exist between bodily illnesses
and neuroses, but that does not make a neurosis an illness in itself.
This girl does not know anything of disease; she is constructing, arranging,
building up her life, and when something interferes with her normal progress,
such an interference is called a disease. This conception, however, is far from
her thoughts, even when they are compulsive. She knows quite well the
difference between physical illness and these thoughts. The error consists in
stating definitively that health lies on one side and disease on the other.
A constant source of trouble was that Father, in order to have Mother free
for his work, always wanted my sister to take me for a walk. However, she
preferred to read novels. She was a real bookworm and sometimes even read by
the light of the moon. When Mother cooked Lina’s favorite dish, Father became
angry and said, “You are quite crazy about your Lina.”
Discord is introduced between the two children. We are not surprised that
both girls feel neglected. This girl’s (the writer’s) attachment to her father
justifies the assumption that her mother has not played her role very well. For
some reason her mother did not succeed in retaining this girl’s affection, so she
is in the second phase of preferring her father. A critical attitude toward her
mother has set in. It is sometimes difficult to find out just when such an attitude
begins. I, myself, liked my father more than my mother because he pampered me
more. At the time, I did not understand why. I certainly esteemed my mother
very highly as a human being, and yet I withdrew from her. When I thought
about it, I came to the following conclusion: When I was three years old, a
younger brother of mine died. On the day of the funeral, I was brought to my
grandfather. My mother came to call for me there; she was crying bitterly. My
grandfather consoled her and I noticed that she smiled. I could not forgive her
for this smile for many years; how can a mother smile on the day she buries her
child? Later on I understood it better; my grandfather probably held out hope of
future children to her. On the other hand, I might have thought: How glad I am
that she can smile on such a sad day. I was very critical of her. Another
remembrance: An uncle of mine asked me, “Why are you so harsh to your
mother?” This shows how critical my attitude was toward her. Reconstructing
the past, I can understand it now. My mother pampered me during the first two
years of my life because I was a sick child. I became accustomed to this

pampering. But when a new child was born, I was dethroned. My mother could
no longer give me so much attention since she had to take care of the newborn
infant. I could not forgive her for that. Then in the second phase, my father took
my mother’s place, providing the pampering that I wanted.
The girl’s father is also angry because the mother cares so much for his
stepdaughter.
One day, in a rage, Father flung a dish of noodles on the floor. Mother
often had secrets with my sister. Father could not stand it. When anger made
him lose control of himself, he would begin to grind his teeth, throw dishes on
the floor, tear his underwear, trample his hat underfoot and threaten to commit
suicide. Once in a while we heard him say. “If only I had a revolver!”
We already know this man is inclined to be jealous. That seems plausible
when the memory of his wife’s first husband comes up, caused by observing her
prefer her older daughter. We know how to cure this man; we would have to
show him that he cannot bear being replaced. We understand that he feels
helpless; only the helpless resort to such drastic means. This clamor for a
revolver is typical; it is a threat frequently made.
Then he would run away, even leaving his meals untouched. I was crazy
about Father, was beside myself when this happened, and was in terrible anxiety
about him. When they quarreled, I always cried, begged him to be quiet and held
his hand. That soothed him a little, but he would run away in spite of it. I waited
apprehensively for his return, and when it took too long, I put on my hat and
went to the café to look for him. I usually found him there and we embraced each
other as heartily as if we had not seen each other for years.
We recognize clearly from the above description that this child witnessed
domestic troubles and the problems of her parents’ marriage disturbed her
childish beliefs resulting in her complete confusion.

Chapter VI Sexual Development
Let us survey the story of this girl through the magnifying glass of
Individual Psychology, in order to uncover all the connecting links which make
her life a single chain. Let us review the story as historians, or artists who study
the development of a work of art. We want to examine how each fact,
experience, and reaction fits in with the other parts in order to find the general
thread, or as we call it, the style of life.
Here is a spoiled girl, excessively attached to her father, who gets what she
wants whenever she expresses a wish, and in whose future, for that reason, we
anticipate great difficulties. When a pampered child leaves the home where she
has occupied a favorable position, she has not been trained to withstand
hardship. Since she has some presentiment of what awaits her, she will try to
preserve the old relationships as long as possible, fear decisions, and approach
problems as slowly as she can. Her entire style of life then appears to have had a
brake applied to it. The hesitating attitude, as I have termed this general
characteristic, is typical for every neurosis. The neurotic is always busy
preparing to do something, sometimes very busy indeed. But before he puts one
foot forward, he objects. He makes what looks like a start, but stops in time to
prevent anything happening. He says, “Yes,” which is supposed to express his
readiness and willingness, but right on the heels of “Yes” comes “But.” And he
remains in the same spot. “Yes-but” concretizes the typical attitude of all those
who are nervous. It is possibly the most succinct expression we can find to
define a neurosis.
We often compare the character traits revealed by the life story of the girl
with the distinguishing characteristics of neurotics, so that we seem to imply that
her character appears neurotic to us. The objection may be raised that the girl has
developed no neurotic symptoms and as long as that is the case, a speculation as
to her neurosis would be premature. As you will remember, however, at the
beginning of the story, we emphasized strongly the necessity of using our
collective store of psychological experience and knowledge, and this experience
includes not only the picture of the fully developed neurosis, but also an
individual’s preparation for a neurosis. Determining indications point to such a
preparation and turn up regularly again and again in the early life of almost
every neurotic. When we look back in a life story and see the appearance and
reappearance of these preparatory traits, we can draw the empirical conclusion,
without knowing the rest of the story in advance, that the life of the person

concerned will degenerate into a neurosis at the first suitable opportunity. Also,
we must prepare ourselves for the eventual outbreak of this girl’s neurosis, in
order not to overlook anything essential, or to lose the thread of her story.
Consequently, the examination of even minute details may be important.
In this biography, many apparently irrelevant details are mentioned, such as
social relationships and people who have minimal effect on her life. In learning
to understand her, we are not so much concerned with what is exciting in her
experiences, but with what has attracted her. All the little incidents must be
taken into consideration to gain a complete picture.
Father was often sad. The reason for that was my unusual bodily weakness.
We see how much she is influenced by the fact that her father is anxious about
her and that his life is devoted to her.
And when he was in good humor for several days, a reaction would immediately
follow.
We recall that she was this man’s only child.
He used to sit in his accustomed place without saying a word and with a
sad face, one leg outstretched, the other bent and drawn under. Or he would sit
on the table with his legs doubled under him, sewing and sewing, and if you
spoke to him, he answered absent-mindedly. That always annoyed Mother and
so there was another quarrel.
We must remember that this girl was deeply impressed by her father’s position
in relation to her.
During an exasperating quarrel, Father hit the glass door with his fist, hurting
his hand very badly.
The attitude of her father to her mother, so different from his attitude to his
child, became apparent to the girl and she felt superior to her mother.
He couldn’t work for several weeks and had to visit the doctor every day. At
that time he went out with me a good deal. I felt ashamed of being alone with
him; I wanted Mother to be there, too.
That is an interesting remark. The child clearly had a feeling of guilt toward
her mother. Successful in supplanting her mother, she felt guilty. We have seen
how this girl wishes to be superior under any circumstances, superior even to her
mother. Certainly, a feeling of guilt can spring from such an attitude; the girl
fights for her mother’s position only because of a lust for power. Other writers
may say that such a feeling of guilt can come only from an Oedipus Complex
because this girl has a libidinous inclination toward her father. To such writers,
we must respond that other authorities state that some girls have no Oedipus
Complex. At this point, he who does not fully comprehend the significance of
the struggle for power may think that the girl wanted something she was too

frightened to take. In reality, however, she wants nothing but the dominating
position in the family, and she has it.
When Mother gossiped with a neighbor, Father was beside himself. He was
jealous of everyone, but most jealous of the boarder who really did have an eye
on Mother.
We do not know how old the child was when she received these
impressions. She is confused about time. When she was a small child, she kept a
sharp eye on everything that happened around her. The position assumed by
each member of the family grew clear to her. Living in the midst of active social
relationships is how we learn to understand human nature. No one who has been
carefully sheltered, before whom nothing was allowed to be said, can ever
acquire such precise psychological perception. The more children are allowed to
observe all that goes on in their home, the better their psychological
understanding will be. The pedagogues say, however, that certain disagreements
and tense situations should not be allowed to develop in the presence of children.
While we do not claim infallibility for our recipe, Individual Psychology is in a
good position. It does not matter what happens in the environment. What does
matter is that the child connects to his family, that he develops social feeling,
and then difficulties cannot produce negative results.
Acquiring information about sex is considered one of the great dangers for
children. This view exposes the thoughtless inconsistency of the sexual experts.
They say that the child is led astray by his school friends. This misleading is
usually harmless and straightens itself out later, or the child simply does not
believe what he has been told. When serious consequences follow such an
explanation, we should blame the unintelligent parenting which prepared the
ground for unpleasant results. There are many ugly things besides sex.
We should not assume that children believe everything they hear. When we
were children, did we believe everything? When I was small, a boy told me that
a butcher slaughtered human beings and sold the flesh. I didn’t believe him.
Similarly, a child may have serious doubts about a suggested explanation of sex.
Children must be carefully taught the truth, so that they can have a firm hold on
the useful side of life.
We once went walking and Father started to quarrel with Mother about the
boarder, then raised his cane and threatened her, thereby accidentally striking
me on the forehead. A swelling the size of a nut resulted. Father then controlled
himself, but was most perplexed. I was so angry at the boarder that I said to
Father, “Come Father, let us go and leave Mother behind.”
The child’s hostility is obvious. She uses everything to gain a victory over her
mother.

Mother’s position was not a favorable one. She was a pretty, cheerful
woman and Father killed her cheerfulness. He wanted to keep her in the house
to take care of the home and sew for him.
We are certain this fact had a harmful effect on the child. She will begin to
dread the fate of her mother. 
She fears that such a fate can change the course of one’s entire existence, and
that the same thing may happen to her that happened to her mother. In this way
she nourishes her suspicions about the dangers of love and marriage. She will
never be trustful; she will watch to avoid any indications that she also will be
imprisoned in this fashion. She will be on her guard and learn to evade such
problems.
One evening Father brought home a pearl-handled revolver from the
neighboring café. Mother and I recalled his frequent threats of suicide and had
no peace until he returned the revolver to the owner of the café. I always
shivered when a quarrel began and they were almost always quarreling.
The child’s trepidation during her parents’ disagreements is not as simple as
she implies. There is always the possibility that she will become of no
importance. Two persons occupy themselves without giving her any
consideration. A child’s interjection into her parents’ quarrels is often because
she cannot endure being overlooked.
In spite of everything, however, I idolized my parents and watched over
them jealously. Once when I noticed that my father started to follow a girl, I
clung to his arm and cried, “You aren’t going to follow that monkey-face!”
We are not surprised. Her goal is not to preserve harmony between her
parents, but to be apprehensive about her own loss of power. That is often the
root of jealousy, particularly where love does not exist and dividing relative
power is the issue.
Most neurotics cling to their families to an extraordinary degree. This girl’s
form of expression is typical, “I idolized my parents and watched over them
jealously.” We are certainly not criticizing close family ties. The final judgment
of every human attitude and action may be based, on the plus side, on this
attitude’s degree of social feeling or altruism, and on the minus side, the degree
of superiority striving or egotism. The same action can therefore be useful or
useless, depending on whether it works with, without, or against social feeling.
The degree of social feeling may be used as a criterion for the evaluation of
human deeds and for the human being as well.
Now that we have seen how all neurotic characteristics are distinctly
opposed to social feeling, how the neurotic strives in a supremely egotistical
manner for personal power at any price, we can assume that his devotion to his

family is not based on sincere affection, but is used as a means to achieve an
objective that feeds his lust for power. A neurotic needs the family which pities
him, believes in him, and thinks he is ill, as he needs his daily bread. He knows
that he would be an absolute nonentity without his family, abandoned without
hope of reducing his feeling of insecurity and insufficiency. It is consequently to
his advantage to make the ties between himself and his family as strong and
lasting as possible, in which the usually uncritical attitude of his family helps
him considerably. He often arranges an exaggerated affection for one or all
members of his family, which naturally has nothing at all to do with wishes
tainted by incest. Because this arrangement gives him domination over the
family, family ties have been declared holy. In general, we find a nervous person
more closely attached to his family than those who do not suffer from or
complain of nervousness. The larger circle of the community frightens him back
into the small circle of the family. Here he obtains what he does not believe
himself capable of obtaining in a larger group. Wherever we meet a nervous
person in the company of strangers, that is, outside the family, his gestures
usually betray a backward tendency toward his family.
From this point, we will watch and see whether our general observations so
far will be corroborated further in the remainder of her story.
And he had to return home with me. And whenever he thought a girl was
pretty, I used to say, “All the women with monkey-faces seem to please you.”
That is the expression of jealousy.
I came home one evening from the movies and found Mother in great
excitement. Father had gone to deliver some material. Mother told me that
Father’s old assistant had been impudent and had wanted to attack her. I didn’t
quite understand what it was he wanted of her, but I was incensed and swore,
crying, “That damn fellow. If I see him, I’ll break his head!”
My best friend was my schoolmate, Olga. She did everything I wanted her to do.
We might have guessed it.
We used to play theatre together.
Again she emphasizes something visible. We have noticed before that this
girl has an extraordinarily good visual sense, a penchant for everything visible.
Those who have more experience with Individual Psychology know that such an
interest must be trained. We have previously mentioned that training like this is
usually started by some sight difficulty in early childhood or even in infancy. We
presume that something similar has been the matter with this child. Her visual
training is unusually strong. We must keep such points of special interest in
mind.
Many dramatists have had bad eye defects; their training has sprung from

such deficiencies. We must be able to see before we can visualize a stage scene.
This visualization is easier for those who have placed seeing in the foreground.
Such training is a disadvantage when the difficulties are overemphasized; on the
other hand, an advantage can be seen in our appreciation of art.
We used to dress up in long robes and bind our heads with veils. Her
brother was then a gypsy or a robber chief who stole me. Gradually he became
annoying to me. He never wanted to let us alone.
We see here the strong preference for girls and the rejection of boys. He
bothers her. We often find a choice like this, showing a preference for members
of the same sex. If the boy was not much older, we can understand how the girls
felt superior to him. That might also be a reason for rejecting him.
Once I locked myself with her in her room. We undressed ourselves, jumped
around naked, and examined ourselves all around in the mirror.
Again the desire to see.
And because we had heard somewhere that two together could do
something impure, we laid ourselves, first one, then the other, on top of each
other. We were very disappointed because we didn’t feel anything. Outside the
door, her brother cried.
Now we hear another reason. At this point, we must address an important
problem. Some might speak of a homosexual component. Psychological schools
that believe in the inheritance of fully developed sexual tendencies will conclude
from the girl’s last remembrance that the primordial urge, fully developed, and
dormant in her up to this moment has finally broken through. This conclusion
appears to us somewhat superficial and mechanistic. Our interpretation is
different. We know that in childhood, as soon as sexual desire manifests itself,
nothing is received with so much shock as knowledge of normal sexual relations.
This child’s upbringing and the impressions she receives from her environment
have conspired at an early age to shock her with the first information about
sexual relations between men and women. And what shocks a child will usually
frighten her.
Premature exposure to even normal sexuality can lead to problems. Such
youngsters either begin to masturbate or they seek homosexual relations; but
whatever form their sexuality may take, it is only the sordid remains of normal
sexuality. Homosexuality and masturbation certainly are not the normal forms of
sexual development. In such cases, the normal has been frightened out of
existence by shock and anxiety. An example will prove our statement. Consider
those places where children are watched too carefully, the poorhouses, for
instance, where boys and girls are not separated. There we find that no
development of the sexual drive takes place other than the normal relationships.

Should we assume that well-to-do children experience sexual development
differently from poor children? Or consider those institutes exclusively for boys
or girls, where cases of homosexuality often occur. Is it then just a coincidence
that perverse sexual practices are more common among institutional children
than among those who grow up in family homes? Or is the Individual
Psychological conception more correct that the direction of an individual’s
sexual development is not inborn, but determined by his environment and
upbringing?
Thus we can see the timid sexual expression of this girl in another light.
The boy annoys her. Without knowing that, however, we may be sure that she
will not increase her sexual experience by approaching boys; she is much too
fearful for that. Consequently, she uses her friend, Olga, who, as she admits, did
everything she wanted her to do and whom she likes for that very reason.
I don’t remember who told me that love dies when one gives someone a
needle. Anyway, I believed it. I talked it over with Olga and we decided to use
this magic on her brother. I took a needle, broke it in two, gave him one half and
told him that that made our friendship stronger and that it meant being true to
each other forever after. He took his half of the needle happily and stuck it in his
jacket. Then I laughed and said: “Now I can tell you that it’s all over with love
because the needle really means that love has been punctured!”
What did the boy do?
He began to cry bitterly.
He was obviously advanced in his development.
I was almost sorry for him. After a while it occurred to me to tell him that a
gypsy had once prophesied that I would die when I was eighteen.
This theme of having an appointed time when she claims she must die
occurs frequently. What happens when she makes this claim? We then begin to
see through the veil: (1) if she really believes it, she feels herself superior to and
excused from the prosaic duties of everyday existence. That is the end result. No
matter what happens, there are no more tasks for her, a situation which suits a
spoiled child; (2) when a girl makes such a statement, she immediately becomes
the center of interest. Everyone is so upset that the girl is treated with more
indulgence than ever--the consequence of her desire for indulgence.
The boy was inconsolable. Tears rolled down his cheeks. I was also very
much distressed. I had said it so convincingly that I almost believed it myself.
I do not know whether I have emphasized yet this peculiarity of hers. Lying
is quite common among neurotics. A pathological liar believes it when he says,
“Our family is going to ruin.” He feels it so much that he is shattered by it. A
human being has the ability to make himself believe what he says. But just

because all lies are not conscious lies (as for example, in neurotic and psychotic
cases), they should not be treated with severity and punishment, but like all
neurotic symptoms, with understanding and explanation. Neurotic lying is
always an attempt to appear greater than one really is. Therefore, it indicates
discouragement and an effort toward seeming greatness. The more a man
believes he must lie, the more deeply he must be able to believe his own lies in
order to appear so credible to himself and others that his story is absolutely
convincing.
Similarly, we cannot fully appreciate the qualities of someone or something
without some identification with him or it. Funny as it may sound, I have the
feeling that I can identify with a bird. Or, for instance, bowling and watching the
ball rolling, we begin to sway as if we were the ball ourselves. A feeling of this
nature which we assume or into which we talk ourselves, as it were, is of much
greater significance than previously recognized. Identification will, of course,
come strongly to the fore when suitable for the goal in view. This girl likes to
see the boy cry, so she tells her story all the more convincingly.
The boy was crazily in love with me. I am still surprised that a child of nine
years can love so much.
We see here a love experience in a child of eight years. Those who have
their eyes open will not wonder. We recognize such tendencies in early youth.
Many are honestly in love with the other sex at the age of four or six.
I made Minna’s acquaintance in the park. Her father was a cashier in a
café. She invited me to her house. She had her own playroom, loads of toys, a
child’s dinner service, a little sideboard, even a set of doll’s dishes, and always
money for sweets.
We can imagine the consequences. She with her two povertystricken
rooms; the other girl with the luxurious apartment. There will be difficulties. She
will feel unable to invite the other girl. She will have to lie.
And now the following bothered me. Minna waited quite a while for an
invitation from me. I was ashamed to have her at my house because we had only
one room and a kitchen, lived so poorly, and had no pretty furnishings. Once
when we were standing in front of my house, I said to her, “Look up there, at the
first story, there is our apartment. The whole floor belongs to us, but mother
keeps the key. We also have a room on the parlor floor, but there isn’t much
space there.” And she looked up curiously. I always had an excuse. One day I
couldn’t keep my appointment with her. I had to do an errand and couldn’t let
her know in time. She waited and waited in front of the house and I didn’t
appear. Finally she screwed up enough courage to enter the house and to knock
on our door. I was very embarrassed to see her in the house upon my return. But

I saw at once that she felt quite at home, and that reassured me. In the course of
our conversation, she asked me if we could go upstairs. I replied quickly, “Not
today, it hasn’t been cleaned.” Soon after, however, she learned the truth, and
we both laughed at my pretensions. We met almost every day and I neglected
Olga. We liked most to play at cooking. We used to mix chocolate and slices of
apples with milk and eat the mess. We used to buy “charlotte russes” and
pickles. And for a small sum we could go to the movies. When children were not
allowed to enter, we would become furious and swear at the theatre owner. Then
we used to read fairy tales together and also books not suitable for our age. I
remember a book I found in a chest, “Julia’s Marriage,” by Prevost. It tells the
story of wedding night and I almost had a headache over it. And once I got hold
of a book, “Children of the Divorced,”--the love and life story of a twelve or
thirteen-year-old boy. He committed suicide at the end, and that made me very
sad. I couldn’t understand the reason for it. And I even read Ibsen in the fourth
school year, naturally without understanding him. For example, I couldn’t
understand why Hedda Gabler shot herself.
Adults frequently do not understand why either.
I wanted to learn from the books, to learn to understand human nature.
This reveals the secret of many of those children who constantly read
books. They want to fill the gaps in their knowledge of their fellow human
beings. Children do not accept everything sight unseen; they test and compare;
they imitate what they see in the moving pictures and in the theatre. They
continually prepare for the role of the adult; they train in every direction. One
aspect of this training lies in experiencing other people’s fate from books. The
strongest interest in beautiful literature arises because we can see how someone
else attempts to solve his problems.
In the meantime, Father had established himself as an independent tailor.
Our apartment served the double purpose of workroom and living quarters,
which cramped us very much. Otherwise things did not go so very badly with us.
Father could even assume the responsibility of new furniture on the installment
plan: two chests, a table, chairs and beds. Before Christmas there was so much
to do that, Mother, who continually had to help Father, found no time to cook.
That annoyed me very much.
This child is upset because everyone is busy working instead of paying attention
to her.
Minna’s mother made the most elaborate preparations. They had been
baking at her house for days; at our house we were sewing. On Christmas Eve,
Mother went with Father to deliver the finished suits. Lina, who had moved
away because of the limited apartment space, took me with her to her house.

There she had a tiny Christmas tree. Everything was very nice, but the evening
meal consisted only of herring, which didn’t particularly appeal to me. When my
parents called for me, I complained, “On Christmas Eve, I have to eat herring.”
Father answered that he had enough money, and we were going to eat in a
restaurant. But I had lost all desire. There was a Christmas tree at home and I
also got what I wanted, a child’s set of dishes like Minna’s and a rattle, but the
mood had been destroyed.
She is severe; when everything does not go smoothly, her mood is destroyed.
I visited Minna the following day. She had a large Christmas tree with
electric candles, and innumerable presents lay on her table. I did not envy her
because of that. . .
This lack of envy might be pride.
. . . but when her mother asked me what I had received, I suddenly assumed the
role of one to be pitied and said, “Nothing at all.”
There lies the suppressed resentment, and at the same time the gesture of a
beggar. We must watch this trait. To belittle oneself in order to produce a greater
effect is the beggar’s attitude.
I was greatly pitied and everyone hurried to make me a present -- a book of
fairy tales and all sorts of pretty cakes. Among my father’s customers was a
young man who was friendly with a divorcee. This woman had a daughter my
age, who resembled me very much. Her mother took a great fancy to me and
often used to take me out. She rented a villa for the summer in a suburb and
invited me to visit her. Father reluctantly let me go. Minna was away in the
country for the summer and this suburb was my first country vacation, and for a
long time the only one. In spite of the fact that I was extremely well treated there,
I became so homesick after two days that I wept ceaselessly and demanded to be
allowed to return home.
We must say something here about the psychology of homesickness.
Anyone who is homesick feels that he is in a more favorable position at home.
Spoiled children are usually homesick. Her position in the country seems to be a
favorable one, but it is really less so; at home she is the center, in the country
only a little girl; therefore the homesickness. She must yield to such
homesickness; she was not prepared for the change in her situation.
There was nothing else to do but bring me home again as soon as possible.
Lina studied for a whole year to be a nurse and how to assist at operations, and
smelled dreadfully of carbolic acid. She fell in love with a Czech. Now and then
she sent me to him with a note. Once the housekeeper opened the door and said,
“You are Miss Rosa’s sister, aren’t you?” and told me some gossip.
How soon this child is initiated into love relationships!

I told my sister about Rosa, but she, of course, already knew about it. She
often cried, and then Father and I would have to console her. When the Czech
returned to his country, she took a position in a hospital in Prague to be near
him. We tried in vain to dissuade her. Her departure irritated me exceedingly.
Why? She loses a person from her court. To exaggerate the situation
somewhat, such a person needs to have a court around her. She does not
consciously realize that by this strategy she assumes an extremely powerful
position.
Chapter VII
The Problem of Love
I have forgotten to mention Tilda, my first friend. I met her on the street.
In spite of the pampering she received, she was able to make the
acquaintance of children on the street. Probably the best way for a child to learn
about human nature and people is on the street. If we could at the same time
prevent the dissemination of so much evil knowledge, it would be a good way to
raise children. If we could arrange for more supervision, and be reasonably sure
that evil elements would not lead children astray, this may be the best way to
obtain a many-sided experience. The common rivalry, the struggle to discover
and influence relationships among human beings is the origin of social life.
Large cities today cannot give children any sort of street life because of traffic
dangers.
We have frequently remarked that this girl is an excellent observer and she
has possibly developed this ability by associating with children on the street.
Even if she has developed in a neurotic direction, she also has developed to an
unusual degree the power to combine her perceptions.
Such abilities are trained to be used later as means for the easier attainment
of the fictive goal. Again and again we perceive how valuable strength and
talents, abilities and possibilities are spoiled and made worthless by a neurotic
goal. Were a neurotic to turn into useful channels the collective strength and
intelligence he employs pursuing a neurotic goal, the diverted energy would
probably be enough to make a genius of him.
She had just climbed onto a delivery wagon; I climbed on after her; we
began to speak to each other, played together, and promised to meet each other
at the same place the following day. Her mother had a candy store in our
neighborhood. I met her again in the fourth year at school and saw her often.
She told me of her suitor, a ten-year old boy, Henry by name, who had already
promised to marry her.
We see how far-reaching the preparation for future life is, even in a child’s tenth
year.

Then I made his acquaintance. I immediately tried . . .
To do what?
… to take him away from her.
Accustomed to being first, she had to choose this course when she found herself
in such a situation.
I was half successful. We three went to the movies together, used to sneak
into the garden of the insane asylum together and play at being married.
That is the beginning of sexual relations. These games, playing doctor,
mother, and father, can be found among children the world over. The children
make them up. I wonder why no one has yet discovered a repetition of forgotten,
archaic rites in these games. It is superfluous to speculate on the theory that each
individual must repeat the entire story of mankind, as some psychologists
believe. Every individual uses the same sort of games as a preparation and
training for adulthood, and he does not have to repeat the whole story of
mankind in order to do this.
We often spoke of a friend of Henry’s who was very goodlooking, but who was
also quite arrogant and didn’t think much of girls.
We see how the variations in adult personalities are formed in early
childhood. Children recognize these variations and also know how to react to
them. Henry’s friend made an impression on our heroine.
That sounded interesting to me, so I asked Tilda to arrange to have us meet.
When she spoke to him about it, he said he would look me over.
I do not know if all my readers can comprehend how the girl is made to
play a subordinate part. Obviously, the boy looked down on girls. His form of
expression is degrading, which she understood. Anyone who is unable to hear
this undertone, who is not musical enough to apprehend it, will not be able to
grasp our way of thinking.
We all met. We walked around a bit and our talk was soon of kisses. I
asserted that I would never in my life let myself be kissed by anyone. The boy
answered that he would prove the contrary to me, by force if necessary. I did not
take him seriously. It was already twilight when we crossed the square, and he
threw his arms around me. I struggled, called to Tilda for help, and freed myself
after some effort.
The picture recurs. Man is the aggressor, the girl the hunted animal. How
hard things are; how careful one must be to avoid such attacks.
I upbraided him for his impudence and pointed out that a stolen kiss was not the
same as one given voluntarily.
Notice how the ten-year old girl can argue; she has learned it in her family.
And that, if I were a boy, I would never bother about stealing a kiss.

With that she degrades him.
I walked alongside him cautiously. What angered me most was that he had
rumpled my hat and hair. Soon after, he asked for another appointment through
Tilda, but I didn’t care about seeing him again since I knew I could have him.
For the first time, this girl faces the problem of love. She must formulate a
response. Unquestioningly, the form of response or reaction will be influenced to
some extent by the behavior of the other person. Nevertheless, I believe we may
definitely conclude from all that has gone before, and from the little test we have
just read, that our girl will not regard love as a means of development, and
certainly not as an expression of social feeling, but as a means to win power and
significance. Provided, naturally, that she does not run away from the problem
completely. We have to watch carefully in her story how she reacts further to the
question of love as one of the three great life problems--whether she approaches
or withdraws from it. We can measure the degree to which an individual is
normal or neurotic by the degree to which he attempts to solve or evade his
problems.
During my fifth year at school, I became friendly with a girl named Sophie.
She could play the piano and I envied her on that account.
We see how her striving for recognition proceeds in all directions.
I had long wanted a piano.
I know that I shall now hear the objection: Is it a sin to want to play the
piano? We find it quite worthwhile, but is that all? No matter what comes along,
she will say, “I want to have that, too; I want to have that, too.” This constant
wanting is characteristic. Anything forced into the foreground to the exclusion or
detriment of other factors, disturbs the smooth course of our existence.
Cleanliness is worthwhile, but when I make it the salient feature in my life and
think only of how to make everything clean, I then not only neglect all other
important tasks, but I also discover that everything is so dirty that it is not even
worth the trouble to continue living. Thus constant washing becomes the
symptom of a compulsion neurosis.1 A person may say that everything is dirty.
Is he right? We shall not even discuss it. If we make cleanliness the most
important thing in life, we can no longer live.
It is the same with sexuality. When I make sexuality the pivot of my
existence, the world is then so topsy-turvey that I don’t know the difference
between left and right. One person makes this problem of major importance;
another individual chooses another problem to overemphasize. To understand
this mistake, we must also understand that everything starts in early childhood
and therefore must be false, because children cannot approach the absolute truth
and cannot judge the world correctly. Stressing one problem to the exclusion of

others disturbs the harmony of life.
And yet, the overemphasis of one principle does not have to disturb life,
and that is the principle of social feeling. When I maintain the belief that, under
any circumstances, I will go only in the direction of general usefulness, I can
make no important mistakes. No one has been able to disprove this principle.
To this point we hear the objection: But the personality is lost. This view
misconstrues social feeling as conformity to an existing culture rather than
attempting to improve it. In the case at hand, however, we find a greatly
exaggerated striving for recognition. The goal of superiority is also expressed in
the desire for a piano.
1 A compulsion neurosis produces symptoms which the patient believes force
him to do certain things against his conscious will.
Sophie’s foster parents--her parents were dead--had a grocery store where
Mother often used to make her purchases. In this way our two families became
acquainted with each other. Her mother suggested to my father that he send me
to the same music school her daughter attended which boasted an excellent
teacher. I could then practice at their house. Father took her suggestion and I
entered the music school.
This intense struggle to attain greater heights will not be hindered or
censored. We would all agree that she should learn to play and that everything
was still in the direction of general usefulness.
Girls and boys were together at the school. Many of the boys fell in love
with me. I thought they were all fools and ran away from them. One in particular
never left me in peace. He always greeted me with, “I kiss your hand, Fraulein.”
That pleased me somewhat, but otherwise I didn’t like him because his father
was a shoemaker.
Her father was a tailor. We see how significant social rank is to her. If her
father had been a shoemaker, and his a tailor, she would have argued in the same
way; that is to say, the shoemaker would then have been better. From this one
sentence we can deduce that this girl wants to surpass everyone, not only in the
family, but in the outside community as well. Consequently, she has little to give
the community. Her problem is: How can I be first? She stumbles on obstacles
and opposition. She must be careful not to fall in love because her hat and hair
may be rumpled.
I liked to make believe . . . that I was of better family and if I could avoid it,
I never said that my father was a tailor. When I was younger and someone asked
me what his occupation was, I used to answer that he was a fire engine
inspector. Our boarder, who had been a fireman, often told us about fires and
how dangerous a fireman’s job was. That made a deep impression on me.

If he had told some heroic story, she would also have made use of it.
I treated the shoemaker’s son badly. When I was in good humor, I
permitted him to accompany me part way, but when I was in bad humor, he was
not allowed to come near me. I used to say “sir” to him and order him about,
“Just see that you go your own way, sir, or I’ll call a policeman.” That made
him angry, so he got two other boys to watch for me and throw stones at me.
Then I would run away. I saw them waiting for me in the schoolhouse and that
frightened me very much. I was afraid our teacher might see them and think that
I had something to do with them.
She dreads a bad reputation, a trait which appears in intensified form in a
neurosis as, “What will the others say?” It is the anxious, consequent slogan of
those who want to be first. Most people live in fear of the opinion of others,
permitting their actions to be influenced by it. When we become aware of how
much superfluous anxiety and worry govern our conduct, and of how little true
courage there is in the world, we cannot wonder that our epoch is called the
“neurotic age.” It was probably not much different in other times; perhaps the
only distinction is in the changing fashions of living.
There was a high school student at the music school who used to lend me
detective stories. Henry also used to lend me some. I devoured them with Olga
or Sophie. Detective stories gradually became my passion. At night I was so
terror-stricken that I couldn’t sleep.
Many children prefer detective stories because they like the tense
excitement produced by reading them and, further, because they like to discover
tricks in such stories which they can utilize to achieve some superiority over
others.
The type of book or the life style of the reader determines the reasons for
the fascination with detective stories. In most case, the reader likes to identify
with the detective whose superior ability to uncover trails and detect clues,
whose strength and dominating position are all so impressive. Here is a man who
obviously knows nothing of impeding weakness in mind or body which makes
so much trouble for the reader in his daily life. In his imagination, the reader
elevates himself to the role of a fictive personality (the detective) and obtains the
laurels of success without exertion. The value of such identification lies often in
the carrying over and retention in daily life of some of the courage inherent in
the imagined role of the detective.
The appeal of detective stories lies as well in the excitement and anxiety
evoked. The reader frequently finds himself in a tense state by identifying with
the pursued, and this tension enables him to come up with ideas for saving
himself. This is especially true of those books in which the author gives the role

of hero or adventurer to the fugitive who must overcome innumerable obstacles
in his path. The reader usually identifies with the character assigned the role of
the hero, no matter whether detective, adventurer, or thief. Only those
individuals who always choose the opposite select a disagreeable character with
which to identify themselves.
All readers extract some form of pseudo-superiority from detective,
mystery, or adventure stories. They like to play with dangers which are really no
dangers for them and which, as they know in advance, they are going to conquer.
They abstract, as it were, from reality without having any responsibility. And
therein lies the danger of fantastic tales. They estrange from reality and open the
way to irresponsible, neurotic dreaming. Courageous individuals do not need
such fictions and will not resort to them.
I was also passionately fond of films dealing with criminals. One of the
theatres once played “The Man in the Cellar.” Children were denied admission.
I schemed the whole day how to get in. Finally I got one of the older girls to buy
a ticket for me, pulled my hat down over my face, and got in.
You see the effect of the detective stories and crime films.
The picture had a terrible effect on me. I couldn’t fall asleep for a whole
week. I was afraid to breathe in the dark, I would wake Mother up, and when she
fell asleep, I would then awaken Father.
We have known for some time about her tendency to disturb her parents in
the night. When her mood became one of anxiety through identifying with the
characters in the motion picture, the result was what her style of life compelled.
The result would have been the same without the feeling of anxiety, but with it,
she feels more justified.
Terrible fear also caused the following:
This girl begins to describe how she gathers anxieties as a miser gathers treasure,
collecting situations which can produce anxiety.
Father had the habit of letting the shutters down, but not closing them.
Every passerby could look in. Once I was lying awake in bed between my
parents. Father was still reading. He used to read an hour before going to sleep.
Suddenly I saw two eyes glaring into the room like those of one crazed.
The erotic reason for the peeping can be recognized distinctly from the way
she describes the incident. When she speaks of horrible shocks, we must not
forget her tendency to harp on and exaggerate situations producing anxiety.
I was very ambitious and learned quickly during my first three years at
school. I liked chorus practice best. I didn’t have a good voice, but had a good
ear. Some children always sang off key.
Here also we see how sharply she notes the difference between herself and

others. For someone else, this difference would not have been significant enough
to remember.
They trembled when called on to sing and didn’t even dare open their mouths.
She has recognized very early the unfortunate inferiority feeling of those
children who lack some accomplishment, and who lose control of themselves
when they must reveal this lack. I have seen children almost desperate because
they could not whistle. I once met a boy who told me that he could not whistle
for a long time. One day he succeeded in whistling and felt as if God were going
to whistle through him. We can see from this description what immense
importance is ascribed to these abilities.
They made me laugh so much that I had to stick my head under my seat.
We have known for some time that laughter is also a language and has
significance. Dostoevsky says that we can tell a man’s character from the way he
laughs. She laughs so heartily that she must hide her head under the chair. That
looks as if it would pain her to show others how superior she is. Anyone who
can recall the picture of a classroom knows that nothing is more noticeable than
hiding one’s head beneath one’s seat. It is an exaggeration which looks more
harmless than it really is.
And sometimes I laughed so much that a little accident would happen . . .
When I was ten years old, in the fourth year at school, I began to neglect my
schoolwork. I became lazy, inattentive, and very dreamy.
We do not know why this girl grew less studious in her fourth school year.
She may have had another teacher whom she liked less; maybe she was scolded.
Suddenly she applied the brakes and stopped. Spoiled children often progress as
long as the way is smooth, and neglect their work as soon as a difficulty presents
itself.
The teacher said I could have been one of the best students, but that I was too
lazy.
She is fully satisfied with that. That is the pronouncement which often
attracts children to laziness; they satisfy themselves with the possibility. They do
not speculate badly. “One bird in the hand is worth two in the bush” is taken to
be the greatest of wisdom. The feeling, “I could be the best,” is sufficient; they
do not go further so as not to destroy this illusion. When they really accomplish
something, they have the advantage of being praised by others; consistently
studious children are not noticed much. Lazy children stumble on a paying road;
like all unmanageable children, they work under less trying conditions.
Father was indifferent to my progress at school. He only concerned himself
with my health. He was always careful to see that I had enough fresh air. In the
evening, when he was through working, he often went walking with me. We

would pace quickly along the streets to the railroad viaduct. Then I waited,
shuddering, until the train shot out of the tunnel. It could be heard thundering a
long way off. It appeared to me like a monster, a dragon, a devil. The moment it
rushed passed me, I swore at it out of the smoke which threatened to obscure me.
Even this little incident is exaggerated, comparisons made to increase the
effect of the sight of the train. Even out of that she extracts the advantage of the
possibility for anxiety. She will construct groundless fears until she cannot rid
herself of her anxiety. That is the development of training toward an anxiety
neurosis.
I was not a good student in high school either. When Christmas came
during my first year in high school, I wanted a piano badly. Father wanted to
buy me a used one, but could not find any good enough. Christmas morning had
already come. I cried, yelled, scolded, threatened neither to eat nor drink, if
there were no piano in the house by evening.
Undoubtedly, her relationship even with her father is poisoned by her desire
to rule. 
At that time Father’s earnings were quite good and he had intended to buy me a
piano anyway. When I became so wildly furious, he dressed himself and
promised that he would try to buy one on the installment plan. After some delay,
he succeeded in getting one and it arrived just in time. I was never so happy in
my life. I immediately opened it and began to play. Then I ran over to Sophie’s
and invited her to return with me and see it. Then I played again and played and
played until Father made me stop. I was really happy that day. The next day I
arose very early and practiced diligently. Before that, I had always said that I
had a piano. Now I didn’t have to lie anymore. 
I used to play pieces for four hands with Sophie. At the end of the year, a concert
was arranged at the music school. I wanted to be nicely dressed for it and asked
for white shoes. Father didn’t want to buy me any and painted an old pair white
for me. The general examination took place at the school on a Sunday morning.
We played our pieces. We even had to learn to bow correctly. Everything went
off smoothly. I had no stage fright and played my pieces without any mistakes. I
played one piece with Sophie.
We would like to use this opportunity to say a few words about stage fright,
a frequent symptom. Stage fright usually appears when people confronted with a
task are less concerned with the accomplishment of the task than with worry
about what people are going to say about them. We have already seen that many
neurotics are greatly dependent on the opinions of others. When their striving to
accomplish something extraordinary is excessively intensified, the success of
this striving becomes increasingly uncertain and the possibility of failure looms

that much nearer. In stage fright, we clearly see the general, neurotic anxiety
before a decision, the hesitating attitude, and the distance between the person
frightened and his fellow human beings. If that pinnacle of success which
inordinate ambition has set is not achieved, stage fright offers an excellent alibi.
If the task (a speech, an examination, or whatever it may be) is crowned with
success, the value of such a success is doubled, for it has been achieved in spite
of the handicap of stage fright.
Various reasons explain the absence of stage fright before a public
appearance. Such absence may indicate perfect objectivity and adjustment to
life, routine training, or the naivete of one who has never suffered a defeat. Stage
fright is naturally no inborn characteristic, but results from early experiences.
The reason for the absence of stage fright in this girl is unquestionably the last
named, that is, the naivete of one who has never suffered a defeat. We can
imagine how it will be when she faces a failure or a dangerous situation. As long
as she continues to progress, she has no stage fright.
My friend distinguished herself and recited a poem at the end of the
performance. A year later we found, in addition, that something practical and
lucrative could be done with my piano playing. Tilda’s father, Mr. Stockinger,
who was a waiter in a wine restaurant, suggested that we play together in the
restaurant. One evening Tilda and I collected our music, small pieces,
quadrilles, waltzes, and so on and went over to the restaurant. We lost our
courage at the entrance. We quarreled as to who should enter first and squeezed
through together. Mr. Stockinger immediately brought us to a table and gave us
some wine. Then we were asked to go to the piano. At first we were too shy. After
some coaxing, however, we went to the piano, and looking neither left nor right,
began to pound the keys. There was much applause and that flattered us. After a
short pause, we played a second piece in our best style. When we had gone
through our repertoire, we took a plate and went around collecting money which
we later divided. We bought a lot of chocolate cake on the way home. I gave
Father a silver coin.
There was a restaurant next door to us, in which an athletic society met
every Wednesday and Saturday. They always engaged a musician to play for
them. I often saw the men exercising. They made the funniest faces when they
marched to the music and when they exercised with the heavy iron dumbbells
which they couldn’t quite manage to raise aloft completely. Their arms trembled
and their bellies shook. I could hardly restrain my laughter.
How she tried to revenge herself on those who were strong. She laughs at
them because of their facial expressions and for any reason she can find.
The musician was ill once and the restaurant owner didn’t know what to do

about getting a substitute on such short notice. He thought of me. I was quite
willing since I could earn a little money.
We should say something here about the desire of children to earn money.
Children have an intense longing to earn money and we must try to channel this
longing in the proper direction. We see the same longing in adults who have
always been financially dependent on others and who have never earned any
money themselves. It is wrong to speak here of miserliness, thrift, or the desire
for money per se. We see it better in the light of Individual Psychology. It
represents the struggle for equality. In our civilization, since money has become
the measure of a man’s worth, even though a most inadequate one, everybody
exerts himself to realize his worth in money. In this way, we understand the
child’s desire to possess money as the attempt to be equal.
The athletes were pleased with me and offered me tarts and beer. One of
the men was very fat. Later I received another tip. At home I assumed all sorts of
airs, snubbed my family, answered their questions nervously, and then told them
they ought to have some consideration for me after the strain of such hard work.
We see how this girl begins to assume airs. She has done it before in order to
appear greater.
I substituted for the pianist as long as he was ill, and later played once in a
while when he was away. There was hardly room to move in our tiny flat. An
apartment was vacant in Sophie’s house which had an additional room; the
living room and kitchen were also larger there. We moved over, but my
proximity to Sophie lasted only a short time. For some reason or other, the
landlord gave Sophie’s parents notice. Her parents sold their store and moved to
Ottakring, quite some distance away from us. I visited her often. She told me
about a boy with whom she had fallen in love and pointed him out to me. I
surveyed him, and then gave her my opinion. “I wouldn’t have anything to do
with a boy like that. Get him out of your head.”
We are already familiar with this attitude. What another has is worthless.
That didn’t stop me from flirting with him . . . I always dressed myself
carefully when I went over to see her and would parade in front of her. She
admired me very much.
There we have the ideal friend for this girl. Her friend must admire her, must put
up with criticism and let herself be ordered about.
She adored me. She took literally whatever I said. She met a girl in her new
neighborhood whom we both mocked. Sophie explained to me that she only went
around with her because she was bored, but that she always thought of me. To
make her jealous, I told her that I had fallen in love with a boy, described him in
detail, and told her how we kissed and how we talked to each other in the

movies. I said he was surely going to marry me. And I promised her that I would
hide her under my bed on my bridal night and she promised to do the same, in
case she married before I did.
Again her penetrating curiosity.
Then we kissed each other and swore to always be true to one another. She
often complained of her foster father. He used to tell nasty jokes which
thoroughly disgusted her. He even wanted to “touch” her. She was very afraid
of him. I shuddered when I heard this. Her foster father was also very strict; he
boxed her ears when she brought home a bad report card from school. My father
would laugh and say, “Five is more than one.” (Five was a bad mark, one a
good mark.) I once got a mark of five in the class on religion. It happened this
way. I had not gone to mass on Sunday and had to give a suitable excuse.
Instead of doing that, when I was asked why I had not attended, I replied,
“Because I didn’t want to.”
We know that in school nothing is more dangerous than to tell the truth
about such things. As long as we lie, we are respectable, but when we tell the
truth, then we get into trouble. I do not know how children emerge from this
training in school. Woe to the child who says, “I was bored,” or who answers the
question, “Why didn’t you greet me?” with “Because I didn’t want to.” When he
lies, he is a valued member of human society; when he tells the truth, he is lost.
Here we see a further reason why children lie. Often it is the way of least
resistance. Children learn to save themselves many disagreeable moments by
lying. They sometimes have the example of an adult whom they detect in a lie
and whom they then imitate. The latter event has the added attraction of being
able to imitate an adult, in other words, to appear greater than they really are.
The class was as still as a mouse. It sounded like blasphemy. It was at least
honest. Only the teacher didn’t know enough to appreciate honesty.
We understand how this girl came to do it. She must also feel superior to her
teacher.
I believe that was in the first class at public school. At that time Father had
a book with pictures illustrating the whole story of the persecution of the
Christians in Rome. I couldn’t read very well at that time, so he explained the
pictures and told me the whole story. I would arrange stage scenes with my doll.
Most of the time, she would take the part of a king’s daughter. Presumably under
the influence of those pictures which presented the crucifixion, I composed the
following play: a strange knight steals my doll and kisses her in front of her
husband who has just come in. Her husband starts to scream. The knight, with
the consent of the stolen princess (the doll) has the husband knifed by a couple
of hangman’s assistants, tortured with heated tongs, and then orders his skin

torn off. And while I was imagining all that to myself, I suddenly had the most
peculiar feeling.
There we have the emerging of a sadistic-sexual fantasy. She is merely an
onlooker, but she is inclined to observe closely the difficulties of others. We
have often remarked how she attempts to degrade others. We must consider two
points in attempting to explain how she comes to create such images: (1) her
father, with the story of the persecution of Christians, has really opened the door
for sexual stimulation under cover of sadistic, painful scenes and pictures; (2)
she discovers at the same time that she belongs to that type which, at the sight of
such scenes is not affected by accelerated heartbeat, gooseflesh, or loss of
control of the sphincter muscles (muscles controlling discharge of bodily waste),
but is stimulated sexually. We gather that her anxiety dreams, her liking for
criminal films, do not remain merely as anxiety images in her, but go further and
excite her erotically.
When the feeling subsided, I got up and thought to myself, “Now you have
made a marvelous discovery. No one suspects what a wonderful feeling such
images can produce.”
We have heard how she was in the process of training herself to produce
anxiety images and now that her type takes clearer form, she begins to train
more strongly in this direction.
The first time I really heard anything about sexual intercourse was in the
first high school class. There was a clique of girls in that class who had matured
at an early age and had well-developed bodies. They were supposed to
understand jokes with a double meaning and to go around with boys. During
rest periods, they could always be seen whispering to each other. I wanted to
learn what they knew, so I approached them, behaved like them in order to win
their confidence and walked home from school with them.
Children frequently pretend to know more than they really do in order to
learn something. Here we see quite clearly how information about sex spreads in
school. I am convinced that we cannot prevent it. Whatever he who attempts to
explain sex to children does in an effort to combat such dissemination is useless
against the elementary force which pervades the school. At that age children are
critical and do not believe everything.
 
When I was finally alone with one girl who was supposed to know a great
deal, I asked her if she knew where children come from. She said, “Yes.” I
begged her to tell me. I had heard different things, but didn’t believe them. She
didn’t want to tell me at first. I teased her so long, however, that she finally

consented. I had to swear that I would never tell anyone.
Notice how the girl who is supposed to be the most experienced is ashamed and
embarrassed, demanding that it be kept a secret.
Then she put her head close to mine, walked up and down with me, and said
that one must have sexual intercourse in order to have a child. The expression
“sexual intercourse” was not clear to me, so she described the procedure.
Horrified, I cried, “That can’t be true!”
Chapter VIII
The Shock of Sexual Knowledge
Individual Psychology has always believed that man is an indivisible
whole, a concentrated bundle of life, striving toward a goal. To attain this goal,
he constructs a system embracing everything that may help him and rejecting all
that may hinder his progress. When a man has an experience that registers in his
memory, it becomes a part of and belongs to his system. This system continues
throughout his life, including all forms of expression. The life of an ordinary
healthy person conceals this system; serious mental disorders reveal it distinctly.
Psychiatrists have long recognized the rigid schematicism of mental illnesses,
especially noticeable in paranoia. Individual Psychological investigations have
gone a step further and have pointed out that a similar life scheme is present in
every human being, with the modification that in relatively normal individuals it
is not so prominently noticeable.
When we apply this idea to our story, we come much closer to an
understanding of this girl’s system. Until now, we have been able to harmonize
every trait and expression with her system. We are dealing here with a spoiled
child who wants to occupy the leading position and avoid every situation which
does not fit into her style of life. Let us see whether our hypothesis is confirmed.
My lack of confidence seemed to offend her somewhat, so she described the
whole thing to me again. Then I wanted to know if only certain people had
intercourse, or really everybody.
This is one of the common questions children ask as soon as they learn
something about sex.
She answered, “Everybody, otherwise there would be no children,” and then
promised to tell me more about it the next time.
Here we now have the point of which I have often spoken. We should not
believe that explanations by children are more pernicious than those by educated
adults. When we compare the explanations given by children and by scientists,
we often prefer the children’s explanation. Their description is more human,
more delicate. This child does not have to believe the other who is supposed to
know more; she can doubt and in this way prepare herself for the truth. When an

adult with his officious authority, comes and gives a brusque and dogmatic
explanation, the child has no time for preparation, no time to doubt, to adjust, or
to protect herself. We merely have to examine a pamphlet on sexual
enlightenment to see that children are more delicate.
In spite of the exact description, I still doubted her words. It seemed too
piggish to me. I came home quite excited. The more I thought about it, the more
the alleged intercourse seemed grotesque. I grew nauseous when I thought of all
other people. I exempted my parents, for I really didn’t believe they would do
anything so filthy. It even occurred to me that it was probably a dirty joke which
some man had concocted and spread about.
You see the attempt to soften the blow.
I did think, however, that it was quite beyond good people, and in
particular, my parents, to do anything of the sort. And a girl who would permit
herself to do that was, in my eyes, contaminated and degraded. It was
inconceivable to me how one could live after it.
Here appears the snag which seems unavoidable when enlightening a child
about sex, since the child already has a fixed form of life. When such a child
strives to be foremost, to shine in every respect, she receives the impression
from such an explanation that sex is concerned with something debasing so she
will, sooner or later, protect herself from the approach of the opposite sex. Even
the most careful explanation cannot avoid this danger. The degree to which she
will repel advances will depend on how much she has fed her ambition. She will
have difficulties and begin to resent her sex. The superiority of the feminine role
appears to be threatened because our culture grants men privileges whereby they
appear superior in sexual intercourse. It is a cultural lie. If we could stamp it out,
permit men no privileges and achieve equality, there would be no place for the
thought of debasement or inferiority. If I believed this pitfall could be avoided
by explanation, I would be manifesting an excessive naïveté.
It was incomprehensible that people could go on living afterward.
We can imagine that such a fiercely ambitious girl will try her utmost to
ward off all thought of love and marriage. She will struggle desperately to avoid
any solution when these thoughts become a serious problem. She will appear
like someone who has set herself the task of building a life from which love and
marriage are excluded.
How I myself came to be I did not think of at all.
That is one of the forms in which the rejection of the feminine role, the
elimination of sexual activity, makes itself manifest. She did not think. What she
does is active and difficult work. It is mental strain not to see, think, or face the
question: How did I come to be?

I confided in Sophie what I had learned and added that I couldn’t believe it.
Then she told me that some time ago, she had heard her parents’ bed creaking
loudly. She couldn’t see anything because it was too dark, but the creaking was
very suspicious--her parents surely had an intercourse. I made her describe the
creaking in detail. Then I said to her, “It may well be fine for your parents, but
mine surely don’t do it. I lie between them in bed and I would have noticed
something long before this. My father is entirely too proper anyway. He
originally wanted to be a priest.
You see how her first reaction comes primarily from her longing for
superiority. Just as she didn’t say before that her father was a tailor, now she
surrounds him with the glory of having wanted to be a priest.
Soon after, I again walked home with my knowing schoolmate. She told me
a whole lot more, all of which was disgusting to me; that all married women had
intercourse; that it hurt very much the first time and that one bled the first time;
that prostitutes did it for money and then had operations so as not to have any
children; and that men wore a rubber protector.
We are now in the realm of sexual clarification.
Another girl said later that she had a thick medical book at home which she
used to read secretly. Sexual intercourse was explained in that book in detail as
well as the sexual organs, and there were also pictures. I asked her to lend me
the book. She answered that she was afraid her parents might discover the book
was missing or that my parents might discover the book in my possession. I
persuaded her that everything would be kept secret and she promised to let me
have the book for two hours.
A frequent procedure during the time of sexual clarification is to look in books.
The dictionary plays an important role.
She invited me to her house. We wrapped the book in newspapers and with
a beating heart carried it to my house and hid it beneath a chest. After supper, I
got it out and sat down in a corner. My parents were very busy just then and
didn’t watch me. I read with boundless excitement. Now I had it in black and
white and could do nothing but accept the sexual act as a fact. But I still thought
my parents incapable of doing any such thing. And I decided then never to
marry.
We have here the confirmation of what we expected, so we can anticipate
precisely what she is going to do or not do, according to the style of life
developed up to now. She collects reasons to avoid love in which she fears a
defeat.
On the rare occasions that Father and Mother were affectionate to each
other, I would throw myself energetically between them and make them

understand that I alone was the one to receive caresses.
Again, she expresses a vigorous reaction against sexuality. When we
assume that she does this because she is jealous of her mother and wants her
mother’s place in relation to her father, we disturb the clear unity of her behavior
pattern. Freud called childish jealousy of one of the parents the Oedipus
Complex. Oedipus was a Greek who unknowingly married his mother after he
had killed his father. We believe that only in a few cases is childish jealousy
based on sexual reasons. In general, the jealousy of children does not express
desire for sexual possession of the father or mother, but merely a wish to occupy
a higher and more powerful position. It is an expression of the struggle for
superiority.
During the night I lay like a Cerberus between them. I often remained
awake for hours--not purposely to watch. I simply fell asleep with difficulty. And
when Father snored, I tickled him with my braid and when Mother snored, I
shook her. I couldn’t stand snoring.
A partial diversion from the theme. Even here there is nothing but “I” and
“I.” Everything must happen as I want it. We often find in the later lives of
adults that they cannot bear certain habits, for example, snoring. Our girl objects
to disturbances like snoring or turning on the light. We see how these trivialities
mirror the lust for power. She seizes the slightest opportunity to lay down a law
for someone else. We can see her powerful compulsion most clearly in the
demand for quiet, a common method for asserting power. It is a means which
appears modest, but is, in reality, tyrannical. As if such a thing as quiet were
possible. The other must pattern his life rules on mine; he must live so that my
demands become his general guideline.
When it grew dark, the prostitutes used to walk the streets. I watched them
now with entirely different eyes. I wished I could hide myself in the room of one
of them to see what happened. And once when it was evening, a man stood
outside a house on the street and his trousers were open.
Such people are called exhibitionists. They are cowards in life who avoid
normal sexual relationships and achieve their sordid satisfaction by exhibiting
their sexual organs to desirable women, usually young girls. They are excited by
the fright and nervousness aroused in the girl; they extract a cheap triumph from
their seeming power to force another person into a wretched situation.
Most girls and women have probably encountered an exhibitionist. It is a
frequent occurrence of which men are less aware. I have learned from personal
experience that it is a widespread abuse. It makes a strong impression on such a
girl, diverting her still further from the normal road.
In telling her story, she knows that she is stepping on the road of desertion.

While she plans and follows her behavior pattern, she lays one brick after
another, cemented by her striving for superiority and her fight to exclude
everything which does not fit into her system.
I screamed and ran away madly. I never ran so quickly in my life.
You see how forcefully she emphasizes the flight which will be manifest in
everything and everywhere.
When I was in the second year at high school, I suddenly imagined that the
calves of my legs were too thin . . .
That is doubt of one’s own beauty. The girl doubts easily. If she imagined
that she were pretty, it would be an impulse in the direction of love. If she made
her longed-for superiority a reality, she might be forced to face and accept a
problem.
An objection could be made here that she is taking pains to make herself
prettier, that she really wants to attract men, eventually to have a normal
relationship. She does want to attract, but merely to secure her superiority. Deep
down, she doubts whether she is really attractive enough for someone to love
her. And this doubt is more important than all the useless puttering about which
seems to flatter her vanity. This doubt is arranged. We must not forget that doubt
does not come from heaven; it fits exactly into a person’s system. We can look at
doubt in two ways. Either we doubt because we have some unsolved problem or
we doubt in order to have an excuse for evading a decision.
Our girl needs doubt in her system; therefore, she makes these discoveries of
which we will undoubtedly hear more.
. . . and put on three pairs of stockings. Father was angry about it because
it was summer and he said my feet would perspire. So I cut off the feet of the
stockings and wore only the top parts. Then I stuffed them with cotton and even
put on a pair of Father’s knitted trunks.
In addition to springing from a doubt of her power to attract, this procedure
is a symptom of a nervous condition already known to us. It is an activity on the
useless side of life, overemphasizing useless things. It destroys the harmony of
life.
My arms too . . .
You see how this progresses.
. . . seemed to me too thin.
We expect her to find many ugly points about herself with the consequence,
“I cannot marry; I must exclude love completely from my life.” She gathers
reasons like a honeybee in order to avoid a love relationship.
I wouldn’t have gone out with a short-sleeved dress for anything. Then I
imagined I had shaky hands. So I tried to hide my hands as much as possible. At

school there were girls with curved bodies. There was nothing to see on me.
Olga and I measured our chests with tape measures. The result was very
discouraging. Then we stuffed our bosoms with handkerchiefs and paraded on
the street.
That looks like an attempt to attract others. In connection with other facts,
however, we perceive that this girl considers herself of little worth. She makes
attempts, as she says, to improve her appearance. These attempts hide a deep
feeling of inferiority. In all that she has done until now, she shows no indication
of moving in the direction of love and marriage. The attempts she makes are
sufficient for parading on the street, but not for marriage.
Once when I passed my hand over my head, it seemed pointed and angular to
me.
Now she is at the end of her art. She can stuff her stockings to make her
calves appear larger, she can stuff her dress front to swell her bosom, but what
about her head? You see how this training goes on. Up to her head everything
has been patchwork; she must come to the point where she proves to herself that
she is not suited for love.
I used to keep my hat on as long as I could. Sometimes the perspiration
would run down underneath and I would not take it off. I remember now that
when I was eight years old, I forgot to take off my hat in the classroom. The
teacher had to remind me of it.
At this point, we should say something more about remembered and
forgotten facts. We have already seen that conclusions for an individual’s style
of life can be drawn from remembrances and incidents. They have a definite
psychological worth. These factual incidents usually have no significance to the
individual himself.
What happens here? The girl tells us more than once that she has hidden her
head. She does not say so directly, but intimates that she has wanted to hide her
head when she was a child. In itself that is an inconsequential remark. Why does
she report it? She jumps from one fact to another, and we often receive the
impression that one fact is supposed to justify the other. This is very common
among neurotic people. They establish a private logic, seeking the most
irrational justifications and proofs for the correctness of their conduct. They
relate experiences which are quite ordinary, but to which they ascribe such
importance that we wonder why they carry so much weight, until we discover
that these experiences or facts are supposed to be justifications. The psychic
machinery of the neurotic is so delicate that its functioning is jarred by the
slightest disturbance from the outside, and so it is protected with a defensive
shield of handy justifications. Nothing is permitted entry into the system until it

is clubbed into form so that it fits.
We wonder at the dexterity of such a person who manipulates experiences
and events until they fit into her style of life. If we did not know that the soul is a
unity on which we work in order to arrange it more artistically, we would
wonder why so insignificant a matter is emphasized. That emphasis is the
compulsion of our psychic life to unity, a part of the general creative power of
the life of the soul.
I was accustomed to making my hats myself, usually from the remnants of
the things Father made. For the most part they were impossible, but sometimes
one was wearable. The making of hats gradually became a mania. It went so far
that Father had to lock up all the extra pieces of material in the house.
Again, she shows a good visual sense. We can imagine that the joy of
designing something pleasing to the eye stimulated her. To that we add that she
has never been scolded, that everything she does or says is praised, and we can
thus understand that hatmaking also represented a training. She clearly shows a
deeper desire to create something pleasing so that she can shine.
Father had an old coat which he had promised to remodel for me. He never
took the time off to do it. I became angry and scolded him. I believe, I said,
“bum” to him.
You know what friendly relations exist between her and her father, but you
see how easily they can be broken when the question of power comes to the fore
and he does not want to follow her wish. We could say she is impulsive.
Impulsiveness is a question of temperament. What is temperament?
Doctors, psychologists and philosophers all differ on the meaning of
temperament. Since the days of the Greeks, temperament has been divided into
four distinct classifications: sanguine, choleric, melancholy and phlegmatic.
Such divisions are purely descriptive and merely satisfy the desire for order in
human thought. Pure forms of temperament seldom occur; what we usually see
are mixtures. A human being, during the course of his life, can also change from
one temperament to another. The representatives of the natural sciences believe
that temperaments are produced by the various activities of the inner glands,
such as the thyroid gland, the sexual glands, the suprarenal glands and so on.
This assumption is quite mechanical and has not been proven. On the contrary,
we regard the temperament as an expedient safety device, the development of
which is determined by the degree of the feeling of inferiority and
discouragement. Temperament is a means by which to attain one’s fictive goal.
For centuries, we thought that temperament was inborn and inherited, a
belief which serves to relieve us of responsibility. When we ascribe a deed to
temperament, we absolve the doer of responsibility. And even when bodily

conditions (socalled dispositions) do have some influence in the development of
a temperamental quality, the objection may be raised that no bodily condition
compels an individual to assume a particular attitude toward life. Of course,
specific physical conditions suggest an abnormal attitude and make a normal one
more difficult.
Like most mental qualities, temperament is trained to serve as means to the
attainment of the goal. He who believes he will achieve his objective by being
quiet and indolent will become phlegmatic, but will remain phlegmatic only as
long as it appears advantageous to him. He who believes he must storm ahead
will become impulsive. Naturally, the environment and the experiences as well
as the physical constitution play an important but never compelling role in the
formation and development of temperament. Every child is impulsive if she
grows up pampered and then has her wishes refused. Mention might be made of
psychopathy, but she handles the matter quite correctly; with the same goal, we
would not act differently.
Father got up, gritted his teeth and struck me lightly. He didn’t hurt me, but a
little accident happened again because of my fear.
We may assume that this girl belongs to the physical type which loses control of
the bladder in a condition of fear.
When the war came, we had to knit all sorts of things for the soldiers,
mittens, socks and so on. I had to knit a pair of mittens. I knit an index finger in
the place of the thumb and vice versa and then I tried to stretch the fingers.
When we had to deliver the knitted stuff, I was afraid to hand mine in, but luckily
the teacher didn’t notice anything.
Many worse things than that were handed out to the soldiers during the war.
I pitied the soldier who would get those mittens. After an absence of two
years, Lina returned from Prague. She was quite elegant and had a lot of trunks
with her. While she was unpacking, I took a pair of her shoes and tried them on.
They fit perfectly. They were the first ones with high heels I ever had on; Father
allowed me shoes with only low heels. Later when I was sent out to get some
beer, I went quickly to the neighboring café. There were usually two men there,
one of whom had once asked me to play cards with him. I was a little in love
with him.
The mention of love may seem surprising. We are not certain whether it is
love or power; it is possibly a relationship consisting almost entirely of a striving
for superiority. If this girl proceeds further, something will surely happen to
prevent the complete development of the affair.
He was there when I entered, but no matter how hard I tried to draw his
attention to the high heels, he didn’t notice them.

Something begins here to which we usually do not pay much attention, an
attempt to make an impression. Another striving lies underneath the one usually
considered, namely, the power motive.
Lina brought me some Bohemian slippers, a writing book and many other
things which I do not remember. But when the perfume and mouthwash
appeared, I seized them, ran to rinse my mouth out, and sprayed my clothes with
the perfume. Now we were all together again-that made me happy.
We know what makes her happy; the fulfillment of her desire for
superiority. The more she approaches her ideal of being the center, the closer she
is to happiness. The bigger her court, the better.
We had a mouse in the house. When mother baked something, the mouse
used to come through a crack in the door. The smell attracted it. Mother and I
were terribly afraid of mice.
Girls usually dread and are disgusted by mice. Their behavior reveals their
reluctance to being taken by surprise, and a fear of being harmed by the mouse.
It is not always a sexual symbol, but when we remember how girls act as soon as
they hear a mouse, how they protect themselves as if they were going to be
assaulted, we can understand how it could be such a symbol in some cases.
I was sitting in my room and brooding. It was a habit of mine then.
The tendency of busying herself with useless things grows more marked.
Father carried the petroleum lamp to the kitchen and sat down at the
sewing machine. And as I sat there in the shadow, something scurried across the
floor from one side of the room to the other. I ran to Father and cried, “A
mouse!” Father was of the opinion that I was seeing mice everywhere and that it
was only a moving shadow. . . . I had a good nose for the smell of a mouse.
We have already heard of her nose.
I could smell it distinctly on my music; I was always an extremely good
smeller. One night, as so often happened, I was lying between my parents who
were already asleep. It was dark and very quiet. I heard something breathing
and scratching at the door. I was terror-stricken and thought at first it was a
burglar. I drew the cover over my head, listening intently. Then I realized that it
was a mouse and woke Mother, who was as frightened as I. Then I awakened
Father. He laughed at us. Jokingly, I promised him a piece of silver if he would
get out of bed and chase the mouse away. When he lit the lamp, the scratching
ceased. Obviously the mouse was afraid of the light. . . . We bought a mousetrap,
but it did not catch the mouse. The rodent became more and more impudent. We
often heard it scratching in broad daylight. The mouse nauseated me so much
that I tried to force my parents to move out. In order to quiet me, they used to tell
the funniest mouse stories. They said that a mouse had once sprung into the

pocket of our assistant, Krassny. Mother’s brother liked to play with mice and
once he even put one inside his shirt.
You see how the idea turns up that a mouse can hide itself in one’s clothing in
some way.
My dread could not be overcome. I couldn’t eat another thing whenever I
happened to hear the mouse scratching during mealtime. Finally, Mother
borrowed another mousetrap from a neighbor, and we caught the mouse with it.
Father wanted to drown it, but when I saw it in the cage, it filled me with pity
because of its pleading eyes and troubled movements and I begged for its life.
How can we reconcile that with the girl’s style of life? No matter how small
this object is, she can now be the merciful one; she controls life and death. It
gives her a feeling of strength. She will probably have her own way.
We went out into the street and let the mouse run free. . . . Soon after we
caught a second mouse. But by that time, I was so bitter that I agreed when they
decided to drown it. Mother poured water into the pail; Father took hold of the
trap; I got up on the table to be safe. Unfortunately, the mouse was too quick for
them and sprang like a flash out of the trap and hid itself. Mother and I were
furious. We knew that it would take care not to go into the trap again. A week
later, when I came home one evening (our apartment was at the end of the house
corridor), a mouse was sitting in front of our door.
She talks so much about mice that we are now attentive. There must be
some connection with a former preparation for the sexual question; something is
reflected here which has already been started.
I screamed, ran to the house door, and shouted to my parents through the
window for help.
She behaves as she did when she saw the exhibitionist.
Mother immediately came out with a broom. The mouse had disappeared. It
was doubtless the same one which we had already caught, so it did not dare,
therefore, to enter our apartment. I believe it also warned the other mice about
our house since, from that time on, we were spared any mice. Also, like most
people, I was very afraid of rats. There were many in our courtyard. They used
to creep out of the sewer pipe. Father often used to say that one could hear them
whistling down the toilet pipe. When I heard that, I did not want to use the toilet
any more. I was afraid that a rat could bite me when I sat down. We let the dog,
Bello, hunt the rats. There was a wild scramble in the yard. The housekeeper
with a broom, Bello running after her, and all us children who were scared, but
who ran around here and there. A mad mix-up. I also couldn’t stand spiders.
She continues to list all things she hated; she does not seem to emerge from this
train of thought.

One morning when I was polishing my shoes, I felt something sticky in one
of them. I thrust my hand inside and there was a partially crushed spider. I
hurled the shoe in the corner and did not wear that pair for a long time. Once
there was one on the wall just above my bed. I sprang out of bed and called my
parents. Father wanted to kill it. I was of the opinion, however, that that might
mean bad luck and seized his arm. The spider finally landed in the pail.
One day Olga found in the trunk of her father, who had been in Siberia . . .
A spider? A mouse? No. … the memoirs of Casanova.
The close thought connection leads one to infer that a mouse was a sexual
symbol in the life of this girl.
At that time I was in the third year of high school. We devoured the book.
Then she discovered a lot of erotic books, bound in black, with the title, “The
Secret Library,” stamped in white. Trembling with excitement, we got the books
out on the floor and read them aloud to each other. The books were called, “The
Black Don Juan,” “The Lady with the Dark Spot,” “The Swimming Instructor in
the Women’s Bath,” and so on. The most awful things happened in those stories.
Naturally, superficial observers will take this as an expression of eroticism.
It is more correctly understood as a deviation from eroticism, as an effort to give
very little place in her real life to it. The reading of erotic descriptions indicated
the exclusion of eroticism in reality.
I saw a postcard which fascinated me in the window of a stationary store. It
depicted a centaur embracing a nymph in a suggestive fashion, while whispering
something in her ear. I wanted very much to buy the card, but was ashamed. The
picture troubled me constantly. Day after day, it drew me to the store. Finally, I
made up my mind, entered the store and asked to be shown postcards. The one I
wanted was among them. Full of joy, I returned home and hid it among my
underwear. When I was alone, I would take it out and concentrate on it,
imagining myself sometimes the centaur and sometimes the nymph.
While we formerly found that she sought sexual excitement in her reading,
she goes further here and begins to interest herself in pictures. She goes over into
the visual.
The postcard made no impression on Olga.
We may conclude that they go different ways in their erotic development. Olga
is another type; possibly she is not so frightened.
Funny that boys could not attract me when I thought they were superior.
Here we find a corroboration of the reason given for examining pictures and
reading erotic books. She shuns love by occupying her fantasy with useless
things. Boys are only there to be made fools of.
When we depreciate the value of something which we originally wanted,

we rid ourselves of a disagreeable duty or responsibility, and retain our good
humor. That is also the meaning of the fable of the fox and sour grapes. When
the fox saw he could not reach the grapes, he consoled himself by saying they
were sour, thereby retaining his good humor.
I never kissed one. The love life of my youth existed in fantasies. I used to
imagine the story of King Saul in which he sent the husband of the woman he
loved to war. And again that a woman was stolen by a knight, raped and her
husband pursued by servants. There always had to be a broken marriage.
We remember that she has already had sexual fantasies.
Gradually erotic images no longer satisfied me, and I went about making
them visible. On a piece of paper I drew a woman with a voluptuous figure, and
a strong man, cut out the figures and laid them together so that they embraced.
But I was a bad artist and my silhouettes looked awful. Therefore, I decided to
write a story.
A new training begins at this point, or it is the continuation of one already
begun which is preparation for her life story. She writes skillfully and fluently.
I first composed an introduction which told of a blond, immaculate girl and
her betrothed. I described the person of the girl in detail; the man interested me
less. Then the novel began. I let a friend of the fiancé appear, an untrustworthy
fellow who immediately desired the girl. And she who treated her lover badly fell
in love with the brutal friend. In a scene where the friend, from a hiding place,
watches the girl bathing, I described her again in minute detail and was
fascinated by my own description.
Here also those who have some understanding of human nature can
recognize this deviation and how she searches for a new road in order to escape
the normal in eroticism. Here we see how this aberration is nothing but the
shoddy rest which remains when the normal is excluded.
At the end I describe an embrace between them. . . . I loved to watch myself in
the mirror.
We see the predisposition to the visual. Such girls who remind us of the voyeur
type are strongly attracted by mirrors.
Other girls disgusted me.
This is an attempt not to proceed further in the direction of homosexuality.
My own person pleased me most. . . . At that time I was in low spirits and
went around with bowed head, not daring to look people in the face, imagined
everyone could see through me and was afraid I wouldn’t grow anymore. I was
horribly unhappy. Finally I went to Father and whispered to him, “I have a
confession to make.” He asked me what was the matter now.
This sort of question is heard only in connection with spoiled children. They

keep us busy with them the whole day long.
And I confessed with shame that I had done a certain thing. He said it
didn’t matter once, but I had better not do it again or I would harm myself.
She has found a more advanced road in eroticism; she has arrived at auto-
eroticism. We can predict, in accordance with the girl’s style of life, that she will
cling to it for a long time. This satisfaction offers her several advantages. First,
she derives physical pleasure. This pleasure is not only harmless, producible at
will, but carries with it no binding consequences. It releases tense emotions
which might force her to solve her love problem in more realistic fashion. The
problem of love is circumvented. The question of power is solved to her
satisfaction since she threatens her father with the possibility of a sordid habit
and is unstopable. Retention of the habit over a long period indicates an asocial
attitude. It is the eroticism of the lonely.
Now I felt better. But on the next day, I began again. And every time I did it, I
would go and confess to Father.
We can explain why she did not hide it. She has her father in her power; she
will force him to watch her more closely. She has secured a further protection
for herself and given her father something else to do. He must watch so that she
does not repeat it.
They used to watch me in bed, but in bed nothing happened.
Chapter IX
The Masculine Protest
When I was fourteen, I resumed my swearing at my parents and at God.
We must assume that difficulties have entered the life of this girl, as they
obstruct the path of every spoiled child. Pampering cannot continue forever and
this swearing represents anger at the deprivation expressed in degrading
remarks.
The pampered child struggles for the continuation of the pampering. We
can give the word “pampering” various meanings and say, “I understand
pampering means this or that.” But that is a waste of time. The moment she
believes she is not being sufficiently pampered, she attempts in her rage to
degrade others. For herself at least, she is in the foreground and overrides
everyone else. Scolding is an attempt to degrade others. With a few exceptions,
every child goes through some phase of being spoiled. This phase is present in
the style of life. The interest in favorable situations is sharpened. The chief
concern lies in the endeavor to regain the pampering. The trait to dominate and
tyrannize is developed. Scolding stronger individuals and God cannot be
separated from the feeling of one’s own superiority.
(Case: A girl who had an illicit love relationship suffered from the fixed

idea that everyone was a murderer. She was the oldest child, spoiled, ambitious,
and brought up by her grandmother. When we hear the word grandmother, we
can predict the pampering. When she was sixteen, she began an affair with an
older man, which signifies weakness and a desire to be pampered. The saying
goes, “An old man’s darling.” The affair lasted a long time and can be explained
thus: I am stubborn and want to have my own way, and this man is also
stubborn, so we have decided to marry. That is the logic of the neurotic. The
man was good and gave in to her in almost everything, withholding his approval
of only one thing, her cooking. The girl took particular exception to this. One
day, she witnessed a murder in the neighborhood, a terrifying incident that made
a deep impression on her. She used the word as a condemnation of civilization in
order to degrade everyone and everything so that, as a consequence, she seemed
to herself to be the only pure and innocent one left. We shall see how and why
she does it.
Her lover had avoided introducing her to his family, and she could not
endure it. We could have predicted that she would not be able to endure a free
love relationship. She would feel herself confined and protest vigorously. During
the war, her lover was sick and she went to great trouble to provide milk for him.
When she finally had procured some milk, his mother took it from her, but then
shut the door in her face. This girl was in a situation where she valued the man
because she needed him. The love relationship had much more significance for
her than for a balanced person. She wanted to be ahead of everyone and exert her
own will through force. She preferred to continue the relationship, but there was
something offensive about it. She achieved a measure of freedom for herself
when she cursed people she did not know. We can compare this conflict
somewhat with the feminine gesture directed against the disadvantaged falling to
the lot of the female sex (the masculine protest). She did not get far--she reached
only resentment and anger. She revenged herself in that she looked on every
respectable person as a murderer, thus condemning our culture. In the beginning
she condemned herself with the rest, later she excluded herself. Consequently,
she was a saint and everyone else a devil.)
Without moving my lips, the most abominable words used to enter my mind. I felt
terribly depressed.
Depression is often found with a compulsion neurosis. A depression usually
starts when an individual believes he is forced by some power to pursue a
particular course of action. Since these courses of action usually obstruct the
activities of others or, at least, prevent a focus on useful things, the resulting
depression resembles a selfaccusation and is viewed that way. Frequently, the
depressed person expresses guilt about his depression, but we should not be

fooled by it. We want to study how depression fits into the system of this girl
and we will also make some comments on depression in general.
Depression is a weapon used to elevate one’s own position. The necessity
for help from strangers is demonstrated through weakness, tears, sad moods and
complaining, forcing others into service. Depression is related to melancholy, a
miniature of it, so to speak.
An individual who fears a failure in life, or whom failure has overtaken, can
point to depression or melancholy as the reason for the failure, thereby freeing
himself of responsibility by demonstrating his own weakness and need for help.
The neurotic logic thus finds a justification for dominating others. Insufficient
social activity in youth sometimes results in the peculiarly aggressive attitude of
depressed or melancholy people, which can be compared to partial suicide in
that one damages oneself and threatens revenge on the environment. When a
depressed person reproaches himself, he reveals an exaggerated notion of his
own importance. In addition, we can always detect a complaint that it is partly, if
not altogether, the fault of others. Supported by this grumbling, the
subordination and assistance of the others is demanded and one’s own
irresponsibility and superiority realized. Depressions grow out of a suspicious
and harshly critical attitude toward society and are usually developed in early
youth.
We can see in a general description of the depressed mood the same
characteristics which the writer of this life story reveals, the manifest striving
over and control of her environment to strengthen her own security. Her system
does not prefer to rule primarily through weakness. She will use this means only
when she cannot succeed with direct aggression, or when she has gone too far
and is forced to apply the brakes. Here she needs the depression in order to have
a justifiable burden. The feeling of being heavily burdened she exaggerates thus:
“I fight against it, but cannot rid myself of it. To be forced to do or say things is
a terrible burden.”
And often I was at the point of confessing to my father.
She has the tendency to make her father her confidant; she wants to indicate
to him: “I am unhappy, one must give in to me, everyone must let himself be
dominated by me.”
I couldn’t bring myself to do it. It was the only thing I kept secret from him. I felt
miserable.
Even if she doesn’t tell her father anything, he will notice the change soon
enough. She will attract his attention through her ill appearance, her sickly and
absent-minded manner.
And when I saw him before me with his weak arms, it hurt me dreadfully. I

thought, “If he only knew.”
She feels herself superior through her degradation of him. His weak arms!
I tried in vain to convince myself that I meant someone else when I thought of a
bad name.
She wants to feel noble.
Then came the thought in between, “Father is a . . .” In order to prove to
myself that father was not a . . . I thought, “Father is not a . . . ; his assistant is a
. . . ,” and cried, “He can go to the devil.” Then I kept still and heard within me
again, “Father is a . . .” Then it seemed to me as if all my cursing were aimed at
Father, and I felt as if someone had hit me a hard blow on the head.
When we ask ourselves whether someone can demand anything from this
girl, we have to answer in the negative. She busies herself with useless things,
letting them consume all her energy. She has no confidence in herself. Her
attitude expresses her doubts whether she will have a position in life similar to
the one she has now in her family, and whether she will be able to solve her
problems in a way that enables her to remain in the center of the stage.
Her neurosis begins here. When we look back, we become aware of the
prolonged preparation consistently leading to this point. Her entire behavior
tends toward evading the duties of a normal life in the society of her fellow
human beings. She fills her time instead by occupying herself constantly with
the matter of superiority in her own circle. When her superiority is endangered,
and the problems of life approach more and more closely, the first compulsion
symptoms appear. She curses her family and God, a habit she has practiced since
childhood. We can now definitely determine that she is on the road to a neurosis.
Her exaggerated desire for superiority and what we have termed her hesitating
attitude have indicated this development for some time. Undoubtedly, she will
sink more and more deeply into the mire of neurotic thought and behavior. In the
vicious circle of a neurosis, a neurotic act provokes a strong reaction that triggers
a still stronger act in the same false direction, arousing a still stronger reaction,
and so on. In general, a neurotic cannot possibly find his way alone out of the
labyrinth of his neurosis. Because of the patient’s lack of penetrating
understanding and his obsession with power, he has little chance of improvement
without some outside, objectively comprehensive assistance.
Following the advancement of this compulsion neurosis can teach us a great
deal. I would like to explain in more detail the character of a compulsion
neurosis to prepare a better understanding of this girl’s story. Compulsion
neuroses are those forms of neurosis in which certain compulsive symptoms,
such as compulsive-washing, praying, brooding, etc. govern an individual’s life.
These compulsions work like commands, and according to the patient’s

arguments, disobedience leads to direst consequences. Such compulsive
symptoms torment the person who has them, arousing in him an anxious, painful
mood.
When we observe what really happens (as we always do in Individual
Psychology) and what the patient achieves with his symptoms, the meaning of a
compulsion becomes clear. The compulsion neurotic has approached life’s
demands pretty closely. His retreat is all the more complete and demonstrative.
Like all neurotics, he is ambitious, but discouraged. When he faces an imagined
difficulty that he does not have sufficient courage to tackle, he shoves between
himself and this difficulty a barrier constructed by his teetering ambition; this
barrier assumes the character of a compulsion. He piles up a mountain of
obstacles in front of him like a mountain of refuse, and when life demands
something of him, he excuses himself by pointing to the refuse heap. He seems
to use up all his energy overcoming this mountain that he himself has built, but
what he really does is avoid the problem or demand. The diligence and haste
with which he works, the severity and ostensible inevitableness of his
compulsion are supposed to legitimatize his good intention.
In his attempt to combat the symptom, the patient assumes the right to
produce it and, arguing according to his own private logic, becomes at the same
time judge, complainant and defendant. As in all neuroses, the goal of a
compulsion neurosis is superiority. We claim that the neurosis (including the
compulsion neurosis) is an illness of position and not of disposition. The
compulsion neurotic substitutes his own compulsion for the compulsion of the
world upon him. His own selfelevation and lust for power is mirrored in the
substitute compulsion. The main reason for and probably the main purpose of
the arrangement of a compulsion neurosis is the frittering away of time which
protects him from the necessity of solving, or even making an attempt to solve
his problems. Only when we look ahead to the goal and result of a neurosis can
we understand the sense of it. Like a revolt, the outbreak of a compulsion
neurosis prevents a yielding to the demands of communal life. That is its
purpose.
The objection may be raised that the patient may well be satisfied and
happy with the superiority which he wins, and with the certainty with which he
protects himself from the imagined danger of facing his problems. This would
indeed be so, were it not a seeming superiority, a seeming certainty. A patient
does not construct a neurosis by purely intellectual means; he brings to his aid
his entire being, all his abilities and feelings in the arrangement of this “yes-but”
mode of life. The neurosis is a weapon, a club; that is to say, the neurotic
believes himself surrounded by enemies against whom he must fight until he has

secured that which he considers the prize of victory. These circumstances leave
no room for joyous feelings which would hinder him in fulfilling his intentions.
He must pay dearly for the waste heap he piles up.
If we apply this general explanation to the life story of our young girl, we
see her energetically occupied in establishing between herself and the
community a barrier, a waste heap. She feels herself compelled to curse God and
her relatives, reproaches herself when she is depressed, rules her environment,
and wastes her time with useless things. Like every neurotic, she uses her
neurosis in order to be able to say: I have not been able to solve my life
problems because I have been so overburdened with these things. This “because”
is typical. It is the neurotic justification in a private logic arranged to evade the
true logic of life and to fit the patient’s needs. Every person with some common
sense can see how weak this justification is. And yet the neurotic must believe in
it as he believes in something holy, whereby he indicates to us that in him is
some glimmering of the distance between his conduct and the real demands of
communal life. Otherwise, why would he have to justify himself?
I was never safe from the compulsion of swearing in the street or in company.
We see how she answers the first question of life (social contact). She
creates a great distance between herself and others. Her swearing prevents
contact with other people.
I was even afraid of myself. I was always worried that some accident would
happen to punish me.
Here we can see what the feeling of guilt really intends. Its only purpose is
to increase the waste heap on which it is thrown. Nietzche is right when he says,
“Conscience pricks are indecent.”
I endeavored to distract myself by every means possible.
We know in advance that she will not be successful.
Once when Minna and I were returning from the gymnasium, I talked
continually in order to drown my thoughts. Suddenly I choked, had to stop and
listen . . . Once I saw a criminal film, “The Man with Nine Fingers.” It was
horrible. An old woman was murdered in the film. My parents waited for me
after the performance. My father said it was poison for me, but he did not divine
the principal cause of my excitement. I seemed to myself like the murderer of my
parents. In my thoughts I also had to swear at God. And then I heard a shriek as
if it were from a devil, “You, you have said all that.” Inwardly I answered at
once: “God is the most beautiful man, and the best one there is.” While I was
saying, “Our Father,” I heard, “Holy Mary, I pray to thee. No, I don’t pray to
thee.”
There you have a pretty picture. When we move to the left and then to the

right nothing happens; it looks as if we have done something, and while we
waste our time in this way, we avoid solving problems.
Then there was an inward whisper again: “I pray to thee, Maria.” I was
perspiring with fear.
Such fixed ideas must shatter their thinker. In this shattering lies the
principal purpose of the neurosis. Now we understand the significance of
feelings a little better. Feelings are never arguments; they run in the direction
demanded by the individual style of life. We can go a step further; the
arrangement works toward the goal of producing the appropriate feelings to help
the neurotic obey (follow) his style of life. This girl helps herself by producing
feelings which build themselves into an impassable barrier for her. We hear that
she does not want to go out into society, that she does not train for a vocation,
and that she will fail in the third test imposed by life, the task of love.
Then the swearing proceeded with full force. I would have to start praying
again. I tried with all my strength, but the nasty thoughts would come in
between; it often took an hour before I could finish a prayer.
She has no connection with religion.
At that time I began to interest myself in men.
God helps the righteous.
I wanted to please all. I received compliments about my eyes and paid special
attention to them.
Other psychologists would be happy. She is beginning to flirt a bit. We know
that she will remain where she is.
I took some trouble to protect my eyes so that they would not lose their luster.
A new occupation. Another compulsion.
Sometimes I used to take a neighbor’s little girl in her carriage to the park.
She would prefer to be in the child’s carriage herself with someone else
pushing her. We know that this activity will have a bad end.
It was very sunny there. I became apprehensive that the sun might dazzle my
vision.
Refer to Freud’s monograph on paranoia. She invents a new obstacle.
From that moment I avoided the sun.
She protects her eyes. Many psychologists would say it indicates that she
wants to find a man, and would not notice that we can change something into its
opposite. We can exaggerate self-protection to a point where we will be totally
isolated.
When we want to understand such vague symptoms, we must approach
them with the Individual Psychological question: What happens when a girl like
this attempts to avoid the sun? All attachments are prevented by it, especially

love, from which she draws further and further away.
I used to watch, anxiously fearing that a ray of sunlight might fall on me. I
avoided all sunny spots. When I was forced to leave the shadow . . .
We see how much she has to occupy herself with it.
. . . and accidentally raised my head in the sun, I would talk it into myself that I
had been dazzled by the sun.
When we glance back at the superstitions of people, at the mythological
details that mention similar things, we can discern the marvelous phantoms of
the ancients. Even in Hamlet there is a warning to women not to go into the sun
or a pregnancy may follow. That comes from an old superstition. However, we
do not have to assume that archaic thoughts were behind the girl’s phantoms; it
is sufficient that she has found something to cut her off from the problem she
seeks to avoid.
I thought it out thus, that the sun had taken away some of my power of
sight, and that I would have to go blind. Day by day, this thought came to me.
Consciousness of the fact that I saw as well as ever was lacking.
She would have been able to do nothing with such insight; it would not
have helped her system. Only when she imagines that she has been harmed can
she withdraw from, that is to say, escape, the solution of life’s problems.
When Lina went out with me, I begged her to avoid the sun. I wanted to find
out if she trusted herself in the sun. She laughed and declined to follow this
procedure. Then Mother came along. That didn’t satisfy me at all.
We see how she hardens herself and that common sense no longer helps. He
who asks the naïve question, “Why is common sense of no more use?” overlooks
that she does not behave sensibly, but wants to run away. We can describe the
wonder of the thundering guns at the front to a deserter a hundred times, but he
will permit himself only those thoughts which help him to flee.
I used to get hold of Olga or some other friend and make her look at the sun.
That is her unsocial trait. She is possessed by the idea that the sun weakens the
power of sight and permits all others to look at it.
So that they would not think I had become a fool, I arranged it so they
noticed nothing. For example, I said: “I don’t know what is in my eye; I can’t
look at the sun, can you?” And as soon as she raised her eyes to the sun, I had to
laugh uproariously.
That looks as if she were purposely trying to do harm, as if she thought it
desirable for the others to have their sight weakened. It is the laugh of the victor,
probably an attempt to be physically superior to the others, supported by the idea
that she knows a secret. She is superior because the others do not know it.
I believed their eyes were dazzled by it and that made me glad.

We see again how that is confirmed.
I always had my eyes cast down on the street. When I raised my eyes, I
protected them with my hand. In spite of my precautions, however, the idea
pursued me. Then I would run home like one possessed and say to my father,
weeping: “I have been dazzled by the sun. I’m disgusted with everything, I’m
going to kill myself.”
She pushes her desertion to the extreme and plays with thoughts of suicide. She
has lost hope. Arms, legs, eyes have lost their appeal.
Then I complained bitterly to my parents because they wanted to let me go
away. At first they laughed and asked whether I had gone crazy. Father assured
me that the sun had great healing power. He often went to the window, opened
it, and cried to me, “Look here, how I open my eyes in the sun. I would be glad if
I could go walking in the sun every day.” When I saw how Father let the sun
shine one him, I became confused. Then I began to lament all over again . . . I
had a feeling of anxiety continuously, as if I were always sensing a terrible
danger.
This danger is, of course, a defeat in love as we have found up to now. She
is too proud. A girl who wants to be ahead of everyone cannot reconcile herself
to the possibility of defeat, so her anxiety is concretized.
Finally, I hardly dared to go out on the street. I was also afraid that a
stroke of lightening could hit and dazzle me. If the sun barely shone through a
window on me, or if someone played with a mirror and the reflected light passed
over me, I was terror-stricken.
Don’t go in the sun. Let no one see you; you cannot compete.
Nowhere did I feel safe. I said to myself that the accident fated to happen to
someone was inescapable, even if one locked oneself in a room. I was already
sick of life and wondered, if things did not improve with me, whether it would he
better to kill myself instead of going on to meet such a fate.
Now we see the consequences of this idea. She pushes the problem of
seeing into the foreground. In order to justify this attitude, she has to find other
measures. So we hear:
In order not to strain my eyes, I read as little as possible.
We are reminded here that she has spoken with emphasis of reading
salacious books. This can be a withdrawal from them and a confirmation that she
must protect her eyes.
When I read, I was always annoyed by being able to see the tip of my nose.
We can understand that very well because she was always looking at the tip
of her nose. That would hold for others too, but others have no interest in the
matter. It is a good excuse for eliminating reading.

I talked it into myself …
We are approaching a beauty defect.
… that I was cross-eyed. I turned myself here and there, held the book in
different positions; the tip of my nose followed me like a bad conscience.
We see how she preoccupies herself more and more with things that make it
possible for her to think her eyes are weakening. I can imagine what would
happen if she were to lose her sight completely.
I once read in the Bible that when some dirt was blown into the eyes of a
saint, he became blind. This I now recalled. Dirt meant bird dung to me. And I
watched carefully when I passed a tree. I also tried to avoid drain pipes where
the sparrows and pigeons gathered. I used to look often at green lawns and
bushes because I had heard that green was good for the eyes.
The more tricks she conjures up to strengthen her eyes, the more her conviction
grows that the condition of her eyes is bad.
If the lampshade was not put on the oil lamp, I would become absolutely mad
with rage.
We see how this tendency reflects her lust for power so that the others must
follow her wishes.
I never looked at light or fire. Here and there people talked of diseases of
the eye, for example, of cataracts. When they talked, they pointed to their eyes. I
strictly avoided doing that. When I noticed that I had done it unknowingly, I was
immediately afraid I would get the disease of which they were then speaking.
That behavior is one of the usual marks of hypochondriacs or compulsion
neurotics. They include everything they can possibly fit into the neurotic mess in
order to fritter away the time, protect themselves, and gain security against being
dragged into the life stream. They feel danger in the stream of life and hang on
to their neurotic life preservers.
I imagined that my eyes could jump out of the sockets as a result of straining
them. I pressed them back carefully with my fingers.
We are astonished at the ostensible nonsense. This girl is possessed by the
thought: How can I protect myself from having to accept love, marriage, and the
role of a woman? She is indifferent to everything else and feels safe. Behind this
confusion a star shines dimly, released from the role of a woman. She pays the
price, she suffers, but merely to get her reward in the future.
I refused to let a blind piano tuner come to the house. It seemed to me that
blindness might be contagious. After that, I even imagined that I had bumped my
eyes against something and they had been knocked out. This delusion lasted for
three months and was followed by a disturbance again started by a compliment.
Compliments were paid to her eyes, so she attempted to destroy them.

This time it was my teeth with which my disordered imagination began to busy
itself.
Someone has complimented her on her teeth; however, that means she is fit for
the role of a woman.
I was drinking from a glass and struck the glass against the edge of one of
my upper front teeth. I suddenly imagined that I had broken off a piece of the
tooth. I ran anxiously to Father and cried; “For God’s sake! Have I broken off a
piece of my tooth?”
Again exit beauty!
Then I opened my mouth and let Father look inside. “Where?” he asked
astonished. In order to see whether he could find the damaged tooth himself, I
didn’t tell him which one I thought I had hurt. But when he could find nothing, I
cried, “A front tooth,” and pointed to the one. Mother and Father examined the
tooth carefully from all sides, and could not discover a scratch. I became
angrier, ran to the mirror, and looked at it myself.
Picture this girl: In her eyes a compliment works like a call to the front of
life. Now that a compliment has been paid to her teeth, she must attack them.
And it seemed to me that it was a shade shorter than the adjoining tooth. So
now I was quite convinced that I had broken off a piece and began to cry
wretchedly. When Lina came home . . .
We remember that she is a professional, a dentist’s assistant.
. . . she had to look into my mouth. She could find nothing. I asked her if she
would dare to strike a glass against her teeth. She laughed, took a glass and
tapped her teeth with it. I stood there and watched her earnestly. I had always
been very particular about my teeth. I remember the following:
This is the tooth complex. She will now prove that everything was not always as
it should have been with her teeth.
The front milk teeth were very shaky. It would have been necessary to tug
only slightly to have pulled them out. Father wanted to try it with a string. I
preferred to try it myself, tied a piece of thread around a tooth, made the other
end fast to the door knob and began to pull carefully. I became afraid and let the
thing go. Then a dentist who was a friend of the family looked at my teeth. I
opened my mouth unwillingly. And before I knew what was happening, the
shakiest tooth was already out. But he let the tooth fall into my mouth and in my
excitement, I swallowed it. My parents were very upset. For a few days I had to
eat cabbage. When I was six, one of my teeth hurt. On the way to the dentist, I
cried and complained and didn’t want to go. Father promised me a pocketbook
if I permitted the dentist to pull out the tooth. I wanted the pocketbook first and
Father really bought me a very pretty bag. Then he advised me to think of the

brave “Tin Soldier” and everything he had had to go through. When we got to
the dentist’s house, I halted for a moment in front of his door, and then said to
Father, “Let’s go to another--I’ll surely cry with this one, and with another I’ll
have more courage.” We turned around and went to another. He looked at the
aching tooth and advised pulling it. I whispered to my father: “I have to
consider it--he has such an angry face--let’s go to another.” And with some
excuse or other we left him and finally returned home. I got such an awful
toothache that night, however, that mother had to go with me the first thing the
next morning to the dentist. I concentrated on the “Tin Soldier” and finally let
the tooth be pulled.
But that was long ago. Now I had my anxiety about my teeth without any
visible reason, without any pain. The idea alone that I might, in some way, strike
my mouth against some object, was enough to make me think I had knocked a
tooth out. When the idea occurred to me, I always used to consider the position
in which I found myself at the moment and measure the distance between me
and the nearest object, such as a box or the piano. I wanted to prove to myself
that it was impossible for me to have hit myself against it. I had retained that
much sense. But the only result of this proof was that I became still more
excited. For then I believed I had not taken enough care and had really damaged
a tooth. And then I would measure distances again. Then I would again imagine
that I had broken a tooth or at least scratched one. I experimented so long until I
was exhausted by my efforts and excitement. Finally, quite discouraged, I would
upbraid myself: “How can a person be so stupid as to knock out a tooth on
purpose?”
Now she imagines that she has already knocked one out. A tooth plays an
extraordinarily important part. We can clearly see how someone arrives at a
tooth fetish. Her tooth-complex is not fully developed, but we cannot deny that
she greatly overvalues a tooth.
My parents had to look into my mouth constantly.
We see how the wasting of time grows to undue proportions and how she
becomes the center of the family.
Naturally they never found anything. No one could find the slightest thing
the matter, not even I. I didn’t believe the others or myself.
She helps herself quite simply in order to be able to go further. She cares about
her teeth, not her duties as a woman.
And so when I discovered tiny irregularities in my teeth which I had not
noticed before, I imagined they were the damages I had inflicted on myself and
began again to fume. Sometimes when I was eating cherries, I bit on a cherry
stone. That depressed me to such an extent and drove me into such a condition

that I needed a whole day to recover. Finally, I used to squeeze the pits out of
the cherries before I ate the fruit. I even had a peculiar way of eating apples. I
cut them in thin slices, laid a slice at a time on the knife, and inserted the knife
carefully into my mouth. Once the knife struck against my teeth and I
immediately thought I had bitten on the knife. I was beside myself and shrieked:
“No one has ever done that before, to bite on a knife and break one’s teeth off.”
My parents demanded to know what the matter was now. Lina happened to be
there. Everyone was amused, as if glad about what had happened. Father was of
the opinion that I deserved it, because of my exaggerated carefulness. I became
still more excited, thought Father really meant that I had broken off my teeth by
my own fault. Chokingly I cried: “Now you do admit that I have knocked out my
teeth?” Father rejoined, “I don’t admit anything. But when you are so stupid as
to imagine anything like that, it’s about time you ate apples like everyone else.”
I did not stop crying. Lina picked up a knife and tapped her teeth with it. Then
she asked me smilingly if the performance was sufficient. Little by little, I
became quieter. About two months later, I noticed that there was some tartar on
my teeth. I had scratched it off before with a needle. When I remembered that, I
became terribly unhappy. “My God!” I said to myself, “certainly no one does
that--scratch the enamel of one’s teeth.” I wanted to commit suicide. When I
drank coffee, I used to think that the heat of the coffee might crack the enamel. I
refused to drink anything too hot or too cold, and drank coffee, tea, soup, beer,
even water, lukewarm. I ate nothing hard. I was afraid to break a tooth if I did. I
ate no more bread crusts, no meat in which there was a bone. No chocolate and
no sugar. Then I didn’t chew anything any more. I let the foods melt in my mouth
and then swallowed them like a toothless hag. That looked so funny that my
parents used to laugh until they cried. Then I avoided even bringing an eating
utensil in contact with my teeth. I opened my mouth as wide as possible and
inserted the food as carefully as I could or sucked the food up from the spoon or
plate. Finally I ate only with my fingers. In the tram, when a window rattled, I
became anxious and thought it might fall and knock out a tooth.
She arranges her life so that she is freed from every occupation.
This delusion also lasted several months. But a still worse one followed. I
had an excruciating youth. 
I was just returning from school. I had accompanied a friend and wanted to
cross the street. A man approached us from the other side. He had a cloth
around his face. I thought at first he had a toothache. When he came nearer, I
noticed that his whole face was eaten away. There was no nose, no lips, only a
number of red holes. I felt as if someone had struck me. I was seized with such
dread of this man that in order not to retrace his footsteps, I turned around and

made a detour home.
Now comes the lupus phobia1 and with it the fear of infection. We now see
more clearly and can prophesy that this fear of infection will lead her to
strengthen her feeling of security and support her still more in her attempt to
exclude love and marriage from her life.
1 Fear of lupus, which is a tuberculosis of the skin. Chapter X
A Lupus Phobia
The last thing she collected in her effort to rid herself of reality was a man with a
rash.
I was seized with such dread of this man, that in order not to retrace his
footsteps, I turned around and made a detour home.
The impact of these impressions, driving her further and further away from
life, is intensified. Again and again, she finds an excuse for continuing her flight.
Still extremely frightened, I told Father what had happened.
Significantly, she tells it to her father and we may well ask why. The
obvious answer would be that she is on good terms with him and has confidence
in him. But we can find another reason for her behavior; she wants to make him
understand what will follow--that she must attach herself still more closely to her
family, lessen her contact with the outside world, appear laden with burdens and
incapable of doing anything or of solving any problems.
He thought it was probably lupus. What was that? A devouring disease whose
name in Latin means wolf.
The father, who had a morbid fear of tuberculosis, had two or three medical
books which he often read--hence his knowledge. We might say that he also has
a phobia, and therefore she has inherited his fear. But it is not so. The girl trains
herself. She takes the means which she can use and which appear serviceable to
her in the specific situation-whether from her father or elsewhere. Supported by
her fear of an infectious disease, she now believes she has the right to separate
herself from the outside world. Why should that be an inherited trait? She wants
to be at the top and observes that she cannot possibly attain in the outside world
the favorable, central place she occupies in the bosom of her family. We would
like to ask anyone who doubts this: Who would leave a favorable situation for an
unfavorable one? Common sense speaks here; we do not need profound
hypotheses. If someone wishes to object, he first has to show us whether he
would willingly leave an agreeable situation to enter a disagreeable one.
I wanted to know if this disease was infectious.
I have already indicated that this girl may already know something of infectious
diseases of the sex organs.

He assured me that it was not the case. But I did not believe him. Not even
when Lina confirmed his words. From the beginning, I was firmly convinced that
lupus was infectious.
I would like to comment about the peculiar methods of the nervous when
they establish their conceptions. They must be right, and everything is turned
about until they have proven what they set out to prove. This disease must be
infectious. Even if all authorities were to say it was not; she would still assert it
was. We find with almost every neurosis this false logic whose force lies in the
fact that it permits the patient to do what she otherwise would do without proof.
For example, I knew a patient who had always played the leading role in her
family and whose situation suddenly became unfavorable through an
unsuccessful marriage. She arranged a hunger strike, explained that she could eat
nothing because she had a weak lung and got an attack of coughing when she
had to swallow the food, consequently doing real damage to her lung. Her
behavior was an attempt at suicide. When such a patient gets to the point where
she asserts that the most important thing at that moment is to get up and go for a
walk to stimulate her appetite, she arranges matters so the conditions cannot
possibly be fulfilled and her insight will not interfere with her neurotic striving.
A “no” in answer to life is clear.
Even though two people who know about it insist that lupus is not infectious, she
will not be convinced.
I would have preferred never to set foot again on that street. But we lived
just around the corner, and the way to school was through it, so I could not
avoid it. Gradually, this fear vanished.
How are we to explain this? We hear that such a disorder can disappear
only when it is treated by means of psychological interpretation. Symptoms of
illness as the outer, visible signs of a neurosis are labile and vanish for a time, or
sometimes change into other symptoms without psychological treatment. The
patient constantly tries to adjust himself to the varying pressure exerted on him
by his environment. The girl says: Gradually this fear disappeared itself. If we
believed her symptom was of sexual origin (repressed libidinous wishes, for
instance), then we would have to assume her libido has undergone a
transformation. Such an interpretation is too far-fetched and, in addition, false.
We know that she has temporarily lost her courage. As soon as she regains it in
some measure, she feels her schemes are superfluous and tries once more to find
a way to life. Obviously, when her courage increases a little, she loses her
anxiety. We see her hesitating attitude toward the question of love. We observe
how she seeks to escape it. We want further confirmation as to whether we are
on the right road. All these phases represent attempts to escape an answer to the

question of love.
One afternoon a boy called for me, an acquaintance of Olga’s who was
attentive to both of us. We went for a walk together and happened to pass a
street where there was a home for people suffering from lupus. The windows of
the home were covered with green netting similar to the netting used to make
nets to catch butterflies. I heard the whirring sound of some apparatus. All at
once, I noticed where we were. I was horribly depressed, spoke not another
word and turned to go home completely broken. I was as if lamed. My thoughts
stood still and only one thing filled me, dread of lupus.
Just when she is with the boy attentive to two girls, something fills her with
dread. Two reasons may explain: (1) the boy also likes another girl; (2) she can
use her lupus phobia to escape the solution of any problem.
At first I could not answer at all the worried questions of my parents as to
why I was so upset. Horrible thoughts whirled in my head. I thought that the
people who accidentally trod in the footsteps of a lupus sufferer would spread
the germs over the whole city.
Now the whole town is full of lupus. Now she cannot go anywhere any
more. The distance between her and the question of love grows step by step.
I asked myself, “Where on earth is there a place with no lupus? Where is
there a spot where no lupus sufferer has left bacteria behind him?” The whole
world appeared infected to me.
We see here the gesture of exclusion of the spoiled child.
I felt as if I were surrounded by bars through which there was no way out. At the
same time I felt I hated and loathed the lupus sufferers.
At this point, we shall also pause a moment. Most people would say that
was a natural and understandable gesture of rejection. But in other situations in
the life of a neurotic person, the same gesture appears without being natural and
understandable. For example, what does an exaggerated fear of mice or spiders
signify? Why does a nervous individual emphasize his hate and loathing so
forcibly? There is no logical rationale for it. The gesture demonstrates a feeling
and aims at something other than an imaginary fear. In our case, it serves to
preserve the distance which the fear of lupus has created between her and life.
Nothing agreeable to her can be used as a means to attain her end. She must
make use of something disgusting in order to create a justifiable distance
between herself and life.
She acts correctly according to her system. If she did not have the
accompanying feeling of hatred and loathing, then her behavior could rightly be
called idiotic. There lies the difference between feeblemindedness and neurosis.
A neurosis is always consistent, constructed on a scheme of private logic.

Feeblemindedness is inconsistent; it has no logical coherence or sequence
whatsoever.
Father’s objection that all other people existed without such fear was of no
avail. It seemed as if lupus was there for me alone.
Here we see how well she says it and still does not understand. The disease
really exists for her.
A punishment for me alone.
This punishment must not be taken seriously. Nervous people say, “This is
the punishment for my sins.” This girl does not care about constructing a guilt
complex if she can merely exclude love.
Like a horrible, gigantic spider, the dread of the devouring disease crawled
through me. If I had known of some way by which I could have killed myself
quickly, I would have done it. But I knew none.
She has not gotten far enough to cut off her life completely. She still has
one resource, her family. Such a girl could be driven to suicide by separating her
completely from her family, for instance, in a sanatorium where she was not well
treated, or if her parents were to withdraw from her and declare her hopelessly
insane. “Better dead than to live like this.” She might then commit suicide as an
act of revenge.
Miserable to the point of being almost feelingless, I commenced washing
my hands and face with potassium permanganate. I rinsed my mouth thoroughly
with Lina’s antiseptic. I would not wear my coat again. I imagined that I had
infected it by wearing it when I passed the lupus hospital. I wore gloves when I
took my shoes off and was careful never to let the shoelaces touch the soles of
the shoes, which I regarded as particularly badly infected. My parents watched
my activities with great apprehension. Then I asked Father whether it was
possible to be infected by the air which came out of the lupus hospital. He
laughed at me and answered that it was quite impossible, for otherwise, all the
people who lived there or passed by would become ill.
That gave me little hope. But I clung to the belief that the soles of my shoes
were infected by having stepped on the same pavement on which the man with
lupus had walked, and consequently, that the floor of our apartment was also
infected. . . .
People who feel forced to wash themselves constantly (washing
compulsion) usually use the argument that everything around them is dirty or
infected. Such an argument serves to shut out some part of life in which they
anticipate a defeat and in which they consequently do not feel secure. We have
heard that the delusion was strengthened when she went out with the boy who
praised another girl.

. . . and that perhaps one of the inmates had spit out the window and I might
have trodden on the slime. My parents tried desperately to pry me loose from
this idea, but in vain.
Her position in the house has now been firmly established. She has become
the central figure, much more than before in that she has succeeded in cutting off
all connection with the outside world.
From that time on, I touched any shoes and coat only with gloves. One day
a piece of lace slipped out of my hand to the floor. Mother had to give it away. I
did not even want to touch Mother any more since she had to come in contact
with the floor when she washed and cleaned. My terrible excitement found vent
in frequent crying spells. To quiet me, my parents and Lina would touch the floor
and my shoes with their fingers before my eyes. But later when Mother cut the
bread without first having washed her hands, I shrieked and refused to eat. She
had to get a new loaf. Even the doorknobs I touched only with gloves and, in
addition, would cover the gloves with a piece of paper.
This is the usual trick of patients with a washing compulsion.
Consequently, what follows is such filth in the room as we can expect only from
people who ceaselessly wash themselves and, at the same time, continuously
fight dirt.
They had been infected by the infected hands of my family! Then I got the
idea that one could never know whether money had been touched by a lupus
sufferer or not. So I did not touch it any more unless I first covered my hand with
a piece of paper. When I had to buy something, I wrapped the money in the
inevitable paper and carried it to Minna. She had to accompany me and pay the
bills.
Now she has a court attendant. Somebody has to accompany her on the street.
That is agoraphobia.
She also had to open doors for me because doorknobs were suspicious. A
beggar suffering from lupus might have touched them! Dirt, misery, poverty
seemed to me grounds for lupus.
In this respect she is not quite wrong.
Finally I did not touch anything any more without paper. When I wanted to
move a chair from one spot to another, or when I had to pass an object, for
instance, a brush, to someone, I first protected myself with paper. I threw away a
pair of gloves I had used to pick up some money because I had forgotten the
paper. I wrapped pencils in paper before writing with them. My frightened
thoughts were running in so many different directions that at last there was
nothing left that I did not believe to be infected.
I remember a wild discussion between a patient with a washing compulsion

neurosis and a chemist in which the patient wanted to prove that no place in the
world was absolutely free from particles of dirt.
The chemist denied it. I was on the patient’s side; it seemed to me that she
was right. But whether she was right or not was of no consequence. What
matters is to make progress in life, to make ourselves useful. We do not make
ourselves useful by declaring that everything is dirty and then resting on our
oars.
One day I took a walk with a school friend and her mother. Suddenly I saw
a terrible looking man with a red, swollen face full of holes. He was standing
near the curb. I asked my friend to look at him. She did and burst out laughing. I
myself was not able to look again in his direction. I was glad we were walking
on the other side of the pavement. I thought this girl would surely become
infected with lupus as punishment for ridiculing him.
Again, I must insert a few remarks. People suffering from phobias and other
forms of neurosis frequently imagine they are pursued by diabolic, relentless
misfortune. I do not believe that many among you have met a lupus sufferer
more than once. This girl has met such a diseased person at least twice. We often
hear that neurotics constantly have an experience repeated. I remember a case of
washing compulsion
-a woman who examined everything in the world for dirt in order to eliminate
dirt. I have never seen anyone who was so much in contact with dirt as she was.
I shall try to explain this in a few words.
A neurotic seeks justifications to protect and strengthen his asocial attitude.
His feelings have led him into a neurosis; his understanding which is not
distorted has not followed his feelings, cannot follow, and is forced continually
to produce means to lessen the tension between intellect and feeling. Reason is
taken in tow by feeling and therefore completes its task by demonstrating that
such a restricted field of activity is inevitable. And so we see the patient
pursuing vindicating arguments or facts, especially those facts that appear to him
fatefully inevitable, like acts of God for which he is not responsible.
We must remember the extraordinary ability of the psyche to arrange,
correct, choose, exclude and purposively apperceive. When we remember this,
we can then understand that where the psychical apparatus has become the
instrument of a neurotic goal, the intellect, governed by feelings, arranges,
chooses, and purposely apperceives those facts that will not disturb the neurotic
development or goal, and the neurotic finally appears to us as a poor, pitiable
victim of circumstance. He plays a trick and is fooled by it himself.
For example, a man says he wants to get married and have a child. He falls
in love with one girl after another and each one rejects him. Consequently, after

twenty years, he is in exactly the same spot as he was when he started, namely,
unmarried. The world pities him since he obviously makes every effort to win a
wife. The world does not bother to examine the sincerity of his efforts very
closely. If it did, it would see that he probably approaches a type which he
knows in advance will refuse him; or that he makes his courtship so clumsy an
affair that he is sure to be unsuccessful; or that his behavior toward the woman
makes him impossible as a prospective husband; in short, that he does
everything to prevent the actual steps leading to marriage in order to remain
within the fortress he has built because of his fear of women.
This pattern is an example of the art and cunning of neurotic thought and
argument, somewhat simplified and schematized, naturally, in order to make it
more understandable. But the example achieves its purpose when it clarifies that
the experiences we have are not important, but the lessons we learn from these
experiences, and that correct interpretation of experience is necessary to
understand another human being. With this peculiarity of the human intellect in
mind, we no longer question whether frequently repeated disturbances and
misfortunes in neurotic life are merely accidents, or whether neurotics tend to
seek their troubles.
I brought Minna two pieces of sugar which I had first rubbed on the soles of my
shoes.
You see how far the tendency to degrade goes. She attacks all other people
as if she had to exterminate them because she feels unable to cope with them.
She alone is worthwhile, and she alone is to be respected.
I was frantic with joy when she ate them.
This excessive form of egotism is converted into criminal trends. Clearly,
her egotism expresses itself in the tendency to degrade. She approaches her
fellow human beings in an aggressive manner; that is egotism. We may call it by
another name, but everyone will have to agree that she is interested exclusively
in herself. The Freudian school calls this manifestation narcissism. The word
“narcissism” is taken from the story of the Greek youth who fell in love with his
mirrored reflection. Narcissism plays an important role in Freudian psychology.
It is the libidinous love of a person for himself. Every person is supposed to have
a greater or smaller narcissistic love for himself. To those acquainted with
psychological literature, I suggest that the Freudian view of narcissism does not
include the tendency to degrade.
I really thought she would get a little lupus from eating the sugar. I then fed
all my friends with that sort of sugar, but gave none to my family. When I had to
go through the street where the lupus man passed, I held my clothes close to my
body for fear that the lupus man might have touched the walls of the houses and

the lampposts. But I often imagined that a part of the dress had somehow grazed
one of those spots. Then I ran straight home and hurriedly took off all my
clothes. When I passed this street with a friend, I would push her, seemingly by
accident, against the walls and lampposts so that she should get some bacilli on
her dress, too.
At this point, we must remember that the outbreak of lupus phobia occurred
when she took a walk with a boy who liked another girl as well. Her gesture
expresses clearly that she wants to exclude this other girl--every girl.
And when I thought that a piece of clothing had become infected, I threw it
away. But since my wardrobe was in a sad condition, I wondered how I could
help myself. I conceived the idea of letting Father destroy the bacteria with his
hot iron and moist cloth.
She has discovered a working method which was later proven correct by
scientific research.
My family frequently had to go through the dangerous street. I asked them
repeatedly to be careful not to touch anything there. Although they promised it
over and over again, the suspicion would not leave me that they did not pay any
attention to my caution. Now none of them was allowed to come near me any
more.
We see how she aggravates her condition. Her radius of activity becomes
smaller and smaller. She is the only one in the world who is pure, free from
bacilli, the only one who realizes how all others plunge into misery. All other
people are profane, depraved, infected; she alone is not. She is a saint. She
achieves her goal of superiority on the useless side of life by cheap means.
And when someone touched me by accident, I raved and stormed, had
crying spells, and threatened to kill myself. I did not know any more where to sit
down so as to be far enough from the others. I used only one chair and no one
else was allowed to sit on it.
This reminds me of the customs of monarchs or religions where a particular
seat may be touched only by a sacred person. If someone were to assert now that
the girl derives these ideas from archaic, inherited traditions, we have just one
response: everybody gets the same silly ideas under similar, restrictive
conditions.
I also selected my own knives, forks and spoons which were put in a certain
place to be protected from infection by the rest of the furniture. I took strict care
of my things. Woe if mother happened to put a wrong fork on my special plate!
We see what we can observe in every neurotic; she is sick. That means a
law for the others. The others receive regulations for their lives from the disease
of the neurotic. That gives her a feeling of superiority even if she does not notice

it. I do not believe this fact can be overlooked by anybody whose attention has
ever been called to it.
One day, during house cleaning, my water glass with my toothbrush in it
was accidentally put on the table. When I saw that I grew furious, swore at my
mother in vile language, menaced her, threatened to kill her--I don’t know what
else I did in my rage.
It almost looks like the divine wrath of a god when someone has violated his
sacred commands.
Such scenes occurred practically every day. Then my parents would
wrangle about me. Father would accuse Mother of not having been careful
enough and thus having excited me. Mother would reply angrily that she could
not keep all my caprices in mind, that she had other things to think of. Our
employees also trembled in my presence.
I do not know whether that is quite true, but it is sufficient that she has the
impression.
When I was on the street, I was always anticipating meeting perforated
faces. The whole city was soon inhabited by lupus sufferers. I saw them
everywhere. I did not dare go out any more at night for fear I might bump into
one of them in the dark.
The restriction goes farther.
In the daytime I stared at all faces, and when someone passed by too
quickly for me to see whether he had a nose or not, I ran after him and stared at
him again. Every time I imagined, “This one has lupus.” Then I would rush
home crying and complain to Father, “I have seen a lupus sufferer again.”
Father always tried to talk me out of my delusion. His clear and sensible
explanations quieted me every time to a certain degree. He was the only one
able to console me a little from time to time.
This “from time to time” needs some further consideration. It means almost
nothing. She may permit herself to be consoled by her father--in order to be able
to start again. Physicians often hear their patients say, “When I leave your office
I feel fine. But as soon as I am out, it starts all over again.” Many doctors believe
it is a magic power emanating from them. However, a patient merely
compliments the physician in order to lead him astray. We usually answer,
“Then you should stay here all day.” The fascination then vanishes quickly.
I washed myself constantly with potassium permanganate. The skin of my
hands became terribly rough, as hard as leather and full of cracks.
That is correct. People who feel compelled to wash themselves all day have the
dirtiest hands in the world.
My teeth become brown from continual rinsing. When the soap or a brush

fell on the floor, I did not use it again. Not for a kingdom would I have picked up
something from the floor. Mother also had to wash her hands ceaselessly. I
watched her carefully, especially before she started to cook. If she forgot to
wash her hands, I did not eat one morsel, however hungry I may have been. The
restrictions I imposed on her irritated her and she complained to Father. He
begged her to indulge me.
Her power extends farther and farther. He who does not comprehend this
does not comprehend the most important facts. Unlimited power is most
important to her, and although she has only a small circle at her disposal, she
does as much as possible to dominate it.
I had the most inconvenient difficulties with my shoelaces. If one of them
touched the soles of my shoes or the floor, Mother had to pull it out immediately
and buy a new one. I had assembled a whole collection of infected shoelaces in a
drawer. I also had a full line of hair pins, soaps, toothbrushes and dental
creams. Father was already considering consulting a physician. My delusion
was kept secret from outsiders.
As a rule, parents keep the ailment secret in a kind of false shame without
helping the child by doing so. On the other hand, if they speak too much about it,
that does not help, either. A method needs to be found which helps everybody.
When I found an illustration of the socalled lupus spoon in Lina’s
instrument book, I shuddered. I wondered why there was only one instrument for
such an abominable disease.
She regards it as an insult, a degradation of her phantom, that there is but one
instrument for it.
Lina told me that one could get lupus not only on the face, but all over the
body as well. I did not dread that so much as the image of a face full of holes.
He who observes a little more closely knows why. “She is the fairest in the
land.” Therefore the stress laid on the facial lupus.
I brooded ceaselessly on the lupus disease. Horrible things came to my
mind. I imagined, for instance, that a lupus sufferer touches someone with his
fingers after having touched his wounds or scratched them. Or that a drop of pus
comes in contact with a coin which one unsuspectingly takes in one’s hand--then
one may scratch one’s own eye which would, no doubt, infect a person with
lupus.
She understands something about inoculation; that is, infecting an eye by
bringing a germ in direct contact with it.
The thought especially that a lupus sufferer might kiss me made me shiver with
fright.
This “especially” is charming.

Finally I fancied that the mere thought of contact with lupus might produce the
disease, that the thought might be as much as the act.
Here again she anticipates some of the modern theories and hypotheses.
Right now the conception of “mind over matter” is widely spread.
When such thoughts came to my mind, I became extremely excited, washed
my face in a hurry, and ran to Father to get some consolation. However, I had to
overcome some reluctance to speak of these ideas, tried first to indicate, to
circumscribe them, never said directly: “I have imagined this or that,” but: “If a
girl were to imagine this, and so on.”
Her conscience is not clear. She does not want to assume any responsibility
for her neurosis. She has some glimmering that her attitude is unjustifiable and
will not admit it. As long as she does not understand and interpret correctly her
intentions and striving, she finds no way out and proceeds further, like a Don
Quixote, to fight windmills.
I also often thought--we lived on the ground floor--how easily someone
could climb in the window--and, what is more, it might be a lupus sufferer!
Two evils at once.
“Such sufferers,” I said to myself, “must always be in great need because they
are avoided by other people.”
Here again let us find out what lies behind those words. We could say, for
instance: as a result they have to be helped. He who speaks thus is on the useful
side. She continues differently. We have to beware of such cunning rascals.
When two people have the same impression, the same experience, they draw
different conclusions according to their different goals and different styles of
life.
The idea of a burglar with lupus scared me to death. Then I remembered a
story which I had read or heard somewhere in which God tests a saint with a
leper--I thought that was the same as lupus. The leper very soon turned out to be
the Lord Himself. And I said to myself: “Even were the Lord Himself to come as
a lupus sufferer to me, I would not admit Him; indeed, I would not touch Him--
or should I make an exception in that case?
One day we went on an excursion. I was in the third grade in school, I
believe. Coming back we passed a new lupus hospital; in fact, I don’t know
whether there were or are two lupus hospitals in this city. I’ll find out. Suddenly
I read in big letters, “Hospital for Lupus Sufferers.” That gave me a sad feeling. I
must have known at that time what lupus is. There was a milkstand in the station
where we had to transfer to another car. Our boarder was with us. Father bought
hot milk for us. I also drank a glass. But with the lupus hospital before my eyes,
I detested the milk. I had a dim feeling that a lupus sufferer had drunk out of my

glass.
That is an old remembrance. What conclusion can we draw from it? No
more and no less than that she now tries to support her lupus phobia. She
searches until she finds new justifications for the continuation of her neurosis.
We frequently find neurotics search for support for the present scheme in their
past life.
In the meantime, our circumstances had changed for the worse. Many of
Father’s customers had been drafted for military service, some of them without
having paid their bills. We could hardly pay the relatively high rent of our
apartment. At the first opportunity, we moved into a house some blocks further
on. It was an old house and our new home was cheaper and roomier than the old
one and was on the first floor. Up to that time, I had slept between my parents.
Now I got a little room to share with Lina and, for the first time, a bed of my
own. Lina slept on the couch.
We already understand enough of this girl’s character to be able to predict
what will follow. She will probably not want to lie there alone. She will not let
herself be driven out of an agreeable situation. She has mentioned this fact
before. It is supposed to express: “I am the center.” That means a description in
space for her psychic construction.
I did not want to be driven so abruptly out of the bed of my parents in which
I had slept so long. For some time I remained--as a temporary arrangement--in
Mother’s bed. Gradually, I decided to reconcile myself to the new custom. Little
by little the lupus delusion, which had harassed me for over a year, disappeared.
What that has to do with sleeping alone is not quite intelligible. However,
the two facts might be related. We have assumed that the lupus phobia is
directed against every possible relationship with men, that she fears the love
problem. She sleeps alone; she emphasizes that the lupus phobia is disappearing.
Perhaps she is relieved by the thought: “One can remain single.” I do not know
whether we find my assumption confirmed. I will follow this idea carefully,
awaiting further corroboration.
I could not put up with lying alone at night very long. Besides, my bed was
unsteady and I was afraid that the upper part might fall down on me and smash
my teeth or crush my nose.
Again a beauty defect.
I was quite particular about my nose. When Lina gave me a kiss, I often
imagined she had distorted it. Then the tapping of a termite made me nervous.
Every other day my sister had night duty, and I felt all the more lonely.
The sister suits her purpose very well. We see how the tendency to
withdraw from men leads her to her sister. Before she slept alone, she chose to

lie beside her mother. We will have to see whether she struggles to save herself
from the confused state of her erotic problems, whether or not her refusal of men
and attachment to women grows stronger.
I asked Mother to sleep in my bed, while I slept in hers. This would
disprove our combination if we, like other psychological schools, recognized the
man in her father. According to their interpretation, the desire to sleep in her
mother’s bed indicates a wish to approach her father sexually and eliminate her
mother of whom she is jealous. However, her father is unquestionably asexual
for her; we do not know yet why she goes through this performance.
At that time I had the custom of hanging my stockings and garters over
Father’s bedstead before going to sleep; on top I put my hairpins; I spread my
shirt, petticoat and bloomers on his comforter, and put my shoes under his bed. I
laid my dress, sweater, coat and hat carefully on the table. No one was permitted
to touch these things lest I become wild with fury. One night, lying awake, I
noticed that Father continually slapped his face in his sleep. The action
frightened me; I thought he was going crazy. Suddenly he opened his eyes and
exclaimed: “What is tickling my nose?” And then I saw that my garters were
doing it. The fear that the headpiece of the bed might fall on me did not let me
sleep peacefully in Mother’s bed, so I had to take it down every evening before
getting into bed. Soon a new cause for alarm appeared. Over the little night
table, standing between Father’s and Mother’s beds . . .
The beds are separated. She plays the role of the mother since she is using her
mother’s bed, but sleeping separated from her father.
. . . hung an image of the Holy Virgin. The image was a little closer to my
side. I became anxious about that. I imagined it might fall down on me. On the
other hand, I was too superstitious to have it removed. So I went back to my own
bedroom and bed.
When we consider the situation of this girl, we realize that pampered
children are very reluctant to leave places to which they have been long
accustomed.
In the middle of one night I fell through my bed with a crash. That made the
bed all the more unattractive to me and I slept thereafter in Mother’s bed with
her. In order to be safe from the holy image, I moved over to the very edge of the
bed. I cannot say that this position was very comfortable. Besides, I still did not
feel safe enough. I often got up when all the others were asleep, stood for a while
somewhere in the room in my nightgown and pondered how I could get rid of the
bed troubles. One night, while I was standing in my former bedroom and
brooding, I accidentally made some noise. Lina awoke, jumped up terror-
stricken and began to cry pitifully. She believed she was face to face with a

ghost. I crept quickly back to bed. The menacing image on the wall drove my
sleep away. I then tried to lie in bed the other way round, my head near
Mother’s feet. But that was more uncomfortable than before. Our feet hit each
other’s face during the night. Finally Father took my vacant bed and let me
sleep in his bed. Even there I did not feel quite at ease. I do not know why I
believed this bed would bring me bad luck.
That seems to agree with the idea that it is dangerous to get too near a man.
Then it was arranged in the following way: Father returned to his bed, Lina
took my bed and I slept on Lina’s couch. But the couch was too short for me. I
was considerably taller than my sister and had long legs. My feet hung over the
end of the couch. I had to wrap them in a special blanket. Then Mother had the
idea of preparing my bed in the kitchen on the sewing table. But the table was
too hard and a draft from a nearby window disturbed me.
This child certainly has many difficulties in bed.
Now we resolved that I should try to sleep with Father in his bed. But since,
in fear of the holy image, I lay down in the direction reverse to the one in which
he lay, the arrangement was as awkward as it had been in Mother’s bed. At last,
Father ordered a carpenter to repair my bed while I watched him do it. Then I
lay down, head at the wrong end, and so it remained.
The position a person assumes in sleep is not accidental and seems to have
some significance in terms of his style of life. Individual Psychological
investigation has shown us that even the phenomenon of sleep is patterned on
the person’s style of life. Those who understand Individual Psychology can often
guess the position someone assumes in sleep.
Experience has taught us, for instance, that people who sleep on their
stomachs are usually stubborn. We can hardly expect a person to exhibit much
courage in life who goes to sleep by rolling himself up like a porcupine and
pulling the blankets over his head. A young man sleeps with his arms crossed on
his chest. His style of life reveals a desire to imitate Napoleon. Later, when life
becomes hard, he conceives the insane idea that he has been chosen general to
lead troops to Russia. Our girl lies in bed the wrong way around. Her position
expresses opposition--nothing else, although, of course, such people may also
assume an oppositional attitude in regard to their love relationships.
Father wanted me to take up dressmaking after I finished high school.
We doubt she will take up dressmaking because that is a subordinate profession.
But I did not care for it. I would rather have entered business school like
Olga who set the example for me in every way. Father did not consent. He
suggested that it would cost too much. He preferred to have me become a pianist
and spoke of a scholarship in a conservatory. I replied; “And then? Then I shall

be a stupid piano teacher!” Finally we came to no decision whatsoever and I
remained at home.
That is the right place.
Next fall I registered for a one-year course at business school. I was the
only one in the class who paid her tuition fee monthly. All but two or three of my
classmates came from wealthy families. I felt happy in their company. I made
friends with the prettiest and most distinguished ones and was invited to their
homes. But since I could never invite them to our house--I had told them a lot of
lies about our circumstances--our friendship did not become as intimate as any
friendship with Olga. I could speak of things with her which would have shocked
the wealthier girls. Although I hated moral conversations, I always made myself
listen patiently. My greatest wish was to prolong these acquaintanceships. . . . I
remember a very disagreeable episode. We could buy liberty bonds at school.
This was done in the following way: The professor called out our names in
alphabetical order and asked every one of us, naming in addition our father’s
profession, how many bonds we wanted to buy. Almost all the girls had
permission from their parents to buy bonds and named smaller or larger
amounts. Meanwhile I was on pins and needles. Not only that Father could not
spare one cent more for war contributions--we were glad when we could get an
extra loaf of bread from time to time--but it was going to be revealed in public
that Father was a tailor. Slowly, my doom approached. When my name was
called out, I arose, blushing all over. The professor had cast a glance at the list
and said “Your father is a tailor. Tailors make much money nowadays.” I do not
remember what I stammered in answer. . . I was a pretty good scholar in
general, but arithmetic and bookkeeping were my weak points. The morning
before an examination in arithmetic, I would say to my father: “I feel so ill, I can
hardly stand up straight.”
That is a common reaction. If a child trains for it properly it becomes
automatic, so that she feels sick merely hearing the word arithmetic. “It makes
me sick to hear of it.” We also notice this behavior in other situations where it is
harder to explain. Headaches, tiredness, even vomiting, often originate this way.
A teacher, for instance, had a fright spell when he approached the city hall in his
town. Without knowing anything about him, we cannot possibly understand
what the city hall has to do with the spell. The reason in this case was that he had
to report to the higher school officials. Another time, at a party, he was asked
when he had to go to school. Five minutes later he had another fear spell. This
becomes intelligible only when we consider the facts that have led to this
condition.
“. . . and went back to bed. The following day I went to school again.

Eventually the professor of arithmetic discovered my trick and gave me the
lowest mark every time I did not attend school. One day I was impertinent to a
professor and got a low mark in conduct. On such occasions, we had to take a
report card home and return it with one parent’s signature. Although I had no
reason to be afraid of Father, I decided to get his signature on that piece of
paper without letting him know what he was signing. To that end I proceeded as
follows: I took a sheet of white paper, covered it with a small strip of red
blotting paper, leaving only a small margin, went to Father and begged him to
write his name in the white margin. First, of course, he wanted to see what was
under the blotting paper. I took it away and there was nothing but a blank sheet
of white paper. Astonished, he asked what I wanted it for. I only smiled. He
probably thought this was another one of my whims, wrote his name, and shook
his head.
The fight with her teacher is almost a pleasure to her; she tries to get the
upper hand over him and succeeds. She won a lasting victory over her father
long ago.
After a while I did the same thing again, and once more Father wanted to
see the covered paper first. The third time, however, he signed without looking.
This time he had signed the conduct report. . . . Our classes were between two
and six o’clock. In the morning I studied, as a matter of fact only before an
examination. Mother then heated the little stove in the bedroom. Father worked
in the kitchen with his assistants late into the night. The customers came and
went during the day. We were never by ourselves, never undisturbed. The
assistants had to work on Sunday morning and in the afternoon customers tried
on their suits. Mother, Lina and I hated this state of affairs. We tried to persuade
Father to work at certain hours, like other tailors, and then rest. But we could
not convince him. He always answered: “You hate the tailoring business. But
without my work you wouldn’t have anything to eat.” We had just enough to eat,
but otherwise, in spite of all the work, we were in need of almost everything.
Father had gradually acquired the fixed idea of working for an unusually low
price, for almost cost price. Sewing was his passion, to produce good suits his
pleasure, to satisfy his customers his ambition and pride. Even when he had so
many orders that the assistants had to work overtime, there was often hardly
enough money left at the end of the week to pay them their wages. Lina always
had to help, although all she had was her meager salary. A relative wanted to
keep the books for Father or even help him to open a store where he would have
had nothing to do but cut and fit. But Father’s initiative had been killed; we
could not get him away from sewing.
That illustrates well the inflexible habit of older age. A life’s training

cannot be easily broken and should be broken only when it is necessary for the
individual and his environment. I must confess I would not try either to detach
such a habitual worker from his work. I would not say to an elderly man that he
ought to stop working, or entirely rearrange his pattern of work, because he
would feel life pressing on him heavily as soon as the routine ceased.
Father’s craze to make a present of his labor to his customers brought
about terrible family quarrels. Mother, with Lina’s backing, showered Father
with reproaches, scolded him, yelled that this life was no life and that he was
ruining all of us, asked him what he thought would become of the child. At first
he would answer, but as soon as Mother mentioned my name he became silent,
went into the bedroom, and tore his hair.
One day, brushing crumbs off the table, I carelessly dropped my pocket
mirror on the floor. While picking it up, I saw that it had a few cracks. “How
silly,” I thought, “now I won’t have good luck for seven years.”
Here is another opportunity for compulsive thoughts and acts. This is the
third time, proof that the disappearance of one symptom (the lupus phobia, for
example) does not indicate a cure, but rather that a new symptom will be
produced, and that the appearance of symptoms will not stop as long as she does
not change her goal and style of life. Besides, I want to emphasize that neurotics
are always superstitious. Everyone who does not believe in himself has to
believe in something else, whatever it may be. Of course, it does not follow that
because we believe in something else, we do not believe in ourselves.
On that day I was somewhat depressed. I went to Olga to ask her whether
she had ever broken a mirror. She could not remember ever having done so. I
thereupon decided to have her break a mirror at an opportune moment so that
she would have no good luck for seven years either.
She constantly strives for equality so that others are no better off than she.
A little later Lina was angry for some reason or other and broke her mirror
in a fit of wrath. I approached the fragments gingerly, looked at them, and
wondered how my sister could break a mirror, knowing that she would not have
good luck for seven years. . . . In the coatroom of the business school, one of the
girls accidentally dropped her pocket mirror while taking off her coat. I was
standing behind her at the moment and she cried jokingly: Oh, goodness now
you have broken my mirror!” I was startled. She quieted me, assuring me that
she herself had broken it, not I. I was badly frightened and asked her if she were
quite sure of it. She swore that it was so. I believed her since I had hardly
touched the mirror, and when I looked at her, I thought: “Whether or not she
has broken a mirror makes no difference. She is not pretty and will have no good
luck anyway.”

Here we have further evidence for the correctness of our assumption that
her main object is to be pretty enough to be the first one in life.
I remember, by the way . . .
She is collecting memories again to support her neurotic behavior.
. . . that as a small child I was once afraid of a mirror. I was passing a
glassware store and looked into one of the mirrors on display. From it a horribly
swollen face stared back at me.
Again the swollen face!
I recoiled, but could not resist looking back a second time. Alongside this
mirror hung another that distorted my face lengthwise in a weird fashion. Father
explained to me afterward that these were mirrors which distorted all they
reflected. Our petroleum lamp had a reflector to make the light shine more
brightly. This mirror, or reflector, had already bothered me, as I remember now,
at the time of my eye phobia. It now began to disturb me very much. I would not
touch the lamp. I was often asked to carry it from the kitchen to the living room
when Father had a customer, but even if fifty customers had waited outside, I
could no longer be made to touch that lamp. I was afraid the mirror might break
because of the intense heat of the petroleum flame and the resulting bad luck
would attach itself to me if I just happened to be present. I let the others sit by
the lamp and took my seat further away. Realizing, however, that it was all the
same whether my parents or Lina or I were near the mirror when it broke, since
the mischief would then pursue us all, I begged Father to take the reflector off
the lamp. This done, I worried about what they would do with it. Mother wanted
to throw it in the garbage can. I objected because it might break in there. Then
she proposed giving it away. I did not like that either. I thought that might also
mean bad luck. Finally, we stored it in a wooden box in the cellar.
We see to what lengths she goes to avoid all possible bad luck. We also see
with what super-caution, wrongly placed of course, she nourishes the idea that
we can somehow force our fate. This wretched phobia contains the idea of
godliness. What must I do in order to control fate?
Chapter XI
Yes! But—
Father had a little work basket of plaited straw in which he kept, among
other things, several pocket mirrors. I was afraid to break them, and was always
very careful not to touch the basket. Finally Father decided to sell the mirrors to
the same man who bought our remnants.
Her attention is concentrated on all the mirrors around her. Significant for
the structure of every neurosis, this type of preoccupation becomes most
conspicuous in a compulsion neurosis. The Individual Psychologist can easily

understand what really happens. By placing all the social tasks of life in the
background, the patient has abandoned her duties. She stands a greater distance
away from the important problems of her life. In order not to suffer a defeat in
trying to solve her problems on the useful side of life, she spends all her time on
useless activities.
We know this extremely spoiled child is striving for a goal of superiority,
that she wants to be more than all the others. We have seen how she succeeded
in attaining her goal within her family. As she grows older, she now has to
approach the community outside her family where her success is thoroughly
uncertain. Like all pampered children, she avoids new situations, especially
when she is less certain of her success. Her striving to remain within the old
situation and attempt to achieve the goal of superiority there becomes more
apparent. This striving is easily accomplished by means of a neurosis whose
intensity can be increased in accordance with the purpose. The father especially,
and the other members of the family as well, are drawn into the whirl of her
fixed ideas which gives her the impression of her superiority in the house.
The symptomatic choice of the mirror now becomes obvious. As in former
years, she makes her principal aim being first or foremost although she now
moves in a broader circle and nearer the front of life. Problems of love and
marriage come closer. Will I be able to surpass other girls in my relationships
with men; will I gain power over men? Her interest concentrates itself distinctly
around the mirror, probably stimulated by her visual training. Occasionally, she
complains of her weak eyes. Children with minor eye defects understandably
increase their interest in all visible objects in order to conquer their difficulties.
In this way they become more closely acquainted with colors, lines, shades,
perspective and usually retain this visual interest for the rest of their lives.
However, this girl has become uncertain, vacillating, as almost all
pampered children do when they have to face a new situation. She tends to solve
the problems of love and sex in the same fashion as she has tried to solve all
problems up to now; that is to say, she wants to be the first. Love and marriage,
however, are social problems. Their solution requires interest in others. Her
prototype lacks such interest in others almost entirely, which is typical for
pampered children. She wants to master the others, force them to obey her
command. Will she be able to do the same in love? The marriage of her parents,
her whole environment perhaps, does not give her the impression of the
unimpeded victoriousness of a woman. Love becomes a dangerous obstacle to
her desire to rule; she is not at all certain of conquering it in her favor. The thus
intensified feeling of uncertainty causes her to shake off responsibility from her
and shift it onto mirrors. Her fate depends on mirrors now. But suppose the

mirror breaks?
A widely spread superstition makes a happy marriage depend on whether
we have broken a mirror. A strange, spiteful magic has to decide, not the magic
effect of our own personality. If she is not the first in the contest of love, then the
mirror bears the blame, and her superiority remains untouched. The superstition
states that she who breaks a mirror cannot marry for seven years. That would
exempt her from having to decide whether she is the “first in the country.” But
she could continue to believe so. Like all pampered children, she hunts for easier
means of gaining the final victory.
Two general remarks may be inserted here. A few of my critics,
unfortunately blinded by rage, believe that I have eradicated sexuality and love
from my psychological conception. However, I wish to point out that in all cases
of neuroses and psychoses, as well as in perversions, the patient does not
approach love in the light of common sense, that is, as an attitude of social
feeling, but merely as sexual desire in the service of a striving for power on the
useless side of life. Both sexual desire and striving for power have switched over
from the tracks of general usefulness onto the tracks of neurosis, and both no
longer share in the progress of humanity, but are part of personal egotism.
Second, I want to emphasize that this unwise use of our love potential
encounters difficulties everywhere. Because love and marriage are tasks for two
people, they have no room for egocentric presumptions on the part of one of
them. Moreover, the partner’s response to the unsatisfactory advances of the
neurotic is naturally unfavorable. And above all, the neurotic always feels hurt
when his timid social feeling is challenged as it is by all problems of life, since
all problems (birth of children, school, friendship, interest in mankind, political
standpoint, profession, love, marriage) are social problems. Regarding the love
problems of the neurotic, we will perceive a diminishing speed in his activities to
the point of a hesitating attitude or complete standstill. The violent aggression in
the beginning comes to a sudden end. From a physical point of view, this
description is sufficiently clear. Physical expression of the disturbance is found
in impotence, vaginism, frigidity, perversions, ejaculation precox, etc. This
superstitious occupation with mirrors exhibits the hesitating attitude of the girl.
If a mirror breaks, this accident is blamed in case she does not win, and her
superiority is saved. Every now and then, the thought of committing suicide
appears. Death seems salvation, the last consolation of the desperate.
The objection might be raised: Why is she anxious about breaking a mirror
if the resulting bad luck would help her avoid the problem of love, and protected
by her superstition, she would not even have to attempt to occupy herself with
the dangerous question? The neurotic does not think so simply. She wants to

appear to make every effort to respond to the demands of communal life. That is
her “yes.” But then she throws a stone in her way which impedes her progress.
That is her “but.” The result is that she has a good alibi for the evasion of the
danger of love; she has reneged. I want to very much, BUT I cannot. That is the
meaning of her fear of mirrors. As long as someone wants to, but excuses herself
with a “but,” she does not want to.
Several mirrors were displayed in the shop window of the candy store that
Tilda’s mother owned. Until then I had not noticed them. One day I suddenly
imagined I had smashed one of the mirrors by closing the store door, and I was
seized with a terrible fright. Tilda carefully examined all the mirrors in the
window and swore that she could not detect a crack in any one of them. But I did
not believe her and was so unhappy all day long that I wanted to die. I said to
myself: “I’ll have misfortune for seven years anyway, and now seven more years
in addition; then I’ll have no more happiness at all in life and it would be better
to die now.”
The next day I was quiet again; but from then on when I went to see Tilda, I
took Minna with me to open and close the door. 
Every time I accidentally touched a woman with a pocketbook, on the street or
in the street car, the fearful thought struck me like lightning that I had
demolished her pocket-mirror and thus caused myself seven more years of
misfortune. Frequently, I followed such a woman and wanted to ask her whether
she really carried a mirror in her pocketbook and, if so, whether it was still
intact. But I never dared do so.
As long as the question is not answered, the possibility remains that a mirror has
been broken. Therefore, she does not dare to ask.
I had to use a mirror when I wanted to comb my hair. I possessed a square
hand mirror which I touched only with the greatest precaution. Sometimes I
fancied that I had put it too roughly on the table, and, at the same time, thought I
had heard it crack. Then I ran to my parents or Lina full of fear; they had to
inspect it thoroughly. And even if they swore by all they held holy that they could
not see any crack, not even a scratch, I did not believe them and I trusted my
own eyes still less. I was bent madly on the thought that there was a crack in it,
perhaps not perceptible to the naked eye.
In order to see whether it would break, I now put the mirror on the table as
carefully as possible. And immediately I fancied again that I had broken it. The
longer I manipulated it in this manner, the more strongly I labored under this
delusion and the more excited I became. After a while, I was raving.
One day on the street, we passed the fragments of a mirror. The idea that I
had touched them with my foot grew in an instant to the conviction that I had

stepped on them. I ran home weeping and complained to Father: “Something
terrible has happened to me.”
In an alarmed tone, he asked what it was. At first I did not want to tell.
Merely to speak about it seemed calamitous to me. I felt as miserable as if I had
just been sentenced to death. At his insistent request, I told him what had
happened.
The mirror story cannot be exaggerated enough. A frequent occurrence in a
neurosis to achieve the purpose at any cost.
Father laughed and said that according to my own description, someone
else and not I had broken the mirror. I had only come in contact with the
fragments which certainly did not mean anything. But this time, he could not
console me. Then I called Minna and led her to the spot where the fragments
were lying, without letting her know my aim. I took her arm and ingeniously
arranged to have her step unsuspectingly on the glass. Now I felt easier. I
thought, “If I have no more luck, you shall not have any more luck either!”
Struggling against the superiority of others. As if it were proof that this
actually has to do with her love problem, the son of the proprietor of the café
appears on the scene at the right moment.
I was very friendly with the son of the proprietor of our favorite café. We
had already played together when we were children. His name was Hans and he
was just as old as I. He had a speech defect. His vocal cords had been hurt in a
tonsil operation.
We often took walks together. But since I disliked being alone with a boy
and wanted to make some new acquaintances, I asked him one day whether he
knew of a friend for me.
Two are less than one. This frequent neurotic phenomenon occurs in the
event of a possibility of affection for a person, in order to prevent a love affair.
Someone cannot be in love with two people at the same time without lying to
herself. When an individual cannot decide in favor of one or the other, this
indecision is the decision. Neither one is wanted. The phenomenon of indecision
appears frequently in life and always indicates a tendency to refuse.
The attempts of the girl to approach love relationships although they are
very careful, do not surprise us. They are attempts to say “yes” in situations of
little danger, in much the same way as someone who seems about to decide to
withdraw, yet makes a few hesitating steps forward only to express her “but.”
This “yes!-but . . .” as we said before, is perhaps the best definition of neurosis.
In the following paragraphs, our opinion will be confirmed and we will see how
she handles a love affair.
In return for it, I was to introduce him to my friend Olga. Then the four of

us could go out together. He replied that he knew many boys and that he would
find a suitable one. I made it a condition that my boyfriend had to be handsome.
Fritz, the friend, was a tall, blond fellow who, in spite of his youth, liked to
show off as a man of the world. He was immediately attracted to me and told me
a lot of nonsense. I also told him a pack of lies....
When I asked Hans how he liked Olga, he said, “Quite well, only her
manners are not so good yet!”; and then, for his taste she was too dull . . . he
likes a lively girl better. He was only fifteen years old and stole money from his
father when he wanted to go to the movies with a girl. I replied: “What do you
think? You must know how to take her. My dear, she has had a lot of experience
—why don’t you try it?”
And I summed up all her nice qualities. I myself did not want to be alone
with Fritz. I always wanted the other two to be with us. Hans, who was easily
influenced by me, promised to go with us the next time. In return, I gave him my
word to find another girl for him if he did not want Olga any more.
Fritz was very much in love with me. In the movies he made bashful
advances. But I rejected him with the words: “I prefer to talk at a certain
distance.” He had to follow suit.
One evening Hans rushed into the room in great excitement, saying that
Fritz had taken a box at the People’s Opera House for “Rigoletto” and that I
should get dressed in a hurry. I did not quite like the idea. I was a little ashamed
to appear with the two boys in a box. But since my parents did not object, I got
ready quickly. Fritz was already awaiting us in the box. He handed me a bunch
of flowers and kissed my hand. Blushing with embarrassment, I took my seat.
I liked the music very well, but I should have preferred to listen to it
without company. Fritz held my hand all the time and kissed it constantly. That
was very bothersome. During the intermissions, we spoke about the opera. I
pretended that I had heard this opera several times and knew every singer. I
answered a certain question with: “The singer doesn’t seem to be well disposed
today.”
After the performance, Fritz made a proud declaration of love and asked
how I thought our relationship would be in the future. I answered: “My nature is
pretty cool. You’ll see that.”
I decided to shake him off as soon as possible. Hans and Olga did not get
along very well together. I therefore tried to talk him into another girl friend of
mine, Elsa. I called his attention to the fact, however, that she was more or less
engaged to another fellow. But if he, Hans, did not proceed too stupidly, it would
be quite easy to estrange her from her boyfriend who, by the way, was a
disagreeable chap.

Elsa was just giving a party for several of her friends, when I came in with
my two boys. During a game of forfeits, Hans wanted to give me a kiss.
However, I was already disgusted with him to such a degree that I refused to let
him kiss me. All the others made a fuss about that because the other girls kissed
their boys without ado. The most I granted him was permission to kiss my hand
—and even that with reluctance. They called me pretentious, which I really was
at that time. I spoke affectedly, turned continuously from one side to the other
and said on every occasion: “That is much too low for me!”
On the way home, I informed Hans that Elsa had invited us to her birthday
party. If he wanted to wheedle himself into her good graces, he probably would
have to give her a present. At my suggestion, he bought her a manicure set.
Elsa was really surprised at the generosity of my boyfriend—in general he
was considered as such. Between him and me, however, there existed merely a
friendship, except that Hans did everything I wanted him to do.
I did not allow him to bring the obtrusive Fritz along this time.
After a while, Hans complained to me that Elsa did not seem to be
interested in him. He could not get any further with her. 
Then I went to her to sound her out about him. She answered very reservedly.
While we were talking, she combed her hair. Suddenly the thought occurred to
me to take a wisp of her hair that had come out in combing and bring it to Hans.
I do not know myself why I was so eager to procure a girl for him.
The tendency to play matchmaker is distinctly based on the malicious
intention to harm, which we can also notice on other occasions. Her intrigues are
always intended to injure girls, her rivals.
When he came to me the next time, I gave him the hair in an envelope and
said: “Elsa sends you this as a souvenir.” At the same time, I gave him the strict
injunction not to speak about it to her because she did not wish it.
Thereupon Hans conceived new hope and began to court Elsa again. 
But when I noticed that she was in love with her fool, the whole business started
to annoy me. I decided not to see her any more and instructed Hans: “Leave that
silly girl alone! You come along with me now to another one!” 
And I brought him to Walli, a girl whom I knew through Elsa. I talked to him so
long until he told her he loved her and begged her for a kiss. 
A long time afterward, Hans came to us one day and said to me, smiling
peculiarly, that he did not feel quite well. I went out with him for a while and, on
my insistent questioning, he finally confessed to me that he had contracted
gonorrhea. He added, “A real man of the world must have such a thing.”
Although I thought his disease very interesting, I avoided giving him my hand
for fear of infection.

Obvious fear of infection, probably used for the purpose of eliminating the
problem of love.
Furthermore, I found out that he had stolen some of his mother’s jewelry
and had taken it to a pawnbroker. He had also stolen money from his father’s
safe. The result was that, from now on, his parents were very strict with him; he
was allowed to go out only on Sunday afternoon. Then he called for me, and we
merely took a walk.
My father liked Hans very much and was amused when I told him that it
was the boy’s greatest ambition to be a man of the world. In the black suit which
Father had made for him, the little fellow really looked quite good. . .
One Sunday afternoon I went with Olga to the city park. Young as I was,
my parents gave me every freedom. We strolled up and down in front of the
music pavilion. Two naval officers came along, looked and smiled at us. Olga
and I blinked at each other, turned our heads slowly around and saw that the two
men were following us. And suddenly they addressed us. We were so
embarrassed that we could hardly answer. We had met with many an adventure
with young fellows before; but young men like these, that was something
entirely new. My companion introduced himself to me and started to relate
stories about life at sea. In order to make ourselves more interesting, we
pretended to be foreigners—Olga was a Hungarian and I a Romanian—and
spoke broken German. We could not, however, maintain the deception. Our
embarrassment threw us into still greater confusion—we were timid anyway. We
grew more and more silent; the two men almost had to pull every word from our
lips. But my naval officer seemed to be very pleased with my timidity. He never
took his eyes off me, showed me every courtesy, and inquired interestedly about
my home conditions. Olga also blushed continuously and did not quite know
what to reply. Then we went to a café. Gradually, we became more lively. Time
passed by in cheerful conversation. We were startled when the clock struck
seven. The officers brought us to the trolley station. They would have liked to
bring us home, but we declined this offer for reasons of decency. My officer,
who had not ceased his attentions to me, emphasized how he regretted that this
was the last day of his leave of absence and that he had to return to port the
following day. He begged me to come to the railroad station. Since I did not
know whether Olga or another girl would have time to go with me and I was
afraid to go alone, I made up some excuse. Then he wanted to have my address
in order to write to me. I replied that he must not write to me at home, but I gave
him the address of Olga’s brother who was serving his apprenticeship in another
shop. When he said goodbye to me, my new admirer was quite moved; he
admonished me to be good and promised me to be back soon. “Little girl,” he

called me. Again, he declared it a pity that he had not met me sooner. He would
never forget me, he said. Would I permit him to address me by my first name?
Once in a while I was to think of him. He had tears in his eyes when he pressed
my hands. I remained completely unmoved. It merely seemed strange to me that
a man who sees a girl for the first time can fall so deeply in love.
Two weeks passed. I had gradually forgotten our meeting. One day Olga
came to our house and whispered to me that I should come with her immediately
because she had several letters and postcards which had accumulated at her
brother’s place. At first I was very much surprised. Then I was happy, if only for
the fact that the other officer, in spite of his promise, had not written to Olga.
The letters were extremely tender. For that reason they caused unpleasant
sensation in me. While I read them, a trembling came over me. I felt urged to
something that was against my nature. I presumed that he wanted to chain me to
himself, which roused my indignation to such an extent that I was restless all day
long. I was still almost a child. I had not even had my period yet. The mere
thought of having to be alone with a man horrified me. I sat down in my
bedroom and imagined what would happen to me if I were his wife. This made
me angry with him and disgusted with myself.
Distinct expression of evasion of love.
Olga advised me to answer, but in a cool manner. And then we talked about
that certain thing which he surely would demand. We started to ridicule him,
and I sneered: “If he thinks I am going to kiss him, he’ll have to wait a long
time.” I had never kissed before. A kiss alone seemed to be the worst. Then I
received a letter or a postcard from him almost daily. He also sent me his
photograph. At last he inquired whether, on his next sojourn in Vienna, he might
propose to me. That disquieted me still more. The thought of being torn from my
accustomed surroundings was unbearable. I made an evasive and short answer.
My parents, who did not object to such an advantageous marriage, teased me
when they noticed my embarrassment. I said to my father, “I will marry only
you.”
Psychoanalysts of the Freudian school would regard this remark as proof
that the sexual desires of this girl are directed toward her father. It would be an
example of this girl’s Oedipus complex, on which Freud later laid less stress.
However, we have long seen from the context that a sexual relationship between
her and her father is not possible; for her, her father is asexual. Not every desire
of a girl is a sexual desire or concerns itself with sexuality (libido). But every
wish is a wish to rise, to win more power and security, to improve one’s
situation and position in the community. When sexuality appears a suitable
means for this purpose, it is adapted to the striving for power and serves as a

weapon to achieve success. We do not believe sexuality is the primal urge,
neither for the beginning nor the end, but believe it is a means which we use as
necessity arises, and which we abandon as easily as we resort to it, when other
ways lead to the goal.
The father of this girl is a comparatively weak man. She knows that she can
rule him. “I will marry only Father” means in the language of her system: “I
want to rule Father, I alone and as completely as possible.”
Her first acquaintance with marriage led her to believe it was a battleground
on which one loses or wins. Reasonably sure of her victory, she wants to proceed
on that battlefield where she has no defeat to dread, and refuses to make one step
on another field which she does not know, and where she may experience defeat.
I was still pretty childish.
The naval officer did not abandon his suit. In one of his next letters, he informed
me that one of his comrades would come to see me in his name. That terrified me
again. Moreover, we were not in a position to receive an officer in our
apartment. We did not even have one room where one could talk alone to a
person. Every corner was crowded with Father’s tailoring business. 
In the meantime, we had often talked about putting me into an office.
She will now be brought face to face with the great, human problem of
work or vocational occupation. She has solved most incompletely, the two other
major social problems: friendship and love. Our expectations are not very high,
but we are most interested to see what she will do with the question of work. As
a pampered child, she will also be badly prepared for this problem of life and
will hesitate, stop, or run away.
After finishing business school, I did not do any work at all. I got up at ten
in the morning, demanded food at once, and ate an awful lot. All day long, I
visited friends and came home only for meals. Father was of the opinion that it
could not go on like that any longer; I could either help a little at home or else
get a job in an office. Household work did not interest me in the least. In an
office, I could make some money.
So, one morning, Father looked through the newspaper and found an
advertisement inserted by a chemical factory for an office girl. 
Mother and I went out to the plant. They engaged me right away. 
Then we rode to Lina who was at the hospital. My sister was on night duty, so
we could speak to her during the day; otherwise, I would not have seen her any
more before starting my new job. In the trolley car, I could see from my
mother’s face that she had something on her mind. She sat silently beside me.
Soon she confessed that she would rather see me refuse the position; the factory
was too far from home; it would be too much of a rush for me. 

When Lina heard the news, she embraced and kissed me and gave me plenty of
advice on my conduct. Then we went home. 
Father also seemed to regret his idea. He probably did not think that I should get
a job so easily. He, too, was of the opinion that the location of the office was too
far from home. And what is more, I had continuous working hours with only
one-half hour for lunch. I would not be able to stand it, he said. He was quite
excited. But I insisted on trying at least. “First you chase me out of the house,” I
reproached him, “and then you want to stop me.” 
The next morning I woke up very early. Mother helped me dress. Then she gave
me a thermos-bottle with hot tea, cold pork, bread and a few lumps of sugar.
Father blessed me as if I were going on a long journey and told me to come
home if there was anything I did not like. My parents were both quite upset. In a
rather depressed mood, I started.
She probably expects great honor from her job. According to the usual
nature of such office positions, we may assume that she will soon find her way
back to her parents. The excitement she speaks of indicates the intense tension
such people feel who do not think of the work or of other people, but solely of
their triumph or possible defeat. In this increased tension, the aforementioned
stage fright originated as a sign of poorly developed social feeling and an
exaggerated interest in one’s own person. At the same time, we find courage,
selfconfidence, and an optimistic attitude only among individuals who feel they
are in contact with other human beings and at home with them. Courage is the
result of a perfect social feeling.
A few old maids were working in the office. My first task was to rule lines in
a large notebook. I was so excited that I made a few ink spots in it. Then I had to
file copes alphabetically. That hurt my eyes.
Her intense interest in her eyes, probably fostered by her parents—she was
nearsighted and was frequently admonished to take care of her eyes—breaks
through as a signal for retreat.
The manager of the office was a young man in uniform. He took me into his
office, showed me around, encouraged me, and said that, of course, everything
was new the first day, but that I would soon be acclimated. However, I had had
enough already from what I had seen so far.
During my lunch time, I ate the bread and cold pork and drank the tea. But
that was as good as nothing. I was used to devouring tremendous portions,
several plates of soup and so on, reading all the time I ate. The old maids made
me nervous, too. Suddenly, I got severe abdominal cramps. I went to the ladies’
room and had to keep going there all afternoon.
It is merely an assumption and would have to be confirmed by other facts

that this girl belongs to the type which reacts to increased psychical tension with
gastrointestinal disturbances.
Later on I broke the thermos bottle. And then it was five o’clock at last. I
staggered exhausted to the trolley car. 
At home each member of my family surpassed the other in pitying me. Lina took
me in her arms and sighed: “Poor child, you have had to work so hard!” Mother
also embraced and kissed me. Father descended from his sewing table, stroked
me, looked lovingly into my eyes and kissed my forehead. Then mother cooked a
delicious meal, all my favorite dishes. But I was so exhausted that I could not
eat. That made Father excited. “Don’t you see,” he exclaimed, “she’ll break
down? If she goes to this office for only a few days, I’ll have her lying here sick
in bed! How she looks! Pale, drawn cheeks! She can’t stand that! She needs an
office where there are many young girls, where she isn’t watched so closely,
where she doesn’t have to work so hard and has a little time to amuse herself, an
office that isn’t so far from here! She isn’t going to go there again!”
Her attitude incites the pampering group to help her in her intention to give up
her position. The retreat is complete.
Just as we finished our dinner, the bell rang. Mother and Lina went to open
the door. From the kitchen, I heard the voice of a man whom I did not know.
Lina came back to the kitchen. It was the friend of the naval officer. I was
startled. I did not feel like saying two words to him and therefore asked my sister
to pretend that I had gone out. In a way, I was sorry. However, because I was
still weak from the abdominal pain of the afternoon, I was afraid of making a
bad impression. And, besides, the whole affair annoyed me.
Evasion from love and possible marriage. We must not be surprised or
become dubious when we notice that she tries to attain her goal with sound
reasons. Such reasons are often used merely as an alibi; or something occurs that
is considered a strong counter-reason. If we are certain of our interpretation, the
counter-reasons are not so important. We do not see any positive act leading to
the solution of the love problem.
Mother and Lina talked to the officer for a while. I did not move. When he
had gone, I slipped into my bed completely exhausted. I could hear Father say to
Mother that she should let me sleep as long as I wanted, so that I could
recuperate from the hardships of the day. Then I fell asleep.
The next morning Father went to the office to give notice on the pretext that
I was sick. When he asked for my papers, the manager did not give them to him,
but said I should come back to the office as soon as I felt better. However, Father
forbade me to go there. After two weeks, I received my papers back. I received
only one more letter from the naval officer written in a sad mood. Thereafter, I

did not hear from him any more. . . .
One day I went shopping downtown with a girlfriend of mine. Two young
officers addressed us on the street. We refused to talk to them, but that did not
discourage them and they inveigled us in a conversation. I went on ahead with
one of them and lost sight of the other two. The young lieutenant led me through
narrow, quiet streets. It was evening. Suddenly, he seized me and wanted to kiss
me. I resisted with all my might. He tore my veil, which I had borrowed from
Lina. I was furious and cried: “Now you leave me alone right away!” He grew
pale and apologized. I replied that I did not want to have anything to do with him
and that I did not care to see him any longer. He said he had torn my veil and
would compensate. I refused any compensation and walked away. He came after
me, apologized again, and threatened to give the money for the veil to a beggar
unless I gave him my address. I told him to do as he pleased and again left him.
But he followed right on my heels and talked and talked to me, until I relented
and even agreed to meet him again socially. In order to show off with an officer,
I decided to meet him in our neighborhood. But when I saw him waiting on the
square with a bunch of roses in his hand, I felt embarrassed. I carried the roses
bashfully with their heads down.
The justified repulse of a too aggressive officer (who certainly had a right
to expect more of girls who permitted themselves to be accosted on the street) is
followed by her agreeing to see him again in order to show him off to her
acquaintances. That illustrates again how she evades the challenge of love, how
she misuses it to feed her vanity, which is nothing more than her longing to
appear more than she really is.
He proposed going to a café. At first I did not want to. But since it was
quite chilly, I went in with him. While we were talking, he asked me if I would
not rather be alone with him. I answered that no one was disturbing us anyway.
Then he said he did not mean it that way, it was so uncomfortable here, he would
like to be all alone with me. Now I understood. “What do you mean? You can’t
have me for that! I want to go home!” He seemed indignant. We left the café.
On the street, he tried to persuade me again, and asked if I were afraid of
him. He gave me his word of honor as an officer that he would not do me any
harm. And while we were walking along, he suddenly tried to push me into a
house—I believe it was hotel. I ran away. He came after me. When he caught up
with me, I screamed at him furiously that he could not force me to do anything
he wanted, that I had never been alone with a man and had no desire to be either.
“Is that so? You don’t believe what I say!” he shouted back. “That is an insult! I
have given you my word of honor! I am not a scamp! Think it over, please!”
“I have nothing to think over. Don’t fool yourself!”

Finally, after much coaxing, I made another engagement with him. This
time, he brought his photograph. That, I thought, was silly. We rode to a park.
There he asked me at once to kiss him. I said to him: “Now, look here. I have
never kissed a man, and if I ever do, it will be only for love. But I am not in love
with you.”
“For that you don’t have to be in love. You’ll learn how to fall in love with
me, just wait. Probably you don’t even know what a real kiss is.”
That made me curious. I thought it might be a shame not to know what a
real kiss was like, and decided not to oppose him, in case he should try to steal
one from me. I did not have to wait long until he gave me a kiss. But I only felt
disgusted. Then I said to him that I was cold and wanted to go home. He was
obviously offended that his kiss had not made me warm instead of cold, and
shouted at me in an angry voice: “Either-or! Either I shall never see you again or
we shall love each other, which you certainly will not have to repent. Didn’t I
give you my word of honor as an officer? What on earth do you think I am?”
“With that sort of voice you won’t get anywhere with me. I will not—that
settles it.” 
“Think it over! I’ll give you a week’s time! And if you don’t agree, return my
picture.” 
“Your picture—there it is. Take it! Goodbye!” 
I handed it to him, turned around and went off. 
Early the next day I ran over to Tilda, told her that I had been kissed and that I
knew at last what a real kiss was. I described in detail all sorts of delight which I
had not felt at all. And then I advised her to obtain the same pleasure for herself
as soon as possible.
We see her approaching the limit of her relationships with the other sex, an
arena in which she fears defeat. She no longer has any fear about being the first
one. She wants only to play with fire. Immediately after, she boasts to Tilda and
tries to make her go over the dangerous road which she herself detests.
The evening after the kiss, I washed my mouth out thoroughly with
potassium permanganate and spit out ten times. . . . 
Tilda had a friend with whom she was quite deeply in love. That vexed me. I
tried to incite her against him; I endeavored to persuade her that he was not
suited to her. I did not succeed with this method, so I called on Minna for
assistance and suggested that she make some disparaging remarks about him to
Tilda. So she said to Tilda: “My, that boy is a homely fellow!” Tilda replied
scornfully: “I don’t care if you like him or not—as long as I like him.”
This endeavor to disturb others in their love happiness expresses her
general aversion to love and, at the same time, her inclination to be a saboteur

when she is not the center of attention. Similarly, in school spoiled children who
do not lead in classwork or games disturb the others because they feel incapable
of obtaining the leading role.
What follows is an attempt to make a joke out of the love play, which is too
dangerous to her ambition; by fooling men, she preserves her feeling of
superiority over them.
In order to change Tilda’s ideas, I took her out with me every afternoon.
We put on large hats and pressed them down on our faces. A fur which Father
had made for me covered my face up to the eyes. Tilda did the same with a fox
fur. One could see nothing of our faces but the eyes which we rolled crazily
when we met a man. We were frequently addressed by men who took us to cafes;
there we devoured a lot of pastry and afterward made our escape. One day an
elderly gentleman between forty and fifty addressed us and invited us to a
barroom. That was something new. At first we hesitated, but as we were two
against one, we thought that nothing could happen to us. An elaborately dressed
woman with bleached hair received us, whispered a few words in the
gentleman’s ear, and showed us to a little booth with a curtain in front of it. The
gentleman ordered wine. We began to feel alarmed. The curtain, however, was
not drawn. Except for a piano-player, who was just starting to play a dance, no
other person was in the restaurant. The wine had scarcely been poured into the
glasses, when Tilda whispered to me that I should be careful because the man
might perhaps have put some narcotic or exciting drug into the wine. That
sufficed to terrify me.
Although we were constantly urged to drink, we took only small sips of the
wine. We made up instead on the cookies. The man then took a seat between us.
We receded anxiously. I had already repented having accepted the invitation and
was wondering how we could manage to get away as soon as possible. The man
did not look as if he could be easily fooled. He was angry because we withdrew
from him and asked in an irritated tone what we were supposed to be here for.
We became more and more dejected. When he left the room for a moment, we
wanted to use the opportunity to get out. We deliberated on what to do in case he
attempted to rape us. There were no weapons, of course, with which we could
have defended ourselves. Tilda had the idea of attacking him if necessary with
the two empty chairs beside us. In order to be prepared in time, we laid our
hands on the armrest. After coming back, he started to sidle up to us. We
repulsed him again. He became furious, called us silly kids, impertinent
dumbbells, and accused us of having cheated him. That was very disagreeable to
us. He renewed his advances. But we succeeded in pushing him away without
the assistance of the chairs. Finally nothing remained for him to do but pay. The

lady with the yellow hair looked dumbfounded when she saw him leave the
place without having achieved his purpose. On the street, the man swore at us
again. But now we felt safe; we told him to go to hell and marched off. We were
glad to have gotten away with a mere fright and decided to be a little more
careful the next time.
Lina induced me to take dancing lessons twice a week. I let a different boy
take me home each time. But I never kissed one of them. One day Tilda came to
me with another girl and told me that there was going to be a masquerade in our
neighborhood. The three of us could go in old-fashioned Viennese costumes.
I was delighted at this idea, all the more so since I had never attended a ball.
I agreed at once, although I did not know how to arrange about getting out.
Father had always opposed my going to dances and balls because of my poor
health. Also, I had no suitable dress and by no means the money to buy a new
costume. Tilda and Gretel had prepared their white dresses and black masks;
whereas, I had not yet had the courage to tell Father about it. At the last moment,
I resolved to ask a rich girl whom I knew to lend me a dress and whatever else I
needed for the ball. She agreed, and I picked from her numerous dresses one that
seemed to be best suited for the ball. She also let me have a mask and a little fan;
patent leather shoes I had myself. I told Father that I was going to see Tilda; I
had let Mother into the secret. She also gave me the money to buy a ticket.
Tilda had already left for the ball when I came to her house with my parcel,
containing, among other things, some powder and a lipstick from Lina. Tilda’s
mother helped me dress. But since the rich girl whose dress I was going to wear
was about three times as stout as I, her dress was far too wide for me. We had to
pin it together hastily with safety-pins. Then I tried on the mask. It pressed
against my face and screwed up my eyelids. However, there was no more time to
adjust it. When I mounted the stairs to the ballroom, I noticed that all the other
girls came in accompanied by men. Only I was alone, which troubled me a little.
For that reason, I put on the mask. But I had to lift it several times in order not to
stumble.
The dance floor was packed. There was an intermission just when I entered.
I searched for my friends and soon found them. They were sitting on a bench
whispering to one another. I took a seat beside them, but they did not recognize
me. After a while I went over to Tilda and said: “How do you do, Miss Tilda.”
Both girls were quite perplexed and then very glad I had been able to come. The
music began to play; we were asked to dance and danced incessantly. We had
paid for our tickets, but unfortunately possessed not one more penny to buy
something to eat or drink. And we were both hungry and thirsty.
A gentleman with quite a bourgeois appearance asked me for a dance. He

looked much too old for me, had a funny pronunciation and did not dance very
well. However, I hoped that he would help me quench my thirst and so I talked
to him after the dance for a while. Then I introduced him to my friends. Before
that, I had whispered to Tilda; “Listen, I have caught a fish who can’t even
dance decently. But I hope he takes us to the restaurant. You two must flirt with
him.”
The gentleman did not seem exceedingly delighted to suddenly have three
girls with him instead of one. But I made him understand, either all three—or
none! Thus the four of us went to the restaurant and drank wine.
After a quarter of an hour, I asked him to excuse me and left the dancing
gentleman to my girlfriends. He soon followed me and wanted to dance with me
continuously. I escaped whenever I could.
A large cap was suspended from the ceiling at one end of the hall. The
couple that happened to pass under the cap during a dance had to get “married”;
that is, they had to kiss each other in a separate room. Most unfortunately, I
danced under the cap with the old man. But I refused to let him kiss me. I said,
“I’ll send you my girlfriend, Tilda. I don’t want to.” Tilda in turn referred him to
Gretel, who did not want to do it either. Thus the poor man was done out of a
kiss and had incurred expenses for nothing.
Afterwards I danced eagerly and received many flowers in little bunches. I
fled from one man to another. Only the mask disturbed me. I was glad when
midnight came and I could take it off. Now I danced all the more; I made several
engagements with men but I did not keep one of them. And then the ball was
over. Several young chaps asked if they might take us home. We refused
politely.
I dressed in Tilda’s house. Her mother laughed at our experience with the
poor fish, as we called him. Then I went home. Father was still awake. He made
an angry face when he saw me. I did not let him get a word in edgewise, and told
him so many funny stories about the ball that he could not help laughing. At last
he only said, “You are never to go alone to a ball. The next time I’ll go with you
if I have time. Dancing all night and then expecting others to pay for you.”
I always had to wear the same dress for my dancing lessons. For a long time
I had wanted to get a new one. But we never had enough money to buy one. I
thought my head off trying to find a way to manage to make a little money. Of
course, I did not want to be chained to an office. I simply hated office work.
Every now and then I looked through the advertisements in our newspaper.
One day I happened to see the following advertisement; “Help wanted. Easy
work. Good pay, etc.” I showed this advertisement to my parents. They did not
like the idea of my taking such a job. They asked what good it had done to send

me to business school. I replied that I cared only to make some money; how I
earned it made no difference to me.
The next day I was already sitting at a long table, stripping feathers apart. 
The other women looked at me with curious eyes. But I did not take any notice
of them and stripped my feathers mechanically. Much dust was caused by this
work which continually irritated my throat. I had to cough a lot. I tried to combat
the cough by thinking of the money that I would earn and the dress that I would
buy for it. Then I remembered a moving picture in which an assistant worker
like me married the boss. Unfortunately, my boss was a small old man with a
paunch. When I told Father about my debut as a feather-stripper, he said the job
was no good because it would endanger my lungs. I went there once again. Then
Father forbade it. I got my few cents and decided to look for another position.
I thought I had found the right one when, after some time, I read the
following advertisement: “School for moving picture actresses. Professor N. N.”
This time Lina had to accompany me. We were received by the alleged
professor, who still looked quite young, in a room decorated with red wallpaper
and a good grand piano. He asked us to attend a rehearsal first. After that he
would examine me.
Two young men and a very gay young woman came in and rehearsed a love
scene. Then it was my turn. One of the men was to be my partner and was to
represent my father, who objected to my being married. The young man
immediately commenced making grimaces. I played the sad one. And then I
imagined how I acted when Father denied me a wish. I stamped my feet on the
floor and bawled: “Don’t be so nasty!” Everyone began to laugh; they all
applauded and cried: “Excellent.” The professor thought I had much talent and
wanted to arrange to give me lessons at once. But Lina told him that she had to
talk to our parents first. When Father heard about the new plan, he was dubious
about its value. Moreover, it was impossible for him to procure the fee for
lessons. Thus, this career also found its premature end.
A little later on the idea came to my mind to become assistant to a dentist
such as Lina had been. I thought this sort of work pretty easy. Besides, I was
curious to see how people behaved when they had a tooth pulled. Soon I found
an advertisement in the paper and applied as a nurse in a dentist’s office. The
dentist, an elderly man with whiskers, did not please me. He asked me if I had
had any previous experience and I had to answer in the negative. Then he
murmured something, put down my name and address in his notebook and
dismissed me.
Two days later I got a postcard from him asking me to come see him.
Before he decided to employ me, he asked me at length about my family and

other personal details. He seemed to be a pedantic man. Then his wife came in
and looked me over. She wore a dressing gown. It was most repugnant to me to
have to shake hands with her. In addition to the tiny salary, he promised me
plentiful tips. He also told me that my predecessor had gotten married. The last
thing he did was to caution me to always have my hair neatly combed.
The following morning I had to be at his office at half past seven. The
dentist showed me the most important of his instruments, explained how to fix
the drill, etc. My head ached from seeing so many instruments. The first patient
came in. I took a place at her left, covered her neck with a small towel, and put
water in a glass. The dentist lit the little spirit flame and pumped hot air on the
tooth. I had to heat a tiny mirror over the flame so that it would not become
misty from the patient’s breath. I was so excited I held the mirror over the flame
too long, and suddenly my chief cried: “Enough! Otherwise the mirror will
crack.” My old fear of mirrors came over me like lightning. I could see the little
mirror cracked and myself burdened with seven years of misfortune. And at the
same time, I reflected on how to get away. Besides, I disliked very much the
rubber plate which served to isolate the tooth under treatment and dripped with
saliva.
At first sight the frequent change of occupation seems to be justified, but
this girl will have difficulty finding a suitable position as long as she does not
change her style of life. In the dentist’s office, her whole attention is directed
toward finding a way of escape. The old, apparently, forgotten fear of mirrors
comes in at the right time. “Besides, I also felt a strong dislike.” The famous
“besides” in a neurosis.
Finally, I had to carry out the brass pot into which the patient spit, and
sterilize the instruments. All this and the obnoxious odor of my hands sickened
me to such a degree that I could hardly eat anything for lunch.
At two o’clock I had to be back. Then the dentist showed me how to wind
absorbent cotton around a nerve needle and advised me to practice that
thoroughly. His wife appeared again, saying I was to help her mend the linen
when I had some time. I thought to myself: “You can wait a long time. What
else? All day long on my feet and in addition, mend her laundry.”
Now the parade of patients began. However, I was cheated of the spectacle
that I wanted to see most of all; no one had a tooth pulled. 
Those who feel inferior and weak want to be present at the misfortune of others.
Some children train and practice to be cruel because they are ashamed of their
weakness. They stand around shivering when a pig is slaughtered, but the
spectacle nevertheless attracts them over and over again. They intend to harden
themselves, they read continually or listen to ghost stories, and so on. The

accomplished tyrant is always a coward and a weakling as well.
I finished my work with difficulty. In the evening I went home and never returned
to the office.
Chapter XII
The Goal of Superiority
One day, while we were taking a walk, Tilda’s friend pulled her onto a
gutter drain and held her on it. Both shook with laughter. Surprised, I asked
them what that meant. Tilda answered: “Don’t you know that a girl doesn’t get
a husband if she stands on a gutter drain?” I cocked my ears at once and
thought: “Peculiar. I always disliked stepping on one of these gutter drains, sort
of a dull presentiment that it would mean mischief!” Now I believed I had found
out at last what was behind that feeling. Afraid of being pushed or pulled onto a
gutter drain like Tilda with the result of never being able to acquire a husband, I
went out with them quite reluctantly from that time on.
Again a new compulsion idea. The symptoms change like the colors of a
chameleon, adjusting themselves along neurotic lines to changing environment
and conditions. The chameleon, the neurosis, remains the same. Even if the
symptoms disappeared temporarily (and on closer inspection there would be
enough neurotic signs to discover) that would not guarantee the disappearance of
the neurosis. It signifies that the neurosis, for the time being, needs fewer
alarming symptoms or does not consider them necessary. Patients often overlook
that fact when they believe themselves to be quite cured because they have been
temporarily freed of their troublesome symptoms. Symptoms are small parts, but
we are interested in the whole human being. The criterion for a cure lies solely in
how the entire individual reacts in the future to life and its demands.
This girl goes further, step by step, in her compulsion neurosis. One
restriction follows another, each more comprehensive. The entire construction of
her neurosis is intelligent and consistent, demonstrating that even intelligence is
merely an instrument used either to overcome life’s obstacles or evade them,
depending on the goal.
She felt reluctant probably because she was not the center of the situation.
The gutter drain idea could free her from the fatal thought of being superfluous,
or one among many, showing why the logical arguments and explanations of her
friends cannot help her. The gutter drain idea has another purpose than to be
logically discussed, and the idea is perfectly correct and intelligent for this other
purpose. Private intelligence fights common sense. We find this private
intelligence throughout the reflections of all kinds of people with conduct
disorders, such as problem children (“because I don’t want to . . .”), neurotics as
in the present case, insane people (“because I am influenced by electric

currents”), criminals (because he has better clothes than I”), suicides (“because
life has no meaning”), perverts (“because perversions are a higher form of sexual
expression”), drunkards, drug addicts (because I cannot live without these
remedies”), superstitious people (“because something brings good luck or bad
luck”) and so on. All these forms of private logic serve to justify the attainment
of personal goals, but not one considers the general, human purpose of the
community. That is why they belong in a neurotic system.
Soon I could do nothing but believe in the mysterious connection between a
gutter drain and its various consequences. Even if I could have been furnished
with clear proof that this remark of Tilda’s was merely a silly saying--Finni, a
friend of Lina’s, whom I had repeatedly seen stepping on gutter drains, got
married in spite of it--even then no one could have changed my mind anymore.
My friends wondered why I made a big detour around the gutter drains or
became frightened when I saw one. When they asked me why I avoided them so
carefully, I answered: “Why, they stink so badly. I can’t stand the smell.”
One day, when we passed a gutter drain and I had shown my usual signs of
fright, I explained to a young man how my fear originated. He placed himself on
a gutter drain before my eyes and stood there for a while. That seemed so funny
to me that I had a fit of laughter. At the same time I felt sorry for him. I said to
myself: “Now he can wait a long time until he gets a wife.” There was no doubt
in my mind as to the truth of this superstition.
I noticed that there was a gutter drain near the trolley station where I had to
get off. I immediately re-entered the car and got off at the next station. Another
day I arrived at the same station with a girl who knew that we had to get off
there. I did not see any other way out of my dilemma but to jump over the drain.
In spite of this precaution, I imagined I had touched the drain with my foot. I
became very despondent, said goodbye to the girl and went straight home. I told
my parents that something terrible had happened to me. They were terrified. But
when they heard what had happened, they became almost hysterical with
laughter. Father put on his overcoat and promised to show me that he could step
on a gutter drain a hundred times. Sobbing, I answered that this was not the same
in his case since he already had a wife and therefore did not have to be afraid
anymore. It would be different if Lina were to do it. So my sister really placed
herself on a gutter drain right in front of me. But that did not quiet me. On the
contrary, I cried all the more, reproaching myself with the thought that if Lina
did not get a husband, I would be guilty.
It was often merely necessary for me to be near a gutter drain to start the
fixed idea that I had somehow touched it. Only when I had succeeded in
inducing all my friends, one after the other, to step on the drain, without letting

them know what I was aiming at, did I feel somewhat relieved. But when winter
came and the streets were covered with snow, I dared to venture out only with
the most elaborate precautions. I was continually on the watch for gutter drains
covered by snow. One evening, I felt as if I had stepped on one. I ran home in a
frenzy of despair, crying and raving. Then I returned to the spot where the
accident had happened to find out whether there really was a gutter drain. There
was none at all, just a puddle.
The fear of gutter drains made going out almost impossible for me. I had
examined my own neighborhood very carefully to see where all the drains were
located, but further out there were innumerable, unknown, spiteful gutter drains.
In spite of my apprehensiveness about going around with men, the prospect of
having to remain an old maid for the rest of my life seemed to me the most
despicable fate. “Old maid” -the mere name terrified me. In sheer desperation,
the idea came to me to retreat from this world and enter a cloister.
This fear of gutter drains places all responsibility for possible failure to find
a husband on the drain, and leaves her personal attractiveness intact. Her vanity
and pride are saved. If no one wants her, it is the fault of the gutter drain, just as
before it was the fault of the broken mirror. Children who make certain acts
responsible for failure in schoolwork frequently have similar superstitions, such
as: stepping on the dividing lines between sidewalk squares, leaping over a
number of stairs, and so on.
Almost every person can remember periods in his life when he had certain
compulsive thoughts or felt forced to do things which led him into such
difficulties. To illustrate: one man feels compelled to doubt everything he hears;
another feels compelled, under certain circumstances or at certain hours of the
day, to pray in order to maintain a mental balance; a third believes that he exists
only by means of supernatural assistance and behaves as if everything were a
present from this supernatural power. We see lighter forms of compulsive action
in ordinary superstitions compelling the person concerned to do or not do
specific things, such as: never to start a journey on Friday, never to light three
cigarettes from the same match, never to put the left shoe or stocking on before
the right, never to let a lamppost or similar street object come between him and
his companion, and the like. Later on, compulsion neuroses and phobias
occasionally branch off from such traits.
These forms of childish superstition evidently reveal an aggravated
inferiority feeling and the lack of confidence in our own strength. Now and
again, however, a successful attempt to busy ourselves on the generally useful
side of life can run parallel with the attempt to win laurels in the realm of
superstition. Success in such cases is usually attributed to a fortunate omen. For

instance, the patient who suffered from the fixed idea that his sisters might burn
to death if he did not pray for their safety from fire every night, saved his sisters
not only from burning to death, but he also constantly thought and took care of
them, which was probably the deeper purpose of his fixed idea.
He was unconsciously forced to carry out his charitable intention and he
would surely have been able to accomplish it consciously, if the meaning of this
unconscious compulsion had been made clear to him. The conscious and
unconscious are not opposite poles, as Freud thinks; thoughts passing over into
the unconscious is a means, a deception of the psyche utilized when the personal
feeling of integrity or the unity of the personality is threatened by some
conscious misinterpretation.
In the course of analysis, we have frequently seen that this girl’s psyche
resorts to all sorts of artifices to overcome real and imaginary difficulties of life,
as well as to aid in her tendency to exaggerate or falsify reality, her choice and
purposive use of experience, and similar mechanisms. The nervous psyche must
use such tricks to be able to even approach the fictive, tension-producing goal.
One of these artifices is the location of the goal in the unconscious, or the
substitution of one neurotic goal for another in the unconscious. When there
seems to be a stark contrast between the conscious and the unconscious (a fiction
which the Freudian school takes as truth), the difference is merely in the means
and has no significance in the final object of elevating the personality and
achieving the fictive goal of godliness.
We find this concept confirmed in the example of the man who prays for
his sister’s life. The conscious and unconscious pursue the same road, both
guided by the goal of superiority on the useful side of life, that is, to take care of
his sisters despite all obstacles.
Another trait in the gutter drain episode should be familiar to us. She feels
relieved when her friends deprive themselves of their chance of marrying by
stepping on the drain.
My fear of gutter drains was supplemented by the following. One day I
began to imagine that the trolley lines J and J2 would bring me misfortune.
Eventually, I added to them the numbers 13, 3, 63, 43, and the letters A, Ak, B,
Bk., D, and C, from the outskirts of the city to the center. It became absolutely
impossible for me to use these lines. I often walked many blocks, even when the
weather was bad. J and J2 were the most strictly forbidden cars--I do not use
them up to the present. I had to face the worst difficulties because of these
prohibitions which I positively had to follow. I could tell many stories about my
sufferings. One evening I got out of Car F at a crossing where I had to change to
Car II. A car came along which I thought was Car H; I am somewhat

nearsighted. I got in, and sat down. Suddenly, I was surprised to notice that the
supposed Car H ran straight down the “Loop” instead of turning into Alser
Street. I jumped up and looked at the sign. What did I read? Car D. I rushed out
and jumped off the car like one bereft of her senses. This mistake depressed me
horribly. I believed I was going to have one misfortune after another from then
on. Again I resolved to enter a cloister.
We see how she restricts her radius of action by the car phobia and, faced
with the problem of love, seeks a way to avoid possible defeat by means of a
cloister.
For the time being, however, I ironed the dress I had worn in that detested
car in order to break the wicked spell. If I had been rich, I would have thrown
away or burned all the things I had worn, including my hairpins. But I, poor
devil, had to be satisfied with ironing out that illfated dress, washing myself from
head to foot and performing a counter-magic. I repeated a number three times.
Then it became quite impossible for me to go through certain streets. When
I had to pass through one of them, I held my breath so that the air from it could
not enter me and go down my throat. And if I had already breathed, I spat out
three times and wiped my mouth with saliva. Which streets were they? I am still
afraid to name them.
Lina used to be terribly angry when I dragged her along a street in a zigzag,
and constantly forced her to make detours. 
The members of my family were also forbidden to ride in the cars with the
unfortunate numbers, or walk through streets taboo for me. If I found out that
they had done it anyway, I did not let them come near me. I remembered with
great care the clothes they had worn in those cars and streets and did not touch
them again. And if I accidentally came in contact with them, I swore and fretted,
tore off my dress and underwear, placed myself in front of the open window
without a bit of clothing on in order to catch pneumonia and die, and finally
threw myself in complete desperation on the bed.
The longing for death, closely related to suicidal tendencies, appears as a
trial solution to escape defeat in the love problem. As always, this attempt results
from a tendency to exclude life when all other ways to a satisfactory solution of
life’s problems seem blocked. Instead of overcoming her difficulties by means of
creative power and choice of a generally useful occupation, which would also
help her overcome her feeling of inferiority, she chooses to detach herself from
and condemn the community and its offering, revenge herself on those who
stand in her way, and acquire a fleeting feeling of superiority in experiencing
mastery over her life and death. These choices represent the confession of the
weakling, of the hopeless.

The streetcar phobia, and the way this girl builds it up, again gives her power
over her family, the weakest part in her environment.
I was once walking along a certain street and grazed a woman carrying a
handbag. The idea suddenly struck me that she might live on one of those
forbidden streets. I followed her to see whether I was right or not, but eventually
lost track of her.
I did not visit the moving picture theatres on that street any more. There
might be people from forbidden streets in them. Not even a fine program could
induce me. Then a number of coffee restaurants in different sections of the city
became so repugnant to me that I closed my mouth and nose when I had to pass
them. One day I forgot to protect myself in this manner in front of the Café
Central. I remembered afterward that I had passed this place and that a disastrous
wind had blown on me from the revolving door of the Café. I felt as if I had been
poisoned and turned about, raced home, flung my hat in a corner, tore off my
clothing, cleaned my face with soap and water, and washed out my mouth.
The streets abhorrent to me bred as rapidly as rabbits. I already detested a
whole district. When people from this forbidden district came to see us, I felt as
if I were in a room with people infected with the plague, whose mere breath
brought ruin and who infected everything they touched. I would never use a
chair on which one of them had sat. At last, nothing remained for me to use but
my own tattered and torn easychair which I guarded like a dragon. If someone
showed the slightest intention of sitting on it, I made a great fuss and prevented
him. I dragged the chair with my own hands from the kitchen to the living room
to use when I played the piano. My clothes were not allowed to be put on
another chair.
One day Mother was making hash. I was delighted in spite of the fact that it
was horsemeat. While she was serving some of the hash to me, she accidentally
brushed her arm against the armrest of a chair on which a forbidden person had
been seated a short while before. I was furious and did not eat one bite of hash.
That made Mother so angry that she almost threw the whole pot on the floor.
Remarkably, even her love for the good midday meals her mother cooks
cannot lessen her fear of uncleanliness. We might think that a strong desire, like
one for physical pleasure, would have enough power to suppress at least
temporarily her lust for power. That would be a superficial thought. Man is a
unity. He does not consist of two or three wishes, fighting each other, with one
or another conquering from time to time; he has only one goal and everything he
does aims toward this goal. In the patient’s opinion, if physical pleasure can be
used as a means toward this goal, such pleasure will be utilized or any other
means which seems practical. But here the physical desire is unimportant in her

struggle toward her objective, superiority, so her desire is disregarded and
secondarily used to illuminate her difficulties which makes her struggle for
superiority such an exhausting one. Our girl eats hash with great relish, and
when she refuses to eat it, she regards her sacrifice as a heroic act, extracting an
additional bit of superiority.
Plates, cups, forks and knives used by forbidden people I never touched
again. Mother had to stow away such utensils in another place apart from the
rest of the pots and pans, so that I could always easily recognize them as
untouchable for me. I grew accustomed to eating with knives, forks and spoons
used only by me and had plates only for my use, just as during the time of my
lupus phobia. If someone I did not like or anyone of my family happened to touch
one of my things after being contaminated by touching or using one of the
obnoxious objects, I did not touch my things any more. Mother had to buy new
implements.
One Saturday night something happened which “soiled” my specific knife
and fork. I immediately began to rave and scold Mother because she had not
been careful enough. The stores were already closed. It was impossible to buy
me another set of eating utensils. Mother borrowed a fork from a neighbor.
To evade direct contact with all forbidden people who came to the house, I
would withdraw to the bedroom. There I felt as if the evil eye which I ascribed
to them penetrated the wall and brought misfortune upon me. So I went to bed
and crept under the blankets.
When misfortune happens because of the evil eye, of course, she is not
responsible. The evil eye is to blame. What patients call bad luck is usually their
own mistakes and stupidities, the cause of which they seek somewhere outside
instead of inside. The evil eye is one of those goblins which would become a real
danger for a neurotic only if it were absent or could not be resorted to.
Certain stores were also prohibited and Mother was not allowed to shop in
them. When I suspected that she had bought supplies in such a store, I cross-
examined her, asked her the most cunning questions, and set traps for her like a
detective. When I found out that she had lied to me, I swore at her in abusive
language and behaved as if I had lost my head.
We remember that her use of abusive language began in her childhood (her
first neurosis commenced with swearing). At that time, she did it secretly and
her conscience pricked her afterward. Now she feels her swearing justified and
does not bother to conceal it. Obviously, the neurosis is progressing.
After the slightest contact with forbidden people or things, I washed myself.
We could have predicted that the last stage of this phobia would be a
washing compulsion. Quite in contradistinction to the mentally defective, she

proves her intelligence by choosing an intelligent plan for attaining her goal.
This girl appears superior again in the washing compulsion. She is the only
clean human being in the world. Everyone else is dirty. Again, we see the
parallel between the conscious and the unconscious. Unconsciously, the striving
for power is a cheap, hidden road to superiority, customary among pampered
children. The conscious aversion to the dirt of others expresses the unconscious
road to superiority. The result is that the patient, without quite comprehending
the full meaning of her actions, is the only one clean and superior. She would not
deny it if we told her so, but she would constantly reiterate and point to her
torments. The more she is tormented by the dirt of others, the cleaner she
remains.
I frequently washed my whole body. I never again used a piece of soap
which fell on the floor. My parents and Lina were not permitted to wash
themselves with this cake of soap either. So the soap which had fallen on the
floor accumulated and soon there was a pile of unusable soap.
I had a number of garments which I could no longer wear. I gave some of
them to Mother. But she was not allowed to come near me when she wore any of
them.
At home I wore an old, torn dress consisting of a green, worn-out skirt and
a red blouse much too tight for one. I wore a pair of Bohemian slippers; if I
could have managed it, I would never have taken them off. Thus I sat like
Cinderella in a corner of the kitchen on my broken chair with the rusty nails, in
front of me all the things whose mere presence seemed pernicious to me, all the
objects bewitched by the touch of residents of those execrated districts and
streets, outside the gutter drains, streets, houses, gas lampposts, coffee
restaurants, trolley cars, stores threatening with their wicked magi; danger,
mischief, and misfortune dogged my steps.
She describes her suffering with much skill and penetration. An antisocial,
selfish life never leads to pleasure in the power which has been won over a few
people at the expense of so much exertion. She sits like a tyrant on a throne
which can be overturned at any moment; she rules by fear and is ruled by fear.
She has to make her position in the “enemy country” secure by cunning and
brute force. She has no real friends, no help, merely oppressed subordinates who,
she instinctively feels, would desert her if they could. No confidence, no candor,
no love comes to her, only obscure mistrust, unwillingness of those she has
made into servants, and dangerous counter pressure. The protecting measures
which have been arranged for her own security become weapons in the hands of
her enemies. The more she thinks of her security and how to preserve if, the
more insecure she becomes.

The suffering of the neurotic grows to an unbelievable torment and drives
him into those great crises in which he either breaks down or hardens himself to
the point where he becomes psychotic; or where he reaches the point of dim
comprehension of the faulty construction of his happy struggle for recognition
and then seeks enlightenment.
Socalled logical arguments are of no avail in attempting to free this girl of
her compulsion ideas and compulsion acts. She must be shown, step by step, the
real construction of her behavior as we see it. She would have to learn to
recognize what the purpose of her symptoms is and what she achieves thereby;
that she wants unconsciously to detach herself by compulsion from the
compulsion of communal demands; that she has built a secondary battlefield in
her intense desire to avoid the principal battlefield of life; that she wants to fritter
away her time so as to have none left for the accomplishment of her daily tasks;
that she intends to evade life’s demands with excuses, curses, alibis or ostensibly
good reasons. In addition, the erroneous views acquired in her childhood must be
set aside; her exaggerated ambition and vanity, and the tendency to isolate
herself must all be explained to her with great delicacy and tact. She can then be
led to change her style of life by unmasking the technical apparatus of her
compulsion neurosis and helping her understand the whole course and
consistency of her conduct.
I started to menstruate unusually late. All my friends had started long ago.
Olga, for example, had her period when she was fourteen. I remember that very
well. One day she took my hand, and while her eyes twinkled, led me into the
bathroom and suddenly lifted her skirts. I saw bloodstains on her bloomers.
“What do you think of that?” she asked proudly. I was quite depressed and
resolved to tell her in about two weeks that I was so far, too. Later on, I always
made my friends believe I had already begun menstruating. However, year after
year went by and the period did not set in.
Most likely, an innate inferiority of her sexual organs, for which there was
apparently no compensation, was responsible for the retardation of her
menstruation. This inferiority was probably indicated on other parts of her body.
My parents were quite worried and had me examined by a doctor. The
doctor ordered hot sitz baths. When I was seventeen, the function finally set in.
When I discovered the signs, I ran at once to Father and told him. He embraced
me happily and said, “Now you are a grown-up girl. You are no longer a child.
We must celebrate that.” And my first menstruation was celebrated by a good
supper.
I frequently had a depressing dream. I dreamt that Father or Mother were
very sick. I woke up crying in the middle of the night, burdened with a bad

conscience, and it took me a long time to fall asleep again. While I tossed in bed
from one side to the other, I resolved to change myself, assist my parents with
their work, go run errands for Father, and help Mother with her housework.
Most children occasionally dream about the death or serious illness of one
of their parents. To interpret such a dream by the saying, “The wish is father to
the thought,” is the privilege of a schematic, insinuating psychology. On rare
occasions, this interpretation is correct. However, we will make such a decision
only when the general mood of the dream speaks for it and, most of all, when the
behavior of the dreamer otherwise justifies such an interpretation. A mitigation
of the death-wish can be found at such times when, in spite of a strongly
antagonistic attitude toward the parents, such a dream occurs as part of severe
depression and sadness. This would be a sign that the child’s struggle against the
parents does not go so far as to wish for the parents’ death. This dream usually
attempts to foresee the future. What will happen when my parents die?
Permit me at this point to insert a few general remarks on the purpose and
significance of dreams. The dream is an obvious fiction in which a person
arranges advance attempts and tests for controlling a future situation or solving a
future problem. It is a fiction because an individual never views a dream
situation in accordance with reality, but always transposes it as if it were reality
and always as he would like to have it; he never really approaches reality, but
tests his abilities under the influence of the dream and attempts a trial solution in
it. A person dreaming is not different from a person awake; the only difference is
in the form of expression. In his waking life he occupies himself with the
present, in dreams (daydreams or dreams in sleep) he busies himself with the
future by means of the past, that is to say by his experiences. Dreaming, he
thinks in advance. And the way in which he thinks in advance mirrors
graphically the psychic attitude of the dreamer, his courage, his adjustment to his
environment, his character traits and their neurotic evasions, his own peculiar
way of facing problems. The dream creates a mood whose purpose is to
encourage or discourage the dreamer in approaching his problem. Such moods
appear in gradations from anxiety to indifference to outspoken courage. All the
dreams of an individual agree with his style of life; they belong to a system and
form part of the individual unity. Conscious thought has little to do in a dream.
The criticism and opposition of the sleeping sense organs are silenced. Thought
in the dream is more abstract, simplified and symbolized, inclined toward a more
childish state, as it were. The dream must remain unintelligible to the dreamer to
protect the unity of his personality, to preserve the mood aroused in him, and to
veil the goal and direction of the dreamer in the unconscious.
I do not have sufficient space her to explain more in detail the means used

in dreams to accomplish their objective, to explain the technique of dream
interpretation. It will suffice to indicate that the dream, like every other soul
manifestation, can be employed to gain insight into the psychic machinery of a
human being.
In our case, the girl is apparently anxious about her future. She needs her
parents to be able to maintain a feeling of superiority. Although she emphasizes
in the following paragraphs that the frequently recurring dream left no
impression on the following day, the mood produced in the dream and its
frequent repetition, a distinctly emotional training, has surely alleviated her
attitude toward her parents. Therefore, this dream signifies a degree of social
feeling, interest in her parents.
In the morning, however, everything was forgotten again. The day, the
light, the morning blotted out my feelings. At this time, I had another tormenting
worry. I fancied I was extremely old. Sometimes I wondered seriously whether it
would not be best to end my life. Then I said to myself: “The years are passing
by so quickly and misfortune approaches at a rapid pace.” I never told my true
age. Such thoughts came to me especially before falling asleep. Sometimes I
woke up frightened, my age flashed into my mind and I thought: “How
wonderful it would be to be born now!”
So old, and nothing done yet for immortality!
The thoughts mentioned obviously touch the problem of love for which she
does not feel prepared because of her exaggerated desire to rule. Then she looks
back at those ideal times when, in early childhood, the pampered girl actually
possessed unlimited power and did not have to face new problems.
Father had had a weak heart for many years. When he was fiftyeight, the
malady suddenly grew worse. He would frequently jump out of bed at night, and
rush to the window struggling for breath. During the day, he was also often
short of breath. Then he would stop working and have Mother take him for a
walk. Up to that time, he had never rested during the day. Now he always lay
down for an hour after dinner. Gradually, he seemed to lose all interest in his
family. Every now and then, we heard him complain of being concerned about
me. I gave no thought to the morrow, like a child, and there was no money in the
house. Father felt that he did not have much longer to live and spoke of it, too.
But I could not comprehend the seriousness of his disease. I never thought that
he might die. Soon he was hardly able to stand on his legs any more. Lina and
the doctor had to give him injections which refreshed him for a while, but the
improvement never lasted long.
Father was very restless in bed. He could not live without his tailoring
business. My sister was on vacation and nursed him. She and Mother alternately

sat up with him during the night. I always stayed awake until about eleven
o’clock; then I grew so tired that I had to go to bed.
To protect himself from becoming cold, Father wrapped a broad gray shawl
around his chest. This shawl unfortunately belonged to the objects which I could
not touch. I asked Mother in vain to take something else for this purpose. She
said that the shawl was just right. So I could not embrace and kiss Father any
more, which I wanted so much to do. I was even afraid to come near him; later
on I regretted it many times although it was absolutely impossible for me to act
differently.
For a short while, it seemed he was going to recover in spite of everything.
We put him in a comfortable chair and he told me a lot of funny stories about his
boyhood. Everyone laughed and we all hoped again. But the next day, he was
again in a somnolent state, sitting upright in his bed. I often saw him moving his
hands in restless sleep, as if he were sewing. One evening he arose suddenly,
staggered to the sewing table in the kitchen, and stretched out his trembling
hands for a coat. We asked him to go back to bed. His feet were already swollen.
My parents were still not married. Mother was much troubled that I might
remain an illegitimate child. Then the doctor left her in no further doubt as to
Father’s condition; I only learned about this afterward, and prepared her for the
worst. Mother talked matters over with Olga’s mother. This woman ran straight
for a priest. She learned from him that a marriage ceremony that evening at eight
o’clock could be performed upon producing a certificate from a physician. Our
doctor wrote out such a certificate. But it was difficult for Mother to speak to
Father about the impending marriage ceremony. I remember her saying, “Look
here, dear; you know we are not married yet—what will become of our Clara?”
Father murmured, “yes”, once in a while and nodded his head to what she said.
When I heard that the ceremony was going to take place that very day, I was
glad despite my grief. At last—I was almost eighteen years old—I would be able
to use Father’s name. Until that time, I had always told others that that was my
name anyway. But now it really would be mine.
We bought two candles, borrowed a crucifix from a neighbor, a pious old
woman, got some holy water, and put these things on a table covered with a
white tablecloth. Everybody was very excited. I trembled all over. At eight
o’clock the priest came with the sacristan who had to serve as witness as well.
During the ceremony, Lina and I remained in the kitchen. Before leaving, the
priest spoke to Lina and me and asked us to come to confession to him.
The ceremony exhausted Father, especially because he had to confess and
receive extreme unction at the same time. Mother wanted to make him believe
he was not very sick. Completely spent, he whispered that everything was all

right, but would she please spare him the sight of the priest in the future.
A few days later, I was visiting Minna in the evening when Mother came
into the room and said in a sad voice that I should go home with her as Father
was sinking. Mrs. K. accompanied us. Father was asleep, sitting up in bed. I sat
down beside him quietly. His breath was heavy and slow. Then I stole away to
the kitchen. From time to time Mother came into my room. I did not know that
the doctor had told her Father would not live through the night. Suddenly, I
heard mother cry, “Father! Father!” I rushed into the room and could just see
Father falling back onto his pillows. Lina embraced him. He had taken his last
breath. I threw myself over his bed, kissed him, called for him, begged him to
forgive me. I did not want to let go of him. Lina had to carry me out. When I got
to the kitchen, I felt nauseous and vomited.
Again we see that she belongs to the type of person who responds to
excitement with nervous disturbances in the digestive apparatus. All our inner
organs are supplied by a separate nervous system, the involuntary nervous
system which is older in evolution than the central nervous system and was
formerly supposed to be the seat of life. When we are joyous and our heart beats
more quickly as a consequence, when we blush with shame, perspire with fear or
have a stomachache because we dread something, it is because of the activity of
the “emotional” nerves which have been correctly classified as the sympathetic
nervous system (N. sympathicus). In some cases, this involuntary nervous
system is abnormally sensitive (an organ inferiority) and consequently functions
more strongly than usual. We might add, however, that the source of irritation
lies in the psychic structure of such people, in their style of life. In such cases a
minor irritation produces a major reaction in those organs attached to this nerve
system: the heart, the bladder, perspiration glands or digestive apparatus, as in
the case of this girl.
In order to treat such disturbances successfully, we must go back to the
psychic source and from that point, change the patient. If we find, as in this case,
that the super-strong desires of the patient increase the psychic tension, then we
have to change her whole style of life. We can accomplish this change only by
strengthening her social feeling. Her private intelligence will be transformed into
common sense in direct proportion to the strength of her social feeling. She will
feel at home with and agree to the problems of life with all their advantages and
disadvantages and lose her anxiety. From now on she will no longer live in a
hostile world and no longer depend for her self-esteem on the opinions of others.
On the useful side of life, she will feel herself a respected human being, and her
feeling of inferiority will be reduced to the point where it can be well utilized as
an impetus to useful accomplishments.

The room windows were opened; a candle was lit. We crouched in a corner
of the kitchen side by side, weeping and unable to sleep. When Mrs. K. left us, a
neighbor came to take her place. We lay down only at dawn. We were stiff all
over. The next day, when I woke up, I felt as if there were a great weight on my
mind. I went to Father, stroked and kissed him and put his cover in order. He
looked so peaceful, not at all like a dead man. At night the men came with a
coffin, laid Father in it and carried him away. We were afraid to sleep at home,
so we slept for a few nights at Mrs. K’s. Mother told us that she had had a vision
of a skeleton two nights before Father’s death.
In the chapel at the cemetery, I saw Father for the last time. His body was
not altered. I still could not believe that he was dead. I stood in front of the
coffin and expected him to open his eyes.
I was always looking at Father’s work table. I could not comprehend his
being dead. I thought he might merely have seemed dead. Mother and I locked
ourselves in the bedroom at night. Saturday night the key to this room broke; we
could not open the door the following morning. Mother called for the janitor
through the window and let down a cord on which to hang all sorts of keys.
None of them fitted. Finally a plumber opened the door for us.
I longed terribly for Father; I cried without ceasing. Frequently, I woke up
frightened in the middle of the night; I could not breathe and felt grieved to
death.
We can feel with the girl how deeply the separation from her father
disturbed her. As long as he lived, he was the pedestal on which she had built her
triumph. From now on, her mother has to replace him inasmuch as she is fitted
for the position.
Then I dreamed that a dog with a muzzle bored his snout into me and
turned and twisted it around. It gave me an extremely painful sensation. I turned
on the light looking, to see whether I was bleeding or hurt anywhere. But I did
not find anything. This dream was repeated frequently.
I also dreamed many times of a tall, bearded man standing at the foot of my
bed, and woke up frightened to death. I could see him as distinctly as if he were
really there.
And then I saw in my dreams a flower rising slowly and bending toward
me, one single flower with five leaves like fingers. Again I woke up full of
anxiety.
We could interpret these dreams correctly only if she gave us some
information about her thoughts and remembrances in association with the dream
material. However, we have two important supporting points. We know her life
style and the problems that oppress her, and we can understand the mood

emanating from her dreams. Correctly interpreted, these dreams should give
evidence of the road she is using as a bridge to her goal of superiority, away
from the road of logic and common sense. The moods springing from these
dreams should also aim in the same direction.
In the first dream, we find love as the present central problem in the life of
this girl. Her aim is to escape union with a man. We can safely assume that the
dog represents a man. We frequently find a similar tendency to degrade in
dreams. Because she has clearly demonstrated this tendency in former parts of
her life story and because as we have read before, she occasionally has called a
man a dog, our assumption is certainly justified. The muzzle is a little confusing.
But if we remember that she always endeavored to provide men with a muzzle,
to play tricks on them, to eliminate dangers and evade possible consequences,
our attention will be more strongly directed to the fact that her “yes-but” has not
only had a reinforcement of the “yes,” but also a reinforcement of the “but.” The
pain and the fear of being hurt, of bleeding, lead her to assume that no
precautionary measure is sufficient.
The second dream, also frequently repeated, permits the conclusion that in
the mood of the dream she is alone with a man. As a precaution, this man is not
pictured as friendly, either. It is impossible to identify him at this place.
However, the second dream confirms the conclusions drawn from the first
dream.
The third dream is ambiguous. We will go only so far as to suppose that the
situation represents a hand stretching out after her. Here again we find the
threatening approach and purposive generation of anxiety which characterizes
the life of this girl plainly enough as the life of a pampered child.
Here the story ends and with it our analysis. I emphasized at the beginning
of the book that we were not concerned here with the complete biography of a
human being, but merely with a portion of a life story. We were more interested
in seeking what we could extract from the material given than in the
completeness of the story. In private consultations as well, we learn nothing
more than parts of life stories from which we must draw our conclusions. I have
tried to give the reader a picture of the procedure followed in a psychological
analysis. I want my reader to see how a psychologist armed with a store of
experience listens to, apprehends, works over, and understands an ordinary and
otherwise insignificant life story. The very ordinariness of this biography is
significant in illustrating how much a psychologist can get out of it.
A patient whose life is so confused can be cured only by thorough
understanding of how the condition developed. In addition, our task is to give a
patient the insight which we have won ourselves by means of experience and

common sense. Such a procedure encourages him. He merely needs to use
common sense to understand. Because common sense is much rarer than the
word implies, we must beware, in attempts at analysis, of premature inferences.
Superficial, mistaken judgments serve to discredit those who make them.
As I have said, I was much more concerned with the events and results of
this partial biography than with the completion of the story. I fear, however, that
an incomplete story will not satisfy most of my readers. The human intellect
strives toward fulfillment; an unfinished fragment stimulates the imagination to
create for itself a suitable ending. As much as I would like to help the reader in
this respect, I know no more than he does. As I said in my preface, I have never
seen this girl. All that I know about her has been written by her and by me in the
present book. She mentions her present condition only once in the story; namely,
when she tells us that to this very day she still cannot bring herself to use certain
street cars. We may assume from that remark that her compulsion neurosis has
probably improved a great deal, but has not entirely disappeared.
Experience also teaches us that when a person has done a rightabout-face
and set foot on the road to normal conduct, she progresses along this road in the
right direction as quickly as she retrogressed before in the wrong direction. Just
as every step into a neurosis inevitably destroys courage, every step out of a
neurosis builds up courage and with it strength and social feeling. That idea
agrees with what I have heard about the writer of this story; namely, that insofar
as she has been able to help herself without the aid of a psychologist, she has
freed herself of her compulsion neurosis, and is taking courageous steps to solve
her difficult life problems. I shall leave to the imaginative power, psychological
understanding, and intuition of my readers to divine how.
Index
A

abnormality................................................................................................................................... 75 above
................................. 2, 4, 27, 35, 57, 119, 126, 132, 147, 149, 169, 172, 176, 199, 240, 283
abuse....................................................................................................................... 36, 73, 108, 232 accusation
................................................................................15, 16, 53, 58, 78, 90, 110, 120, 131
accuse...................................................................................................................... 15, 121, 269 
achievement................................................................................................................ 4, 26, 87, 150 
acquisition ............................................................................................................................ 35, 161 
activity...3, 5, 8, 9, 10, 20, 22, 26, 31, 33, 48, 51, 53, 64, 68, 70, 73, 79, 80, 81, 86, 106, 150, 169, 195, 230,
233, 245, 251, 266, 268, 316 
active ..................................................................................................... 104, 134, 173, 202, 230 
adapt ..................................................................................................................... 13, 37, 46, 74, 90
adaptation ...........................................................................6, 13, 22, 27, 31, 32, 34, 43, 98, 107 
addiction ............................................................................................................................... 16, 146 
adjustment ...........................................12, 36, 50, 51, 75, 80, 90, 98, 104, 114, 143, 145, 223, 313 
adolescence............................................................................................................................. 45, 81 
affection.............................................................................53, 76, 77, 129, 154, 162, 198, 204, 286 
aggression..............................................................................17, 102, 120, 121, 147, 173, 246, 284 
agoraphobia .......................................................................................5, 20, 60, 62, 92, 94, 148, 265 
alcohol 
alcoholism ......................................................................................................................... 16, 89 
alibi............................................................................................................. 146, 170, 222, 284, 294 
altruism....................................................................................................................................... 204 
ambition............10, 15, 26, 39, 40, 55, 71, 93, 94, 99, 117, 146, 222, 229, 248, 278, 289, 297, 312 
ambitious...........28, 35, 39, 55, 91, 106, 116, 117, 120, 122, 123, 125, 171, 220, 230, 244, 248 
ambivalence.......................................................................................................................... 57, 132 
anger.............................................................. 15, 20, 24, 29, 34, 38, 39, 40, 59, 132, 199, 244, 245 
antithesis..................................................................................................................................... 132 
antithetical............................................................................................................................. 147 
anxiety ...3, 5, 8, 20, 21, 24, 37, 55, 60, 62, 72, 74, 80, 92, 102, 117, 118, 129, 163, 165, 168, 181, 190, 194,
199, 206, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222, 226, 253, 257, 262, 313, 317, 318 anxious ................................... 4, 35,
71, 100, 158, 166, 195, 201, 218, 248, 259, 275, 284, 314 
arrangement..................................................... 12, 89, 138, 139, 147, 173, 204, 248, 250, 273, 276 
arrogance .............................................................................................................................. 21, 102 
art 22, 26, 27, 51, 59, 60, 70, 96, 103, 123, 150, 200, 205, 234, 267 
artist................................................................................................................................. 23, 241 
artists ........................................................................................................... 23, 37, 67, 145, 200 
as if 32, 42, 44, 45, 67, 85, 86, 88, 89, 104, 108, 109, 130, 138, 153, 161, 162, 164, 165, 166, 170, 171, 175,
180, 187, 188, 194, 199, 208, 220, 238, 247, 250, 253, 258, 259, 262, 263, 267, 285, 292, 297, 305, 308,
309, 310, 313, 315, 317, 318
assertion...................................................................................................................................... 161 
association ............................................................................................................................ 33, 318 
assumption..................... 4, 11, 48, 51, 148, 162, 167, 179, 181, 187, 198, 236, 274, 280, 293, 318 
assumptions........................................................................................................................... 115 
asthma .................................................................................................................................... 64, 88
attention.9, 15, 17, 23, 24, 25, 43, 46, 52, 53, 56, 59, 60, 62, 63, 64, 65, 67, 72, 77, 82, 84, 87, 88, 
90, 93, 98, 100, 106, 115, 134, 139, 151, 152, 153, 154, 156, 157, 160, 163, 169, 170, 176, 
179, 187, 193, 194, 196, 197, 199, 210, 237, 246, 250, 268, 269, 282, 287, 296, 301, 318 attitude.2, 3, 4, 5,
7, 9, 11, 13, 14, 15, 27, 28, 32, 33, 34, 36, 37, 38, 39, 41, 42, 44, 49, 51, 52, 57, 
58, 59, 61, 64, 68, 69, 71, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 80, 85, 86, 87, 90, 92, 94, 99, 100, 101, 102, 
104, 107, 109, 114, 115, 120, 122, 123, 125, 127, 134, 139, 142, 145, 147, 149, 150, 151, 152, 

161, 181, 194, 198, 200, 201, 202, 204, 211, 224, 236, 243, 245, 247, 254, 266, 272, 276, 283, 
284, 292, 294, 313, 314 
avoiding.......................................................................................................... 68, 96, 119, 145, 171 
avoidance ................................................................................................................ 85, 104, 119 
awareness ............................................................................................................................. 96, 108 
awkward ..................................................................................................................................... 276

B
beauty ............................................................................32, 155, 164, 179, 181, 233, 254, 256, 274
becoming .....................................................................................38, 55, 87, 99, 104, 161, 189, 315 being....2,
3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 14, 21, 22, 26, 30, 31, 32, 36, 39, 40, 43, 44, 45, 50, 56, 58, 62, 63, 65, 67,
70, 72, 73, 75, 77, 78, 80, 81, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 93, 96, 102, 104, 105, 106, 117, 121, 128, 
132, 134, 139, 147, 148, 151, 157, 158, 160, 162, 165, 168, 172, 173, 177, 180, 185, 197, 198, 
199, 202, 204, 207, 208, 214, 221, 225, 228, 235, 236, 237, 244, 246, 248, 254, 255, 263, 264, 
267, 282, 286, 290, 296, 300, 303, 307, 309, 310, 314, 317, 318, 319 
belief........................................ 30, 40, 41, 42, 71, 72, 77, 78, 86, 90, 109, 145, 173, 216, 236, 264
below ...................................................................................................... 2, 18, 33, 43, 57, 147, 172 
blind............................................................................................................ 101, 169, 252, 254, 255 
blindness ............................................................................................................................... 255 
blushing .................................................................................................................... 82, 83, 87, 277 
body..................................... 27, 42, 43, 74, 119, 143, 144, 187, 188, 218, 268, 271, 311, 312, 317

C
case....2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19, 25, 26, 27, 29, 30, 33, 34, 35, 36, 38, 39,
46, 49, 53, 55, 56, 58, 60, 61, 64, 65, 67, 70, 71, 72, 73, 75, 76, 77, 78, 80, 81, 82, 85, 86, 87, 
88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 94, 96, 97, 102, 103, 104, 106, 108, 109, 113, 114, 115, 116, 119, 122, 124, 
128, 130, 132, 133, 138, 140, 142, 147, 152, 153, 160, 164, 169, 184, 200, 216, 218, 225, 261, 
263, 266, 272, 277, 284, 296, 297, 304, 314, 316
cases ...3, 8, 10, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 28, 33, 34, 36, 39, 40, 44, 46, 47, 53, 59, 63, 67, 69, 70, 75, 77, 79, 81,
82, 84, 85, 86, 88, 90, 91, 93, 97, 99, 102, 103, 104, 108, 110, 115, 117, 118, 120, 123, 126, 128, 135, 143,
144, 148, 153, 154, 165, 168, 180, 191, 193, 194, 206, 208, 231, 238, 283, 306, 316 
castration ...................................................................................................................................... 44 
catatonic 
catatonia .................................................................................................................................. 11 
causality.............................................................................................................................. 132, 185 
caution ........................................................................................................................ 268, 281, 301 
central nervous system................................................................................................................ 316 
change9, 14, 17, 21, 35, 36, 39, 44, 59, 63, 64, 65, 78, 81, 108, 134, 149, 151, 169, 172, 203, 211, 
235, 246, 251, 261, 279, 297, 301, 303, 307, 312, 316 
character ......20, 21, 25, 27, 55, 61, 63, 64, 70, 77, 97, 99, 100, 103, 104, 105, 134, 144, 146, 147, 
171, 173, 180, 193, 194, 200, 219, 220, 247, 248, 273, 313 
character traits ....................................................................................... 146, 173, 180, 200, 313 
characteristics................... 47, 57, 60, 64, 76, 114, 122, 127, 128, 154, 173, 193, 200, 204, 246 
child.4, 13, 14, 15, 17, 20, 21, 23, 24, 27, 31, 34, 35, 37, 38, 40, 42, 43, 45, 49, 50, 52, 53, 57, 59, 
60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 67, 69, 70, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 82, 88, 92, 93, 96, 98, 99,
100, 110, 116, 118, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 136, 138, 139, 142, 144, 145, 151, 
152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 
176, 177, 178, 179, 180, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 189, 195, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 
205, 206, 208, 209, 210, 211, 213, 224, 225, 227, 228, 229, 234, 236, 244, 251, 263, 266, 271, 
276, 277, 279, 280, 282, 290, 291, 293, 312, 313, 314, 315, 318 
children 4, 5, 6, 14, 15, 22, 23, 24, 25, 28, 29, 34, 37, 38, 39, 40, 42, 43, 46, 53, 56, 57, 58, 61, 63, 67, 69,
70, 72, 74, 76, 77, 79, 81, 82, 86, 94, 96, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 104, 107, 109, 110, 116, 117, 118, 120, 121,
122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 132, 134, 138, 139, 153, 156, 158, 160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 170,
172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 183, 184, 186, 187, 188, 189, 190, 195, 198, 202, 203, 207, 209,
210, 211, 213, 214, 216, 218, 220, 221, 223, 225, 227, 228, 230, 231, 239, 242, 275, 282, 283, 284, 286,
296, 302, 310, 312 
choice .............................. 16, 23, 24, 59, 68, 73, 79, 97, 98, 99, 106, 180, 184, 206, 282, 306, 308 
clean ..................................................................................................... 68, 118, 130, 148, 216, 310 
cleaning ..................................................................................................................... 9, 118, 269 
cleanliness ..................................................................................... 118, 119, 120, 148, 183, 216 
collective .................................................................................................................... 162, 200, 213 
common sense11, 19, 24, 32, 48, 52, 82, 84, 89, 108, 144, 145, 150, 179, 249, 252, 283, 303, 316, 
318, 319 
community...........................................................142, 143, 144, 204, 217, 249, 282, 291, 304, 308
communal.....................................................................22, 23, 52, 108, 168, 248, 249, 284, 312 
communal life ....................................................................................... 108, 168, 248, 249, 284 
comparison ................................................................................................................. 110, 160, 172 
compensation.....6, 21, 23, 24, 28, 55, 68, 81, 90, 96, 143, 144, 145, 146, 161, 165, 175, 187, 295, 

312 
compensatory ...................................................................................... 2, 23, 143, 144, 165, 180 
competition............................................................................................... 10, 33, 38, 65, 67, 75, 82 
completion.................................................................................................................................. 319 
complex ...........................................................................17, 36, 40, 44, 55, 94, 114, 154, 256, 258 
compulsion 8, 10, 25, 26, 68, 81, 103, 117, 118, 119, 127, 132, 135, 138, 146, 166, 168, 177, 216, 
232, 235, 245, 247, 248, 249, 251, 255, 282, 303, 306, 311, 319, 320 
compulsive .............................................................................117, 148, 167, 198, 247, 279, 305 
concentrate ..................................................................................................................... 43, 80, 240 
concentration........................................................................................................... 8, 24, 37, 60 
concept ............................................................................................................................... 182, 306 
conception ........................ 2, 11, 13, 21, 22, 27, 59, 99, 108, 114, 143, 173, 198, 207, 272, 283 
conflict.................................................................................................................... 34, 62, 120, 245
conscience .............................................................................26, 168, 169, 182, 254, 272, 310, 312 
conscious ....20, 23, 43, 50, 79, 91, 93, 104, 106, 108, 136, 144, 162, 184, 194, 208, 216, 306, 310 
consciousness.............................................................................3, 4, 14, 34, 37, 44, 56, 96, 108 
constitution ......................................................................................................................... 158, 236 
contact13, 14, 21, 25, 32, 52, 96, 101, 106, 107, 145, 152, 180, 190, 249, 259, 260, 264, 266, 271, 
285, 292, 307, 309, 310 
contempt ..................................................................................................................................... 175 
contribution .................................................................................................................................. 11 
cooperate .................................................................................................... 117, 118, 120, 121, 124 
cooperation............................................... 2, 13, 21, 73, 114, 118, 120, 123, 124, 126, 130, 149 
cosmos.......................................................................................................................................... 24 
courage ....4, 7, 12, 14, 16, 18, 21, 22, 23, 33, 37, 43, 44, 46, 48, 52, 66, 67, 68, 79, 80, 87, 88, 90,
99, 100, 107, 114, 142, 144, 145, 161, 179, 209, 218, 223, 248, 257, 262, 276, 292, 298, 313, 
319 
courageous ...............................................................22, 39, 44, 84, 89, 100, 109, 145, 149, 320 
coward ...................................................................................................................... 21, 52, 84, 302 
cowardice .............................................................18, 38, 45, 70, 84, 89, 94, 147, 161, 173, 185 
creative ................................................................................................................. 32, 123, 235, 308 
creative power ......................................................................................................... 32, 235, 308 
crime................................................................................................................... 54, 67, 84, 85, 219 
criminal ................................................................................................. 9, 76, 85, 226, 249, 267 
critical.............................................. 9, 11, 18, 35, 37, 59, 64, 68, 99, 115, 139, 152, 198, 227, 246 
cruel............................................................................................................ 127, 164, 184, 185, 302 
cruelty ..................................................................................................... 46, 127, 147, 184, 185 
cry25, 101, 127, 157, 192, 195, 207, 208, 256, 257, 275, 316 
crying ......................... 16, 25, 26, 40, 53, 58, 106, 190, 198, 205, 258, 264, 268, 270, 305, 312 
culture............................................................................16, 21, 23, 42, 96, 172, 188, 216, 229, 245 
cure.............................................................. 6, 27, 36, 42, 45, 48, 58, 104, 107, 149, 199, 279, 303 
curse ................................................................................................................................... 127, 249 
cursing........................................................................................................................... 120, 247 
cyclothymia .................................................................................................................................. 18

D
daydream ...................................................................................................................................... 94 
deaf 
deafness................................................................................................................................... 23 
death ......22, 36, 55, 65, 76, 92, 93, 96, 97, 110, 117, 118, 119, 131, 139, 148, 177, 183, 239, 272, 285, 306,
308, 312, 317, 318 
defeat ...8, 9, 11, 12, 28, 29, 30, 35, 46, 49, 50, 52, 64, 67, 68, 85, 94, 98, 105, 147, 148, 149, 168, 172, 223,
231, 253, 264, 282, 291, 292, 296, 307, 308 
defense...................................................................................................................... 48, 64, 69, 103 
deficiency ................................................................................................. 38, 77, 80, 114, 165, 173 
delinquency ................................................................................................................................ 146 
delinquent.................................................................................................................. 78, 99, 168 
delusion .......................................................................................255, 259, 264, 270, 271, 273, 285 
delusions ............................................................................................................................... 149 
Demosthenes ................................................................................................................................ 23 
dependence............................................................................................................... 14, 21, 24, 172 
dependency............................................................................................................................ 172 
depreciation .................................................................................................................................. 73 
depression.......................... 10, 15, 16, 17, 18, 25, 42, 53, 55, 56, 58, 106, 128, 194, 245, 246, 313 
depressed.......................... 16, 53, 56, 60, 64, 106, 245, 246, 249, 258, 262, 279, 292, 307, 312 
deprivation.................................................................................................................................. 244 
desire to dominate....................................................................................................................... 134 
despair ................................................................................................................................ 105, 305 
destruction ...................................................................................................................... 15, 67, 166 
dethronement .................................................................................................................... 64, 67, 89 
detour.................................................................................................. 100, 110, 155, 259, 260, 304 
detours........................................................................................................................... 147, 307 
development 4, 5, 6, 9, 13, 14, 15, 28, 37, 38, 43, 49, 65, 69, 70, 71, 73, 74, 75, 76, 84, 85, 97, 98, 99, 101,
102, 105, 114, 142, 143, 144, 145, 147, 151, 162, 186, 200, 206, 207, 215, 221, 236, 237, 241, 247, 266 
dexterity.......................................................................................................................... 23, 42, 235 
diagnosis............................................................................6, 19, 22, 40, 48, 91, 114, 115, 120, 121 
difficulty ....10, 29, 30, 32, 42, 43, 46, 47, 60, 62, 64, 69, 75, 92, 98, 104, 110, 114, 117, 129, 130, 171, 205,
221, 231, 248, 301, 302 
difficulties ....3, 4, 7, 9, 13, 22, 26, 27, 32, 36, 38, 42, 43, 44, 45, 58, 67, 72, 77, 79, 81, 84, 92, 106, 114,
121, 125, 129, 150, 160, 161, 165, 171, 180, 183, 187, 188, 195, 197, 200, 202, 205, 209, 226, 229, 244,
270, 276, 282, 283, 305, 306, 307, 308, 309 
discontent ....................................................................................................................... 24, 93, 117 
discouraged..................................................................................11, 30, 67, 75, 161, 174, 248, 257
discouragement ......................................................................................... 66, 98, 146, 208, 236 
disease ................................... 56, 107, 146, 162, 197, 198, 255, 260, 261, 263, 269, 271, 288, 314 
disorderly
disorderliness .......................................................................................................................... 24 
displace 
displacement............................................................................................................................ 38 
disposition ............................................................................................ 35, 37, 47, 50, 73, 107, 248 
distance.........4, 8, 13, 24, 30, 72, 80, 87, 92, 94, 100, 169, 222, 224, 249, 257, 262, 263, 282, 287 

division of labor............................................................................................................................ 98 
dog.......................................................................................166, 167, 169, 174, 190, 239, 317, 318 
dogs ....................................................................................................................................... 174 
dominance ............................................................................................................ 11, 38, 48, 87, 90
dominant ............................................................................................... 21, 47, 59, 97, 134, 174
Don Juan............................................................................................................................... 85, 240 
doubt................................................................................24, 73, 229, 233, 271, 276, 304, 305, 315 
doubtful ............................................................................................................................. 93, 99 
dream............5, 11, 40, 46, 58, 70, 72, 75, 88, 91, 93, 105, 107, 108, 109, 139, 312, 313, 314, 318 
dreams .......................................... 5, 11, 20, 46, 70, 75, 107, 108, 110, 137, 149, 226, 313, 318 
dreams ............................................... 5, 11, 20, 46, 70, 75, 107, 108, 110, 137, 149, 226, 313, 318 
drive.............................................................................................................................. 50, 145, 207 
drives............................................................................................................... 89, 146, 147, 311 
drug 
drugs...................................................................................................................................... 146 
Drug........................................................................................................................ 35, 36, 297, 304

E
early memories
earliest memory............................................................................................... 28, 50, 59, 80, 89 
earliest recollections........................................................................................................ 82, 123 
early recollections ............................................................................................................. 79, 83 
eating ................................................... 37, 64, 89, 91, 131, 170, 174, 183, 187, 189, 258, 268, 309 
economy
economic ................................................................................................................................. 70 
education ...................................................................................3, 4, 14, 21, 29, 45, 74, 76, 77, 142 
educators ............................................................................................................................... 142 
ego ..................................................................................................................................................5 
egotism.................................................................................................... 64, 147, 204, 267, 283 
eldest child.................................................................................................................. 63, 64, 65, 66 
emotion..................................................................25, 38, 39, 70, 77, 107, 108, 121, 165, 185, 197 
emotional........................................................24, 38, 77, 81, 105, 111, 121, 130, 166, 314, 316
empathy ........................................................................................................................................ 73 
encourage ................................................................................................................................... 313 
encouragement .............................................................................................. 27, 36, 43, 46, 149 
enemy ..................................................................................................................... 49, 67, 122, 311
enemies ................................................................................................................. 170, 249, 311 
energy ................................................................................................................. 145, 213, 247, 248 
enuresis......................................................................................................................................... 24 
environment.....13, 14, 18, 21, 22, 23, 24, 32, 34, 37, 38, 43, 45, 50, 51, 63, 64, 72, 74, 76, 77, 79, 106, 121,
136, 143, 147, 148, 164, 170, 171, 176, 180, 202, 206, 207, 236, 246, 249, 262, 279, 283, 303, 308, 313 
envy .................................................................................................................... 59, 60, 64, 67, 211 
epileptic ........................................................................................................................................ 34 
epoch .......................................................................................................................................... 218 
equal ..........................................................................................4, 16, 26, 32, 44, 72, 102, 103, 224 
equality................................................................................................ 67, 69, 73, 224, 229, 279 
error .................................................................................................................. 46, 50, 56, 168, 198 
Esau ...................................................................................................................................... 69, 128
escape 3, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 24, 26, 35, 36, 39, 44, 47, 48, 50, 51, 58, 67, 72, 85, 87, 92, 94, 98, 99,
101, 103, 147, 148, 149, 169, 197, 242, 252, 262, 297, 301, 308, 318 
Eve................................................................................................................................ 57, 163, 210 
evil........................................................................................................................ 84, 213, 309, 310 
evolution..................................................................................................................................... 316 
examination ....................................... 19, 26, 48, 50, 52, 82, 88, 109, 115, 124, 201, 222, 277, 278
examinations ....................................................................................................... 26, 71, 80, 124 
exclusion..................................................................26, 33, 36, 41, 47, 96, 139, 186, 216, 240, 263 
excuse..4, 30, 36, 103, 110, 138, 146, 148, 169, 171, 209, 225, 233, 248, 254, 257, 260, 284, 289, 299, 312 
excuses .......................................................................................................... 148, 248, 284, 312 
exhibitionism 
exhibitionist............................................................................................................. 94, 232, 239 
expectation ................................................................................................................................... 33 expecting
................................................................................................................... 51, 58, 299 
experience....7, 10, 14, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 27, 29, 31, 48, 49, 57, 61, 63, 65, 67, 74, 75, 81, 83, 85, 88, 93,

94, 97, 104, 115, 117, 118, 119, 121, 124, 144, 147, 151, 171, 180, 187, 200, 205, 207, 208, 213, 228, 232,
266, 267, 272, 287, 291, 299, 300, 306, 319

F
failure ........................................................ 14, 35, 48, 49, 57, 59, 65, 104, 171, 222, 223, 245, 305 
failures........................................................................................................................... 107, 132 
fainting ......................................................................................................................................... 34 
fairy tale.........................................................................................70, 178, 179, 184, 186, 209, 211
family ..3, 4, 8, 10, 16, 24, 25, 26, 29, 34, 37, 38, 52, 53, 55, 57, 58, 60, 63, 66, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 76, 77,
81, 97, 98, 99, 102, 104, 115, 117, 119, 124, 125, 128, 129, 131, 134, 139, 145, 148, 149, 155, 178, 180,
186, 193, 202, 204, 207, 208, 215, 217, 224, 245, 247, 257, 258, 260, 261, 263, 265, 268, 279, 282, 293,
301, 307, 308, 309, 314 
family constellation ...................................................................................................................... 37 
fantasy ........................................... 44, 46, 58, 59, 65, 74, 79, 86, 87, 89, 93, 94, 99, 156, 226, 241 
fate....................................................... 32, 55, 57, 70, 119, 171, 177, 203, 210, 254, 281, 283, 305 
father .3, 4, 16, 25, 27, 28, 29, 30, 34, 35, 36, 38, 50, 53, 55, 60, 61, 64, 65, 66, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 81, 89,
93, 94, 98, 99, 104, 105, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 131, 132, 133, 135, 136, 144, 151, 152, 153, 155, 156,
157, 158, 162, 163, 164, 166, 167, 169, 170, 171, 182, 186, 190, 193, 196, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 204,
208, 211, 214, 217, 222, 223, 225, 226, 230, 231, 235, 240, 243, 246, 247, 250, 253, 257, 260, 270, 274,
275, 
277, 
278, 
282, 
286, 
289, 
290, 
291, 
300, 
313, 
317
fatigue..................................................................................................................................... 8, 105 
favoritism ..................................................................................................................................... 38 
fear.......3, 5, 8, 9, 10, 12, 24, 26, 39, 40, 48, 49, 52, 62, 64, 71, 81, 82, 84, 87, 89, 93, 96, 97, 106, 109, 117,
118, 119, 122, 123, 131, 133, 147, 148, 163, 164, 170, 174, 177, 185, 191, 196, 200, 218, 219, 236, 237,
250, 259, 260, 261, 262, 263, 267, 268, 269, 274, 276, 277, 284, 285, 288, 289, 296, 301, 304, 305, 306,
309, 311, 316, 318, 319 
feeling 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 13, 14, 15, 17, 20, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 32, 33, 36, 37, 40, 43, 44, 48, 49, 52, 54,
55, 56, 59, 68, 70, 71, 74, 75, 78, 79, 80, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 91, 94, 98, 99, 100, 102, 103, 104, 106,
107, 109, 114, 120, 121, 127, 128, 142, 144, 145, 146, 147, 160, 161, 168, 169, 171, 172, 173, 174, 176,
190, 193, 194, 202, 204, 208, 215, 216, 219, 221, 226, 234, 236, 239, 244, 246, 249, 253, 259, 263, 266,
269, 273, 283, 292, 297, 303, 306, 308, 314, 316, 319 feeling of inferiority .... 2, 3, 7, 8, 22, 25, 28, 74, 86,
88, 99, 144, 145, 146, 147, 160, 161, 169, 172, 173, 174, 234, 236, 308, 317 
feeling of superiority ............................................25, 55, 86, 144, 190, 194, 269, 297, 308, 314 
feeling of worth ....................................................................................................................... 52 
fellow man.................................................................................................................................... 81 
female....................................................................28, 44, 75, 76, 94, 104, 105, 130, 136, 147, 245 
feminine ....................................... 27, 28, 29, 30, 33, 74, 76, 147, 172, 173, 186, 229, 230, 245
fetish........................................................................................................................................... 258 
fiction ................................................................................................................... 32, 110, 306, 313 
fictitious ............................................................................................ 8, 62, 80, 85, 89, 145, 148 
fictitious goal......................................................................................................................... 148 
fictitious superiority .............................................................................................................. 145 
fictive goal........................................................................11, 144, 146, 148, 168, 213, 236, 306 
firstborn ........................................................................................................................................ 63 
forget .................................................................................................... 92, 130, 179, 220, 233, 290 
form5, 8, 9, 10, 18, 22, 28, 31, 32, 40, 41, 65, 71, 78, 79, 80, 85, 86, 93, 94, 97, 99, 103, 109, 114, 120, 127,
129, 132, 142, 143, 146, 147, 150, 154, 165, 168, 176, 177, 182, 187, 204, 206, 214, 215, 218, 219, 226,
229, 235, 267, 304, 313 
freedom........................................................................21, 22, 24, 45, 115, 156, 172, 173, 245, 289 

Freud .................................................................................................. 107, 162, 231, 251, 290, 306 
Freytag, Gustav ............................................................................................................................ 43 
friendship.............................................................3, 7, 13, 14, 50, 65, 124, 207, 277, 284, 288, 291
frigidity......................................................................................................... 33, 104, 109, 120, 284 
future .5, 38, 41, 51, 59, 82, 96, 97, 98, 99, 107, 173, 180, 188, 195, 197, 198, 200, 213, 255, 287, 303, 313,
314, 316

G
game ....................................................................................................................... 17, 66, 139, 287
games .......................................................................................... 28, 73, 74, 155, 173, 214, 296 
genius ............................................................................................................................. 23, 76, 213 
glance ............................................................................................................... 6, 49, 194, 252, 277 
glands ......................................................................................................... 27, 49, 74, 81, 236, 316 
goal 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 31, 32, 33, 36, 37, 39, 41, 46, 48, 52, 55, 59,
61, 63, 64, 65, 68, 73, 74, 75, 76, 79, 84, 85, 86, 90, 92, 93, 94, 98, 100, 102, 103, 108, 114, 123, 126, 127,
128, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 169, 171, 173, 175, 178, 185, 204, 208, 213, 216, 228, 236, 248,
250, 266, 268, 279, 282, 291, 294, 303, 306, 309, 310, 313, 318 
God.................................. 26, 46, 105, 166, 177, 196, 220, 244, 247, 249, 250, 256, 258, 266, 272 
Goethe .......................................................................................................................................... 43 
greed........................................................................................................................................... 147 
grief .................................................................................................................................... 148, 315 
Groos, Karl ................................................................................................................................. 173 
group .................................................................................................................... 52, 142, 205, 294 
guessing...................................................................................................................................... 115 
guidance ............................................................................................................................. 152, 179 
guilt ..................................................... 16, 17, 25, 55, 109, 127, 128, 166, 168, 202, 245, 249, 263 guilt
complex............................................................................................................. 16, 55, 263

H
habit......................................................... 35, 36, 50, 60, 62, 88, 102, 186, 219, 238, 243, 247, 279 
hallucination ................................................................................................................... 57, 90, 101 
hallucinations ........................................................................................................................ 101 
handshake ................................................................................................................................... 100 
handwriting............................................................................................................. 18, 43, 150, 176
happy6, 7, 10, 20, 53, 56, 78, 91, 102, 105, 117, 128, 138, 155, 160, 174, 222, 237, 248, 251, 277, 283, 290,
311 
happiness..............................................................................12, 20, 71, 189, 194, 237, 284, 296 
hate ............................................................................................................. 147, 148, 166, 263, 278 
hated child ............................................................................................................................... 24 
hate ..................................................................................................................... 118, 119, 176, 263
headache ....................................................................................................................... 64, 188, 209 
headaches ...................................................................................... 8, 38, 39, 101, 105, 109, 110 
heart............................................... 5, 8, 40, 60, 88, 91, 99, 100, 103, 107, 115, 190, 231, 314, 316 
Herder, Johann Gottfried .............................................................................................................. 44 
heredity....................................................................................................................... 3, 69, 77, 124 
hero....................................................................................................................................... 84, 219 
hesitiation 
hesitating attitude .................................................................7, 65, 114, 200, 222, 247, 262, 284 
homosexuality .....................................................................29, 31, 62, 73, 74, 75, 76, 85, 207, 242 
homosexual ................................................................................................... 61, 74, 75, 93, 206 
hostility......................................................................................................................... 23, 136, 203 
hostile................................................. 37, 65, 73, 89, 93, 98, 121, 122, 125, 139, 149, 180, 317 
human ..9, 14, 15, 21, 23, 27, 31, 32, 40, 41, 88, 114, 142, 144, 145, 147, 148, 150, 151, 158, 160, 162, 173,
185, 197, 198, 202, 203, 204, 208, 210, 213, 222, 225, 228, 235, 242, 247, 267, 291, 292, 303, 304, 310,
314, 317, 319 
human nature................................................................................................ 88, 202, 210, 213, 242 
humiliation ............................................................................................... 62, 86, 94, 104, 105, 116 
hunger................................................................................................................................. 191, 261 
hurting ........................................................................................................................................ 201 
hypnosis...................................................................................................................................... 107 
hypnotic...................................................................................................................................... 107 
hypothesis........................................................................................................................... 117, 228 
hysteria ....................................................................................................................................... 146

I
Ibsen, Henrik .............................................................................................................................. 209 idea
..7, 9, 10, 22, 30, 35, 40, 46, 57, 69, 77, 83, 84, 86, 92, 94, 96, 97, 98, 99, 104, 105, 106, 111, 114, 118, 119,
123, 126, 127, 130, 131, 135, 139, 158, 172, 184, 191, 197, 228, 238, 244, 252, 253, 254, 257, 264, 265,
268, 272, 274, 275, 276, 278, 281, 285, 287, 292, 297, 298, 300, 303, 305, 306, 308, 319
ideal ...........................................................................33, 85, 99, 114, 118, 133, 172, 224, 237, 314 
ideal final form................................................................................................................ 99, 114 
identification................................................................................................................. 69, 208, 218 
illness...9, 12, 16, 18, 22, 39, 47, 53, 55, 56, 68, 82, 96, 97, 99, 100, 106, 131, 139, 148, 160, 168, 170, 171,
197, 198, 248, 261, 312 
image ...............................................................................................30, 86, 154, 181, 271, 275, 276 
images ................................................................................................. 5, 86, 148, 154, 226, 241 
imagination......................................................................................43, 94, 114, 119, 218, 256, 319 
imaginary .....................................................................................9, 10, 25, 28, 86, 93, 263, 306 
imitation ..................................................................................................... 8, 69, 74, 156, 173, 176 
immortality ........................................................................................................................... 97, 314 
impatience .............................................................................................................................. 38, 60 
imperfection.......................................................................................................................... 23, 129 
imperfect ............................................................................................... 11, 38, 42, 43, 118, 124 
impotence ..............................................................22, 23, 33, 47, 48, 56, 57, 58, 90, 103, 138, 284 
inborn ............................................................................................... 21, 62, 74, 193, 207, 223, 236 
incest .................................................................................................................................... 89, 204 
incomplete ............................................................................................................................ 10, 319 
indecision ......................................................................................................................... 3, 33, 286 
independence .................................................................................................................... 22, 29, 45 
independent ........................................................................................... 24, 53, 93, 98, 151, 210 
Individual Psychology .. 3, 4, 11, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 27, 32, 34, 38, 41, 43, 47, 48, 79, 84, 104, 107, 113,
114, 115, 116, 121, 142, 143, 146, 150, 168, 200, 202, 205, 224, 228, 248, 276
infantile................................................................................................................... 34, 40, 107, 147
inferiority.....2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 23, 27, 37, 42, 44, 47, 49, 52, 57, 59, 60, 65, 75, 86, 114, 136, 143, 144, 145,
149, 158, 160, 161, 165, 168, 173, 175, 188, 220, 229, 306, 312 
inferiority complex................................................................................................................ 114 inferiority
feeling .......................................................3, 145, 149, 158, 160, 161, 168, 220, 306
insane.................................................................................................................. 214, 264, 276, 304 
insatiable.........................................................................................................................................8 
insecurity .............................................................................................. 7, 24, 38, 71, 144, 193, 204 
insight......................................................................................20, 31, 108, 150, 252, 261, 314, 319 
insomnia ..................................................................................................................................... 170 
instinct ...................................................................................................... 21, 69, 96, 173, 176, 180 
intelligence ..................................................................................................... 52, 75, 213, 303, 310 
intelligent .............................................................3, 15, 49, 63, 78, 92, 104, 157, 166, 303, 310 
intention................................................... 33, 40, 103, 123, 143, 150, 168, 248, 288, 294, 306, 308 
intentions................................................................................................................. 50, 249, 272 
interest .15, 22, 25, 26, 32, 33, 35, 36, 37, 39, 42, 47, 49, 52, 55, 60, 66, 73, 75, 80, 81, 84, 92, 94, 96, 97,
98, 99, 108, 113, 119, 127, 133, 142, 143, 152, 154, 179, 181, 190, 193, 194, 205, 208, 210, 241, 244, 250,
254, 282, 283, 284, 292, 293, 314 

intolerance .................................................................................................................................... 95 
intuition ................................................................................................................................ 23, 320 
irritability...................................................................................................................................... 37 
irritable........................................................................................................................ 18, 38, 60 
isolation .......................................................................................................... 24, 35, 49, 51, 80, 84

J
Jacob..................................................................................................................................... 69, 128 
jealousy.............................. 33, 34, 64, 67, 90, 91, 92, 134, 136, 157, 158, 193, 194, 204, 205, 231 
jealous .................................... 67, 85, 89, 91, 109, 137, 157, 193, 194, 199, 202, 225, 231, 274 
joke................................................................................................................. 7, 125, 132, 229, 297 
jokes .............................................................................................................................. 225, 227 
joy235, 240, 267 
Jung,Carl Gustav ........................................................................................................................ 162

K
Kant. Emanuel .............................................................................................................................. 44

L
language ..................................................................45, 75, 103, 147, 150, 197, 220, 269, 291, 310 
laughter....................................................................................................... 188, 220, 223, 303, 304 
law ................................................... 15, 33, 37, 41, 66, 85, 119, 121, 138, 139, 143, 179, 232, 269 
laws ................................................................................................................... 69, 77, 168, 195
laziness ..................................................................................................................... 16, 67, 93, 221 
lazy........................................................................................................................................ 221 
leadership ..................................................................................................................................... 69 
leader..................................................................................................................................... 152 
learning............................................................................................................... 43, 52, 59, 92, 201 
lefthandedness............................................................................................................................. 42 
libido ............................................................................................................................ 40, 262, 291 
Lichtenberg, George ................................................................................................................... 107 
life problems....................................................................................................... 103, 215, 249, 320
life style (see also style of life) ................................................................... 113, 140, 170, 218, 318 
life tasks........................................................................................................................................ 65 
liveliness....................................................................................................................................... 57 
logic........................................................... 5, 10, 11, 15, 72, 82, 108, 146, 244, 245, 249, 261, 318 
love 3, 7, 8, 10, 13, 14, 15, 22, 25, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 38, 40, 41, 44, 49, 50, 55, 56, 57, 58, 62,
63, 65, 68, 71, 80, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 94, 96, 102, 104, 106, 109, 118, 119, 133, 134, 142, 145, 148, 149,
154, 157, 171, 175, 197, 203, 204, 207, 208, 209, 211, 215, 217, 224, 225, 230, 231, 233, 234, 237, 241,
242, 243, 244, 245, 250, 251, 253, 255, 259, 262, 263, 266, 267, 273, 276, 282, 283, 284, 286, 287, 288,
289, 290, 291, 294, 295, 296, 297, 300, 307, 308, 309, 311, 314, 318 
loyalty........................................................................................................................................... 31 
lying................................................... 58, 67, 80, 109, 119, 208, 219, 225, 238, 274, 285, 286, 293

M
male .......................................................................................................................... 28, 44, 57, 136 
manic-depressive .................................................................................................................... 18, 84 
mania............................................................................................... 9, 10, 18, 19, 166, 194, 235 
mankind.............................................................................................. 51, 69, 84, 96, 162, 214, 284 
marriage.....5, 7, 8, 10, 12, 15, 22, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 38, 39, 41, 44, 48, 49, 53, 56, 57, 58, 61, 68,
74, 80, 85, 86, 88, 89, 91, 94, 98, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 109, 116, 123, 124, 133, 135, 142, 195, 199, 203,
230, 234, 241, 255, 259, 261, 267, 282, 283, 290, 291, 294, 315 marry .....5, 8, 29, 39, 48, 57, 58, 68, 71,
88, 89, 105, 106, 135, 148, 154, 157, 213, 225, 231, 233, 244, 283, 290, 291 
masculine protest .........................................................28, 30, 45, 89, 132, 147, 172, 173, 184, 245 
masculinity ........................................................................................................................... 27, 173 
masculine ................................. 27, 28, 30, 33, 44, 45, 77, 89, 93, 132, 147, 172, 173, 184, 245 
masochism.............................................................................................................................. 86, 94 
mastery ................................................................................................................................. 36, 308 
masturbation ............................................................................3, 26, 49, 58, 62, 71, 80, 86, 87, 206 
mathematics.................................................................................................................................. 92 
maturity ................................................................................................................................ 21, 151 
May, Karl ..................................................................................................................................... 65 
melancholy ............................................................................................................. 55, 56, 235, 245
memory.....................6, 56, 57, 59, 61, 79, 83, 92, 93, 105, 108, 144, 158, 183, 187, 197, 199, 228 
menstruation ......................................................................................................................... 29, 312 
mental disorder ............................................................................................................... 18, 27, 228 
metaphor..................................................................................................................................... 108 
migraine.................................................................................................................................. 38, 64 
mind...7, 14, 27, 28, 32, 52, 58, 72, 74, 91, 104, 114, 116, 117, 119, 126, 143, 144, 150, 154, 172, 179, 205,
218, 240, 245, 267, 269, 271, 272, 292, 300, 304, 314, 317 
misbehavior .................................................................................................................................. 81 
misinterpretation......................................................................................................................... 306 
mistrust ................................................................................................................................. 80, 311 
mood...............8, 11, 21, 70, 105, 165, 169, 176, 178, 210, 219, 246, 248, 292, 294, 313, 314, 318
morphine............................................................................................................... 16, 35, 36, 48, 53
mother .3, 6, 7, 10, 13, 14, 15, 20, 21, 28, 34, 35, 36, 38, 46, 50, 51, 53, 58, 59, 60, 61, 64, 65, 71, 72, 73,
74, 75, 77, 78, 79, 80, 82, 83, 87, 88, 89, 92, 93, 94, 97, 101, 109, 121, 125, 126, 128, 132, 136, 138, 139,
151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 163, 166, 170, 174, 176, 185, 188, 193, 196, 198, 199, 201, 202, 203,
209, 210, 211, 213, 214, 217, 231, 237, 245, 257, 266, 269, 274, 275, 284, 289, 292, 293, 298, 299, 309,
315, 316, 317 
motives ............................................................................................................................... 6, 36, 99 
movement ........................................................................................... 43, 60, 81, 99, 110, 142, 165 
murder ............................................................................................................................ 17, 55, 244 
murderer ............................................................................................................... 84, 244, 245, 250
muscles ........................................................................................................................... 37, 93, 226 
music .....................................................................60, 164, 217, 218, 222, 223, 238, 287, 289, 298 
musical ....................................................................................................................................... 214 
musician ..................................................................................................................................... 223 
myths ............................................................................................................................................ 86

N
narcissism ................................................................................................................................... 267 
nation............................................................................................................................................ 45 
national ......................................................................................................................................... 52 
need ..6, 7, 17, 18, 45, 47, 57, 74, 92, 93, 94, 97, 121, 153, 160, 170, 185, 219, 245, 260, 272, 278 
neglect .......................................................................................9, 15, 106, 109, 119, 163, 216, 221 
neglected child ...................................................................................................................... 118 
neuralgia ................................................................................................................................. 38, 39 
neurasthenia................................................................................................................................ 146 
neurosis..2, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 13, 14, 26, 38, 43, 46, 52, 60, 67, 68, 71, 88, 91, 92, 102, 103, 108, 117, 118, 119,
124, 132, 138, 142, 147, 149, 166, 168, 169, 172, 177, 194, 197, 200, 216, 218, 221, 245, 247, 248, 249,
250, 261, 263, 265, 266, 272, 273, 282, 283, 285, 286, 301, 303, 310, 312, 319 
neuroses...................................... 5, 18, 27, 41, 52, 118, 146, 168, 170, 198, 247, 248, 283, 306 
neurotic ....8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20, 21, 23, 25, 28, 33, 36, 38, 39, 41, 48, 51, 53, 57, 59, 65, 72,
78, 86, 88, 89, 92, 101, 103, 107, 108, 113, 118, 120, 124, 127, 129, 131, 132, 136, 137, 138, 145, 146, 147,
148, 149, 161, 166, 168, 169, 171, 173, 179, 193, 197, 200, 204, 208, 213, 215, 218, 219, 222, 234, 244,
245, 247, 248, 249, 250, 255, 261, 263, 266, 267, 269, 280, 283, 284, 286, 303, 304, 306, 310, 311, 313 
Nietzsche, Friedrich...................................................................................................................... 17 
normal4, 9, 13, 14, 23, 26, 27, 28, 29, 32, 33, 37, 39, 41, 43, 44, 62, 66, 75, 89, 94, 100, 101, 103, 118, 123,
132, 144, 145, 148, 160, 197, 198, 206, 215, 228, 232, 233, 236, 242, 247, 319

O
obedience............................................................................................ 65, 66, 68, 90, 107, 147, 163 
objective ........................................................ 2, 15, 16, 33, 69, 71, 82, 94, 184, 204, 236, 309, 313 
obstacle......................................................................................................................... 62, 251, 283 
obstinacy..................................................................................................................................... 173 
occupation .3, 5, 10, 13, 14, 15, 26, 34, 35, 49, 50, 57, 65, 71, 80, 97, 98, 124, 142, 155, 156, 180, 217, 251,
259, 284, 291, 301, 308 
Oedipus complex ........................................................................................................................ 290 
only child.......................................................................................63, 72, 73, 75, 91, 125, 152, 201
opinion........................... 12, 33, 38, 82, 93, 129, 130, 182, 218, 224, 238, 240, 258, 286, 292, 309 
opponent ....................................................................................................................................... 53 
optimistic...................................................................................................... 22, 32, 33, 46, 52, 292 
organ................................................................................................8, 103, 143, 145, 187, 188, 316 
organ dialect.......................................................................................................................... 103 
organ inferiority .................................................................................................... 187, 188, 316 
organ jargon .......................................................................................................................... 103 
orientation..................................................................................................................................... 41 
overcoming................................................................................32, 68, 85, 121, 128, 143, 248, 308 
oversensitivity
overcompensation ................................................................................................................. 143

P
pain.................................................................. 29, 47, 66, 71, 72, 84, 145, 184, 220, 257, 294, 318 
painter........................................................................................................................................... 23 
palpitation 
palpitations ................................................................................................ 8, 38, 40, 60, 62, 115 
pampering....................................................................................149, 152, 166, 199, 213, 244, 294 
pampered......28, 34, 35, 49, 51, 53, 61, 62, 72, 75, 79, 82, 88, 92, 93, 106, 115, 118, 128, 152, 158, 161,
165, 
186, 
195, 
198, 
200, 
236, 
244, 
275, 
282, 
283, 
291, 
310, 
314, 
318
pantomime.................................................................................................................................. 121 
paralysis............................................................................................................................ 18, 56, 84 
paranoia .................................................................................................... 10, 84, 89, 138, 228, 251 
paranoid........................................................................................................................... 87, 138 
parent........................................................................................................................ 60, 65, 73, 278 
parents 4, 7, 32, 38, 46, 49, 50, 51, 55, 56, 61, 64, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 75, 76, 77, 78, 82, 86, 115, 125,
129, 132, 135, 139, 153, 163, 164, 166, 168, 169, 178, 179, 180, 182, 184, 187, 188, 189, 195, 197, 199,
203, 204, 210, 217, 219, 224, 229, 230, 231, 238, 239, 240, 244, 250, 253, 257, 258, 262, 264, 269, 271,
273, 277, 281, 283, 285, 287, 289, 290, 292, 293, 300, 304, 311, 312, 314, 315 
passivity...................................................................................................................................... 104 
passive................................................................................................................... 104, 147, 173 
patient....2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18, 19, 26, 27, 28, 29, 33, 34, 35, 36, 38, 39, 40, 46,
47, 48, 50, 51, 53, 55, 56, 59, 60, 61, 62, 64, 65, 71, 72, 74, 75, 76, 79, 80, 83, 84, 86, 88, 89, 90, 91, 93, 94,
102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 110, 114, 115, 116, 120, 125, 133, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, 166, 170,
171, 216, 247, 248, 249, 261, 265, 266, 270, 282, 283, 301, 306, 309, 310, 316, 319 
pattern......12, 18, 24, 26, 34, 69, 70, 76, 77, 80, 146, 148, 164, 165, 166, 168, 180, 190, 231, 232, 267, 279 
peace................................................................................................................... 178, 194, 203, 217 
perception ..................................................................................2, 9, 51, 66, 80, 144, 152, 165, 202 
perfection.................................................................................................................................... 144 
personal superiority .......................................................................................................... 85, 90, 94 
personality ................................................. 15, 31, 36, 151, 180, 182, 196, 216, 218, 283, 306, 313 
perspective.............................................................................................................. 14, 24, 115, 283
perverse ...................................................................................................................................... 207 
perversion ......................................................................................................................... 34, 58, 85 
philosophy ............................................................................................................................ 82, 132 
phobia...................................... 8, 119, 120, 260, 262, 268, 273, 279, 280, 281, 307, 308, 309, 310
phobias .......................................................................................................................... 266, 306 
physician.................................. 2, 14, 18, 26, 27, 48, 51, 53, 70, 110, 113, 149, 153, 270, 271, 315
pity.........................................................................................25, 109, 158, 169, 190, 194, 239, 290 
play..7, 13, 17, 28, 45, 64, 66, 69, 73, 75, 88, 89, 97, 100, 154, 155, 156, 173, 184, 189, 191, 192, 195, 205,
209, 214, 215, 216, 217, 219, 222, 223, 226, 236, 237, 238, 288, 296, 297, 298, 318
pleasure...................................................... 17, 18, 66, 176, 188, 189, 190, 242, 278, 296, 309, 311 
poetry............................................................................................................................................ 70 
polarity ....................................................................................................................................... 132 
possession....................................................................................................................... 5, 155, 231 
poverty.......................................................................................................... 16, 123, 175, 209, 265 
power.....15, 18, 23, 27, 31, 35, 36, 59, 66, 69, 85, 86, 87, 90, 93, 96, 98, 101, 106, 128, 134, 142, 143, 145,
157, 161, 162, 163, 173, 184, 193, 202, 204, 213, 215, 232, 233, 235, 237, 243, 245, 247, 248, 252, 253,

255, 
270, 
282, 
283, 
291, 
305, 
308, 
309, 
310, 
311, 
314, 
320 
practical
...................................................................................10, 11, 20, 22, 60, 81, 150, 223, 309 
praise ............................................................................................................................ 69, 123, 185 
pregnancy....................................................................................................... 44, 88, 105, 135, 252 
pregnant.................................................................................................................. 40, 68, 135, 139
preparation.....11, 13, 28, 29, 32, 45, 52, 76, 80, 84, 92, 93, 97, 115, 156, 185, 194, 200, 213, 214, 229,
239, 241, 247 
prestige ..................................................................................................... 13, 16, 22, 148, 157, 193 
pride...................................................................................................... 15, 133, 194, 211, 278, 305 
primitive ..................................................................................................................................... 147 
private intelligence ............................................................................................................. 303, 316 
private logic.....................................................................19, 52, 147, 148, 234, 248, 249, 263, 304 
probability .................................................................................................................................. 125 
problem....2, 4, 7, 8, 9, 14, 15, 18, 22, 30, 32, 36, 41, 47, 49, 50, 53, 55, 57, 58, 59, 65, 67, 72, 73, 77, 80,
87, 94, 103, 105, 108, 109, 110, 114, 115, 116, 120, 127, 130, 142, 169, 170, 179, 180, 195, 206, 215, 216,
217, 230, 233, 243, 248, 252, 254, 262, 273, 284, 286, 289, 291, 294, 304, 307, 308, 313, 314, 318 
problem child ............................................................................................ 4, 9, 67, 77, 127, 304
profession .......................................................... 71, 98, 99, 142, 156, 175, 179, 180, 276, 277, 284 
proof .......................5, 12, 62, 86, 107, 109, 110, 121, 130, 134, 167, 257, 261, 279, 286, 290, 304 
prophesy ..................................................................................................................................... 259 
prostitute............................................................................................................................... 86, 175 
prostitution ................................................................................................................................. 175 
protection.................................................................................................. 4, 21, 101, 160, 243, 251 
prototype........................................................ 21, 31, 35, 36, 37, 41, 45, 51, 64, 79, 93, 97, 98, 283 
provocation................................................................................................................................. 127 
psyche............................................................................................14, 22, 23, 32, 41, 143, 266, 306
psychic...2, 14, 20, 21, 31, 35, 45, 47, 63, 69, 80, 85, 88, 96, 97, 98, 107, 143, 144, 146, 150, 171, 235, 273,
313, 314, 316 
psychology ....................................................................3, 11, 84, 86, 143, 150, 167, 211, 267, 313
psychological20, 25, 31, 39, 70, 73, 74, 114, 130, 150, 165, 172, 200, 202, 234, 261, 267, 274, 283, 319,
320 
psychosis .................................................................................................................... 9, 15, 18, 119 psychotic
................................................................................................. 15, 113, 146, 208, 311 
psychotherapist............................................................................................................................. 48 
punishment ....................................................................................28, 126, 137, 190, 208, 263, 266
purpose ......8, 9, 11, 21, 33, 50, 70, 85, 96, 101, 108, 144, 148, 150, 153, 163, 166, 179, 185, 210, 248, 249,
250, 257, 267, 274, 282, 285, 289, 291, 297, 303, 306, 311, 313, 315 
purposeful................................................................................................................................... 163

Q
quantitative ................................................................................................................................. 194

R
race ............................................................................................7, 67, 68, 69, 81, 96, 128, 129, 144 
radius .......................................................................................................................... 142, 268, 307 
rage.............................................................. 15, 34, 39, 86, 109, 132, 196, 199, 244, 255, 269, 283 
rational........................................................................................................................................ 148 
readiness ............................................................................................................................... 98, 200 
reality.2, 10, 11, 13, 20, 28, 37, 52, 59, 69, 71, 84, 86, 87, 89, 90, 98, 99, 106, 107, 108, 122, 138, 144, 148,
149, 150, 161, 177, 179, 183, 202, 219, 232, 233, 240, 260, 306, 313 reason ......4, 8, 31, 37, 42, 45, 48, 55,
57, 58, 61, 82, 84, 86, 89, 99, 100, 101, 109, 128, 132, 133, 138, 160, 171, 178, 198, 200, 201, 206, 207,
209, 220, 223, 224, 225, 241, 245, 248, 257, 260, 277, 278, 280, 290, 294, 298 
recollection ......................................................................................6, 51, 61, 79, 80, 92, 93, 94, 97 
rejection.....................................................................................42, 48, 94, 104, 154, 206, 230, 263 
religion ......................................................................................................................... 51, 225, 250
religious............................................................................................................. 81, 97, 107, 176 remorse
......................................................................................................................... 
50, 
168, 
169 
repression
............................................................................................................................. 76, 165
repressed............................................................................................................ 
87, 
94, 
165, 
262
resentment .................................................................................................... 34, 132, 138, 211, 245 resistance
.......................................................................................... 16, 27, 48, 58, 61, 68, 94, 225 responsibility .....3,
6, 31, 50, 53, 125, 146, 160, 168, 171, 193, 194, 210, 219, 236, 241, 245, 272,
283, 305 
responsible ................................... 3, 11, 14, 23, 27, 59, 122, 170, 177, 197, 266, 305, 310, 312
retreat...........................................................................................146, 161, 197, 248, 293, 294, 305 
retreating....................................................................................................................................... 82 
revenge .............................................. 53, 61, 78, 104, 105, 107, 120, 166, 176, 223, 246, 264, 308 
revolutionary ................................................................................................................................ 69 
ridicule........................................................................................................................ 125, 162, 290 
rigid ............................................................................................................................ 148, 163, 228 
role.8, 15, 17, 27, 28, 33, 44, 45, 46, 57, 59, 70, 74, 75, 77, 93, 104, 105, 134, 143, 149, 156, 167, 172, 173,
186, 195, 198, 210, 211, 218, 219, 229, 230, 231, 236, 255, 256, 261, 267, 275, 296 
roughness.................................................................................................................................... 126 
rule.....16, 17, 31, 37, 41, 48, 51, 67, 74, 88, 95, 117, 120, 123, 125, 126, 129, 130, 132, 133, 134, 136, 161,
171, 173, 190, 191, 222, 246, 271, 283, 291, 293, 314 
rules........................................................ 31, 53, 72, 89, 122, 128, 147, 170, 194, 232, 249, 311

S
sadism..................................................................................................................... 66, 85, 138, 166
sadistic......................................................................................... 66, 85, 87, 125, 137, 138, 226
safety .............................................................................................92, 127, 147, 168, 236, 298, 306
salvation ............................................................................................................................. 121, 284 
Saul....................................................................................................................................... 70, 241 
scheme.........................................................................146, 147, 148, 152, 163, 173, 228, 263, 273 
Schiller, Friedrich ......................................................................................................................... 43 
schizophrenia.............................................................................................................. 10, 13, 45, 84 
school ..3, 6, 7, 13, 22, 24, 25, 27, 35, 42, 45, 50, 52, 65, 67, 68, 73, 75, 77, 80, 87, 88, 93, 98, 99, 109, 130,
142, 156, 158, 165, 168, 169, 185, 186, 202, 206, 209, 213, 215, 217, 218, 220, 221, 222, 225, 226, 227,
232, 233, 240, 259, 261, 266, 267, 272, 274, 276, 277, 278, 280, 284, 290, 291, 296, 300, 306 
science ................................................................................................................ 24, 26, 51, 96, 123 
second child..................................... 3, 7, 25, 38, 56, 63, 65, 67, 68, 69, 70, 74, 122, 124, 128, 138 
security ......................................................24, 65, 98, 108, 144, 161, 172, 246, 255, 259, 291, 311 
self .....7, 9, 12, 15, 17, 22, 26, 34, 48, 51, 56, 59, 67, 69, 79, 89, 91, 92, 96, 97, 98, 104, 107, 108, 110, 111,
114, 135, 144, 145, 171, 185, 193, 245, 248, 251, 292, 317 
selfaccusation........................................................................................................... 17, 56, 245 
selfconfidence ...................................................................7, 12, 48, 67, 89, 104, 114, 193, 292 
self-esteem .................................................................................................... 145, 171, 193, 317 
self-evaluation ................................................................................................................... 59, 91 
self-preservation...................................................................................................................... 96 
selfreproach............................................................................................................................ 26 
self-training ................................................................................................................. 79, 97, 98 
semblance ................................................................................................................... 147, 160, 193 
senile ............................................................................................................................................ 68 
sensation ............................................................................................... 46, 136, 196, 197, 290, 317 
sense organ ................................................................................................................................. 313 
sensitive.............................................................................................................. 103, 104, 121, 316 
sensitiveness ................................................................................................................................. 48 
sensory type................................................................................................................................ 180
sex27, 28, 31, 53, 68, 74, 75, 85, 87, 89, 94, 124, 136, 142, 147, 194, 202, 203, 206, 208, 227, 228, 229,
245, 261, 283, 296 
sexual.....3, 11, 14, 18, 22, 23, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 45, 48, 49, 56, 58, 62, 65, 66, 68, 73, 74, 75, 76,
81, 85, 86, 87, 89, 92, 94, 99, 103, 104, 106, 107, 120, 125, 135, 138, 148, 157, 162, 163, 165, 178, 185,
202, 206, 207, 214, 226, 227, 229, 230, 231, 232, 236, 237, 239, 240, 241, 262, 283, 290, 304, 312 
sexuality ...................................... 20, 27, 31, 61, 71, 75, 80, 94, 120, 157, 206, 216, 231, 283, 291 
Shakespeare................................................................................................................................ 156 
shame.................................................................................................................. 242, 271, 296, 316 
shock ...................................................................................................................... 93, 94, 164, 206
shyness ......................................................................................................................................... 44 
sickness................................................................................................................. 88, 160, 161, 173 
significance...........4, 21, 79, 131, 151, 171, 173, 202, 208, 215, 220, 234, 245, 250, 276, 306, 313 
significant ..........................................................................2, 92, 100, 173, 186, 193, 217, 220, 319 
sin 183, 190, 216 
skin ....................................................................................................................... 11, 226, 259, 270 

sleep...11, 16, 17, 62, 80, 88, 91, 100, 101, 105, 106, 107, 163, 170, 171, 181, 218, 220, 274, 275, 276, 294,
313, 315, 317 
sleep.....................................................................................100, 106, 107, 170, 171, 273, 275, 313 
sleepsleeplessness..................................................................................................... 8, 39, 170, 171 
smell ............................................................................................119, 186, 188, 191, 237, 238, 304 
social9, 13, 14, 15, 16, 21, 22, 25, 26, 27, 29, 30, 32, 33, 35, 36, 37, 40, 41, 42, 44, 45, 46, 48, 49, 50, 51,
52, 53, 59, 64, 67, 68, 75, 78, 79, 80, 81, 84, 85, 86, 88, 89, 90, 92, 98, 99, 100, 104, 105, 109, 114, 118,
119, 120, 122, 123, 124, 133, 142, 144, 145, 149, 168, 175, 180, 185, 190, 201, 202, 204, 213, 215, 216,
217, 245, 249, 282, 283, 291, 292, 314, 316, 319 
social interest.........................................................25, 35, 40, 48, 80, 86, 88, 98, 99, 114, 119, 123 
social usefulness ........................................................................................................................... 81 
socially useful............................................................................................................... 44, 114, 123 
society ...14, 15, 21, 31, 46, 49, 50, 52, 53, 58, 65, 71, 75, 82, 87, 96, 97, 102, 127, 142, 223, 225, 246, 247,
250 
sorrow................................................................................................................................... 56, 162 
soul ..........................................................................................10, 18, 20, 24, 85, 97, 150, 235, 314 
spasms .................................................................................................................................... 38, 64 
speech................................................................................................................... 45, 150, 222, 286 
stage fright.................................................................................................................... 71, 222, 292 
stammer ........................................................................................................................................ 42 
status............................................................................................................................... 56, 66, 133 
stealing ................................................................................................................................. 67, 215 
stomach..............................................................................................3, 37, 38, 62, 64, 88, 100, 103 
stress..................................................................................................................... 68, 129, 271, 291 
striving.....2, 9, 10, 11, 15, 20, 21, 25, 27, 29, 33, 35, 39, 44, 55, 57, 59, 63, 64, 68, 70, 74, 79, 80, 81, 82,
83, 85, 90, 96, 97, 98, 100, 114, 118, 128, 130, 143, 144, 145, 147, 157, 158, 163, 169, 174, 176, 177, 180,
193, 
216, 
222, 
228, 
232, 
237, 
246, 
261, 
272, 
282, 
283, 
291, 
310 
striving 
to
overcome.............................................................................................................. 114 
stupid .............................................................................................75, 179, 183, 193, 257, 258, 276
stuttering................................................................................................................................. 23, 42 
style of life.....5, 9, 11, 12, 14, 18, 20, 21, 22, 25, 26, 27, 28, 31, 32, 33, 36, 47, 53, 57, 58, 63, 70, 72, 76,
79, 81, 83, 93, 96, 100, 103, 105, 107, 108, 117, 118, 121, 123, 125, 128, 134, 144, 147, 149, 176, 178, 187,
200, 219, 228, 231, 234, 235, 239, 242, 244, 250, 276, 279, 301, 312, 313, 316 
submission .............................................................................................................................. 90, 94 
success...5, 22, 26, 36, 44, 48, 50, 59, 61, 64, 68, 82, 85, 88, 93, 97, 102, 108, 125, 149, 171, 218, 222, 282,
291 
sucking ....................................................................................................................................... 184 
suffering ...............6, 12, 20, 47, 68, 88, 91, 100, 110, 118, 119, 142, 149, 158, 262, 265, 266, 311 
suggestion............................................................................................... 17, 40, 107, 182, 217, 288 
suicide .7, 9, 18, 34, 35, 36, 53, 54, 92, 93, 120, 139, 162, 199, 203, 209, 246, 253, 258, 261, 263, 284 
suicides............................................................................................................................ 22, 304 
superiority....2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 20, 22, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 39,
41, 44, 45, 46, 50, 55, 56, 57, 59, 68, 73, 74, 75, 76, 79, 84, 85, 86, 89, 93, 98, 102, 108, 114, 121, 126, 127,
144, 145, 146, 147, 148, 157, 158, 160, 163, 169, 170, 173, 175, 176, 184, 190, 192, 204, 216, 218, 219,
229, 230, 231, 232, 233, 237, 244, 246, 247, 248, 268, 282, 283, 284, 286, 306, 309, 310, 318 
superior ..3, 5, 10, 18, 33, 39, 49, 56, 60, 86, 114, 117, 127, 138, 148, 149, 169, 170, 172, 173, 174, 177,
193, 
201, 
202, 
206, 
207, 
218, 
220, 
226, 
229, 
241, 
246, 
253, 
310 
superiority
complex................................................................................................................. 
57 
superiority 
striving
................................................................................................................ 204 
superstition ..................................................................................4, 77, 84, 252, 283, 284, 304, 306 

suspicion..................................................................................................................... 7, 33, 80, 268 
syle ..2, 5, 6, 9, 11, 12, 14, 18, 20, 21, 22, 25, 26, 27, 28, 31, 32, 33, 36, 47, 48, 49, 53, 57, 58, 59, 63, 64,
70, 72, 76, 79, 81, 83, 93, 96, 100, 103, 105, 107, 108, 117, 118, 121, 123, 125, 128, 134, 144, 147, 149,
176, 178, 187, 200, 219, 223, 228, 231, 234, 235, 239, 242, 244, 250, 276, 279, 301, 312, 313, 316 
symbol .................................................................................................................. 99, 105, 237, 240 symbols
......................................................................................................................... 108, 150 
sympathy 
.............................................................................................................. 
87, 
117, 
136, 
164
sympathetic ......................................................................................................... 17, 20, 61, 316 
symptom ..28, 30, 40, 64, 71, 82, 114, 127, 129, 131, 133, 138, 147, 161, 163, 171, 177, 216, 222, 233, 248,
262, 279 
symptoms ......5, 8, 9, 12, 19, 24, 27, 33, 36, 38, 42, 45, 60, 64, 65, 71, 72, 80, 82, 85, 87, 91, 104, 107, 115,
124, 127, 131, 137, 138, 139, 147, 160, 168, 170, 171, 178, 191, 200, 208, 216, 247, 248, 251, 261, 279,
303, 311

T
teacher ......................... 25, 77, 78, 98, 154, 156, 217, 218, 221, 225, 226, 234, 236, 276, 277, 278 
teachers ............................................................................................................. 4, 42, 50, 77, 86
teeth .........................................................................71, 86, 137, 199, 236, 256, 257, 258, 270, 274 
temper....................................................................................................................... 34, 38, 39, 162 
temper tantrums..................................................................................................................... 162 
temperament ....................................................................................................................... 235, 236 
tenderness ........................................................................................................... 154, 160, 171, 172 
tension ...6, 8, 9, 18, 24, 37, 38, 46, 62, 63, 64, 71, 72, 77, 82, 87, 88, 92, 105, 218, 266, 292, 293, 306, 316 
the question 5, 9, 14, 24, 26, 29, 67, 90, 98, 101, 123, 178, 180, 215, 225, 230, 235, 262, 285, 291 
theoretical ................................................................................................................................... 143 
thinking...................................... 2, 11, 19, 29, 91, 92, 106, 107, 115, 117, 118, 127, 184, 214, 300 
thirst.................................................................................................................................... 184, 299 
thought.6, 22, 29, 40, 48, 75, 97, 109, 110, 134, 139, 143, 148, 152, 157, 158, 168, 174, 183, 184, 191, 198,
205, 217, 223, 225, 226, 229, 230, 231, 235, 236, 238, 240, 241, 246, 247, 252, 253, 255, 256, 258, 259,
260, 262, 266, 267, 268, 271, 272, 273, 274, 278, 279, 280, 281, 284, 285, 287, 288, 290, 295, 296, 297,
299, 
300, 
301, 
303, 
305, 
306, 
307, 
309, 
313, 
314, 
317 
thyroid
................................................................................................................................ 129, 236 
time..5, 10, 13, 16, 17, 22, 26, 29, 31, 38, 40, 44, 45, 46, 47, 50, 53, 55, 56, 57, 58, 65, 67, 68, 70, 71, 72,
73, 76, 79, 81, 87, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 98, 99, 103, 104, 106, 113, 116, 117, 124, 125, 126, 129, 130, 131,
132, 133, 134, 135, 137, 138, 139, 145, 150, 151, 153, 155, 163, 168, 171, 179, 180, 183, 187, 188, 191,
196, 197, 198, 200, 202, 207, 209, 210, 211, 213, 215, 219, 220, 222, 224, 226, 228, 229, 230, 231, 235,
239, 240, 242, 243, 244, 247, 248, 249, 250, 255, 256, 258, 261, 263, 264, 265, 270, 273, 274, 277, 278,
279, 280, 282, 284, 285, 286, 287, 288,
289, 290, 292, 293, 295, 296, 297, 298, 299, 300, 301, 303, 304, 307, 309, 310, 312, 314, 315, 
316, 317 
timidity ....................................................................................................................................... 289 
Tolstoy, Nikolayevich .................................................................................................................. 96 
tooth.................................................................................................... 256, 257, 259, 300, 301, 302 
training ....4, 13, 18, 26, 28, 29, 42, 74, 75, 77, 78, 94, 98, 104, 123, 130, 160, 165, 180, 185, 205, 
210, 214, 221, 223, 225, 226, 234, 235, 241, 279, 282, 314 
trait ...................................... 134, 153, 155, 172, 190, 193, 194, 211, 218, 228, 244, 252, 260, 306 
traits..........................................................................................27, 124, 147, 193, 195, 201, 306 
transference .................................................................................................................................. 48 
trap........................................................................................................................................ 83, 239 
treatment....4, 16, 17, 18, 24, 35, 40, 47, 48, 51, 59, 78, 79, 81, 102, 103, 107, 109, 114, 116, 117, 
129, 130, 131, 133, 137, 140, 146, 149, 153, 170, 261, 301 
truth ......................5, 16, 17, 25, 28, 41, 48, 59, 78, 84, 94, 106, 203, 209, 216, 225, 229, 304, 306 
twin 
twins........................................................................................................................................ 63 
tyrant ...................................................................................................... 34, 53, 193, 196, 302, 311

U
ugliness................................................................................................................................. 65, 179 
uncertainty...................................................................................................................... 45, 71, 283 
unconscious ................................................... 20, 108, 144, 147, 148, 162, 191, 194, 306, 310, 313 
understanding ....2, 5, 9, 11, 22, 25, 36, 41, 48, 52, 84, 85, 113, 115, 123, 124, 128, 142, 143, 146, 202, 208,
209, 228, 242, 247, 266, 319, 320 
unfaithful ................................................................................................................................ 35, 92 
unfaithfulness .................................................................................................................... 53, 90 
unhappy ....................................................... 7, 29, 32, 53, 61, 68, 69, 135, 142, 242, 246, 258, 284 
unhappiness............................................................................................................... 15, 30, 139 
unique............................................................................................................................. 45, 46, 185 
unity................................................. 2, 47, 48, 57, 79, 107, 123, 150, 182, 231, 235, 306, 309, 313 
unmasking .................................................................................................................................. 312 
upward striving............................................................................................................................. 22

V
vaginism ..................................................................................................................................... 284 
vain............................................................................................................... 33, 212, 246, 264, 315 
value ...................................... 2, 5, 9, 16, 20, 23, 47, 51, 52, 77, 120, 171, 193, 218, 222, 241, 300 
values ...................................................................................................................... 83, 132, 142 
vanity.............................................................................................76, 138, 155, 233, 295, 305, 312
virtue ........................................................................................................................ 26, 56, 65, 105 
vomiting ................................................................................................................... 62, 88, 91, 277

W
war...............................................................................................109, 116, 133, 236, 241, 245, 277 
washing compulsion ................................................................................... 147, 264, 265, 266, 310 
weakness..2, 3, 8, 15, 23, 47, 51, 53, 58, 64, 92, 143, 147, 160, 172, 173, 187, 194, 201, 218, 244, 245, 246,
302 
weapon ..............................................................................17, 52, 59, 102, 109, 171, 245, 248, 291 
Weber, Frederick ........................................................................................................................ 113
weeping ........................................................................................................ 69, 194, 253, 285, 317 
Wild................................................................................................................ 28, 65, 239, 265, 274 
wisdom ............................................................................................................................... 130, 221 
wish .6, 7, 40, 42, 45, 53, 55, 74, 77, 82, 86, 88, 100, 108, 110, 120, 121, 134, 135, 138, 144, 157, 167, 172,
173, 174, 189, 200, 231, 235, 274, 277, 283, 288, 291, 300, 313 
withdrawal............................................................................................................................ 51, 254 
woman6, 7, 10, 15, 16, 28, 30, 31, 35, 40, 44, 53, 56, 58, 65, 66, 71, 72, 74, 75, 76, 77, 80, 81, 82, 87, 89,
90, 91, 93, 102, 104, 109, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 127, 130, 131, 132, 134, 137,
138, 149, 172, 173, 176, 184, 188, 190, 194, 196, 203, 211, 241, 249, 255, 256, 258, 266, 267, 283, 284,
297, 300, 308, 315
work...2, 7, 8, 14, 23, 25, 26, 32, 36, 48, 50, 53, 73, 77, 81, 88, 92, 96, 97, 98, 103, 105, 107, 108, 109, 110,
115, 123, 124, 130, 131, 132, 134, 142, 145, 149, 155, 170, 174, 180, 198, 200, 202, 221, 224, 230, 235,
247, 278, 279, 282, 291, 292, 293, 299, 300, 302, 312, 317 world14, 21, 22, 33, 39, 41, 42, 44, 45, 51, 55,
57, 60, 69, 75, 83, 85, 92, 101, 126, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, 151, 165, 172, 181, 182, 190, 214, 216, 218,
248, 260, 262, 264, 265, 266, 268, 270, 286, 288, 289, 305, 310, 317 
worthlessness.......................................................................................................................... 27, 49

Y
yes-but ........................................................................................................................ 148, 248, 318 
younger.7, 38, 39, 45, 60, 61, 64, 65, 67, 68, 70, 72, 76, 80, 81, 82, 89, 93, 95, 122, 128, 198, 217 
youngest .......................................... 6, 35, 36, 58, 60, 69, 70, 71, 93, 102, 103, 104, 106, 110, 152 
youngest child ......................................................................................... 35, 36, 69, 70, 93, 152
Appendix: Basic Principles of Classical Adlerian Psychology
Henry T. Stein, Ph.D.1
Alfred Adler (1870-1937) developed the first holistic theory of personality,
psychopathology, and psychotherapy that was intimately connected to
humanistic philosophy of living. His lectures and books for the general public
are characterized by a crystal clear common sense. His clinical books and
journal articles reveal an uncommon understanding of mental disorder, a deep
insight into the art of healing, and a great inspiration for encouraging optimal
human development. Adler's essential principles are as follows.
Unity of the Individual
Thinking, feeling, emotion, and behavior can only be understood as
subordinated to the individual's style of life, or consistent pattern of dealing with
life. The individual is not internally divided or the battleground of conflicting
forces. Each aspect of the personality points in the same direction.
Goal Orientation
There is one central personality dynamic derived from the growth and
forward movement of life itself. It is a future-oriented striving toward a goal of
significance, superiority, or success. In mental health, it is a realistic goal of
socially useful significance or superiority over general difficulties; in mental
disorder, it is an unrealistic goal of exaggerated significance or superiority over
others. The early childhood feeling of inferiority, for which one aims to
compensate, leads to the creation of a fictional final goal which subjectively
seems to promise future security and success. The depth of the inferiority feeling
usually determines the height of the goal which then becomes the "final cause"
of behavior patterns.
1 This brief overview was first published in 1997 on the Classical Adlerian
Psychology web site at http://go.ourworld.nu/hstein/principl.htm. A more
comprehensive exposition of principles, “Classical Adlerian Theory and
Practice,” may be found in Volume 1 of The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred
Adler, or on the web at http://go.ourworld.nu/hstein/theoprac.htm.
Self-Determination and Uniqueness
The goal may be influenced by hereditary and cultural factors, but it

ultimately springs from the creative power of the individual, and is consequently
unique. Usually, individuals are not fully aware of their goal. Through the
analysis of birth order, repeated coping patterns, and earliest memories, the
psychotherapist infers the goal as a working hypothesis.
Social Context
As an indivisible whole, a system, the human being is also a part of larger
wholes or systems--the family, the community, all of humanity, our planet, the
cosmos. In these contexts, we meet the three important life tasks: occupation,
love and sex, and our relationship with other people--all social challenges. Our
way of responding to our first social system, the family constellation, may
become the prototype of our world view and attitude toward life.
The Feeling of Community
Each human being has the capacity for learning to live in harmony with
society. This is an innate potential for social connectedness which has to be
consciously developed. Social interest and feeling imply "social improvement,"
quite different from conformity, leaving room for social innovation even through
cultural resistance or rebellion. The feeling of genuine security is rooted in a
deep sense of belonging and embeddedness within the stream of social
evolution.
Mental Health
A feeling of human connectedness, and a willingness to develop oneself
fully and contribute to the welfare of others, are the main criteria of mental
health. When these qualities are underdeveloped, feelings of inferiority may
haunt an individual, or an attitude of superiority may antagonize others.
Consequently, the unconscious fictional goal will be self-centered and
emotionally or materially exploitive of other people. When the feeling of
connectedness and the willingness to contribute are stronger, a feeling of
equality emerges, and the individual's goal will be self-transcending and
beneficial to others.
Treatment
Adlerian individual psychotherapy, brief therapy, couple therapy, and
family therapy follow parallel paths. Clients are encouraged to overcome their
feelings of insecurity, develop deeper feelings of connectedness, and to redirect
their striving for significance into more socially beneficial directions. Through a
respectful Socratic dialogue, they are challenged to correct mistaken
assumptions, attitudes, behaviors and feelings about themselves and the world.
Constant encouragement stimulates clients to attempt what was previously felt as
impossible. The growth of confidence, pride, and gratification leads to a greater
desire and ability to cooperate. The objective of therapy is to replace

exaggerated self-protection, self-enhancement, and self-indulgence with
courageous social contribution.

