
THE VERTICAL GARDENING GUIDEBOOK
HOW TO CREATE BEAUTIFUL VERTICAL GARDENS, CONTAINER GARDENS AND AEROPONIC VERTICAL GARDENS AT HOME
TOM CORSON-KNOWLES
Copyright © Authentic Health Coaching, 2012-2013. All Rights Reserved.
This detailed book will teach you everything you need to know about vertical
gardening! Whether you want to build your own free-standing vertical garden, a
wall garden or a vertical aeroponics garden, this book will teach you everything
you need to know!
Here’s a picture of one of my vertical aeroponics gardens at home!
Join us on Facebook to join the Vertical Gardening community online and
share your insights, experiences and get your questions about Vertical
Gardening answered. Join us at: http://on.fb.me/HmllNU

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction
Chapter 1. What is Vertical Gardening?
Chapter 2. Why Plant a Vertical Garden?
Chapter 3. How do You Plan a Vertical Garden and Prepare the Soil?
Chapter 4. How to Build a Free-Standing Vertical Garden
Chapter 5. Maintaining Your Vertical Garden
Chapter 6. How do You Grow Year-Round with a Vertical Garden?
Chapter 7. Composting for Your Vertical Garden
Chapter 8. How do You Start Seeds for a Vertical Garden?
Chapter 9. How do You Control Common Pests
Chapter 10. How do you Water a Vertical Garden?
Chapter 11. How Do You Grow An Aeroponic Vertical Garden?
Chapter 12. The Joys of Vertical Gardening
Excerpt From The Urban Gardening Book
Special Facebook Group
About The Author
Other Books By Tom CorsonKnowles

Introduction
Gardening is a topic that is very popular these days, especially with the down
economy and skyrocketing food prices. For many people, gardening is a way to
save money and eat healthy. Unfortunately, not a lot of people have acres of land
or even a yard to introduce a garden. Over the years, there’s been talk about
converting to sustainable lifestyles, even in urban areas. This concept has grown
into something that many urbanites thought unthinkable – urban gardening.
Vertical gardening isn’t a brand new concept, but it is one that is being
reintroduced to the modern world. For most, it is an opportunity to grow organic
food and live a healthier lifestyle, even with limited space.
The purpose of this eBook is to enlighten individuals who are new to the concept
of vertical gardening. It is a style of gardening that can be done on acres of land
or a few square feet of space. Hopefully, you will find this book to be
educational enough to help you start your own vertical garden.
Let’s start gardening!

Tom CorsonKnowles
A beautiful salad prepared from my vertical garden at home on my balcony.

CHAPTER 1. WHAT IS VERTICAL GARDENING?
If you’re new to the world of gardening, or just recently found out about this
unique way of gardening, you may be curious to learn more about how it all
works. First, to clear things up for those who don’t know, vertical gardening is
just as it sounds – growing plants upwards. But don’t all plants grow upward?
Yes, but in a vertical garden, the vegetation isn’t planted horizontally like with
most gardens. Instead, the plants are grow up the side of an upright structure,
such as a PVC board, trellis, wire fence or other supporting material.
Some people even use walls, which work by having a sideways garden. This
consists of a tray with soil that is attached to a wall vertically. You can transport
plants into its soil once they have sprouted.
Other common names for vertical gardens are green walls, live walls and sky
farms. Just as you would think, these are walls that were filled with all sorts of
growing life. Some people intentionally plant vines around their walls, so that
they can sprout and grow along the walls, giving their property a nice design.
Above is a picture of a small green wall on the side of a house.
However, green walls aren’t the only form of vertical gardening. There are many
different types of ways to grow a vertical garden. Sky farms are usually found as
part of a building and are located in urban areas. Some sky farms are edible,
while others are only for decoration. Either way, they make for spectacular
views.
Vertical gardening is a simple way to create space in your garden, whether it’s in
your backyard or on your rooftop. It’s a great form of gardening for older people
with back problems, since they don’t have to bend over to tend to their garden. It
also keeps your plants away from most pests, digging pets, weeds and rot.

Who doesn’t love the idea of having a beautiful garden without having to till and
do other back-breaking garden work? In fact, this is one of the main reasons
homeowners all across the world are turning to vertical gardening for a new way
to enjoy gardening with a lot less work (but more on that later).
Some people may think that vertical gardens can only be used for vine plants,
but this isn’t true. You can grow everything from tomatoes and onions to spinach
and mustard greens. Perennial and annual flowers can also be planted in this
style.
You can get creative with your vertical garden, making it out of just about any
materials you can find around your property at local home improvement store.
You can even buy some pre-made structures for vertical gardening at specialty
stores and web sites include modular trays, mobile living walls, frames, wire
cages, gazebos, arches, tripods, netting, poles, hanging pocket shoe organizers
and tube planters, which are all great for décor.
You can even get a vertical gardening aeroponics system for about $500 with
only 10 minutes of maintenance a week! More on that in Chapter 11 on
aeroponic vertical gardening.
To sum it all up, when it comes to vertical gardening you have the option of
either building your own from scratch (for you crafty types!) or buying one that
is easy to assemble and use. It’s never been easier to start a vertical garden!
It’s very likely that you’ve seen vertical gardens before. They can be found
growing in various establishments, including museums, corporate buildings and
other architectures that have gorgeous living architectural designs.
How do Plants Grow Vertically?
Some plants grow vertically naturally, such as with certain vining plants. There
are some that need a bit of help to get started. If you’re planning to grow grapes,
tomatoes, cucumbers, pole beans and similar vegetables, then you can easily
grow them vertically.
All you need is a trellis or other upright platform that will direct the plants north.
Vining plants are commonly found creeping up the side of walls, even without
the intervention of humans. Imagine how great your garden could look by
directing your vining plants to the areas you want them to grow!

Cucumbers and other vining plants naturally love to “climb” and will happily
grow and fill up your vertical garden.
For the non-vining plants, all you need is a simple setup that allows you to grow
them vertically. This can be a setup that involves shelves or trays with soil that
allows you to insert plants. You can find many different designs for vertical
gardens
Remember, you can either build your own or buy some pre-made kits, depending
on the scale of your vertical gardening dreams!
Your entire gardening space can have towers, trays or walls filled with vertical
gardening specimen. It’s important that you know which types of plants to grow
together, because some can be more beneficial than others – especially when it
comes to attracting certain bugs (More on that in Chapter 9 on pest
management).
Likewise, having the wrong plants near each other can cause enemy bugs to
attack your precious plants. Your vertical garden can be used to grow anything
you want, including flowers, plants, herbs, vegetables and fruits.
The concept of a vertical garden isn’t hard to comprehend. Once you see how a
vertical garden is set up, you’ll see that it’s exactly like a horizontal garden, but
a lot easier to start and maintain. Plus vertical gardens take up a lot less space!

CHAPTER 2. WHY PLANT A VERTICAL GARDEN?
There are many reasons why people choose to grow a vertical garden. Whether
they’re intrigued by the style or require additional space for growing, vertical
gardens are definitely an answer.
One big reason why folks choose to plant a vertical garden is because they lack
sufficient space. If you live in an urban or suburban area that has a very small
yard or no yard at all, you can use vertical gardening to produce a massive
amount of food and beautiful plants where conventional gardening may be
impossible

Urban Living
If you live in a city, you can still enjoy vertical gardens! Here’s how:
Vertical Gardening on Your Balcony or Patio
Don’t fret if you have a small condo or apartment in the city that has no green
space. The beauty about vertical gardening is that it can be built anywhere you
have enough space. With a vertical garden, a foot of space is enough to start a
garden!
Vertical gardens work great in small places and you will be surprised how much
food you can grow in a tiny space when you grow vertically!
If you have a balcony or patio that has free space, you can transform the entire
area into a vertical garden. A lot of people in urban areas have taken to this idea.
Just take a look at many of the balconies that you find in major cities throughout
the United States. You may see all types of plants growing on them.
In fact, I personally have a Tower Garden® by Juice Plus+® vertical aeroponics
system (learn more in Chapter 11) growing on my balcony. It turns my otherwise
“dead space” of a concrete balcony into a massive food-producing haven. In just
a 2 foot by 2 foot area, my balcony vertical garden produces fresh, delicious,
organic tomatoes, mint, purslane, lettuces (4 kinds!), strawberries, cucumbers,
watermelons, parsley and snap peas!
That one vertical garden has saved me about $50 a month in grocery bills too!

Vertical Gardening on Your Rooftop
If you weren’t lucky enough to get an apartment that has a balcony or patio, then
you may be able to use the rooftop. Make sure to speak with the management of
your building to make sure that it’s alright. If so, you can begin planning out an
area of the rooftop for your vertical garden.
In fact, rooftop gardens are cropping up in urban areas all over the world - both
for fun and commercial use.
Video Extra: Check out this video of a chef in New York City who uses
Vertical Gardening on the rooftop of his restaurant to produce several TONS of
fresh 
produce 
every 
year! 
You 
can 
watch 
it 
on 
Youtube:
www.youtube.com/watch?v=72rtc2EaMQA

Suburban Living
If you live in the suburbs and have a small yard or larger, then you have even
more options for vertical gardening!

Small Backyard Space
Do you live in a suburban area with a small yard?
Maybe you already have a garden and lack more space to plant additional
vegetables, fruits and/or flowers. No matter where you live, you can put vertical
gardening to use even if you only have a small amount of space to work with.
It’s 100% Eco-Friendly
Individuals who are looking to plant a garden in an economical manner will find
vertical gardening to be a great option. These ingenious garden plans can also be
very eco-friendly. The benefits of vertical gardening are quite extensive, which
is why so many vertical gardens are popping up all over the world.

Vertical Gardens are Environmentally Friendly
One of the best factors about vertical gardening is that it doesn’t have a negative
effect on the environment. There are various reasons why vertical gardening can
be even friendlier to the ecosystem than conventional gardening.
For starters, a lot of the manufacturers of vertical gardening supplies use “green”
materials that are biodegradable or recyclable. Since vertical gardens help to
keep away pests, less or no pesticides are required to keep them safe.
In fact, some people build their vertical gardens themselves using PET plastic
bottles that they saved around the house. The plastic bottles are cut in half and
used to filter water that drains from the hanging plants. This prevents water from
being wasted, another reason why it’s eco-friendly!
Another way to use PET bottles is to cut an opening on the side of the bottle.
Pour in soil and plant the seeds of small herbs. The PET plastic bottles can then
be screwed into a vertical platform, such as a wall or board using a screw and
washer. This can be a great design for an outdoor wall you have in the garden.
Above is a picture of a “bottle garden” using recycled plastic soda bottles.
PET plastic does not contain bisphenol-A but it may contain other hormone
disruptors that can leach into the plants and your food so I avoid the use of it
personally except for flower gardens.
Surely, you can probably think of many other ways to grow the seeds for your
vertical garden, using items like rain gutters and containers. There are many
different eco-friendly designs that you can use for your vertical garden.

Vertical Gardening is Economically Friendly
Anyone who is worried about the high costs of starting a garden should rest at
ease once they learn how easy and cheap it is to build a vertical garden. First of
all, you aren’t required to buy a home with a lot of land in order to plant a lot of
plants.
If you design your vertical garden smartly, you could have a large garden even if
you have limited amount of space horizontally. Whether you’re using a yard,
balcony or rooftop, vertical gardens are proven to be easy on your wallet – and
most gardeners find they’re saving enough money on their grocery bills to more
than pay for their investment in building the garden.
The amount of money you’ll spend on a vertical garden is far less than what
you’d spend on a traditional in-the-ground garden. Since there’s no tilling of the
dirt required, you won’t need all of the gardening equipment that is commonly
needed.
Then if you set up your vertical garden correctly, you could have it so that water
isn’t being over-consumed. There are water preservation techniques that are easy
to implement into a vertical garden. Simply place something at the bottom to
catch dripping water and reuse it, saving you on your water bill.
A common practice is to place a water capturing barrel underneath the rain
gutters – which prevents excess storm drainage problems in urban areas. Then
you can use all the fresh rainwater to keep your garden healthy if there’s a dry
spell!
How Many Plants Can You Grow?
The design of your vertical garden is what determines how many plants you’ll be
able to grow. It’s important that you utilize as much of the available space as
possible – don’t leave any area untouched. For instance, you can hang plants on
the walls and grow them in corners and rows throughout the garden space.
The great thing about vertical gardening is that you get to be creative and you
can always change things, add new layers and experiment with different designs
and types of plants.
The supplies for setting up your vertical garden are fairly cheap as well. You can
try being creative and using items that you find around your home or you can go
with eco-friendly vertical gardens that you can buy with easy assembly.
You’d be surprised at what you can use that’s already lying around your house.
There’s a lot of competition for vertical gardening materials, so you shouldn’t
have a problem finding great deals for vertical garden setups. You should go for

materials that are made from biodegradable and recyclable materials. And if
you’re going to use plastics when growing food crops, I recommend food-grade
safe plastic to prevent leaching of potentially harmful chemicals into the plants.
So why do people create vertical gardens?
Overall, they are ideal for urbanites and suburbanites, and they’re perfect for
people who care about the environment. It won’t break your bank account to
start and maintain a vertical garden – and you’ll find the abundance of fresh food
will cut down on your grocery bills significantly.
The benefits of vertical gardening in terms of environmental friendliness,
expense and output far outweigh those of traditional gardens, making them a
must-have for many. You’d be surprised to know that even people who have
sufficient land to garden are turning to vertical gardening methods to make
maximum usage of their acreage because they can get better yields growing
vertically.
In fact, Dickson Despommier, one of the pioneers in vertical gardening, says
“Vertical Gardening could be the only way to feed the world’s growing
population without destroying more rainforest for farmland.”

CHAPTER 3. HOW DO YOU PLAN A VERTICAL GARDEN AND
PREPARE THE SOIL?
Planning out your vertical garden can be a very fun endeavor that you should be
a good bit of thought into. If you’re a beginner at gardening, then you will find
this information to be very beneficial.
Otherwise, planning a vertical garden is very similar to planning a traditional
garden except that you may need to use some different supplies and landscape
design to help your garden grow vertically.
You can use the tips below to help plan your vertical garden project.
Choosing a Site for Your Vertical Garden
The first thing you’ll need to do is find an area that can be used for your vertical
garden. The location of your vertical garden is very crucial. Having sufficient
sunlight for your garden is a given, so make sure to time how much sunlight
your plants would get per day.
If there isn’t enough sunlight throughout the day for the types of plants you want
to grow, then you should try to find a different location or consider using
artificial lighting if there are no other options. Most balconies and patios receive
lots of sunlight throughout the day, unless there is a tall adjacent building or
structure that blocks morning and afternoon sunlight.
Keep in mind that some plants can grow to be large (especially plants that live
all year round), casting shadows over the other plants below them. Try to make a
pyramid from biggest to smallest, so that all of your plants are able to receive
equal sunlight. Of course, there are some plants that love shadows, so use this
knowledge to plan out which plants will be where in your vertical garden.
Make sure to plan space in your gardening location and design for foot paths so
that you can walk around your garden and tend to it once it’s up and producing.
If you’re planning to grow in a tight area, such as a balcony, rooftop or small
space in your yard, then you will need to design your vertical garden in a way
that will allow you easy access.
Sounds obvious, I know, but I’ve seen people “wall off” parts of their yard with
huge tomato plants or cucumber vines and then have to rip them out and start
over with a better design. Just a little bit of thought ahead of time can save you a
lot of money, time and effort once your garden is growing!
Vertical Gardening Tip: You might want to draw a simple picture of your

vertical garden design. It doesn’t need to be fancy at all, but just get the
dimensions of your space and choose which plants you want to plant where.
Drawing it out can help make the planning process a whole lot easier!

Inside Your Home
Indoor plants have always been popular with nature lovers. Why not try vertical
gardening inside of your home?
It’s already a growing trend throughout the world, simply because it gives more
room for plants and you can keep animals and bugs away from your vegetables,
herbs, fruits and flowers. The only thing you need to do to ensure their survival
is to choose a location in your home that receives lots of sunlight.
A vertical gardening panel like the one pictured above can be kept indoors and
moved outdoors when the weather changes.
If the vertical garden is mobile, you can move the garden outdoors on your patio
or balcony to get extra sun for a few hours and then bring them back inside
(although that can be a lot of work depending on how big your garden is). Grow
lights can be used indoors as well.
Indoor vertical gardening isn’t for everyone, but if you’ve got the space you can
make it happen! Aeroponics vertical gardening kits like can also make indoor
vertical gardening a whole lot easier (See Chapter 11 on aeroponics for more
info).

Patio Vertical Gardens
If you don’t have yard space to grow a vertical garden, you can plan on using an
available patio, deck or balcony instead. Patios can be just as effective for
growing a vertical garden. As long as it gets enough sunlight throughout the day,
you should have no problem getting things set up. Just research the types of
plants you want to grow to see how you should design your garden for maximum
plant production.
Since you are limited in the amount of space that you’re able to use, you’re
going to have to get creative with the type of structures that you use. Some ideas
include trellises, arbors, pyramid-shaped assemblies, fencing, tripods and
containers. If you are going to be planting vining plants and others that spread
rapidly, you will find vertical gardening on your patio to be quite successful.
To maximize the usage of space, you can use hanging containers, upside down
planters and baskets that can be hung on railings, canopies or arbors. Having a
row of plants on shelves can also produce more space for other structures you
may want to use.
You can also use vertical planters like the one pictured below to grow more in a
small patio space.

Choosing the Type of Structures to Use for Your Vertical Garden
As mentioned, there are many different types of structures that you can use for
your vertical garden. There are a multitude of possible setups for the different
types of plants that you’ll be growing.
It’s important to note how heavy your plants will become and how much weight
the structure is able to handle so that your vegetation will have enough support
as it grows. The structures you use should be anchored into the ground, so that
it’s not easy to tip over by passersby and your growing plants.
This is especially important when growing heavier vining plants like melons,
pumpkins and squash. These plants absolutely thrive in vertical gardenings and
you would be surprised how big and fast they will grow. All of these plants love
“climbing” with their vines and lots of sunlight and I’ve seen 40 pound
pumpkins growing from a vertical garden – so make sure you’ve got enough
support for when the big fruits come!

Trellises
One structural option for your vertical garden is a trellis. These are small enough
to fit in almost any space and can hold different types of plants. You can make it
yourself or purchase it from a store.
Trellises can also be attached to a wall in your garden or staked into the earth for
better support and the design prevents mold from spreading disease throughout
your plants. Trellises have a nice design and can be combined with other forms
of garden structures. Plants that grow well on trellises and tripods are those that
have tendrils, such as pole beans.
This trellis is supporting several bean plants and is one of the simplest vertical
gardens you can create.
If you decide to plant heavy plants on your trellises, make sure that the trellis
you use is made of either wood or metal. Lighter plants can be used on metal
trellises as well. Try arranging your plants in a pyramid shape. To keep your
trellis in place, you can stake it to the ground using poles or stakes made of
wood or iron.

Wire Fences and Poles
If you want an organized vertical garden that is filled with many types of vining
plants, like peas and green beans, then wire fences and poles are your best bet.
These types of plants may need a bit of help creeping up vertically. You can
simply tie up the vines along the poles and wires and they will do the rest.
If you already have a fence set up, you can plant crops next to it that will grow
upwards using the support of the fence. You can also just build your own using
some simple chicken wire or other type of fencing material.

Arches
Another great structure that fits nicely in gardens is arches. These can be used
for plants that are heavier, such as vining plants like grapes.
Arches can also be used for plants that climb or hanging baskets of plants. Your
vertical garden can look like a typical garden with beautiful garden furniture and
arches, making anyone want to lounge out in the yard on a warm day and enjoy
the spectacular view.
This arch is completely covered with beans! Arches make for a beautiful, simple
vertical garden design and can be a lot of fun.

Pockets
Pockets can be purchased at the store or you can make them yourself by using
the shoe pockets that are commonly found hanging in closets (holes will need to
be drilled to allow for aeration and water drainage. The pockets should be 15
inches by 24 inches, which can support up to 20 pounds of dirt. Pockets can be
used for planting small perennials and edible plants.
Pocket bags like in this picture above can also support a small vertical garden –
in this case with lots of fresh greens!

Trays
Trays are rectangular in shape and are divided into 30-degree angle individual
cells for planting. There are holes at the bottom that allow air and water to seep
through. To make your tray look unique, you can make or buy a frame of your
choice to go around it.
Gardening trays that were designed for vertical gardening come with brackets
that allow you to easily mount them.
Trays for vertical gardening like the ones pictured above can be mounted on a
wall which is often how small green walls are made at home. Just make sure
your wall or siding of your house can support the weight!
If you keep the base of the tray on the ground and attach some screws, nails or
clips to fasten it to the wall it should hold up fine.

Hanging Pots
The design of pot hangers are made so that they are easy to install and nearly
invisible. They have hangers that can hold up to 100 pounds. The hangers can be
screwed into a wall. The pots are held onto the structure with the help of clamps.
Hanging pots like the ones pictured above can make for gorgeous flower
arrangements.

Walls
If you have walls in your garden or plan to build some, you will find that you
can have certain plants grow along it. All some vining plants need is a rough
surface to attach to. You don’t want to use wood, painted or mortar surfaces
because plants can cause damage to these types of structures. Brick walls are
usually alright, but Ivy vines can cause damage to the bricks so be warned!
Wall vertical gardens can be extremely elaborate like in this picture or much
simpler – it’s up to you.
Make sure to place your vining plants in an area where you don’t mind them
spreading. Some plants end up growing vertically too far, reaching the gutters of
homes and eventually pulling them down with their weight. Morning Glories are
notorious for doing this.
Some of the plants you grow may have to be tied to their structure, such as with
tomatoes, otherwise they will spread across the ground – defeating the purpose
of vertical gardening.
When you grow plants on the walls outside of your home, it can help prevent
your home from getting damaged by acid rain and other pollution, and it helps to
keep the soil around the home from flooding because the vertical garden will
soak up extra rain water. It creates a great year-round ecosystem that absorbs
pollutants and natural gas – naturally!

Planters and Gutters
If you decide to use planters or rain gutters, make sure to purchase them between
eight inches and 12 inches so that they’re strong enough to support the plants.
These can be placed along your wall. If the pieces are too long, you can use a
saw to make them the right size.
Holes will also need to be drilled at the bottom of the gutters or planters, which
should be around six inches apart. This will allow water to drain, so that the
roots of your plants don’t end up rotting from sitting in water.
A gutter garden like the one pictured above can be created with just a normal
rain gutter and a wire or hook to hold it in place. Just make sure not to place it
somewhere that’s exposed to strong winds because it could get damaged and
your garden could get ruined from a wind storm.

Choosing the Type of Gardening Style You’ll Use
There are many different forms of vertical gardening. There are three types of
vertical gardens that you can start in your home, including the following:
Traditional – This is the most common way for growing vertical gardens, which
uses soil.
Hydroponics – Another form of gardening that is gaining popularity, which uses
no soil, only water and aqua-life. This method is expensive to set up. I don’t
cover hydroponics in this book because it can be very complicated, especially if
you’re going the aquaponics route and requires a lot of specialized equipment
and knowledge.
Aeroponics – A new technique that is picking up momentum in the planting
world. This too can be used for vertical gardening and the awesome thing about
this method is that it requires no water systems or soil, only nutrient-rich water.
We’ll get more into this later in Chapter 11.
Choosing What to Grow in Your Vertical Garden
There’s a large variety of plants that you can grow in your vertical garden. The
site you choose will determine how many large and widespread plants that you
will be able to grow. The setup of your vertical garden will also play a role in
what types of plants you’ll be able to grow.
The most popular plants that are grown in vertical gardens are vine and creeping
plants. Even gardeners, who aren’t necessarily converting to vertical gardening,
use vertical supports like beanpoles and trellises to grow their, gourds, zucchini
and peas.
Fruits, vegetables, perennials and annuals can all be grown in vertical gardens.
Those that have vines are the best suited, such as grapes, strawberries, Morning
Glories, melons and pumpkins. Plants that vine offer higher yields, which is
always a great thing. Other plants that you can choose that don’t grow vertically
on their own can also be grown, including raspberries, roses and tomatoes. Some
people even grow small trees on their patios!
If you decide to go with tomatoes, you should choose a variety that is
indeterminate because their stems continue growing. Determinates have roots
that stop growing after reaching a few feet. Then for the heavier vining plants
such as the melon, gourds, cucumbers and the like, you should go with varieties
that are smaller. Having heavier and bigger plants can be too much for small
supports.

Fruits, vegetables and other plants that you decide to grow that are medium in
size can be done with the help of slings and ties. Some use household items
which should be placed at the bottom of the plants and tied to the structure. Just
try to use ties that are made up of cloth, so that it won’t cut into the plants. You
can look for nice looking ones that will offer a nice accent to the décor of your
vertical garden. Preferably something that blends in well.
Choosing the type of plants you want to grow in your vertical garden should be
based on multiple factors, including weather, space, shade and the area you live
in. Learn more about the types of plants that grow best in your town. If you’re
totally new to gardening and not sure, look up a local gardening store and talk to
some of the experienced staff there – they’ll be able to tell you what kinds of
plants grow best in your area and help you find seeds and supplies!
Keep in mind that certain plants grow well together while others don’t and some
plants grow better vertically, while other plants don’t. For instance, vining
varieties grow better in vertical gardens than a bush would, simply because
bushes are too big. There are some plants that come in the form of vines and
bushes, such as peas, cucumbers, squash and beans, so make sure to buy the vine
varieties if possible.
Melons and pumpkins are two types of fruits that do well in vertical gardens.
These two will need to be supported by slings and ties to grow vertically.  Here’s
a list of the types of plants that are commonly grown in vertical gardens:
         Capsciums
         Korean Box
         Golden Diosmas
         Cuphea
         Chillies
         Lettuce
         Mondo Grass
         Mandevilla
         Chinese Star Jasmine
         Daisies
         Petunias
         Miniature and Climbing Roses
The plants you choose should be based around a root system. As you may know,
some plants have a vigorous rooting system that is large and complicated. These

plants require lots of support.
Overall, the plants you decide to grow should be grouped together by
similarities. The ones that need a lot of water, shade or sunshine can be placed
on their own trellises or walls.

Designing Your Vertical Garden
The main purpose of vertical gardening is to be able to grow lots of plants in a
limited amount of space. Making the most of the space you do have, whether big
or small is very important. The design of your vertical garden is what will ensure
that you do just that.

Start from the Back
When setting up your vertical garden, you should start from the back and work
your way to the front. For instance, at the back of your vertical garden, you want
to place your lush and productive plants. These will give a nice backdrop for the
rest of your garden. The plants that you decide to grow along a wall can also be
placed at the back, such as pole beans and other spreading varieties.
To create a nice design for your wall, you can grow vines on your walls that
have beautiful flowers. Other plants you can grow include cucumbers, squash
and beans, which all grow well together. Again, try to choose smaller varieties at
first to avoid having an out-of-control 50-ft long squash monster!
Next in line could be your indeterminate heirloom tomatoes and medium-sized
plants. These grow to be a good size and can be pruned into a single vine per
plant if needed. This is done by plucking off the vines that grow out of the main
vine.
Another variety is the heirloom cherry tomato, which are very tasty. Your
tomatoes can be planted in an upside down hanging planter or in a deep
container. By hanging your tomatoes, it can lessen the damage caused by
harmful insects and make more room in the middle of your vertical garden for
other plants that you may want to grow.
Lastly, you can plant your main vertical plants in the front and to the sides of
your vertical garden. You can place trellises and other structures that you find
attractive around the garden.
Some people grow potatoes in potato grow bags because they produce lovely
flowers. These can be placed in deep pots to give more pizazz to your vertical
garden if you decide to do the same. Others grow radishes, carrots and other
types of fruits and vegetables in this area. To dress up the sides of your vertical
garden, you can install railings or tables, where you can grow even more plant
life.
Don’t forget that vertical gardening casts shadows for the plants below them.
Try planting sun-loving plants on top and shadow loving plants at the very
bottom, underneath the vining plants with big leaves.
Preparing the Soil for Your Vertical Garden
Preparing soil for your vertical garden is similar to traditional in-the-ground
gardening, but it’s a lot easier. For starters, vertical gardens only require small
pots or strips of fertile soil. This is enough to give your plants sufficient nutrition
to flourish.

With most vertical gardens, you don’t need a lot of compost, fertilizer or water.
Depending on the design of your garden, watering should be a breeze. You can
either use a drip can, irrigation system or watering can. The best part about
gardening is that you can make your own compost at home using scraps of other
plants, vegetables and fruits that one would usually throw away – especially
since you won’t need as much soil as in a conventional garden.
Vertical gardens are more exposed to the elements, which means that they tend
to dry out quicker, which is a good thing for plants that commonly get fungi
growth. You’ll need to keep an eye on the soil because it will likely require
fertilization (preferably using natural methods rather than conventional
fertilizers, but that choice is up to you). Make sure that there is sufficient
drainage for the plants. There should also be enough room to allow roots to
grow.
If you will be using a raised bed for your vertical garden design, make sure that
the soil is between six and 12 inches deep to allow the roots to spread and grow.
What you’re growing in your vertical garden will determine how your soil
should be prepared. For some plants, certain pH levels should be maintained,
especially for acid plants like blueberries, which require soil with low pH levels.

Fertilizing Your Soil Organically
Plants need lots of life in their soil, so you have to make sure that there is plenty
of organic matter within it. Fertile soil is the key to life and this is especially so
for those delicious veggies and fruits you may be growing.
Before planting anything, make sure to work the soil a bit. The soil should be
damp, not too wet. When it’s too wet, it will cause the dirt to become compact;
the soil should be loose enough for the roots to spread. The organic matter in the
soil should make up about 5%, which can be ensured by using a soil test. With
organic material, your garden soil will have improved texture, better capacity for
holding water, increased fertility, more aeration and drainage and can support
more beneficial organisms that live in the soil.

Animal Manure
There are different types of organic materials that you can use for fertilizer. One
is animal manure, which has plenty of nutrients. You should apply the manure to
your soil months before planting your seeds.
Fresh animal manure is known to cause damage to plants because it sometimes
has pathogens that are harmful, along with weed seeds. Stick with manure that is
old, prepackaged or composted. Manure that is at least six months old, and that
is from an herbivore is best.

Green Manure
Green manure is another option for organic material. This can consist of
different crops, including ryegrass, alfalfa and similar plants that are turned over
for the process of decomposition. By adding nitrogen, it can help the green
manure decompose quicker. It will also keep your soil from being starved of
nitrogen.
You can either use your own green manure or purchase it from a gardening
store. Some people plant cover crops during the final harvest, which is plowed
during autumn or spring. By waiting until spring, the cover crop is able to hold
in more soil moisture during snowy cold winters. It is also known to prevent the
soil from becoming eroded and it insulates perennial plants.

Compost
Like green manure, compost consists of plant life, but instead of covering crops,
it is placed in a bin with soil and fertilizer for the decomposition process.
Compost is oftentimes used in place of animal manure. It helps to improve the
soil and its ability to retain water. There are also plenty of nutrients in compost,
but it has less phosphorous, nitrogen and potassium than manure.
Compost is the stuff of life! Plants need healthy soil to grow so if you’re
planning to grow on land that’s been damaged or compressed, make sure to use
good healthy compost.
You can read more about composting later on in Chapter 7.

pH Level of Soil
Depending on the type of plants that you are growing, you will need to have a
certain pH level for your soil. Some vegetables require soil that is slightly acidic,
between 6.0 and 7.0. Level 7.5 and higher is considered to be alkaline and
anything below that is considered acidic. It’s important that you pay attention to
the alkalinity and acidity levels of your soil because if not at the right levels, it
could deprive your plants of certain nutrients, resulting in poor growth. A soil
pH test can be used regularly to keep an eye on things.
To make your soil more alkaline, you can use lime. Then to lower your soil to
acidic levels, sulfur can be used. This should be done six months in advance,
since it takes time for them to take effect. There are also store-bought products
that you can purchase that may work faster.

Fertilizer
Just like with manure, you should place down your fertilizer in advance, so that
the soil can absorb its nutrients. You can combine this with your compost, since
it can give your soil phosphorous, potassium and nitrogen, among other types of
micronutrients.
There are different types of fertilizers that you can use for your garden, including
manure, fish emulsion and blood meal. Organic materials are lower in
phosphorous, unlike with fish emulsion and manure.
If you decide to buy your fertilizer prepackaged, make sure to look at the label to
see what the contents are made up of. Some fertilizers have to be absorbed in
water before being applied to your garden and others come in the form of
granules. When reading the label, you want to check to see how much
phosphate, nitrogen and potassium it has. You will find many that are made up
of 8% nitrogen, 32% phosphate and 16% potassium.
Make sure that you don’t over fertilize your garden because it can cause
excessive plant growth, which means you’ll receive less yields of veggies and
fruits. A soil test can be done to check the nutrient levels of your soil.              
After planting your garden, you can place down a nitrogen fertilizer once your
plants have already started growing. This should only be done if your soil has
been depleted of nitrogen and requires more.
If you are growing tomatoes, the fertilizer should be placed six to eight inches
away from the main stem and for onions, it should be placed three to four inches
away from the main stem.  You can use a store-bought nitrogen fertilizer that is
made up of 20 to 30 percent nitrogen, but it should not contain any seed
germination inhibitors or weed killers.
If you’re growing leafy vegetables, such as cabbage, lettuce, sweet corn and
spinach, you can put down the nitrogen fertilizer once the plants have grown
between three and five true leaves. Nitrogen fertilizer shouldn’t be used on
tomatoes, peppers, pumpkins, cucumbers, squash or eggplants until they have
started to bear fruit. Doing it too soon could minimize the amount of fruit they
produce, or worse, it could prevent them from growing fruit at all.

CHAPTER 4. HOW TO BUILD A FREE-STANDING VERTICAL
GARDEN
A free-standing vertical garden can be much easier to build than you might
think! There are a couple of ways you can build one, but we’ll focus on the two
most common and easiest ways.
For a free-standing garden, you will need several feet of space. This works best
if you have a small sized yard and grass to work with. It’s probably not a good
option if you live in an apartment or condo – you may went to use an aeroponics
gardening system if you have only a few feet of space to work with.
The first one we’ll discuss looks like a fence and can be used as such if you’re
looking to increase the privacy of your yard, patio or balcony. The difference is
that the free-standing structure has a double layer, so that plants can be placed in
the middle of the layers.
You can make your free-standing vertical garden as wide and tall as you want it,
but just keep in mind the accessibility of it. You don’t want to have to climb
ladders to reach the top and you don’t want to have to bend too low to reach the
bottom if you have back problems.
The tools and materials you will need to build a free-standing vertical garden
structure are:
         Hammer or drill
         Nails or screws
         Two-by-fours
         Extra wood for small pieces to be cut
         Wooden posts
         Tape measure
         Saw
A free-standing vertical garden is ideal if you don’t have a wall or roof to hang
your plants. It’s cheap to make and quite easy if you’ve ever worked with
carpentry projects. If you don’t have any experience, ask your friends or family
to come over and help you – it will make for a fun and productive day!
Keep in mind that there are many different designs for free-standing vertical
gardens that you can purchase online, but this is only one of the two examples of
how you can do it yourself.

Here are the steps to follow to build your free-standing vertical garden:
The Fence-Like Vertical Garden
1. Cut eight two-by-fours into the length of your choice (The length of these
boards will be the length of your garden)
2. Cut four wood posts into the height of your choice (The post height will
determine the height of your garden)
3. Begin nailing the two-by-fours to the front and back of the wooden posts
until it makes four equal rows.
4. Nail smaller cut pieces of wood that are a few inches wide at the ends of the
two-by-fours to close them off (This helps provide more support for the
structure).
5. Nail blocks of wood every four inches in between the two-by-fours, so that
the plant can sit on something inside of the two-by-fours.
6. The final construction can be dug into the dirt like a fence, so that it doesn’t
tip over and fall.
7. Close up the bottoms of the two-by-fours with a strainer-like net and place
your soil and plants inside these nets – you can buy plant hangers or plant
holders at any gardening supply store or online.
Below is a picture of the design and layout of the fence-like vertical garden wall.
If you need to see the picture in greater detail you can see the full-size version
here on the website.

When the garden is complete it should look like the picture below.

The Communal Wall Method
This is another way that you can construct your free-standing vertical garden. It
is easily moved and can be placed anywhere you have the space for it. You can
place flowering pots at the bottom of the communal wall and allow them to
creep up the sides.
The structure is simple, four wooden poles are stood upright and attached
together by four other wooden poles that are nailed together and placed at the top
to hold the other four together. Two more wooden boards are placed a foot from
the bottom to hold the structure steady.
At the end, it would look like a room with no walls. A wire mesh is placed on
adjacent sides, which is used for your creeping vertical growing plants. Think of
a pergola-style structure.

Supplies Needed
         10 2x4s at the length you choose
         Extra wood for supports
         Nails or screws
         Hammer or drill
         Saw
         Wire mesh

Steps
1. Nail together three of the boards at the ends, into the shape of street sign
that has two signs. There should be one pole standing upright and two
boards that are perpendicular at the top.
2. Cut diagonal pieces of wood to hold up the wood that is at the top of the
structure. Nail to the outside of the top board and the pole that ascends
downward.
3. Nail the other two boards a foot from the bottom on the north and south
sides, using four foot long pieces of wood to nail them to the upright poles.
4. Attach the wire mesh to the north and south sides. The four pieces of wood
that were nailed at the bottom can be used as spacers to attach additional
wire meshes on the opposite side of the structure for more plants, giving
you four walls in total.
When all done the structure should look like the picture below.
The boards you use should be long enough to give you sufficient space, so that
your plants are able to get east and west sunlight. Make sure to place your
structure in an area that receives at least 6-8 hours of sunlight.
This structure will allow you to enter into your vertical garden through the two
open sides, providing you with enough room to water, pluck and seed your
garden.
Below is a picture of the communal wall happily supporting a new vertical
garden.


CHAPTER 5. MAINTAINING YOUR VERTICAL GARDEN
Building and starting your vertical garden is great, but what would it matter if
you don’t know how to properly maintain it?
Luckily, one of the other great reasons about vertical gardening is that it is so
much easier to take care of than an outward growing in-the-ground garden.
There are a few things that you need to frequently maintain to keep your vertical
garden flourishing beautifully.

Water
This is a no-brainer. You should have set up your vertical garden in a way that
makes watering your plants easy. This could be setting up a water drip system or
other automated irrigation system.
Or if you’re into doing things the old fashioned way with a watering can,
hopefully you set up your garden in an organized way, so that you know exactly
how much water each section needs. It’s important that you don’t overwater or
underwater plants.
If you have water drippers installed for your vertical garden, make sure that they
remain unclogged from the nutrients you add into the system. This is done to
ensure that your plants receive plenty of nutrition. You can find these at your
local nursery.

Trimming and Pruning
Some of your plants will be required to be pruned and trimmed to keep from
overgrowing and overtaking your vertical garden. Pruning and trimming ensures
that certain plants are able to flower and produce fruit.
Whenever you find dead leaves or flowers, make sure to clip them off. Other
plants may need to be pruned, so that they grow in the manner that you prefer.
Keeping your garden nice and neat will add to the beauty and enjoyment and can
also improve the health of your plants.

Checking for Disease
It’s important to keep a close eye on the plants in your garden to check for any
diseases or plant damage. You want to know exactly when any type of disease
hits, so that you can react quickly. It’s best to sever the diseased leaves, so that it
doesn’t spread to the rest of the plant. You also want to watch out for rotted
roots, which in this case would have to be plucked entirely.
Above is a picture of brown root rot on tomato plants. If this happens it’s best to
just remove the plants so the rot doesn’t spread.
If you notice that your plants are being eaten up, this could be due to unseen
pests. Try to find out what type of pest you have. Then you can research natural
solutions for getting rid of them.
How To Make Your Own Organic Spray to Get Rid of Pests and Plant Diseases
You can make a great natural pest control spray at home. All you need is an
empty plastic spray bottle (if you don’t have one, you can buy it at any home
supplies store) and some tea tree oil (which you can buy at most health food
stores or online).
1.        Combine 4 cups of water with 2 tbsp. of tea tree oil. Mix well.
2.       Place the solution in an empty plastic spray bottle.
3.       Spray the solution directly onto leaves of plants to combat fungus. You
can even help prevent diseases in your plants by spraying the solution on
plant roots and leaves routinely!
You can also use the tea tree oil spray as an antiseptic or air freshener in
troublesome areas that are prone to mold, mildew or fungal infections.
Maintaining the pH Level and Nutrients of Soil
Ensure to check the pH levels of the soil for your various plants to see if you

need to acidize or alkalize it for better growth. This can be done when you check
to see if more nutrients are needed in the soil. You should group alkaline and
acid plants together, so that this can be maintained easily. You can also add
fertilizer or compost as needed.

Harvest
When it comes time to harvest, you can easily do so without breaking your back.
Some plants yield fruits and vegetables quickly, allowing you to pluck a little
here and there throughout the summer.
Maintaining your vertical garden is pretty simple, since you don’t have to worry
about weeding and tilling the ground. You can even start seeds indoors and then
plant them when it’s warm enough outside. If you have mobile gardens, you can
place them indoors during the winter.
You’ll quickly see that vertical gardening maintenance is a breeze compared to
conventional gardening!
My mom harvesting snow peas from her vertical aeroponics garden at home.

CHAPTER 6. HOW DO YOU GROW YEAR-ROUND WITH A
VERTICAL GARDEN?
If you’re looking to grow vegetables, fruits, herbs or flowering plants all year
round, then you’re going to need to set up your garden in a place where it can get
the type of climate it needs year round.
There are a variety of ways that you can achieve this. It’s important that you
consider this before setting up your vertical garden, so that you can do so in an
indoor, temperature-controlled environment. Of course, you can have both, an
indoor and outdoor vertical garden setup.
Growing a Vertical Garden in Your Home
One of the more popular and more affordable ways of growing a year-round
vertical garden is to set one up inside of your home. This can be done throughout
your house, including in your kitchen, living room, dining room and any other
rooms that receive lots of light throughout the day. You can set up the vertical
walls or trellises right in front of the windows, so that they can get enough
sunlight.
One simple way to grow plants in your home is to build frames around your
windows where you can place your plants. These allow light to come in and
provide your garden with plenty of photosynthesis. Another way is to use your
indoor walls as vertical gardens. These are great for decorative and edible plants.
Below is an example of a gorgeous vertical wall garden indoors.
Some people use their garages as a vertical garden haven, but this will need to be
remodeled to have more windows and aeration, so that your plants don’t
suffocate in the dark. If you can have vents installed, so that you can cool off and
warm up the garage as needed, that will make everything a lot easier.

Building a Greenhouse Outdoors
If you don’t have enough space in your home or would like additional growing
space for your year-round vertical garden, you can build or buy a green house.
This will keep your plants warm enough during the winter to keep them
growing.
You’d be surprised at how many plants you could fit into a greenhouse using
vertical gardening setups, compared to what would be allowed with in-the-
ground gardening. You can produce a large yield of fruits, vegetables and herbs
that can be plucked year-round. You may just fall in love with a vertical garden
greenhouse!
Grow Annuals, Perennials and Vines
These types of plants grow fast and don’t need much help to do so. Even without
much light and human intervention, they grow rapidly and produce lots of
flowers. You can grow these on your walls in pots or frames.
Make sure to keep the dead wood and leaves trimmed off so that the plant will
continue to grow. Keep in mind that annuals grow faster than perennials - if you
are going to start seeds indoors, you want to time it correctly.

CHAPTER 7. COMPOSTING FOR YOUR VERTICAL GARDEN
When I was a kid growing up, my parents had a big “compost pile” in our back
yard. It was always my chore every week to take out the “compost bucket”
underneath our sink.
We always had a very strict policy – if we were going to throw something away
and it was food scraps, we had to throw them in the compost bucket. If it was
plastic or paper trash, we had to throw it in the trash can. I just thought it was
normal to always be composting!
I remember playing out in our big compost pile as a kid. I would always have
fun using a pitchfork to toss the fresh food scraps in with the rich, dark compost.
Of course, there were times when the smell was so bad taking out the compost
bucket… but I do have very fond memories of composting as a young kid!
Above is a picture of my compost pile at my parents’ home where I grew up.
That’s good compost!
Compost isn’t just for fun though – it’s one of the best forms of fertilizers that
you can use for your vertical garden. If you are looking for a sure way to give
your vertical garden plenty of nutrients, and cheaply, composting is definitely
the way to go.
The great thing about composting is that you can create it on your own. You can
start off with a store-bought package of compost, but you won’t have to keep
buying it. Compost is simple to make and affordable – in fact, it can be totally
free!

COMPOSTING THE CHEAP WAY
First, we’ll talk about the frugal way to create compost on your own. Before we
get into that, let’s talk about what compost is...
Compost is a mixture of organic matter that has begun to decompose,
transitioning into awesome fertilizer for your soil. Some people even grow their
fruits, vegetables and herbs directly in compost without any soil. Compost can
be made up of dirt, scraps of veggies, grass, flowers, leaves, fruits, mushrooms
and other scraps that grow from the ground.
You can place this in a wooden box or container with earth worms, scraps of cut
grass, leftover veggies and fruits, then cover it up and let it sit to begin
decomposing. If there’s a dry spell or drought, you should water the compost
pile a little to keep it damp and so that the earthworms don’t dry out. The water
will also help the bacteria decompose the organic matter – they can’t do it if
there’s no moisture!
Place your compost box in a warm place in your home or outside (preferably
outside because of the smell, but there are indoor composting units you can buy
that seal tightly and keep the smell at a minimum). You should stir or mix your
compost every now and then to allow oxygen to penetrate through the bottom
layers.
Once your compost is ready, you can begin using it in your garden. There are
soil tests that you can use to see how much nutrients are in your compost. You
should try using nutrient-rich organic matter for your compost such as
mushrooms, peat moss and scraps of veggies. Of course, to keep things
affordable, you can stick with composting the scraps of yard and food scraps that
you commonly produce.

COMPOST PILES (ALSO CALLED COMPOST HEAPS)
Another cheap way to create compost on your own is to create heaps of scraps.
This is probably the most cost effective because it doesn’t require you to buy or
build any structures. You simply throw all your old food scraps into a contained
pile somewhere in your yard.
A small compost pile could be about five feet wide and three feet tall. The length
and size of your compost pile will vary based on how much food scraps and
organic material you throw in and how quickly you use it in your garden.
Heaps should be used if you have sufficient space in your yard. Simply add
scraps to the pile that you accumulate daily, or keep them in a container and
dump them into a heap once you have generated enough. By creating a heap in
the fall, your compost will continue to decompose throughout the winter months.
If space allows, you should try to create two heaps of compost. Once the first
heap is large enough, then allow it to decompose, while you work on building
the second heap. It’s not required for you to turn the compost in your heaps, it is
entirely up to you. But keep in mind that the decomposition process will take
longer if you don’t.
Avoid throwing food scraps onto a heap of compost that has not been turned
because it will attract insects (mostly flies). Wood can also be added, but make
sure that they are chopped up, so that the pile doesn’t become brush. Wood takes
longer to decompose, sometimes up to a couple of years – but it will make a
richer compost when you combine as many kinds of compostable organic
material as you can find.

SHEET COMPOSTING
If building heaps of compost isn’t something you want to do, you can use this
method instead. All you have to do is spread a thin layer of organic materials on
an area of your garden – this can be materials like leaves, food and garden scraps
and cut grass, all of which should be shredded or chopped before being added.
Once this is done, you will then till the layer of materials using a spade, hoe or
other tool.
One issue with sheet composting is that it tends to release carbon residues, which
will pull nitrogen from the soil to help with decomposition. Also, if you have
items in your compost that are high in nitrogen and could end up releasing
nitrogen too fast; this could slow down the decomposition process.
The best time to do sheet composting is in autumn. The compost should be
spread out in a two inch by four inch layer. The best tool to use for tilling is a
rotary tiller, if you’re planting a vegetable garden.  A garden fork or hoe would
be best if you’re planting perennial or bulb flowers.
Sheet composting in action.

TRENCH COMPOSTING
Trench composting is known to be one of the easiest ways to create compost
from food scraps. All you need to do is dig a hole in your yard that is about a
foot deep, then simply chop up and mix the food scraps with the soil you dug up.
Afterward, you will place about eight inches of additional soil on top. If the
temperature is warm enough, the compost will take between one month and a
year to decompose.
There are some people who randomly make trenches of compost, while others
create an organized system. One system that is commonly used is to bury food
and garden scraps inside of holes that were dug near the drip line of bushes and
trees.
Trench composting in action.
In England, they use a trench composting system that involves a three-season
rotation, known as vertical composting. The garden is divided up into rows that
are three inches wide. Here is how the system works:
Year One – A hole is dug that is a foot wide and then filled with compostable
materials. Once the compost is an inch high, the hole is covered with soil. A one
inch section is left open as a path right next to it. Next in line is another one inch
strip that is used to plant your garden items. In all there are three rows.
Year Two – Unlike with year one, the third section is the one used for the
trench. The same steps are used to create the compost. Your garden is planted in
the second row and the first row is now the walking space.

Year Three – The section that was used for the trench in year one and the
walking path in year two now becomes the planting area, which should be rich
because the compost should be fully decomposed. The second space is now the
trench and the third space is now for walking.

MORE ADVANCED COMPOSTING SUPPLIES
There are other different methods of composting that you can use that require
certain equipment. Some equipment is cheap, while others are more on the
expensive end. First on the list are holding units, which are bins that are used to
throw your kitchen scraps into.
Little maintenance is needed with most models and they’re small enough to be
used on of apartment and condo balconies. You should use non-wood materials
for your compost in holding units. Just throw in the scraps as you get them,
instead of trashing them.
Holding bins are easy to use, but require time to generate ready compost. They
don’t require you to turn them at all, which is why the process is a lot slower –
sometimes taking as long as six months to two years. The process will work
much faster if you add earth worms to your compost bins!
Portable units can be purchased that can be turned and aerated. They can be
moved about easily. These usually come in the form of plastic, wire fencing /
hardware cloth, wood with wire frames or snow fencing.
You can try increasing the aeration of the compost in the holding units by poking
holes into the soil and placing ventilating stacks in the center. It will look like
pipes sticking out of the middle of the dirt which will allow oxygen into the soil,
further decomposing the organic matter.
You will have to place the pipes down before pouring in the compost. The pipes
can be made out of wire mesh or even grouped together sticks that are tied
together loosely. If you decide to use PVC pipes, make sure that they are about
an inch in diameter or bigger. Drill holes throughout the sides of the pipes to
give more aeration to your pile.
Some people place down a plastic aeration mat or wooden pallet before dumping
in the compost. Since you will be continually placing in new organics into your
compost, the finished compost will usually be found near the bottom of the pile.
When needed, you can remove the compost at the bottom of the heap for your
garden. Some holding bins have removable doors at the front or bottom, so that
this can be easily done. If you want, you can remove the completed compost and
place it in a separate bag.
Keep in mind that holding units that are heavier or permanent and have no
removable doors will require more effort to create the compost. You will have to
remove the finished compost to another container. It’s a good idea to have about
three of these bins – one could be for finished compost, another for maturing

compost and the third for fresh compost.
You have the choice of buying a holding bin that is made of plastic or wood, or
building one yourself using hardware cloth, pallets, metal barrels, limber and
tires. These permanent structures can also be made with bricks, rocks and
concrete blocks.
If you decide to build one yourself using wood, avoid using those that are penta,
creosote or copper arsenate (CCA). Don’t use these types of wood around your
edible gardens either! These heavy metals can leak into your soil and go straight
through your skin, giving you heavy metal toxicity or poisoning! I highly
recommend you use wood that is naturally resistant to decay, such as cedar or
pine that hasn’t been treated.

TURNING UNITS
Unlike typical compost bins, the turning units are made specifically for aeration.
You are able to spin this to keep oxygen flowing through your compost. If
you’re looking to create compost faster then turning units are the kind you’ll
love. All of the aeration forms bacteria that decompose the compost quicker.
You will find two different types of turning units available – a series of bins or a
rotating barrel. By turning the bins every five to ten days and within two months
or less, your compost will be ready – if your compost has a good mixture of
carbon, nitrogen and moisture.
By heating up the compost between 90 and 140 degrees Fahrenheit, it will kill
diseases, fly larvae and weed seeds. This is also a good environment for the
compost to decompose. Turning units will cost a bit more than holding units. If
you decide to build one on your own, it will take a little more effort upfront.
A small compost turning unit.
Those who buy the turning bins that have multiple bins and rolling balls
sometimes find it hard to operate, especially if they have problems with their
back or physical limitations. There are some turning bins that are created to have
easier use and maintenance. Barrel turning units are smaller in size than the other
types of bins, so if you don’t require too much compost, then this could be the
option for you.
With the turning units, make sure to accumulate your food waste in a container
so that when you place it into the bin it is filled to the prescribed level. The
container you save it in should be pest-proof.
If you’ll be keeping the compost container indoors, there’s a neat trick you can
use to reduce the smell – just throw a light layer of saw dust on top of the scraps.

WHAT COMPOST SHOULD LOOK LIKE
You want your compost to be rich, dark and earthy like in the picture below
from my compost pile at home. It shouldn’t have any bad smell from food scraps
– the bacteria should have broken all that down by the time you use it for your
garden.

CHAPTER 8. HOW DO YOU START SEEDS FOR A VERTICAL
GARDEN?
Starting seeds for your vertical garden is just like with starting seeds for
traditional gardening methods. If you are new to gardening and starting seeds,
then this chapter will teach you what you need to know!
You can either start seeds yourself or you can purchase plants that have already
started to grow. Here are a couple of reasons why starting seeds is a great idea:
         It’s affordable
         You can do this for any type of plant you want to grow
         The plants usually are of higher quality
         You’ll know they’re organic
In order for your seed starting to succeed, you’re going to need to have the right
environment for them to germinate. It’s a good idea to start with seeds that start
to germinate quickly.
For beginners, it’s a good idea to limit the variety of plants that you are trying to
create seedlings for. You don’t want to work with too many types because you
could end up getting frustrated with certain types of plants that take longer or
require too much effort to get started.
Just to give you an example, strawberry seeds can take up to 4 weeks to sprout
whereas lettuce can sometimes sprout in a day or two.
Starting seeds on your own can be a lot of fun. If you want to bypass this step,
you can just go buy starter plants at your local gardening store.

Picking Containers for Your Seeds
You’re going to need containers to start your seeds. The type of container you
choose is up to you, but should be at least two to three inches deep and contain
holes at the bottom for drainage. Some people take the easy route and purchase a
seed starting system. If you’re going to be growing tomatoes and peppers, you
can buy a seed starting system and then transport them into a pot.

Starting Seeds Without Soil
When starting seeds, sometimes you don’t even need soil at all. In fact, I
recommend sprouting seeds without soil in most cases. This will enable you to
avoid problems with insects and diseases. The medium should consist of a blend
that is spongy, fine-textured and moist. When sprouting seeds for my aeroponic
vertical garden, I use rock wool cubes. You can buy them at any hydroponics
supply store or online. More on that in Chapter 11.
You can find ready-mixed blends readily sold at gardening centers in your area
or online. These blends consist of vermiculite, milled sphagnum moss and
perlite. Since these blends don’t have a lot of nutrients, if any, so you will need
to add a liquid fertilizer to the mix. This should be done a few weeks after your
seeds start to germinate. Once you transplant the seeds into the garden, you can
discontinue the fertilizer.
The transplantation of your seedlings should take place after six to eight weeks.
They can then be transplanted into a larger pot. It should contain coarser
materials with the vermiculite, perlite and sphagnum, such as garden soil or
compost. Usually a 1/3 of each item is used in the blend. This mixture will get
your transplants prepared for a life out in your garden.
Starting Your Seeds at the Right Time
Certain plants grow faster than others, which is why you should try and time
your seed starting accurately. You don’t want to start seeds that grow too fast to
where you can’t transplant them out to your garden right away.
You will need to time rapid growing plants closer to planting time and those that
grow a lot slower can be planted earlier, so that they are ready by the time you
want to transport them outdoors.
For instance, you can begin growing leeks and celery 12 weeks before you want
to transplant them outside into your garden. Then there are sunflowers and
cucumbers, which only need between three and four weeks to be transplanted to
your outside garden. Most seed packets give directions for seedling and how
long it takes before they’re ready for transplantation. To better organize your
seed starting, you can create a schedule for all of the different plants you decide
to grow this season.
If you will be starting your seeds inside of a greenhouse or a room that is very
warm, then you can subtract a week or so from the planting date. When starting
seeds in very warm temperatures, it can cause the plant to grow faster, which
will leave you with a big plant that is ready to be transplanted sooner than you
expected.

Some seedlings will have to be transplanted into larger pots after they’ve been
growing for about three to four weeks. If you’re growing your seeds in flats
instead of individual plant cells, then this is especially so. These plants will need
space to allow their roots to grow before being transplanted outdoors.

Starting and Maintenance of Seedlings
The container that you are growing your seeds in should be kept moist and
warm. Room temperature water is the best to use. Fill the trays you have
purchased with the medium you decide to use and make sure that it is thoroughly
moistened.
Fill the tray about ¼ to ½ from the top, then plant the seeds. Make sure to check
the seed packages to see if the seeds are required to be chilled or soaked before
being planted. You’ll also need to double check whether the plants prefer
sunlight or shade and specific temperatures.
It’s important that you create the perfect habitat for your seedlings to get the best
results. This is why it’s easier to start with a small variety of seeds – because it
can be pretty difficult to create multiple climates at once. If you can, you should
try growing plants that have similar requirements. But just know that if you do
make a mistake and some of your seeds don’t sprout, you can always try again!
Trust me, we’ve all made those kinds of mistakes many times in our gardening
adventures.
You can either plant the seeds in their own cells or scattered across the surface
of the soil. Don’t sow the seeds too thickly; they only need a fine layer of soil.
Most seeds should be covered three times their thickness, unless the seeds are
very tiny or require light to germinate, which in this case would need light
coverage.
Always read your seed packets because they should have all the information you
need to know about how to sprout them!
A mister or dribbles of water can be used to keep the medium moist and this will
ensure great contact between the soil and your seeds. Make sure to put labels on
the trays, so that you know which plant is which. Don’t throw away the seed
packets either - you might want to use them for future reference.

Correct Temperatures for Your Seedlings
The temperature of your seedlings should be based on the requirements of that
particular plant. This temperature should be that of the soil, not the air. Most
plants grow great in soil that is 60 degrees Fahrenheit, while others germinate
best in 85 degrees Fahrenheit. On average, many plants do well in 78 degrees
Fahrenheit. I’ve rarely problems germinating seeds indoors at room temperature
– just try to protect your seedlings from any sudden or drastic temperature
changes.
It’s important that the soil isn’t too cold, because this will take the seeds a longer
time to germinate or they won’t start at all. To heat up the soil, you can use a
heating mat or simply move the container on top of a warm refrigerator,
television or sunny window sill. Once you start to see sprouts emerging from the
soil, it’s a good idea to put the plants in a sunny window or under lights within
24 hours.
After germination has begun, you should ensure that the air temperature is kept
around 70 degrees Fahrenheit. If the temperature is over 75 degrees Fahrenheit,
then this could cause the plants to grow too fast.
This isn’t always a good thing because they could end up weak and leggy. It’s
sometimes alright for the temperature to reach temperatures as low as 50 degrees
Fahrenheit because most seedlings still grow well, as long as the soil is still
between 65 and 70 degrees Fahrenheit.
Providing Sufficient Light for Your Seedlings
Light usually isn’t a requirement for the germination process, but it is necessary
once you start to see sprouts. Place the plants in a window that faces south or
under grow lights. Make sure to check on your plants every day. If your plants
don’t receive sufficient light, they could end up growing tall and leggy which is
hard to correct.
So how much light do your plants need?
For most, about 14 to 16 hours of light is needed each day. This will give your
plants enough food to build a healthy system and well-nourished leaves. You can
enhance the amount of light your windowsill plants are getting by placing a
cardboard with aluminum on the back of the container to allow light to bounce
off and back to your plants.
If you don’t have a window that faces south, but still would like to grow your
plants indoors, you can use grow lights or full-spectrum fluorescent light bulbs
instead. You don’t want to use incandescent light bulbs because they give off too

much heat and not enough light – they even lack the blue-spectrum light that is
responsible for making your plants dark green and stocky.
When using fluorescent light bulbs, make sure that you place them very close to
the plants – about three inches away from the sprouts. You can leave the lights
on for about 12 to 14 hours daily. Then for windowsill plants, you may need to
offer them supplemental light for a couple of hours – this is especially so during
the winter time.

Ensuring Seedlings Get Enough Moisture
During the germination process, consistent moisture is needed. Just make sure
that the soil isn’t soggy because this could cause your seeds to go rotten. Some
people use clear plastic to cover their flats until their seeds have started to
germinate. You can find seed starting systems that come with plastic covers that
help your plants retain moisture.
Once your seedlings have begun to sprout, you should remove the plastic – you
don’t want humidity levels to be too high. Make sure to check the moisture level
of the soil each day. There shouldn’t be too much moisture because it can cause
the roots to retard and not grow, plus disease will begin to manifest. It’s a good
idea to allow the soil to dry out a bit before watering it again – this will help to
prevent mold and fungus from growing.
As mentioned, warm water is better to be used than cold water from the tap.
Room temperature water would suffice. If you have tap water that is chlorinated,
avoid using it right away. You can fill up a jug or watering can and then allow
the chlorine to dissipate by leaving it in direct sunlight outdoors for 24 hours.
You should also avoid using water that has gone through a water softener
because it contains sodium that can harm your seedlings. The best water to use is
always fresh rain water. You can set up buckets underneath your gutter spouts to
collect it or get a rain barrel or rain capturing device.
When watering your plants, the water should always be able to trickle down all
the way to the bottom of the container – if it doesn’t, then you haven’t watered it
enough. Thorough watering will allow the plants roots to spread out nicely (just
don’t overdo it and drown the plants).
There’s a neat trick I’ve seen others use to ensure that your seedling containers
get sufficient water. First, fill up your sink with an inch or two of water. Then
put you containers in the water and allow them to sit there until the surface of the
soil feels moist. Then just remove and let them drain and voila! – a perfect
amount of water for your seedlings.

Controlling Humidity in the Air
You should try to maintain a level of humidity in your home that is between 50
and 70 percent. When the humidity is too high and the air circulation is poor,
fungus will begin to grow and disease problems will ensue.
A very low level of humidity is no good either. When the air is too dry, you can
make up for this by placing your plants on capillary matting or a humidity grid.
For small rooms, you can open the windows or run a fan to help improve the air
circulation for your growing plants.

Transplanting Sprouts to Larger Pots
When your seedlings have developed into sprouts you may need to transplant
them into a larger pot if things start to get crowded in your containers. If each of
the seedlings had their own growing cells, then this won’t be a problem.
Larger pots can be used for overcrowding of plants that are too young to be
transported outdoors. You should do this before the roots begin to get tangled in
the containers, making them more difficult to transplant. Ripping and tearing the
roots can interfere with the plants ability to survive.
Transplantation of your seedlings to larger pots can be done by pulling them up
gently by their leaves or roots. Avoid pulling on their stems because they are
very fragile – you don’t want the stems to be bent or smashed. You don’t want to
damage too much of the roots either! Just be gentle and delicate with the
seedlings and it should work out fine.
You can either use a spoon or your hands to do the transplants. It’s easy to
separate the stems from the roots when the soil is dry instead of wet. Or you can
simply pull a clump of plants out of the soil and then separate them.
When transplanting them to their pots, the soil should have the same depth or a
little bit deeper than their containers. There is an exception to tomatoes – you
should remove the entire plant and then bury the stem which will then produce
more stems beneath the soil.
After your plants have been repotted, make sure that they are well watered and
fertilized. They should be placed under grow lights or on a windowsill that is
sunny.

Feeding Your Seedlings
You don’t have to worry about feeding your seedlings until they develop their
second set of true leaves. You don’t want to feed young seedlings a full dose
fertilizer because they are too fragile. Only give the young seeds a half-dose
until after three to four weeks. Once they’re old enough, you can give them
fertilizer weekly. Fertilizer can help if you’re having trouble starting seeds.
Transplanting Your Seedlings to Your Garden
Now that it’s nice and warm outside, it’s time to start transplanting your
seedlings outdoors. The best way to do this is to start slowly exposing your
plants to the outside world. They’ve been bred on the inside and will need a
grand introduction to the outdoors, where the temperatures and weather aren’t so
kind and predictable.
About a week before you transplant your plants, you should start the weaning
process by minimizing the amount of water and fertilizer that you use. Place the
pots of plants outside on a protected porch or under a tree every day for about an
hour. You can then gradually increase how long you leave them outside. Don’t
allow them to be exposed to too much hot sun and wind.
Try to choose a day for transplantation that is overcast or drizzling. The wind
should be calm this day and the sun not too hot. The transition process can be
made easier for the plants by placing a shade fabric over them. It will also
protect them from pets, flea beetles and other outdoor enemies. Don’t forget to
water your transplanted plants well to allow the roots to flourish beneath the
earth.
What Went Wrong with My Seedlings?
There are a variety of things that could go wrong with your seedlings if you’re
not careful. If you followed all of the directions, but a quarter of your seedlings
failed to germinate, you can try to troubleshoot the problem. The first thing you
should do is check the seeds package to make sure that you followed all of the
directions properly, including providing the right amount of light, water and
climate control.
Take a look at the soil of the seedlings that failed to germinate – if it is cold and
very wet, then the seeds have probably rotted. You can dig them up and take a
look to see if this is the case. If the seeds look soft and swollen, then this is a
sign of rot. You will need to replant the seeds and this time around, don’t
overwater the plant.
If the soil was a bit dry, this too could cause your seeds not to germinate. When

the soil is too dry, the roots sometimes don’t take hold. Another reason your
seeds may not have germinated is because the seeds were old. Make sure that the
shop you buy your seeds from sells new seeds. When you replant the seeds,
make sure to keep the soil moist.

Seeds Are Leggy and Tall
If your seeds did sprout, but are leggy and tall, then it’s likely due to lack of
light. Try giving the plant grow light exposure for 15 to 18 hours. Having the
temperature too warm can also make your plants leggy. Lower the room
temperature and minimize the amount of fertilizer that you’re giving the plant.
Below is an example of a tomato that has grown leggy and tall.
Tomato Has Purple Veins on the Leaves
If you look beneath the leaves of your tomato plants and you see purple veins,
this is likely due to the plant not getting enough phosphorous. If you’ve only
been giving your tomato plant a half dose of fertilizer during the first few weeks,
then up it to a full dose. You should use a fertilizer that has phosphorous content
that is at least three. Try looking for fertilizer that is especially made for
seedlings.
The Plants Started to Grow then Fell Over
If your plants started out great, but then their stems started to wither until they
toppled over, this could be due to a soil-borne fungus known as damping off. It’s
hard to kill this fungus once it becomes present, but you can counter this by
using a soilless medium that is sterile and ensuring proper air circulation.
Mold is Present on the Top of the Soil
If you notice that there is mold growing on the surface of the soil then this means
that the medium you’re using is too wet. If you act quickly, you can save your
plants. Just don’t water your plants for a few days and increase the air circulation
in the room. Scraping the mold off the top of the soil can be done or
transplanting it to a new container with fresh soil or soilless medium is an option
as well.

CHAPTER 9. HOW DO YOU CONTROL COMMON PESTS
The first thing you should realize when it comes to gardening is that there is no
such thing has a pest-free garden and nor should you want it to be that way!
There are good insects and bad insects, but the key is knowing which of them
benefits your garden and which of them are harmful.
Learning about the plants you’re growing and their predators and helpers can be
very helpful in this matter. There are a couple of ways that you can combat
harmful pests without using chemical pesticides.
Some of the common insects that are actually beneficial to gardens include:
         Earthworms
         Braconid wasps
         Praying mantis
         Spiders
         Yellow jackets
         Lacewings
         Honeybees
         Syrphid flies
         Tachinid flies
         Ladybugs
         Ground beetles
One method of protecting your vertical garden from the unwanted pests is to
grow certain plants that repel them or that attract predator insects that eat them.
Below are some of the plants that are known to do just that:
         California poppy
         Broccoli flowers
         Dill flowers
         Parsley flowers
         Capsicum
         Oregano
         Marigolds
         Lemon balm
You should learn about companion plants for each of the plants that you are

trying to grow. This will help to ensure that enemy bugs don’t come and eat
them up.
Also, make sure to keep your garden free from litter, so that it doesn’t act as a
breeding ground for unwanted insects. Weeding the grass that is around your
vertical gardens will help to keep pests at bay since they like to breed and dwell
in weeds.
Non-Chemical Pest Control
If you’re looking for an eco-friendly way to get rid of the pests in your garden,
you can use other living organisms to do the work for you. You can purchase
toads, lady bugs, snakes and other sorts of predators that are known to eat the
pests that you have.
There are consumer products that you can buy that are made with all non-
harmful organic materials. These are made into sprays that are easy to apply. A
lot of the ingredients used are soap, vinegar and certain types of herbs that are
known to kill or repel certain pests.
Some people have even made their own concoctions using dish detergent and
water or with a mixture of other herbs like onions and hot peppers. There are
thousands of natural insect and pest repellants you can use to protect your
garden!

Chemical Pest Control
This isn’t a recommended option, but it is an option if nothing else works.
Chemical pesticides work by poisoning the pests that are disrupting your garden.
It can also be harmful to your plants and your health, which is why it’s a good
idea to try and keep your vertical gardens as organic as possible. Chemical pest
control is known to negatively affect the ecosystem, so it should be used
sparingly.

Common Pests in Gardens
You may find some of these pests in your vertical garden. Here is a list of them
and how they can be ridded of:

Cats
If you or your neighbor has cats that like to come and play in your garden, you
may notice that they have a negative effect on your plants. The best way to get
rid of them is to protect your growing areas with strong nets.
You can also grow plants that have a strong smell that keeps them away. There
are also devices with high-pitched sounds that only cats can hear that you can
purchase. If you ever catch them in your garden, you can also spray them with
water or chase them away. It wouldn’t hurt to buy a pet dog either. Personally, I
love cats and enjoy them playing in my garden (as long as they don’t hurt my
tomato plants!) but some cats may damage your plants so just be aware.

Birds
Birds love to eat seeds, fruits and flowers. Scarecrows can be used and other
humane traps. Bird netting is another great option. Or you could bring back the
cats!

Aphids
You may notice your vegetable garden getting attacked by an unseen pest, which
are likely aphids. They mainly come when your garden has a dry spell, so make
sure to keep your garden well-watered. I’ve found that the tea tree solution spray
I shared with you earlier works exceptionally well to ward off aphids.

Caterpillars
These greedy little pests can quickly eat up your garden if you don’t keep an eye
out. You can try spraying vinegar on the leaves of the plants to kill them or you
can remove them by hand one-by-one.
Hopefully, you will be able to keep your vertical garden pest free. A lot of
people find fighting certain pests easier because the garden is off the ground.
You can also recognize when there is a pest a lot quicker, since you don’t have
to kneel down to see any damage done.

CHAPTER 10. HOW DO YOU WATER A VERTICAL GARDEN?
Keeping your vertical garden well-watered is important for it to thrive. Watering
your plants can be done in a variety of ways, manually or automatically. The
great thing about vertical gardens is that you can use irrigation systems.
The beauty of it all is that vertical gardens allow you to conserve water, saving
you money and placing less demand on the environment. However, it’s
important that you regularly water your garden because the roots of your plants
need to stay moisturized. Make sure to keep in mind the amount of water each
plant requires – and remember that as plants grow, they will consume water
much faster to feed their growing leaves.

Vertical Garden Irrigation Systems
This is the best type of watering system to use for your garden because it uses
the vertical build of your garden to an advantage. There are a couple of different
irrigation systems that you can use. The one you choose will be based on the
type of structures you have in your garden and your own personal preferences.
Irrigation Systems with Gravity Fed Drips
This type of irrigation system is very common in vertical gardens. This system is
placed at the top of your vertical garden and the water is released with the help
of gravity. The water first reaches the top layer of plants and then drizzles on
down to the other rows beneath it until all plants have been watered. Then at the
very bottom of the vertical garden, there is a collection tray that collects the
water drainage from the plants. A pump can be used to recycle this water right
back into your garden.

Comprehensive Drip Irrigation Systems
These systems are best used for vertical gardens that require a lot of water. Like
its name suggests, it is more comprehensive than the gravity fed irrigation
systems. With this type of system, you can have a drip line installed on each row
of your vertical garden, so that you can ensure that your plants get all the water
they need. Just like with the gravity fed systems, there is a water collection tray
at the bottom for water, which can then be recycled.

Using a Pipe Network
Then there are other gardeners that decide to use a network of perforated plastic
pipes that run throughout their garden. The water is sprayed onto the plants at
time intervals specified on the timer that it is controlled by. This is a good option
for people, who are traveling away from home, are very busy or who commonly
forget to water their gardens.

CHAPTER 11. HOW DO YOU GROW AN AEROPONIC
VERTICAL GARDEN?
If you’ve never heard of aeroponics as a form of gardening, then you’re
definitely missing out. This is an awesome way to grow your gardens vertically.
There are so many great advantages of growing an aeroponic vertical garden,
making it almost nonsensical not to do it. Aeroponics is having a big impact on
the vertical gardening community.
So what’s so great about vertical gardening with aeroponics? This form of
gardening uses absolutely no soil and only about 10% of the water and land
compared to traditional gardens. All the water in the system is recycled so
there’s no runoff which is why you can grow plants with much less water than
traditional gardening.
With aeroponics the plants also grow much faster as well (NASA quoted that
aeroponic gardens grow at least twice as fast as soil gardens).
Pest control is a lot easier as well because the plants are so healthy they can
pretty much combat disease and insects on their own (or at least better than
plants in soil).
Aeroponics can be used to grow almost anything, including herbs, fruits,
vegetables and flowers. These systems can be placed in small spaces, such as
decks, balconies, rooftops, porches and patios.
Above are some baby Alpine strawberries just a few weeks old in my vertical

garden.
What is Aeroponics?
Aeroponics is a form of gardening that requires no soil or other form of medium
to grow plants. The name itself is Greek and was chosen because it describes this
method perfectly – air labor.
It’s important that you don’t get aeroponic gardens confused with hydroponic
gardens because the two are different. Hydroponics involves growing plants in
sand, gravel or water with no soil. Aeroponics is a specialized type of
hydroponic gardening where the roots are exposed to the air and then watered
with a nutrient-rich water regularly.
Today, aeroponics systems for the home and commercial use have become so
sophisticated and easy to use that all you really need to do is set up the system
and check the water, nutrient levels and pH once a week or so.
Aeroponic Gardens are Eco-Friendly
Unlike with traditional gardening, which can place a great demand on the
ecosystem (especially when harmful chemicals are used), aeroponic gardens are
safe for you and the environment.
The greatest benefit of this system is that it preserves water and energy better
than any other type of garden. It has been recorded as using 1/10 the amount of
water than what would traditionally be needed to grow the same crop. Some
have even dropped this number down to 1/20 depending on the climate.

How Aeroponics Gardening Works
The way aeroponic gardens are built allows it to receive lots of air exposure. The
garden is literally on a tower that extends into the air, giving it lots of oxygen.
The root systems and stems are free of constraints, allowing it maximum growth
and root expansion, due to the lack of physical contact and access to pure water.
Since the plant roots are 100% suspended in the air, they are able to get lots of
oxygen. The system also provides the roots with micro-droplets of nutrient
water. The design of aeroponics helps to prevent pathogens from forming on the
plants.

Less Disease in Your Garden
Aeroponic gardening allows plants to flourish without many of the common
traditional diseases found in soil-growing plants. Since the contact between
plants is reduced and there's no soil in the system, the plants are protected from
many common disease. However, it's still possible to see diseases such as blight,
mildew, botrytis, bacterial wilt, anthracnose, fusarium and leaf spot so be aware
if you see signs of disease.
When plants are placed in soil or other medium, disease is able to easily spread
to plants. In the event that a plant does become diseased in an aeroponic system,
it can easily be removed in seconds without spreading it to the other plants.

How Plants are Watered
Since aeroponic systems only use 10% of the water soil gardens use, you may be
wondering how these plants are watered. The irrigation systems that are used in
these systems usually come in the form of misters, sprayers, foggers or gravity-
fed drip systems. A good system will have a timer that you can customize to
water the plants on a regular schedule.

Benefits of Aeroponic Systems
Here is an overview list of all the great benefits that are associated with growing
aeroponic vertical gardens:
         The most cost-effective method of gardening
         Yields more seeds, since the plants grow pathogen-free
         Easy to use, even for first-time gardeners
         Harvests are fast and easy
         Plants receive lots of nutrients
         Eco-friendly because less water is used and no harmful chemicals are
needed
         Less nutrient solution throughput is required

Growing Your Own Aeroponics Garden
If this all interests you, then you will find that getting an aeroponic garden
started is quite simple. All you need is a vertical aeroponics system, which can
be purchased online or at a local gardening supply store.
There are different types of systems available, big and small. You can also try
making the system yourself. These systems pretty much resemble a tower. Some
people use nothing more than a sealable storage bin, fittings and PVC pipes (just
be warned that PVC will leach phthalates and other toxic chemicals into the
plants – which is why I never use it for gardening). A pump is also needed to
recycle and deliver the water for your irrigation system.
If you wish, you can even transplant your aeroponic plants to the soil without
worrying about it going into shock.
Personally, I use the Tower Garden for much of my food gardening.
I love aeroponics systems because they are very low maintenance. They come
with everything you need to setup and manage your vertical garden. The kit
includes the Vertical Aeroponics Tower which holds 20 plants, the water basin,
water pump, a pH testing solution, pH adjusting solutions, nutrient solutions and
easy to follow instructions and customer support.
This chef in New York City grows all his produce fresh on the rooftop of his
restaurant with about 30 Tower Garden units.
The Tower Garden is also one of the most technologically advanced units on the
market and it comes with all the supplies included for just $499 + shipping.
Currently, the Tower Garden is only available in the United States and Canada.
You can learn more about Tower Gardens at www.TowerGarden.com

AFTER YOU SET UP AN AEROPONICS GARDEN
Once you have set up your aeroponics system, place the mesh holders over the
growing chambers and begin planting your seeds inside of them. You can
usually place between two and three seeds in most kits – but for bigger plants
like cucumbers, tomatoes and watermelon, it’s best to just plant one seed as they
will grow 3 to 4 times faster than normal in an aeroponics environment. Place
the growing chambers in the slots of the system, then ensure that the vapor cover
is set over it correctly, so that it will receive the mist spray as needed.
Make sure to read the directions of the aeroponics kit to see how much nutrient
solution you need to place inside of the system. You will then need to check to
see what settings you need to place for your water valves. The kit will come with
a hydro controller. After a couple of days have passed, you will know which
seeds did not sprout. This will be determined by the type of plant that you are
growing.
As the seedlings begin to mature, you will see the roots exposed through the
tray. You will need to lift the container to trim the roots using pruning shears and
then remove the plant from the chamber.
Like this book? Share it on Facebook!

CHAPTER 12. THE JOYS OF VERTICAL GARDENING
Well, it’s been an amazing journey for me to be able to share my experiences of
vertical gardening with you. And I want to thank you for spending the time with
me to learn more about this wonderful new way of gardening!
I hope you learned a lot about vertical gardening and all the joys that it can
bring. Give vertical gardening a try and you will see how easy and productive it
can be!
If you’re a creative buff or don’t mind spending a few hundred dollars to get
started, you can have your garden up and producing delicious food and beautiful
flowers in no time.
There are so many different things that you can grow in your vertical garden:
         Vegetables – cucumbers, pumpkins, squash, tomatoes, lettuce, spinach,
asparagus, potatoes, green, red and hot chili peppers, mustard greens and
peas.
         Fruits – kiwis, strawberries, grapes, raspberries, watermelons and dates.
         Herbs – oregano, basil, dill weed, sage, thyme, parsley and cilantro.
         Annual vines – trombetta squash, black-eyed Susan, Musica and
nasturtiums.
         Flowers – roses, daisies, ferns, petunias and Chinese star Jasmine.
This is only a small list of the types of plants that you can grow in your vertical
gardens. All types of annuals, perennials and vines can grow right on your patio,
rooftop or deck. Making the most of the space you have to use can make a world
of difference to your dinner plate.
Imagine being able to pluck fresh herbs and vegetables to make delicious salads
and sides for dinner time. Your family will love the variety of recipes you’ll be
able to manifest in your kitchen.
Depending on what you grow in your vertical garden, you can have everything
you need to make your meals full of fresh produce, cutting down your grocery
bill partially or. Produce prices continue to climb high, even for nonorganic
vegetables, fruits and herbs. If you want to get out of the rat race for affordable
organic produce, then you’re best bet is to grow your own.
Once you have chosen the types of edibles and non-edibles that you want to
include in your garden, make sure to learn all you can about them, so that you
can maintain excellent growth. You can purchase a plant book that goes into

greater detail about different plants, including how to grow and maintain them.
Knowing the proper climates, watering habits, sunlight and nutrients needed for
your plants could make all the difference between having a plush garden and a
dying garden.
I even encourage people who have land to plant in the ground to give vertical
gardening a try. This method can triple or quadruple the amount of fruits and
vegetables that you can yield each season. Even greenhouse efficiency can be
maximized with the use of vertical gardens.
If you’re really interested in aeroponics gardening, you can try growing plants in
your home, a greenhouse or outdoors. They are a bit more expensive at the
beginning if you decide to buy an already-made system, but you can attempt to
build one yourself to cut the costs.
Whatever type of vertical garden you decide to grow, you will surely have a
blast with the outcome. You’ll yield plenty of vegetables, flowers, herbs and
fruit – you’ll be amazed at how easy it is. Especially when compared to
traditional in-the-ground gardening.
Create a schedule for the plants you want to grow next season. Start buying
seeds and get prepared to start your seedlings before the warm months roll in,
then get them transplanted into your vertical gardens. If you have children, you
can involve them in your vertical garden project and see their eyes light up!
Have fun and eat fresh!
If you’d like to stay connected and share your experiences with vertical
gardening, come join us and like our Vertical Gardening Fan Page on Facebook:
http://on.fb.me/HmllNU

EXCERPT FROM THE URBAN GARDENING BOOK
GROWING PLANTS INDOORS
Who said that you have to have plants growing outside?
If you don’t have the luxury of having a yard, balcony or rooftop for gardening
you can grow plants in the comfort of your own home. Just make use of the
windowsills throughout your property. You can build shelves for the ones that
don’t have a sill. Some people even have a vertical garden on their walls, which
can be constructed with shelves or pockets on a board. There are different
designs available for these – some you can even build yourself.  Another great
option is to use a vertical aeroponics system near a window to grow 20-30 plants
in a 2 ft by 2ft area. More on that in Chapter 13.
If you don’t get enough sunlight coming into your home because of your
location, you can opt to buy artificial lighting, called grow lights. Make sure to
purchase grow lights that are specifically designed for plants. Not just any light
bulb can be used. Also, you’ll need to have the right temperature and amount of
light spectrum (red, white and blue light) for your plants. Some grow better
under red light, while others need the full spectrum.

CHOOSING A SITE THAT HAS PLENTY OF LIGHT OR SHADE
When it comes to choosing a site for your plants, it’s important that you know all
you can about how to nurture and grow them. This means researching whether
that specific plant needs majority sunlight or majority shade. You can set up
your urban garden in a way that will allow this to work out for each of your
plants. For instance, you can have some plants facing south where it will get
plenty of light and others in front of larger plants, so that it will get lots of shade.
Not paying attention to this important detail could leave you with shriveled,
withering plants that are dying from excessive or insufficient sunlight.
If you’re planting from seed, the seed packets should tell you how much sun
your plants need. Otherwise, just Google it to found out. For example, you can
search “Sun Requirement For Tomatoes” to find out how much sun tomato
plants need to produce fruit.

CONTAINERS, WALL GARDENS, WINDOW GARDENS AND AEROPONIC
SYSTEMS
The easiest ways  to garden indoors are to use containers, an aeroponics system,
window garden system or a wall garden. We’ll cover container gardening and
wall gardening in the next chapter. Aeroponics systems are covered in Chapter
13.
Right now let’s talk about window gardening.
Above is a picture of a typical “Window Garden” made using plastic bottles.
You can either manufacture them yourself or buy a complete system like those
found at windowfarms.com
Here’s a complete video tutorial for you if you want to grow your own window
garden using plastic bottles: http://bit.ly/Tvf0UG
Personally, I don’t recommend using plastic bottles for food gardening as the
phthalates and other chemicals can leach into the food. I’d much prefer to use
food safe plastic to grow to avoid any contamination. But that’s just my opinion.
If you want to make your own window garden with old plastic bottles, by all

means go for it!
Above is a picture of the Windowfarm system which start at $199.

LIST OF PLANTS THAT CLEAN THE AIR
The following is a list of amazing plants you can grow indoors that help clean
and purify the air you breathe. These plants are perfect for anyone who has
allergies or frequent respiratory infections (colds, viruses, flus, etc.). They’re
also just great for anyone who loves breathing clean air and gorgeous plants!
ALOE (ALOE VERA)
This easy-to-grow, sun-loving succulent helps clear formaldehyde and benzene,
which can be a byproduct of chemical-based cleaners, paints and more. Aloe is a
smart choice for a sunny kitchen window. Beyond its air-clearing abilities, the
gel inside an aloe plant can help heal cuts and burns. You can also make
smoothies with the inside flesh of the aloe (just avoid the outer green flesh as it
will make you very regular!)

SPIDER PLANT (CHLOROPHYTUM COMOSUM)
Even if you tend to neglect houseplants, you’ll have a hard time killing this
resilient plant. With lots of rich foliage and tiny white flowers, the spider plant
cleans the air of chemicals including benzene, formaldehyde, carbon monoxide
and xylene, a solvent used in the leather, rubber and printing industries.

GERBER DAISY (GERBERA JAMESONII)
This bright, flowering plant is effective at removing trichloroethylene, which
you may bring home with your dry cleaning. It’s also good for filtering out the
benzene that comes with inks. Add one to your laundry room or bedroom —
presuming you can give it lots of light (south-facing windows are best!).
[End of Excerpt] If you enjoyed reading this excerpt from Urban
Gardening: How To Grow Food In Any City Apartment Or Yard No Matter
How Small, you can grab your copy here: http://amzn.to/ZEIGNX

SNAKE PLANT (SANSEVIERIA TRIFASCIATA 'LAURENTII')
Also known as mother-in-law’s tongue, this plant is one of the best for filtering
out formaldehyde, which is common in cleaning products, toilet paper, tissues
and personal care products. Put one in your bathroom — it’ll thrive with low
light and steamy humid conditions while helping filter out air pollutants.

SPECIAL FACEBOOK GROUP
Come join our special Facebook group for gardening lovers like you! In this
group, we’ll be sharing tips, resources and ideas for happy, healthy, easy
gardening.
Come join us on Facebook here: http://on.fb.me/HmllNU

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
TOM CORSONKNOWLES is the #1 Amazon best-selling author of Dr.
Corson’s Top 5 Nutrition Tips, Rich by 22 and How to Reduce Your Debt
Overnight, among others. He lives in Kapaa, Hawaii. Tom loves to eat healthy
and grow his own fresh food with his vertical gardens.
Connect with Tom on Facebook: facebook.com/tomcorsonknowles
Follow Tom on Twitter: Twitter.com/juicetom

RECOMMENDED GARDENING BOOKS
Urban Gardening: How To Grow Food In Any City Apartment Or Yard No
Matter How Small
This is a fantastic book for anyone in the city who wants to grow a fabulous
urban garden.
Indoor Gardening: How To Grow Gorgeous Gardens Indoors With Ease
This book is perfect for anyone who wants to grow an indoor garden for food,
fun or just to create a gorgeous ambiance in your home. Did you know that some
plants can remove as much as 87% of the toxins in your home in just 24 hours?
Container Gardening: How To Grow Food, Flowers and Fun At Home
This book is great if you want to create gorgeous, fun container gardens at home
including detailed instructions for terrariums, growing succulents, bonsais and
other fun and unique plants.

ONE LAST THING…
If you enjoyed this book or found it useful I’d be very grateful if you’d post a
short review on Amazon. Your support really does make a difference and I read
all the reviews personally so I can get your feedback and make this book even
better.
If you’d like to leave a review then all you need to do is click the review link on
this book’s page on Amazon here: http://amzn.to/TzIv7n
Thanks again for your support!

