
The Phenomenological Mind
‘Offering a fresh new approach, this clear and accessible book shows the relevance
of phenomenology to contemporary investigations of the mind and brain. It will be
useful for students and scholars alike in the cognitive sciences who wish to gain
a better understanding of phenomenology and its relevance to their research.’
Evan Thompson, University of Toronto, Canada
‘This excellent and much-needed book offers the ﬁrst comprehensive introduction
to phenomenological philosophy of mind. Written by two internationally renowned
contributors to this exciting and fast-growing interdisciplinary ﬁeld, it will be an
indispensable resource for students and researchers alike.’
Matthew Ratcliffe, Durham University, UK
‘This is an outstanding book, and a very welcome and much-needed addition to
the literature.’ 
Daniel Hutto, University of Hertfordshire, UK
The Phenomenological Mind is the ﬁrst book to properly introduce fundamental questions about
the mind from the perspective of phenomenology. 
Key questions and topics covered include: 
•
what is phenomenology? 
•
naturalizing phenomenology and the empirical cognitive sciences 
•
phenomenology and consciousness 
•
consciousness and self-consciousness, including perception and action 
•
time and consciousness, including William James and Edmund Husserl
•
intentionality 
•
the embodied mind 
•
action 
•
knowledge of other minds 
•
situated and extended minds 
•
phenomenology and personal identity. 
Interesting and important examples are used throughout, including phantom limb syndrome,
blindsight and self-disorders in schizophrenia, making The Phenomenological Mind an ideal
introduction to key concepts in phenomenology, cognitive science and philosophy of mind. 
Shaun Gallagher is Professor and Chair of Philosophy and Cognitive Sciences at the University
of Central Florida and Research Professor of Philosophy and Cognitive Science at the University
of Hertfordshire. He is the author of How the Body Shapes the Mind (2005) and co-editor of Does
Consciousness Cause Behavior? An Investigation of the Nature of Volition (2006).
Dan Zahavi is Professor of Philosophy and Director of the Center for Subjectivity Research at 
the University of Copenhagen. He is the author of Subjectivity and Selfhood (2006) and Husserl’s
Phenomenology (2003).
They jointly edit the journal Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences. 


The
Phenomenological
Mind
An Introduction to Philosophy of 
Mind and Cognitive Science
Shaun Gallagher and Dan Zahavi

First published 2008 
by Routledge 
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN 
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada 
by Routledge 
270 Madison Ave, New York, NY 10016 
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, and informa business
© 2008 Shaun Gallagher and Dan Zahavi
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised
in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or
hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information
storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers. 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book has been requested
ISBN 10: 0–415–39121–0 (hbk) 
ISBN 10: 0–415–39122–9 (pbk) 
ISBN 10: 0–203–08659–7 (ebk) 
ISBN 13: 978–0–415–39121–4 (hbk) 
ISBN 13: 978–0–415–39122–1 (pbk) 
ISBN 13: 978–0–203–08659–9 (ebk) 
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2007.
“To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.”
ISBN 0-203-08659-7 Master e-book ISBN

Contents
List of ﬁgures
ix
Acknowledgements
xi
1
Introduction: philosophy of mind, cognitive science and phenomenology
1
An oversimpliﬁed account of the last 100 years
2
What is phenomenology?
5
Outline of this book
10
2
Methodologies
13
Fantasies in the science of consciousness
14
Phenomenological method
19
Naturalizing phenomenology
28
Conclusion
40
3
Consciousness and self-consciousness
45
Consciousness and pre-reﬂective self-consciousness
46
Pre-reﬂective self-consciousness and ‘what it is like’
49
Blindsight
57
Self-consciousness and reﬂection
61
Conclusion: driving it home
65
4
Time
69
The default account
70
A phenomenology of time-consciousness
75

The micro-structure of consciousness and self-consciousness
79
Time-consciousness and dynamical systems theory
80
Is consciousness of a temporal process itself temporally extended?
82
Historicity
85
5
Perception
89
Perceptual holism
94
The role of others
100
6
Intentionality
107
What is intentionality?
109
Resemblance, causation, and mental representation
111
The positive account
113
Intentionalism
116
Intentionality and consciousness
119
Phenomenology, externalism, and metaphysical realism
121
7
The embodied mind
129
Robotic and biological bodies
133
How the body deﬁnes the space of experience
141
The body as experientially transparent
144
Embodiment and social cognition
148
8
Action and agency
153
The phenomenology of agency
158
Experimenting with the sense of agency
162
My actions and yours
167
9
How we know others
171
Theory of mind debate
171
Problems with implicit simulation
177
Empathy and the argument from analogy
181
Mentalism and the conceptual problem of other minds
183
Interaction and narrative
187
10 Self and person
197
Neuroscepticism and the no-self doctrine
198
Various notions of self
199
Sociality and personality
205
A developmental story
206
VI
CONTENTS

Pathologies of the self
208
Conclusion
213
11 Conclusion
217
References
223
Index
240
CONTENTS
VII


Figures
2.1
Formal integration of experimental science and phenomenology
32
2.2
A neurophenomenological experiment
35
2.3
Correlation of behavioural responses and phenomenological clusters
36
2.4
Dynamical neural signature
37
4.1
An enduring consciousness
72
4.2
Principles of simultaneous awareness
73
4.3
The problem of repeating content
74
4.4
The structure of time-consciousness
76
5.1
Müller-Lyer illusion
96
5.2
Ebbinghaus illusion
96
7.1
Human agent controlling a NASA robot
139
9.1
False-belief scenario
174
9.2
Shared representations
178


Acknowledgements
A few comments about how we wrote this book. It is a co-authored work, and although we started
out by dividing the chapters between us so that we each were ﬁrst author on half of them, they
were subsequently passed forth and back and rewritten so many times jointly that they now all
stand as fully co-authored chapters.
In the process of writing the book, we have received very helpful comments from a number of
people. We would like to thank Nils Gunder Hansen, Daniel Hutto, Søren Overgaard, Matthew
Ratcliffe, Andreas Roepstorff, and especially Thor Grünbaum and Evan Thompson for their
extensive comments on earlier drafts. We also want to thank Mads Gram Henriksen for helping
with the compilation of the list of references, and Jonathan Streater who compiled the index.
A significant part of Shaun Gallagher’s work on this book was supported by a Visiting
Professorship at the University of Copenhagen, sponsored by the University’s Research Priority
Area: Body and Mind and the Danish National Foundation’s Center for Subjectivity Research.


Introduction: Philosophy 
of Mind, Cognitive Science,
and Phenomenology 
This is a book about the mind. What the mind is, and how it works are currently the topics of many
complex debates that span a number of disciplines: psychology, brain science, artificial
intelligence, philosophy of mind – disciplines that belong to what is generally referred to as the
cognitive sciences. The interdisciplinary nature of these debates is no coincidence. Rather, it is
necessitated by the fact that no single discipline can do full justice to the complexity of the issues
at hand. In this book, we want to explore a variety of issues that have traditionally been studied
by philosophers of mind. However, we do not intend to take a pure philosophical approach – that
is, we do not take a philosophical approach that would ignore the other sciences. We will
frequently appeal to the details of scientiﬁc evidence from studies in cognitive neuroscience and
brain imaging, developmental and cognitive psychology, and psychopathology. This is, however,
a book on the philosophy of mind, and no matter how interdisciplinary it gets, it remains an
attempt to address philosophical problems.
Everything we said so far, however, could be the basis for a standard philosophy of mind or
philosophy of cognitive science textbook, of which there are already a sufﬁcient number. We
propose to do things differently, and for reasons that will become clear as we proceed, we think
this difference is important and productive, and one that signals a change in the way things are
developing in the cognitive sciences. Speciﬁcally, we will take a phenomenological perspective on
the issues that are to be discussed, where phenomenology refers to a tradition of philosophy that
originated in Europe and includes the work of Husserl, Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty, Sartre, and other
more recent thinkers. We will not try to do justice to all aspects of phenomenology. Rather, our
treatment involves a selection of topics that we think are of particular importance for contemporary
discussions in philosophy of mind and cognitive science. Also, our focus will not be historical or
based on textual exegesis of ﬁgures in the phenomenological tradition, although we will certainly
cite their work where relevant. To understand the motive for this selection of perspective, let us
look brieﬂy at the way philosophy and psychology have developed in the past century or so.
1

AN OVERSIMPLIFIED ACCOUNT OF THE LAST 100 YEARS
If we took a snapshot of the philosophical and psychological discussions of the mind around the
end of the nineteenth century, we would find complex discussions about the nature of
consciousness (for example, in the writings of the American philosopher/psychologist William
James, and the European philosopher Edmund Husserl), the intentional structure of mental
states (e.g. in the work of the Austrian philosopher and psychologist Franz Brentano, Bertrand
Russell, and again, Husserl), as well as discussions about the methodology needed for a proper
study of the mind (e.g. Wilhelm Wundt, Gustav Theodor Fechner, and again, James and Husserl).
One would also notice that all of these people were inﬂuencing each other, sometimes directly
(corresponding by letters in a pre-electronic age) or indirectly (by reading each other’s work). So,
for example, James was inspired by theorists and experimentalists in Europe, and in his 1890
Principles of Psychology (1950) he cited the work of Brentano and many of his students, including
the psychologist Carl Stumpf. Although James did not cite Husserl, a student of both Brentano
and Stumpf, the latter had recommended that Husserl read James’s Principles. Husserl did so,
and he clearly learned from James. Husserl also corresponded with the logician Frege. Both
criticized the then prevalent doctrine of psychologism, that is, the idea that the laws of logic are
actually reducible to laws of psychology.1 Both of them had a strong interest in the philosophy of
mathematics and logic, which was also of interest to Russell, who had a copy of Husserl’s Logical
Investigations in his prison cell (where he served time for civil disobedience).
As we move further into the twentieth century, these thinkers and their particular philosophical
approaches start to move apart. James became less involved in psychology and occupied himself
with the development of the philosophy of American pragmatism. The kind of logical analysis
found in the work of Frege and Russell became the basis for what has become known as analytic
philosophy. And Husserl developed an approach to consciousness and experience which he
called phenomenology. By mid-century, and indeed throughout most of the latter part of the
twentieth century, we ﬁnd that with respect to discussions of the mind (as well as other topics)
there is very little communication going on between analytic philosophy of mind and
phenomenology. In fact, on both sides, the habitual attitude towards the other tradition has
ranged from complete disregard to outright hostility. Indeed, up until the 1990s, it was unusual
to ﬁnd philosophers from these two schools even talking to each other. There has been plenty of
arrogance on both sides of the aisle. Thus, for example, Jean-Luc Marion (1998) suggested that
during the twentieth century phenomenology had essentially assumed the very role of philosophy,
apparently ignoring any contribution by analytic philosophy. On the other side, Thomas Metzinger
allegedly proclaimed phenomenology to be ‘a discredited research programme . . . intellectually
bankrupt for at least 50 years’.2 Even when phenomenologists do talk with analytic philosophers
we find reactions such as John Searle’s claim, in response to a critique by Dreyfus, that
phenomenology suffers from serious limitations, or as he puts it, using the less reserved
economic metaphor, ‘I almost want to say . . . bankruptcy – and [it] does not have much to
contribute to the topics of the logical structure of intentionality or the logical structure of social
and institutional reality’ (Searle 1999a, pp. 1, 10).3
2
INTRODUCTION

To explain how these different schools of philosophers came to think of themselves as so
opposed to each other, or perhaps even worse, indifferent towards each other, would involve
telling a larger story than is necessary for our purposes. We endorse David Woodruff Smith’s
observation: ‘It ought to be obvious that phenomenology has a lot to say in the area called
philosophy of mind. Yet the traditions of phenomenology and analytic philosophy of mind have
not been closely joined, despite overlapping areas of interest’ (Smith 2003). In this book, however,
you will be able to discern some of the important differences between the approaches of the
analytic philosophy of mind and phenomenology, as well as some of their overlapping concerns.
Another part of the relevant history involves what happens in psychology. Here is the standard
version, which is a somewhat distorted history of what actually happened, although it is the one
given in almost every textbook account. At the end of the nineteenth and beginning of the
twentieth century there was a great interest in explaining conscious experience and the cognitive
processes that are involved in attention and memory. The early experimental psychologists relied
on introspection as a method that aimed to produce measurable data about the mind. Around
1913, however, the emphasis shifted to the notion of behaviour as the proper object of
psychological study. Behaviourism, as an approach to the study of animal and human psychology,
was defended and articulated in the work of the American psychologist John Watson (1913),
and came to dominate the study of psychology, especially in America, until the 1970s, peaking
around 1950. The shift to behaviour and its emphasis on the measurement of observable action
was at the same time a shift away from the interior life of the mind and the method of
introspection. Behaviourism, however, was ultimately replaced by cognitive approaches that
returned to the earlier interest in the interior processes of mental life, this time armed with
computational models developed in computer science, and more recently, all of the scientiﬁc
advancements in brain research. Finally, in the late 1980s and throughout the 1990s,
researchers again focused on attempts to understand and explain consciousness. 
This story is distorted and oversimpliﬁed even in its broad strokes. One could easily point to
historical evidence that suggests, in complete contrast to the standard story, that behaviourist
approaches and attempts to obtain objective measures were common in the earliest psychology
laboratories of the nineteenth century, and introspection was frequently considered problematic,
even by the so-called introspectionists, although it continued to play some part in psychological
experimentation throughout the twentieth century. Furthermore, computational concepts of the
mind can arguably be traced back to the eighteenth century; and consciousness has been of
continuing interest since the time of John Locke, at the end of the seventeenth century, and
perhaps since the time of the ancient Greeks. One might also claim that the standard story is
simply partisan, reﬂecting the interests of the people who invented it. As Alan Costall (2004,
2006) has argued, the understanding of the early history of psychology as introspectionist was
an invention of John Watson, who wanted to put behaviourist psychology on everyone’s agenda.
Yet, the psychologist that Watson most associated with introspection, Wilhelm Wundt, expressed
his own distrust of introspection: ‘Introspective method relies either on arbitrary observations
that go astray or on a withdrawal to a lonely sitting room where it becomes lost in self-absorption.
The unreliability of this method is universally recognized’ (Wundt 1900, p. 180; translated in
Blumental 2001, p. 125). Furthermore, although cognitivists claimed to offer a revolution in
INTRODUCTION
3

psychology, as Costall (2004, p. 1) points out, ‘Cognitivism is very much a continuation of the
kind of mechanistic behaviorism it claims to have undermined.’
The story, then, is more complex than standard accounts indicate. The ‘cognitive revolution’,
the emergence of cognitive science after 1950, and mid-century analytic philosophy of mind
were all influenced by behaviourist thought. Gilbert Ryle, for example, wrote in his book The
Concept of Mind, that what we call the mind simply is ‘overt intelligent performances’ (1949, p.
58), and he admits to the importance of behaviourism for this kind of insight (1949, p. 328).4
In contrast, it is often thought that phenomenology was primarily an introspectivist enterprise.
As we will show in the following, this is also a misconception (see Chapter 2). But, in terms 
of comprehending the relation between phenomenology and philosophy of mind, it is 
certainly the case that analytic philosophers of mind thought of phenomenology as being 
introspectionist, and from their point of view introspection, as a method for understanding the
mind, was dead. 
If we set the question of introspection aside for now, another way to characterize the difference
between contemporary mainstream analytic philosophy of mind and phenomenology is by noting
that whereas the majority of analytical philosophers today endorse some form of naturalism,
phenomenologists have tended to adopt a non- or even anti-naturalistic approach. However,
matters are somewhat complicated by the fact that naturalism is by no means an unequivocal term.
We will discuss this point in more detail in Chapter 2. For now it will be sufﬁcient to point out that
science tends to adopt a naturalistic view, so that when ﬁnally the cognitive revolution occurred,
that is, when psychology started to come under the inﬂuence of computational theories of mind
in the 1950s and 1960s, and when the interdisciplinary study of the mind known as cognitive
science started to emerge, the philosophical approach that seemed more attuned to science was
analytic philosophy of mind. Moreover, there was quite a lot of work for philosophers of mind to
do when the dominant model was a computational one. Logic and logical analysis play an essential
role in the computational model. More importantly, however, philosophy of mind contributed
important theoretical foundations and conceptual analyses to the emerging sciences of the mind.
The philosophical deﬁnition of functionalism, for example, plays an important role in explicating
the computational model so that it can apply both to natural and artiﬁcial intelligence. 
In this organization of cognitive disciplines, phenomenology, defined as the specific
philosophical approach, was pushed to the side and generally thought to be irrelevant. For a long
time the one lone voice that insisted on its relevance to issues pertaining to the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial
intelligence and the cognitive sciences was Hubert Dreyfus (1967, 1972, 1992). But this situation
has recently changed, and it is this change that motivates this book. Computationalism is not as
dominant as it had been in the ﬁrst 30 years of cognitive science. Three developments have
pushed it off its throne. The ﬁrst is a revived interest in phenomenal consciousness. Starting in
the late 1980s (see, for example, Marcel and Bisiach 1988), psychologists and philosophers
started to talk about consciousness in the context of the cognitive sciences. During the 1990s
a broad debate about the ‘hard problem’ of consciousness began, led by David Chalmers (1995),
in the wake of important writings by, among others, Thomas Nagel (1974), Searle (1992), Daniel
Dennett (1991), and Owen Flanagan (1992). When methodological questions arose about how
to study the experiential dimension scientiﬁcally, and therefore, without resorting to old-style
introspectionism, a new discussion of phenomenology was started. In other words, in some
4
INTRODUCTION

circles, phenomenology as a philosophical approach was thought to be of possible importance
when consciousness was raised as a scientiﬁc question. 
The second thing that happened to motivate a reconsideration of phenomenology as a
philosophical-scientiﬁc approach was the advent of embodied approaches to cognition. In the
cognitive sciences, the notion of embodied cognition took on strength in the 1990s, and it
continues today. Scientists and philosophers such as Francisco Varela, Evan Thompson, and
Eleanor Rosch (1991), Antonio Damasio (1994), and Andy Clark (1997) objected to the strong
Cartesian mind–body dualism that, despite the best efforts of philosophers like Ryle, Dennett,
and others, continued to plague the cognitive sciences. Functionalism led us to believe that
cognition could be instantiated in a disembodied computer program, or ‘brain-in-a-vat’, and that
embodiment added nothing to the mind. Varela, Thompson, Rosch, as well as Clark and others,
pointed back to the insights of the French phenomenologist Maurice Merleau-Ponty (1962) as a
way to develop their objections to disembodied cognition. Indeed, we will see that Merleau-Ponty
offers one of the best examples of how phenomenology can play an important role in the cognitive
sciences.
A third development that has made phenomenological approaches to cognition relevant to
experimental science has been the amazing progress in neuroscience. In the past 20 years we
have been able to learn a tremendous amount about how the brain works. Technologies such as
brain imaging (fMRI, PET) have generated new experimental paradigms. The science of brain
imaging is complex, and is certainly not just a matter of taking a snapshot of what is going on
inside the head. But the generation of images of neural processing using non-invasive technology
has made possible a variety of experiments that depend on reports about the experience of the
experimental subjects. Both in order to design the experiments properly and in order to interpret
their results, experimenters often want to know what the subject’s experience is like. Again, the
issue of methodology calls for some consideration of dependable ways of describing conscious
experience, and phenomenology offers just such a method.
It seems clear, then, that the time is ripe for a careful account of how phenomenological
philosophy and method can contribute to the cognitive sciences. This book is an attempt to do
that. What marks out the territory covered in this book, in contrast to other textbooks on
philosophy of mind, then, is that it develops a phenomenological approach to the philosophy of
mind. The idea, however, is not to displace or dismiss analytic philosophy of mind. Indeed, part
of what we want to explore is how phenomenology can enter back into a communication with
analytic approaches that goes beyond generalities. To us the most exciting development of the
past few years has been the growing interest of both analytic philosophers of mind and
phenomenologists in experimental science. If, for a variety of historical and conceptual reasons,
analytic philosophy and phenomenology have for a time been ignoring each other, the thriving
ﬁeld of consciousness research is certainly an area where communication has been re-sparked. 
WHAT IS PHENOMENOLOGY?
Phenomenology, understood as the philosophical approach originated by Edmund Husserl in
the early years of the twentieth century, has a complex history. In part it is the basis for what has
INTRODUCTION
5

become known as continental philosophy, where ‘continental’ means the European continent,
despite the fact that much of continental philosophy since 1960 has been done in America.
Within this designation one ﬁnds a number of philosophical approaches, some building on the
insights of phenomenology, such as existentialism and hermeneutics (theory of interpretation),
and others reacting critically against phenomenology, including certain post-structuralist or post-
modernist ideas. There is, however, a line of major philosophical thinkers, including Heidegger,
Sartre, and Merleau-Ponty, who extend phenomenological philosophy from its origins in Husserl.
Following this lineage means that we understand phenomenology to include a somewhat diverse
set of approaches. To provide a basic idea of phenomenology, however, we will here focus on what
these approaches have in common. In later chapters we will have the opportunity to explore
insights provided by some of the individual phenomenologists.
Most introductory textbooks in philosophy of mind or in cognitive science start with or frame
the entire discussion by descriptions of different metaphysical positions: dualism, materialism,
identity theory, functionalism, eliminativism . . . and so on (see, for example, Braddon-Mitchell
and Jackson 2006; Chalmers 2002; Heil 2004; Kim 2005). Before we even know for sure what
we are talking about, it seems that we have to commit ourselves metaphysically and declare our
allegiance to one or the other of these positions. Phenomenology pushes these kinds of questions
aside, brackets them, sets them out of play, and asks us instead to pay attention to the pheno-
menon under study. One of the underlying ideas of phenomenology is that the preoccupation with
these metaphysical issues tends to degenerate into highly technical and abstract discussions
that lose touch with the real subject matter: experience. It is no coincidence that Edmund
Husserl’s maxim for phenomenology was, ‘Back to the things themselves!’ (Husserl 1950/1964,
p. 6). By this he meant that phenomenology should base its considerations on the way things
are experienced rather than by various extraneous concerns which might simply obscure and
distort that which is to be understood. One important concern of the philosophy of mind and
cognitive science should be to provide a phenomenologically sensitive account of the various
structures of experience.
But what is the thing under study? Don’t we have to know whether we are studying the mind,
or the brain, or whether it is something material or immaterial? Is consciousness generated by
speciﬁc brain processes, or not? How can the phenomenologist set such questions aside and
hope to make any progress? Or, someone might object, ‘How can the phenomenologist deny
that the brain causes consciousness?’ The proper response to this is that phenomenologists do
not deny it; nor do they afﬁrm it. They suspend these kinds of questions and all judgements
about them. They start with experience.
Take perception as an example. When I look out of the window and see my car parked in the
street, I am having a visual perception. An experimental psychologist would want to provide a
causal explanation of how visual perception works, perhaps in terms of retinal processes,
neuronal activation in the visual cortex and association areas in the brain that allow me to
recognize the car as my own. She might devise a functionalist account that explains what sorts
of mechanisms do the work, or what sort of information (colour, shape, distance, etc.) needs to
be processed in order for me to have the visual perception of my car. These are important
explanations for science to develop. The phenomenologist, however, has a different task. She
would start with the experience itself and by means of a careful description of that experience
6
INTRODUCTION

she would attempt to say what perceptual experience is like, what the difference is between
perception and, for example, an instance of imagination or recollection, and how that perception
is structured so that it delivers a meaningful experience of the world. Without denying that brain
processes contribute causally to perception, such processes are simply not part of the perceiver’s
experience. 
There is of course a relationship between what the phenomenologist is doing and what the
psychologist is doing. Clearly they are trying to give an account of the same experience. But they
are taking different approaches, asking different questions, and looking for different kinds of
answers. To the extent that phenomenology stays with experience, it is said to take a ﬁrst-person
approach. That is, the phenomenologist is concerned to understand the perception in terms of
the meaning it has for the subject. My perceptual experience of seeing my car in the street, for
example, includes nothing about processes that are happening in my brain. The typical cognitive
scientist, on the other hand, takes a third-person approach, that is, an approach from the
perspective of the scientist as external observer rather than from the perspective of the
experiencing subject. She attempts to explain perception in terms of something other than the
experience, for example certain objective (and usually sub-personal) processes like brain states
or functional mechanisms.
One might think that there is nothing much to say about experience itself. One simply
experiences as one experiences. The phenomenologist finds quite a lot to say, however. For
example, the phenomenologist notes that my visual perception of the car has a certain structure
that characterizes all conscious acts, namely an intentional structure. Intentionality is a ubiquitous
character of consciousness, and as the phenomenologists put it, it means that all consciousness
(all perceptions, memories, imaginings, judgements, etc.) is about or of something. In that sense,
experience is never an isolated or elemental process. It always involves reference to the world,
taking that term in a very wide sense to include not just the physical environment, but the social
and cultural world, which may include things that do not exist in a physical way (for example,
Hamlet, the Prince of Denmark). The phenomenological analysis of intentionality leads to a
number of insights. For example, the intentionality of perception is richly detailed in the following
sense. When I see a particular object in the street, I see it as my car. Perception is not a simple
reception of information; rather, it involves an interpretation, which frequently changes according
to context. To see my car as my car already suggests that perception is informed by previous
experience, and at least in this sense Locke and the empiricists were correct to suggest that
perception is educated by experience. One should think of this as perception enriched by
experience and by habitual, as well as customary, ways of experiencing things rather than as a
case of perception plus thought. It’s not that I perceive x and then add something quite different
and novel, namely the thought that this is my car. The perception is already meaningful, and may
be even further enriched by the circumstances and possibilities of my embodied existence. The
phenomenologist would say that perceptual experience is embedded in contexts that are
pragmatic, social, and cultural and that much of the semantic work (the formation of perceptual
content) is facilitated by the objects, arrangements, and events that I encounter. In a particular
instance I may see the object as a practical vehicle that I can use to get me to where I’m going.
In another instance I may see the exact same object as something I have to clean, or as something
I have to sell, or as something that is not working properly. The way that I see my car will depend
INTRODUCTION
7

on a certain contextual background, which can also be explored phenomenologically. To
encounter my car as something to drive is to encounter it as something I can climb into, as
something located in a place that affords the kind of motion the car is built for. My perceptual
experience will consequently be informed by the bodily abilities and skills I possess. It has been
customary to say that perception has representational or conceptual content. But perhaps such
a way of talking fails to fully capture the situated nature of perceptual experience. Rather than
saying that I represent the car as drivable, it is better to say that – given the design of the car,
the shape of my body and its action possibilities, and the state of the environment – the car is
drivable and I perceive it as such.
The intentional structure of perception also involves spatial aspects that can be explored
phenomenologically. My embodied position places precise limitations on what I can see and
what I can’t. From where I am standing I can see the driver’s side of the car. The car appears in
that proﬁle, and in such a way that what I do see of the car occludes other aspects or proﬁles of
the car. I cannot literally see the passenger side of the car – it is not in my visual ﬁeld. Nonetheless,
I see the car as having another side to it, and I would be extremely surprised if I walked around
the car and found that the passenger side was missing. The surprise that I would feel indicates
that I have a certain tacit anticipation of what my possible action in the immediate future will bring.
I am surprised because my anticipation is disappointed. This temporal structure of our experience
has been described in great detail by phenomenologists, and it is a feature that we will return to
repeatedly in the following chapters. 
In any perception of a physical object, my perception is always incomplete in regard to the
object – I never see a complete object all at once. Let’s call this ‘perspectival incompleteness’.
There is always something more to see that is implicitly there, even in the perception of the
simplest object. If I move around a tree in order to obtain a more exhaustive presentation of it,
then the different proﬁles of the tree, its front, sides, and back, do not present themselves as
disjointed fragments, but are perceived as synthetically integrated moments. This synthetic
process is once again temporal in nature. 
Phenomenologically, I can also discover certain gestalt features of perception. Visual
perception comes with a characteristic structure such that, normally, something is always in
focus while the rest is not. Some object is at the centre of my focus, while others are in the
background, or on the horizon, or at the periphery. I can shift my focus and make something else
come into the foreground, but only at the cost of shifting the ﬁrst object attended to out of focus
and into the horizon. 
Notice that in these kinds of accounts the phenomenologist is concerned with particular
experiential structures of perception, and precisely as they relate to the world in which the
perceiver is situated. That is, even as she attends to experience, the phenomenologist does not
get locked up in an experience that is purely subjective, or detached from the world. The
phenomenologist studies perception, not as a purely subjective phenomenon, but as it is lived
through by a perceiver who is in the world, and who is also an embodied agent with motivations
and purposes.
In addition to this kind of intentional analysis of how we experience the world, or how the world
appears to us, the phenomenologist can also ask about the phenomenal state of the perceiver.
This is sometimes referred to in the philosophy of mind literature as the qualitative or phenomenal
8
INTRODUCTION

features of experience – or, in a fortuitous phrase made famous by Nagel (1974), the ‘what it is
like’ to experience something. The phenomenal features of experience are not divorced from the
intentional features. What it is like to stand around and admire my new car is obviously quite
different from what it is like to stand around and see my new car get smashed by another car.
In a short reﬂection we have identiﬁed some ubiquitous aspects or structures of perception:
its intentionality, its gestalt character, its perspectival incompleteness, its phenomenal and
temporal character. There is much more to say about temporality (see Chapter 4), perception
(Chapter 5), intentionality (Chapter 6), and phenomenality (Chapter 3). Notice, however, that
what we have been outlining here amounts to a description of experience, or more precisely a
description of the structures of experience, and that as phenomenologists we have not once
mentioned the brains behind this experience. That is, we have not tried to give an account in terms
of neuronal mechanisms that might cause us to perceive the car in the way that we perceive it.
So in this way a phenomenological account of perception is something quite different from a
psychophysical or neuroscientific account. Phenomenology is concerned with attaining an
understanding and proper description of the experiential structure of our mental/embodied life;
it does not attempt to develop a naturalistic explanation of consciousness, nor does it seek to
uncover its biological genesis, neurological basis, psychological motivation, or the like. 
This kind of phenomenological account is consistent with Husserl’s original conception of
phenomenology. In his view, phenomenology is not interested in an analysis of the psychophysical
constitution of the human being, nor in an empirical investigation of consciousness, but in an
understanding of that which intrinsically and in principle characterizes perceptions, judgements,
feelings, etc. 
Nonetheless, and this is an important point for our purposes, we can also see that this
phenomenological account is not irrelevant for a science of perception. There is currently a
growing realization that we will not get very far in giving a scientiﬁc account of the relationship
between consciousness and the brain unless we have a clear conception of what it is that we
are trying to relate. To put it another way, any assessment of the possibility of reducing
consciousness to neuronal structures and any appraisal of whether a naturalization of
consciousness is possible will require a detailed analysis and description of the experiential
aspects of consciousness. As Nagel once pointed out, a necessary requirement for any coherent
reductionism is that the entity to be reduced is properly understood (1974, p. 437). Without
necessarily endorsing a reductionist strategy, it is clear that if, in a methodical way, we pursue a
detailed phenomenological analysis, exploring the precise intentional, spatial, temporal, and
phenomenal aspects of experience, then we will end up with a description of just what it is that
the psychologists and the neuroscientists are trying to explain when they appeal to neural,
information processing, or dynamical models. Indeed, the phenomenologist would claim that this
kind of methodically controlled analysis provides a more adequate model of perception for the
scientist to work with than if the scientist simply starts with a commonsense approach. 
Compare two situations. In the ﬁrst situation we, as scientists who are interested in explaining
perception, have no phenomenological description of perceptual experience. How would we
begin to develop our explanation? We would have to start somewhere. Perhaps we would start
with a pre-established theory of perception, and begin by testing the various predictions this
theory makes. Quite frequently this is the way that science is done. We may ask where this pre-
INTRODUCTION
9

established theory comes from, and ﬁnd that in part it may be based on certain observations or
assumptions about perception. We may question these observations or assumptions, and based
on how we think perception actually works, formulate counter-arguments or alternative
hypotheses to be tested out. This seems somewhat hit or miss, although science often makes
progress in this way. In the second situation, we have a well-developed phenomenological
description of perceptual experience as intentional, spatial, temporal, and phenomenal. We
suggest that starting with this description, we already have a good idea of what we need to
explain. If we know that perception is always perspectivally incomplete, and yet that we perceive
objects as if they have volume, and other sides that we cannot see in the perceptual moment,
then we know what we have to explain, and we may have good clues about how to design
experiments to get to just this feature of perception. If the phenomenological description is
systematic and detailed, then to start with this rich description seems a lot less hit or miss. So
phenomenology and science may be aiming for different kinds of accounts, but it seems clear
that phenomenology can be relevant and useful for scientiﬁc work.
Currently, the term ‘phenomenology’ is increasingly used by philosophers of mind and cognitive
scientists to designate a ﬁrst-person description of the ‘what it is like’ of experience. In the next
chapter we will show why this non-methodical use of the term, as an equivalent to introspection,
is misleading, and that quite a lot depends on the methodological nature of phenomenology. 
As we indicated, many philosophy of mind textbooks start off by reviewing various theories
about the mind – dualism, identity theory, functionalism, etc. It is also the case that psychology
and cognitive science may already be informed by speciﬁc theories of the mind. Phenomenology,
however, does not start with a theory, or with a consideration of theories. It seeks to be critical
and non-dogmatic, shunning metaphysical and theoretical prejudices, as much as possible. It
seeks to be guided by that which is actually experienced, rather than by what we expect to ﬁnd
given our theoretical commitments. It asks us not to let preconceived theories form our
experience, but to let our experience inform and guide our theories. But, just as phenomenology
is not opposed to science (although its task is somewhat different from empirical science), neither
is phenomenology opposed to theory. It would be an oversimplification if we considered
phenomenology as simply a set of methods for the pure description of experience. Using such
methods, however, phenomenologists are led to insights about experience, and they are also
interested in developing these insights into theories of perception, intentionality, phenomenality,
etc. The overarching claim of this book is that these phenomenological-based theoretical
accounts and descriptions can complement and inform ongoing work in the cognitive sciences.
In fact, we think they can do so in a far more productive manner than the standard metaphysical
discussions of, say, the mind–body problem that we ﬁnd in mainstream philosophy of mind.
OUTLINE OF THIS BOOK
In contrast to many textbooks on philosophy of mind and cognitive science, then, we will not
begin by wrestling with the various metaphysical positions. Without doubt we will meet up with
these different positions in the following chapters, but the framework for this book will be set by
starting closer to experience and scientiﬁc practice. 
10
INTRODUCTION

In Chapter 2 we will take up certain methodological questions which are directly relevant to
the practice of experimental science. We want to ask about what actually happens in the lab, in
the experiment, and how scientists go about studying the mind. If part of what psychologists
and neuroscientists want to study is experience, what kind of access do they have to it? We also
want to provide a clear explication of phenomenological methods. This is something that we
have often been asked to do by scientists who are interested in using phenomenological
approaches, but who are puzzled about how phenomenological methods are supposed to work.
This chapter is not absolutely essential for understanding the rest of the book, but it does address
some issues that are both practical and substantial in regard to understanding what a
phenomenological approach is.
In Chapter 3 we discuss different concepts of consciousness. In contemporary analytic
philosophy of mind there is an important debate going on about higher-order theories of
consciousness, and we want to review that debate and suggest an alternative way to approach
the problem of consciousness. This debate involves fascinating questions about issues that
range from the common experience of driving a car, to certain experimental results about non-
conscious perception, to some exotic cases of pathology, such as blindsight. 
In Chapter 4 we explore one of the most important, but also one of the most neglected aspects
of consciousness and cognition, as well as action – the temporality of experience. William James
had described consciousness metaphorically as having the structure of a stream. He also argued
that the present moment of experience is always structured in a three-fold temporal way, to
include an element of the past and an element of the future. He called this, following Clay, the
‘specious present’. For phenomenologists, this issue goes to the very foundational structure of
experience. 
In Chapter 5 we dig deeper into perception. Contemporary explanations of perception include
a number of non-traditional, non-Cartesian approaches that emphasize the embodied and
enactive aspects of perception, or the fact that perception, and more generally cognition, are
situated, both physically and socially, in signiﬁcant ways. We’ll try to sort these approaches out
in order to see on what issues they agree or disagree. This will lead us to consider the debate
between non-representationalist views and representationalist views of the mind.
Chapter 6 takes us to one of the most important concepts in our understanding of how the
mind is in the world – intentionality. This is the idea that experience, whether it is perception,
memory, imagination, judgement, belief, etc., is always directed to some object. Intentionality is
reﬂected in the very structure of consciousness, and involves notions of mental acts and mental
content. It is also a concept that is of direct relevance for the contemporary debate between
externalism and internalism. 
Chapter 7 takes up the question of embodiment. Here, we examine the classic pheno-
menological distinctions between the lived body (Leib) and the objective body (Körper). But we
also want to show how biology and the very shape of the body contribute to cognitive experience.
We explore how embodied space frames our experiences and we discuss cases of phantom
limbs, unilateral neglect, and deafferentation. We also pursue some implications for the design
of robotic bodies.
Chapter 8 shows how an adequate scientiﬁc account of human action depends on certain
phenomenological distinctions between the sense of agency and the sense of ownership for
INTRODUCTION
11

bodily movement. We suggest, however, that human action cannot be reduced to bodily move-
ment, and that certain scientiﬁc experiments can be misleading when the focus is narrowed to
just such bodily movements. Here too there are a number of pathological cases, including
schizophrenic delusions of control, that will help us to understand non-pathological action.
Chapter 9 concerns the question of how we come to understand other minds. We explore
some current ‘theory of mind’ accounts (‘theory theory’ and ‘simulation theory’), and introduce
a phenomenologically-based alternative that is consistent with recent research in developmental
psychology and neuroscience.
In Chapter 10 we come to a question that has been gaining interest across the cognitive
sciences – the question of the self. Although this question has long been explored by philo-
sophers, neuroscientists and psychologists have recently revisited the issue. What we ﬁnd is
that there are almost as many different concepts of the self as there are theorists examining them.
To make some headway on this issue, we focus on the basic pre-reﬂective sense of unity through
temporal change that is implicit in normal experience. We examine how this pre-reﬂective sense
of self can break down in cases of schizophrenia, and what role it plays in the development of a
more reﬂective sense of self, expressed in language, narrative, and cultural contexts. 
NOTES
1
Psychologism is not entirely defeated, and it has recently been revived in the form of what might be
called neurologism. The well-known neuroscientist Semir Zeki wrote in a recent article: ‘My approach
is dictated by a truth that I believe to be axiomatic – that all human activity is dictated by the
organization and laws of the brain; that, therefore, there can be no real theory of art and aesthetics
unless neurobiologically based’ (Zeki 2002, p. 54). The limitations and problematic nature of this
proposal become obvious the moment one simply replaces the claims about art and aesthetics with
claims about other human activities such as astrophysics or archaeology.
2
Cf. the editorial in Journal of Consciousness Studies (1997), 4/5–6, 385.
3
For a more sober and forward-looking discussion of the relation between analytic philosophy and
phenomenology, see Moran (2001).
4
Was Ryle really a behaviourist? No. See Dennett (2000).
12
INTRODUCTION

Methodologies
Let’s admit it right from the beginning. Discussions of methodology are quite good as sleeping
aides. They tend to put us right to sleep. Most of us want to get on with it and get to the issues,
the ‘things themselves’, the experiments, and so on. But in this chapter we are not going to give
you a boring outline of the details of a method, or provide a set of rules. Rather, we are going to
jump into the middle of a debate that is raging within the cognitive sciences. People are being
accused of being introspectionists or heterophenomenologists or neurophenomenologists, or,
worse, just plain phenomenologists. It is even the case that there has been a recent outbreak of
terminological hijacking. That is, some theorist will come up with an extraordinarily good term
for something, and next thing you know, other theorists are using that term to refer to something
quite different.1 What we need to do in the following is to sort out the differences between these
various approaches. 
Having said that, we know that readers often come to a book like this with very different
interests and purposes. On the one hand, if your main interest concerns the issues themselves,
you might want to bypass the methodological question of precisely how one goes about
investigating the mind. We invite you to push on to Chapter 3, since there is nothing in this chapter
that is essential for understanding the remaining chapters, and you might then return to this one
at a later point when questions of method seem more important. On the other hand, if you are
still not sure what phenomenology is or how it works, you may want to read the ‘Phenomenological
method’ section later in this chapter. Or, on even another hand (since we are co-authoring we
fortunately have four hands to deal with these complex issues), if you are already familiar with
the phenomenological method and really want to know how it can be applied in empirical science,
you may want to skip the section on phenomenological method and go directly to the ‘Naturalizing
phenomenology’ section. 
It may be helpful to begin by noting that in philosophical and scientiﬁc discussions of cognition
and consciousness one often ﬁnds a distinction made between ﬁrst-person and third-person
2

perspectives. Indeed, traditional and contemporary deﬁnitions of the mind–body problem, the
‘hard’ problem, or the problem of the explanatory gap, have often been framed by this distinction.
Scientific objectivity, it is said, requires a detached, third-person approach to observable
phenomena, and for this we need, and usually have, good observational access to things in the
environment, some of which are brains. Brain science depends on taking a third-person,
observational perspective. In contrast, even if we have a kind of direct access to our own
experience from the ﬁrst-person perspective, some philosophers and scientists would consider
this to be too subjective to generate scientiﬁc data. Dennett (2001) has recently remarked: ‘First-
person science of consciousness is a discipline with no methods, no data, no results, no future,
no promise. It will remain a fantasy.’
If this is so, then there seems to be a real problem. Seemingly there can be no science of
consciousness per se if (1) consciousness is intrinsically ﬁrst-person, if (2) science only accepts
third-person data, and if (3) any attempt to explain something that is ﬁrst-person in third-person
terms distorts or fails to capture what it tries to explain. Perhaps, then, it was simply a nineteenth-
and early twentieth-century fantasy to think that one could base a scientific study of
consciousness on careful introspection. Let’s take a closer look at these claims.
FANTASIES IN THE SCIENCE OF CONSCIOUSNESS
Introspective observation is what we have to rely on ﬁrst and foremost and always. The
word introspection need hardly be deﬁned – it means, of course, looking into our own
minds and reporting what we there discover.
(James 1950, I, p. 185)
Let’s ﬁrst ask what has been the fate of introspection as a method in the experimental science
of the mind? The standard view is that it has been left behind in the same way that we have left
the nineteenth century behind. As John Watson wrote in 1913: 
Psychology as the behaviorist views it is a purely objective experimental branch of natural
science. Its theoretical goal is the prediction and control of behavior. Introspection forms
no essential part of its methods, nor is the scientiﬁc value of its data dependent upon the
readiness with which they lend themselves to interpretation in terms of consciousness.
(Watson 1913, p. 158)
Even after the ofﬁcial demise of behaviourism, many have continued to deny that introspection
is even possible, and philosophers like William Lyons (1986) have charted the complete demise
of this method in psychology. But the situation is in fact less clear. In a recent paper, Price and
Aydede (2005), a psychologist and a philosopher, respectively, claim that introspection continues
to be used in experimental science because ‘the subjects’ verbal reports [or non-verbal behaviors
like button-pushes] about their own cognitive states have routinely been taken as evidence for
the cognitive models postulated’ (2005, p. 245). Furthermore, according to Jack and Roepstorff
(2002), two cognitive scientists: ‘Introspective observation is not just a pervasive feature of our
14
METHODOLOGIES

personal lives. Cognitive scientists use this source of evidence to inform virtually every stage of
their work’ (p. 333). Perhaps James was wrong, however; it may not be so clear what different
people mean by introspection. On a very basic level one might argue that all reports given by
subjects, even if directly about the world, are in some sense, indirectly, about their own cognitive
(mental, emotional, experiential) states. If, in a psychophysical experiment one instructs a subject
to push a button, or say ‘now’ when they see a light come on, then the subject is reporting about
the light, but also about their visual experience. Even if one neutralizes the instruction in a way
that carefully avoids mention of an experiential state (‘Push the button when the light comes on’),
the only access that the subject has to the fact of the light coming on is by way of her experience
of the light coming on. In this sense the ﬁrst-person perspective is inherent in all experiments
that depend on subjects’ reports. This seems to be what Price and Aydede mean. But does this
mean that all such reports are introspective? 
For example, the experimenter may ask the subject to say ‘now’ when she sees the light come
on. How precisely does the subject know when she sees the light come on? Does she introspect
her experience looking for the particular visual state of seeing-the-light-come-on? Or does she
simply see the light come on and report that? One might ask, ‘How could she possibly report that
she sees the light come on if she doesn’t introspectively observe that she sees the light come
on?’ There is a long tradition in philosophical phenomenology (specifically the tradition that
follows Husserl) that explains how. We are aware of what we experience without using
introspection precisely because we have an implicit, non-objectifying, pre-reﬂective awareness
of our own experience as we live it through. At the same time that I see the light, I’m aware that
I see the light. The awareness in question is not based on reﬂectively or introspectively turning
our attention to our own experience. It is, rather, built into our experience as an essential part of
it, and it is precisely this which defines our experience as conscious experience (for a more
extended argument, see Chapter 3). On this view, I consciously experience the light coming on
just as I see the light coming on. I don’t have to verify through introspection that I have just seen
the light come on, since my ﬁrst-order phenomenal experience is already something of which I
am aware in the very experiencing. 
The idea of ‘ascent routines’ suggests in a similar fashion that reports on experience are not
necessarily introspective (Evans 1982). For example, if a subject is asked ‘Do you believe that
p?’, the subject does not start searching in her mind for the belief that p. Rather, she
straightforwardly considers whether p is or is not the case about the world. So too, in regard to
perceiving the world, the perceiver does not have to introspect for perceptual representations in
her mind; she can say what she perceives simply by consciously perceiving the world. If you were
asked whether it is raining outside, you would look out the window rather than in your mind.
In this sense it does not seem correct to say, as Price and Aydede do, that from a ﬁrst-person
perspective ‘conscious experiences seem accessible only through introspection’ (2005, p. 246)
or ‘introspection seems to be the only available method of access to qualia’ (ibid., p. 249). First-
person reports of this kind are not introspective reports, if we think of introspection as a matter
of reﬂective consciousness. They are nonetheless ﬁrst-person, pre-reﬂective reports expressive
of experience. But, one might ask, even if I can report what I am seeing without using intro-
spection, can I also report that I am seeing without using introspection? Again, if I am asked ‘Do
you see the light?’ I can certainly say yes, without initiating a second-order introspective cognition
METHODOLOGIES
15

that takes my own experience as an object. If, in contrast, the question were ‘Do you taste the
light?’ that would likely motivate a reﬂective attitude in me, likely with the goal of ascertaining
whether I understand your use of the word ‘taste’. But even this reﬂective attitude would not
constitute an introspective cognition, since my attention would be on the word you used and its
relation to what I’ve just experienced (to which I still have pre-reflective access), rather than
directed to my consciousness of the word, or to the details of my consciousness of the world. If
the linguistic articulation of my experience might be considered a type of reﬂection in this sort
of case, it is not necessarily an introspective sort of reﬂection where I am focusing my attention
on my experience. Rather, I’m focused on the light, on your question, on its meaning.
Even in the case where consciousness itself is the object of study, then, we need a distinction
between straightforward reports about the world (e.g. Did the light come on or not?) and reﬂective
reports about experience (e.g. What is it like to experience the light coming on?). In the ﬁrst case
we may be measuring reaction times or looking into the subject’s brain to see what lights up in
there when the light comes on out there. In the second case we are asking about the
phenomenology – the first-person experience itself. We consequently seem to get a clean
distinction between third-person, objective data (reaction times, brain images), and ﬁrst-person
data (What does it feel like? On what is the subject focused?). But let’s be careful. Things are
more complicated, as we will discover shortly.
Furthermore, when the investigation is about consciousness, the third-person data are
supposedly about the subject’s ﬁrst-person experience. After all, in such experiments, the scientist
is not concerned about the light, but about the subject’s experience. Even if it is an attempt to
capture what is objectively happening inside the brain, an fMRI or PET scan lacks any pertinence
for the study of consciousness unless it is correlated to the subject’s ﬁrst-person experience.
Indeed, the only reason brain states or functional states assume the relevant importance they
do is through their putative correlation with mental states identiﬁed on other, experiential grounds.
Without experiential classification and subsequent correlation, we would simply have a
description of neural activity, and it would not be informative in the way we want it to be. We would
not know, at least in the ﬁrst case, whether the brain activation had something to do with memory,
or face recognition, or feelings of agency, or light perception, etc. So the interpretation of third-
person data, when such data are about consciousness, requires us to know something about
the ﬁrst-person data. The terrain of the explanandum (the thing to be explained) has to be properly
investigated before explanatory proposals can make any sense. 
In the practice of experimental psychology more stock is put on non-introspective reports
about the world than on introspective reports. How reliable are such non-introspective reports
about the world? In general and for many cases, these kinds of reports do seem very reliable. If
an experimenter applies or presents a sensory stimulus that is well above threshold, the subject’s
report that they experience the stimulus as, for example, clearly present seems above suspicion.
Reliability may decrease, however, when the stimulus is closer to threshold, and may depend on
the mode of report, or other subjective factors that qualify the report. Marcel (1993), for example,
has shown that requests for quick reports of close to threshold stimuli using different modes of
report (verbal, eye blink, button push) elicit contradictory responses. At the appearance of a just
noticeable light stimulus, subjects will report with a button push that they did see the light and
then contradict themselves with a verbal report. This kind of data, and more generally, uneven
16
METHODOLOGIES

or inconsistent data, can motivate two different strategies. Most often, following established
scientiﬁc procedure, data are averaged out across trials or subjects, and the inconsistencies are
washed away. Less often, scientists are motivated to take this ﬁrst-person data seriously and to
employ further methods to investigate it. 
Let’s consider one methodological statement of the standard way of averaging out the data.
This is the method that Dennett calls ‘heterophenomenology’ (1991, 2001, 2007).2 Dennett has
on many occasions made it clear that his goal is to explain every mental phenomenon within the
framework of contemporary physical science. More speciﬁcally, the challenge he has set himself
is to construct a convincing and adequate theory of consciousness on the basis of data that are
available from the third-person scientiﬁc perspective (Dennett 1991, pp. 40, 71). However, if this
enterprise is to succeed, we ﬁrst need a clear and neutral method that will allow us to collect and
organize the data that subsequently are to be explained. Dennett’s name for this method is
heterophenomenology. According to heterophenomenology, we need to adopt a strict third-person
methodology in the study of consciousness. This means that its only access to the pheno-
menological realm will be via the observation and interpretation of publicly observable data.
Accordingly, the heterophenomenologist intends to access consciousness from the outside. His
focus is on the mental life of others as it is publicly expressed or manifested. In other words, the
heterophenomenologist will interview subjects and record their utterances and other behavioural
manifestations. He will then submit the ﬁndings to an intentional interpretation, that is, he will
adopt the intentional stance and interpret the emitted noises as speech acts that express the
subject’s beliefs, desires, and other mental states. If there are any ambiguities, he can always
ask for further clariﬁcations by the subject, and through this process, he will eventually be able
to compose an entire catalogue consisting of the things the subject (apparently) wants to say
about his own conscious experiences (Dennett 1991, pp. 76–77; 1982, p. 161).
For the heterophenomenologist, the subjects’ reports about their conscious experiences are
the primary data in consciousness research: ‘the reports are the data, they are not reports of data’
(Dennett 1993a, p. 51). It is consequently no coincidence that Dennett characterizes
heterophenomenology as a black box psychology (Dennett 1982, p. 177). Strictly speaking,
heterophenomenology doesn’t study conscious phenomena, since it is neutral about whether
they exist; rather, it studies reports that purport to be about conscious phenomena. Thus, Dennett
urges us to adopt a neutral stance and to bracket the question concerning the validity of the
subjects’ expressed beliefs, and he argues that this manoeuvre amounts to a third-person version
of the phenomenological method (Dennett 2003, p. 22).
Why is the neutrality required? Dennett provides different reasons. Occasionally, he compares
the neutrality in question with the neutrality that is required in an anthropological investigation.
Just as we shouldn’t prejudge our anthropological ﬁeldwork by declaring certain mythical gods
real divinities (Dennett 1993a, p. 51), we shouldn’t prejudge the phenomenological investigation
by declaring conscious phenomena real. Dennett also refers to the existence of false positives
and false negatives. Our access to our own mind is neither infallible nor incorrigible. We
sometimes get things wrong about our own experience; some of the beliefs that we have about
our own conscious states are provably false. And some of the psychological processes that
happen in our minds take place without our knowledge. Given these possibilities of error, Dennett
thinks it is best to adopt a policy of moderation and simply abstain from commitment (2001). 
METHODOLOGIES
17

People believe they have experiences, and these facts – the facts about what people believe
and express – are phenomena any scientiﬁc study of the mind must account for (Dennett 1991,
p. 98), but from the fact that people believe that they have experiences, it doesn’t follow that they
do in fact have experiences (Dennett 1991, p. 366). To put it differently, we shouldn’t simply
assume that every apparent feature or object of our conscious lives is really there, as a real
element of experience. By adopting the heterophenomenological attitude of neutrality, we do not
prejudge the issue about whether the apparent subject is a liar, a zombie, a computer, a dressed-
up parrot, or a real conscious being (ibid., p. 81). Thus, heterophenomenology can remain neutral
about whether the subject is conscious or a mere zombie (Dennett 1982, p. 160), or to be more
precise, since heterophenomenology is a way of interpreting behaviour, and since (philosophical)
zombies, per deﬁnition, behave like real conscious people, there is no relevant difference between
zombies and real conscious people as far as heterophenomenology is concerned (Dennett 1991,
p. 95). 
But from this alleged stance of neutrality where we bracket the question of whether or not there
is a difference between a zombie and a non-zombie, Dennett quickly moves a step further, and
denies that there is any such difference. As he puts it, zombies are not just possible; they are
real, since all of us are zombies. If we think we are more than zombies, this is simply due to the
fact that we have been misled or bewitched by the defective set of metaphors that we use to think
about the mind (Dennett 1993b, p. 143; 1991, p. 406). It is important not to misunderstand
Dennett at this point. He is not arguing that nobody is conscious. Rather he is claiming that
consciousness does not have the ﬁrst-person phenomenal properties it is commonly thought to
have, which is why there is in fact no such thing as actual phenomenology (Dennett 1991, p. 365).
The attempt to investigate the ﬁrst-personal dimension phenomenologically is consequently a
fantasy.
Heterophenomenology itself, however, involves something of a fantasy. The fantasy here is the
idea that in the study of consciousness or the mind, science can leave the ﬁrst-person perspective
behind, or neutralize it without remainder. In attempting to say something about consciousness
(or specifically about the experience X), heterophenomenology fails to acknowledge that its
interpretations of ﬁrst-person reports must be based on either the scientist’s own ﬁrst-person
experience (what he understands from his own experience to be the experience of X), or upon
pre-established (and seemingly objective) categories that ultimately derive from folk psychology
or from some obscure, anonymous, and non-rigorous form of phenomenology. Thus, as Jack and
Roepstorff suggest, from ‘the moment we conceive of an experimental paradigm, through piloting
and refinement, to the interpretation of results, we are guided by considerations of our own
experience and the experiences we attribute to others, understood by proxy to our own’ (2002,
p. 333). The scientist’s own intentional stance, required for the interpretation of the subject’s
report, is not itself something that has come under scientiﬁc control; it is infected, directly or
indirectly, by the first-person perspective. This is why Merleau-Ponty, in Phenomenology of
Perception, criticizes the one-sided focus of science on what is available from a third-person
perspective for being both naïve and dishonest, since the scientific practice constantly
presupposes the scientist’s ﬁrst-personal and pre-scientiﬁc experience of the world (Merleau-
Ponty 1962, p. ix). This is also why the usual opposition of first-person versus third-person
accounts in the context of the study of consciousness is misleading. It makes us forget that so-
18
METHODOLOGIES

called third-person objective accounts are accomplished and generated by a community of
conscious subjects. There is no pure third-person perspective, just as there is no view from
nowhere.
PHENOMENOLOGICAL METHOD
Is it possible to gain a more controlled approach to ﬁrst-person experience? Can we approach
consciousness scientifically? Phenomenologists have answered these questions in the
afﬁrmative. Phenomenology is important here, as Evan Thompson explains, because ‘any attempt
to gain a comprehensive understanding of the human mind must at some point confront
consciousness and subjectivivity – how thinking, perceiving, acting, and feeling are experienced
in one’s own case. Mental events do not occur in a vacuum; they are lived by someone.
Phenomenology is anchored to the careful description, analysis, and interpretation of lived
experience’ (Thompson 2007, p. 16). To understand what phenomenology can deliver, and to
exploit it for experimental science, we need to understand the methodology that deﬁnes the
phenomenological stance or attitude. We then need to see how this stance can be incorporated
into scientiﬁc practice.
Let’s take a closer look at the phenomenological method. Like ordinary scientiﬁc method, it
also aims to avoid biased and subjective accounts. Some people mistake phenomenology for a
subjective account of experience; but a subjective account of experience should be distinguished
from an account of subjective experience. In a similar way, some people confuse an objective
account of experience with the idea that we can understand subjective experience by turning it
into an object that can be examined using third-person methods. The problem is that these terms,
‘subjective’ and ‘objective’, are ambiguous; they can mean different things in different contexts.
In science, objectivity, in the sense of avoiding prejudice or bias, is important. It is one of the
reasons that controls are used in experiments, and there are various methodological steps one
takes to maintain objectivity. Phenomenology is also concerned to maintain objectivity in this
sense. It does so by way of a carefully delineated method. 
Phenomenology and introspection
First, let’s return to an issue that tends to confuse things. Is phenomenology the same as
introspection? Husserl once raised the following question: Why introduce a new science entitled
phenomenology when there is already a well-established explanatory science dealing with the
psychic life of humans and animals, namely psychology? Could it not be argued that a mere
description of experience – which is supposedly all that phenomenology can offer – does not
constitute a viable scientiﬁc alternative to psychology, but merely a – perhaps indispensable –
descriptive preliminary to a truly scientiﬁc study of the mind (Husserl 1987, p. 102)? As Husserl
remarked in these lectures from the early part of the twentieth century, this line of thought had
been so convincing that the term ‘phenomenological’ was being used in all kinds of philosophical
and psychological writings to signify a direct description of consciousness based on introspection
METHODOLOGIES
19

(ibid., p. 103). The parallel to contemporary discourse is quite striking. Currently, the term
‘phenomenology’ is increasingly used by cognitive scientists to designate a ﬁrst-person description
of what the ‘what it is like’ of experience is really like. And against that background, it might be
difﬁcult to understand why phenomenology should not simply be seen as a kind of psychology
or even as a form of introspectionism. 
In Consciousness Explained, for instance, Dennett criticizes phenomenology for employing an
unreliable introspectionist methodology and argues that it has failed to ﬁnd a single, settled
method that everyone could agree upon (Dennett 1991, p. 44). A comparable view can be found
in Metzinger, who recently concluded that ‘phenomenology is impossible’ (2003, p. 83). What
kind of argument do these theorists provide? The basic argument seems to concern the
epistemological difficulties connected to any first-person approach to data generation. If
inconsistencies in two individual data sets should appear, there is no way to settle the conﬂict.
More speciﬁcally, Metzinger takes data to be such things that are extracted from the physical world
by technical measuring devices. This data extraction involves a well-defined intersubjective
procedure, it takes place within a scientiﬁc community, it is open to criticism, and it constantly
seeks independent means of verification. The problem with phenomenology, according to
Metzinger, is that ﬁrst-person access to the phenomenal content of one’s own mental state does
not fulﬁl these deﬁning criteria for the concept of data. In fact, the very notion of ﬁrst-personal
data is a contradiction in terms (ibid., p. 591).
But is it really true that classical phenomenology is based on introspection? Consider Husserl’s
Logical Investigations, a recognized milestone in twentieth-century philosophy and indisputably
a work in phenomenological philosophy. In fact, Husserl himself took it to be his ‘breakthrough’
to phenomenology. What kind of analyses does one ﬁnd in this book? One ﬁnds Husserl’s famous
attack on and rejection of psychologism; a defence of the irreducibility of logic and the ideality
of meaning; an analysis of pictorial representations; a theory of the part–whole relation; a
sophisticated account of intentionality; and an epistemological clarification of the relation
between concepts and intuitions, to mention just a few of the many topics treated in the book.
Does Husserl use an introspective method, and is this a work in introspective psychology? Anyone
who reads Logical Investigations should answer ‘no’, since what we find there are clearly
philosophical arguments and analyses. Rather than concluding that this work is not phenome-
nology, one should rather reconsider the hasty identiﬁcation of phenomenology and introspective
psychology. 
Phenomenological disputes as well as disputes among phenomenologists are philosophical
disputes, not disputes about introspection. Although it would be an exaggeration to claim that
Husserl’s analyses in Logical Investigations found universal approval among the subsequent
generations of phenomenologists, we don’t know of any instance at all where Husserl’s position
was rejected on the basis of an appeal to ‘better’ introspective evidence. On the contrary,
Husserl’s analyses gave rise to an intense discussion among phenomenological philosophers,
and many of the analyses were subsequently improved and refined by thinkers like Sartre,
Heidegger, Lévinas, and Derrida (cf. Zahavi and Stjernfelt 2002). This clearly contrasts with
Metzinger’s claim that the phenomenological method cannot provide a method for generating
any growth of knowledge since there is no way one can reach intersubjective consensus on claims
like ‘this is the purest blue anyone can perceive’ versus ‘no it isn’t, it has a slight green hue’
20
METHODOLOGIES

(Metzinger 2003, p. 591). These kinds of claims are simply not the kind that are to be found in
works by phenomenological philosophers and to suggest so is to reveal one’s lack of familiarity
with the tradition in question. 
Although phenomenology is interested in the phenomena (how things are experienced; or as
phenomenologists like to say, how they are ‘given’ or presented to the subject in experience) and
in their conditions of possibility, phenomenologists would typically argue that it is a metaphysical
fallacy to locate the phenomenal realm within the mind, and to suggest that the way to access
and describe it is by turning the gaze inwards (introspicio). As Husserl already pointed out in
Logical Investigations, the entire facile divide between inside and outside has its origin in a naïve
commonsensical metaphysics and is phenomenologically suspect and inappropriate when it
comes to understanding the nature of consciousness (Husserl 2001a, II, pp. 281–282, 304).
But this divide is precisely something that the term ‘introspection’ buys into and accepts. To
speak of introspection is to (tacitly) endorse the idea that consciousness is inside the head and
the world outside. The same criticism can also be found in Heidegger, who denies that the relation
between human existence (Dasein) and the world can be grasped with the help of the concepts
‘inner’ and ‘outer’ (Heidegger 1986/1996, p. 62), and in Merleau-Ponty, who suggests in this
context that it is impossible to draw a line between inner and outer (Merleau-Ponty 1962, 
p. 407). Indeed, all the major figures in the phenomenological tradition have openly and
unequivocally denied that they are engaged in some kind of introspective psychology and that
the method they employ is a method of introspection (cf. Gurwitsch 1966, pp. 89–106; Heidegger
1993, pp. 11–17; Husserl 1984, pp. 201–216; Merleau-Ponty 1962, pp. 57–58). Husserl, who
categorically rejects the suggestion that the notion of phenomenological intuition is a form of inner
experience or introspection (1987, p. 36), even argues that the very suggestion that pheno-
menology is attempting to restitute the method of introspection or inner observation (innerer
Beobachtung) is preposterous and perverse (Husserl 1971/1980, p. 38). What is behind this
categorical dismissal? There are many different reasons. To understand some of them, we must
return to the issue of the phenomenological method. 
Phenomenological reduction
Phenomenology is supposed to be concerned with phenomena and appearances and their
conditions of possibility, but what precisely is a phenomenon? For many philosophers, the
phenomenon is understood as the immediate ‘givenness’ of the object, how it appears to us, how
it apparently is. The assumption has frequently been that the phenomenon is something merely
subjective, a veil or smoke-screen that conceals the objectively existing reality. According to such
a view, if one wished to discover what the object was really like, one would have to surpass the
merely phenomenal. If phenomenology employed this concept of the phenomenon it would be
nothing but a science of the merely subjective, apparent, or superﬁcial. But not surprisingly the
phenomenologists endorse a rather different understanding of what a phenomenon amounts
to. In their view, the reality of the object is not to be located behind its appearance, as if the
appearance in some way or other hides the real object. Although the distinction between
appearance and reality must be maintained (since some appearances are misleading),
METHODOLOGIES
21

phenomenologists do not understand this as a distinction between two separate realms (falling
in the province of, say, phenomenology and science, respectively), but a distinction internal to
the phenomenon – internal to the world we are living in. It is a distinction between how objects
might appear to a superﬁcial glance, or from a less than optimal perspective, and how they might
appear in the best of circumstances, be it in practical use or in the light of extensive scientiﬁc
investigations. Indeed, only insofar as the object appears in one way or the other can it have any
meaning for us. Rather than regarding questions concerning structures and modes of appearance
as something insigniﬁcant or merely subjective, phenomenologists consequently insist that such
an investigation is of crucial philosophical importance.
Indeed from Husserl’s early formulations of the phenomenological research programme it is
clear that he considered the task of phenomenology to be that of providing a new epistemological
foundation for science. He soon realized, however, that this task would call for an ‘unnatural’
change of interest. Rather than focusing exclusively on the objects of knowledge, we should
describe and analyse the experiential dimension in detail in order to disclose the cognitive
contribution of the knowing subject (Husserl 2001a, II, p. 170); a contribution that in his view had
been virtually ignored by ordinary science. 
Ordinary science is, naturally, so absorbed in its investigation of the natural (or social/cultural)
world that it doesn’t pause to reﬂect upon its own presuppositions and conditions of possibility.
The ordinary sciences operate on the basis of a natural (and necessary) naïvety. They operate
on the basis of a tacit belief in the existence of a mind-, experience-, and theory-independent
reality. Reality is assumed to be out there, waiting to be discovered and investigated. And the aim
of science is to acquire a strict and objectively valid knowledge about this given realm.3 This
realistic assumption is so fundamental and deeply rooted that it is not only accepted by the
positive sciences, it even permeates our daily pre-theoretical life, for which reason Husserl called
it the natural attitude. But this attitude must be contrasted with the properly philosophical
attitude, which critically questions the very foundation of experience and scientific thought
(Husserl 1987, pp. 13–14). A strict naturalism denies the existence of a unique philosophical
method, and claims that philosophers should consider their own work to be directly continuous
with the natural sciences. In contrast to this, phenomenologists consider philosophy to be doing
work that is different from natural scientiﬁc research. Philosophy is a discipline which doesn’t
simply contribute to or augment the scope of our positive knowledge, but instead investigates
the basis of this knowledge and asks how it is possible. As Heidegger remarks, philosophers
should be ‘aroused by and immediately sensitive to the completely enigmatic character of what,
for sound common sense, is without question and self explanatory’ (1976, pp. 23–24). Indeed,
according to one reading it is precisely this domain of ignored obviousness that phenomenology
seeks to investigate.
But how is phenomenology supposed to accomplish this? How should it proceed? In a ﬁrst step,
we need to suspend or bracket our acceptance of the natural attitude in order to avoid
commonsensical naïveté (as well as various speculative hypotheses about the metaphysical
status of reality). This bracketing doesn’t amount to a form of scepticism. That the world exists
is, as Husserl writes, beyond any doubt. But the great task is to truly understand this indubitability
(which sustains life and positive science) and to clarify its legitimacy, and we cannot do so as long
as we simply take its validity for granted (Husserl 1971/1980, pp. 152–153; 1970, p. 187).
22
METHODOLOGIES

Husserl has a technical term for the suspension of our natural realistic inclination; he calls the
procedure epoché.
The purpose of the epoché is not to doubt, neglect, abandon, or exclude reality from
consideration; rather the aim is to suspend or neutralize a certain dogmatic attitude towards
reality, thereby allowing us to focus more narrowly and directly on reality just as it is given – how
it makes its appearance to us in experience. In short, the epoché entails a change of attitude
towards reality, and not an exclusion of reality. The only thing that is excluded as a result of the
epoché is a certain naïvety, the naïvety of simply taking the world for granted, thereby ignoring
the contribution of consciousness. 
Descriptions of phenomenological method often seem to imply that once one carries out the
epoché, one then fully achieves a certain attitude and can simply go about the business of
developing phenomenological descriptions. But one shouldn’t think of the epoché as something
that is accomplished for good in one ﬁrst step, then to be followed by several other procedures.
The epoché is an attitude that one has to keep accomplishing. 
Importantly, the epoché does not involve an exclusive turn inward. On the contrary, it permits
us to investigate the world we live in from a new reﬂective attitude, namely in its signiﬁcance and
manifestation for consciousness. Although this reﬂective investigation differs from a straight-
forward exploration of the world, it remains an investigation of reality; it is not an investigation
of some otherworldly, mental realm. We should consequently not commit the mistake of
interpreting the notion of experience in purely mentalistic terms, as if it were something that
happened in a pure mental space, constituting part of the mental inventory. 
For example, how do we go about describing the experiential difference between tasting wine
and tasting water, between hearing a foghorn and seeing the full moon, or between afﬁrming and
denying that the Eiffel Tower is taller than the Empire State Building? Do we do so by severing
our intentional link with the world and by turning some spectral gaze inwards? No, rather, we
discover these differences, and we analyse them descriptively by paying attention to how worldly
objects and states of affairs appear to us. The phenomenological descriptions take their 
point of departure in the world in which we live.4 Indeed, for phenomenology, as Donn Welton
(2000, p. 17) indicates, mental acts do ‘not belong to a closed interior realm available only 
to introspection. Rather, they have their being by virtue of their relationship to that which
transcends them.’
This is why Merleau-Ponty, in Phenomenology of Perception, can declare that phenomenology
is distinguished in all its characteristics from introspective psychology and that the difference 
in question is a difference in principle. Whereas the introspective psychologist considers
consciousness as a mere sector of being, and tries to investigate this sector as the physicist
tries to investigate the physical world, the phenomenologist realizes that consciousness ulti-
mately calls for a transcendental clariﬁcation that goes beyond commonsense postulates and
brings us face to face with the problem concerning the constitution of the world (Merleau-Ponty
1962, p. 59).
The concept of the transcendental calls for further clariﬁcation, however. The simplest way to
understand Merleau-Ponty’s claim is by acknowledging that phenomenology – despite all kinds
of other differences – is ﬁrmly situated within a certain Kantian or post-Kantian framework. One
way to interpret Kant’s revolutionary Copernican turn in epistemology (1956, B xvi) is by seeing
METHODOLOGIES
23

it as the realization that our cognitive apprehension of reality is more than a mere mirroring of a
pre-existing world. Rather, a philosophical analysis of reality, a reﬂection on what conditions
something must satisfy in order to count as ‘real’, should not ignore the contribution of
consciousness. Thus, and this pinpoints a main difference from at least a good part of recent
analytic philosophy’s preoccupation with consciousness, the phenomenological interest in the
ﬁrst-person perspective is not primarily motivated by the relatively trivial insight that we need to
include the ﬁrst-person perspective if we wish to understand mental phenomena. Rather, the
phenomenologists’ focus on the ﬁrst-person perspective is as much motivated by an attempt to
understand the nature of objectivity, as by an interest in the subjectivity of consciousness. Indeed,
rather than taking the objective world as the point of departure, phenomenology asks how
something like objectivity is possible in the first place. What are the primitive modes of
understanding that precede our belief in objectivity? How is objectivity constituted? 
In phenomenological texts the term ‘constitution’ is a technical one. This concept should not
be understood as involving any kind of creation or fabrication (Heidegger 1979, p. 97).
Constitution must be understood as a process that allows for the manifestation or appearance
of objects and their signiﬁcation, that is, it is a process that permits that which is constituted to
appear, to manifest and present itself as what it is (Husserl 1973a, p. 47; 1973b, p. 434). And
this process is something that in signiﬁcant ways involves the contribution of consciousness.
Without consciousness, no appearance. Incidentally, this also makes it clear that phenomenology,
despite its emphasis on how things are given in experience, does not succumb to what
philosophers call the ‘myth of the given’, the idea that experience is pure reception of the world,
and that cognition is a purely receptive attitude.
Thus, the phenomenological interest in the first-person perspective is motivated by
transcendental philosophical concerns. It makes use of a distinction between the subject
conceived as an object within the world and the subject conceived as a subject for the world, i.e.
considered as a necessary (though not sufficient) condition of possibility for cognition and
meaning (cf. Carr 1999). Objects are constituted, that is, experienced and disclosed in the ways
they are, thanks to the way consciousness is structured. As Husserl writes, ‘[T]he objects of which
we are “conscious,” are not simply in consciousness as in a box, so that they can merely be found
in it and snatched at in it; . . . they are ﬁrst constituted as being, what they are for us, and as what
they count as for us, in varying forms of objective intention’ (2001a, I, p. 275). Phenomenologists
consequently reject the suggestion that consciousness is merely one object among others in the
world, on a par with – though possibly more complex than – volcanoes, waterfalls, ice crystals,
gold nuggets, rhododendrons or black holes, since they would consider it to be a necessary
(though not sufﬁcient) condition of possibility for any entity to appear as an object in the way it
does and with the meaning it has.5 Phenomenologists argue that a view from nowhere is
unattainable, just as they would deny that it is possible to look at our experiences sideways to
see whether they match with reality. This is so, not because such views are incredibly hard to
reach, but because the very idea of such views is nonsensical.
It is at this point necessary to introduce yet another technical term, namely the notion of the
phenomenological reduction. The epoché and the reduction can be seen as two closely linked
elements of a philosophical reﬂection, the purpose of which is to liberate us from a natural(istic)
dogmatism and to make us aware of our own constitutive (i.e. cognitive, meaning-disclosing)
24
METHODOLOGIES

contribution to what we experience. Whereas the purpose of the epoché is to suspend or bracket
a certain natural attitude towards the world thereby allowing us to focus on the modes or ways
in which things appear to us, the aim of the phenomenological reduction is to analyse the
correlational interdependence between speciﬁc structures of subjectivity and speciﬁc modes of
appearance or givenness. When Husserl speaks of the reduction, he is consequently referring
to a reﬂective move that departs from an unreﬂective and unexamined immersion in the world
and ‘leads back’ (re-ducere) to the way in which the world manifests itself to us. Thus, everyday
things available to our perception are not doubted or considered as illusions when they are
‘phenomenologically reduced’, but instead are envisaged and examined simply and precisely as
perceived (and similarly for remembered things as remembered, imagined things as imagined,
and so on). In other words, once we adopt the phenomenological attitude, we are no longer
primarily interested in what things are – in their weight, size, chemical composition, etc. – but
rather in how they appear, and thus as correlates of our experience.
When we perceive, judge, or evaluate objects, a thorough phenomenological examination will
lead us to the experiential structures and modes of understanding to which these types of
appearance are correlated. We are led to the acts of presentation – the perception, judgement,
or valuation – and thereby to the experiencing subject (or subjects) in relation to whom the object
as appearing must necessarily be understood. By adopting the phenomenological attitude, we
pay attention to how public objects (trees, planets, paintings, symphonies, numbers, states of
affairs, social relations, etc.) consciously appear. But we do not simply focus on the objects
precisely as they appear; we also focus on the subjective side of consciousness, thereby becoming
aware of our subjective accomplishments and of the intentionality that is at play. If we want to
understand how physical objects, mathematical models, chemical processes, social relations,
or cultural artefacts can appear as they do, with the meaning they have, then we need to examine
the experiencing subject to whom they appear. 
The phenomenological investigation of consciousness is not motivated by the wish to ﬁnd a
place for consciousness within an already well-established materialistic or naturalistic framework.
In fact, the very attempt to do so, assuming that consciousness is merely yet another object in
the world, would prevent one from discovering and clarifying some of the most interesting aspects
of consciousness, including the true epistemic and ontological signiﬁcance of the ﬁrst-person
perspective. The problem of consciousness should not be addressed on the background of an
unquestioned objectivism. Too frequently the assumption has been that a better understanding
of the physical world will allow us a better understanding of consciousness; rarely has it been
thought that a better understanding of consciousness might allow for a better understanding of
what it means for something to be real. That something like a conscious appropriation of the world
is possible does not merely tell us something about consciousness, but also about the world. But,
of course, this way of discussing consciousness, as the constitutive dimension, as the ‘place’ ‘in’
which the world can reveal and articulate itself, is quite different from any attempt to treat it
naturalistically as merely yet another (psychical or physical) object in the world.
It should now be clear why phenomenology is not simply a collection of descriptions of
phenomenal consciousness, which we might generate if we start to introspect on our experience.
In some respects phenomenology does engage in a kind of reﬂective process. Phenomenology,
however, is also about describing the world and how it appears in such experience. It includes
METHODOLOGIES
25

an examination of the world from the first-person perspective. So although it requires a
suspension of our natural, everyday attitude, it also takes that attitude, that being-in-the-world,
as part of the subject matter to be investigated. In this sense, phenomenology is not just about
consciousness, as if consciousness could be considered in isolation from everything else in our
lives. It’s about how we are immersed in our everyday situations and projects, how we experience
the world, relate to others, and engage in the kinds of actions and practices that deﬁne our lives.
Phenomenology has as its goal, not a description of idiosyncratic experience – ‘here and now,
this is just what I experience’ – rather, it attempts to capture the invariant structures of experience.
In this sense, it is more like science than like psychotherapy. Psychotherapy is focused on the
subject as a particular person and may appeal to introspection in its concern about the way and
the why of the person’s experience of the world, here and now. By contrast, phenomenology is
not interested in understanding the world according to Gallagher, or the world according to Zahavi,
or the world according to you; it’s interested in understanding how it is possible for anyone to
experience a world. In this sense, phenomenology is not interested in qualia in the sense of
purely individual data that are incorrigible, ineffable, and incomparable. Phenomenology is not
interested in psychological processes (in contrast to behavioural processes or physical processes).
Phenomenology is interested in the very possibility and structure of phenomenality; it seeks to
explore its essential structures and conditions of possibility. Phenomenology aims to disclose
structures that are intersubjectively accessible, and its analyses are consequently open for
corrections and control by any (phenomenologically tuned) subject.
One reason why any account of the phenomenological approach to the study of consciousness
must mention the epoché and reduction, is because this reference situates the investigation in
question, it provides its systematic context. The epoché and the reduction are elements in the
reflective move that makes phenomenology a transcendental philosophical enterprise. Any
attempt to downplay the signiﬁcance of these methodological elements runs the risk of confusing
phenomenological analyses with psychological or anthropological descriptions. We could put
this transcendental view in a somewhat paradoxical way: phenomenologists are not interested
in consciousness per se. They are interested in consciousness because they consider con-
sciousness to be our only access to the world. They are interested in consciousness because it
is world-disclosing. Phenomenology should therefore be understood as a philosophical analysis
of the different types of world-disclosure (perceptual, imaginative, recollective, etc.), and in
connection with this as a reﬂective investigation of those structures of experience and under-
standing that permit different types of beings to show themselves as what they are. 
Another reason why it has been necessary to spend some time discussing these methodo-
logical concepts is because we can thereby ward off a number of widespread misunderstandings
that again and again have blocked a proper appreciation of the import and impact of pheno-
menology, especially as it has been proposed by Husserl. Thus, according to one reading, Husserl
makes use of a methodological procedure that separates mind from world (Dreyfus 1991, pp.
73–74). As a consequence, he not only loses sight of the world, but also remains incapable of
providing a satisfactory account of such central issues as intersubjectivity and embodiment. In
the light of the account just given of the aim and focus of Husserl’s phenomenological method,
we can see why such a reading is quite problematic. This will become even clearer in some of
the later chapters.
26
METHODOLOGIES

Eidetic variation and intersubjective veriﬁcation
But what does the phenomenological reduction accomplish, especially if we are interested in the
cognitive sciences? Remember that phenomenology, in contrast to the objective or positive
sciences, is not particularly interested in the causal or substantial nature of objects, i.e. in their
weight, rarity, or chemical composition, but in the way in which they show themselves in
experience. There are essential differences between the ways in which a physical thing, a utensil,
a work of art, a melody, a state-of-affairs, a number, an animal, a social relation, etc., manifests
itself. Moreover, it is also possible for one and the same object to appear in a variety of different
ways: from this or that perspective, in strong or faint illumination, as perceived, imagined, wished
for, feared, anticipated, or recollected. Rather than regarding questions concerning the way things
are given in experience as something insigniﬁcant or merely subjective, such questions concern
something very basic; something that is presupposed by all ordinary sciences. In order for a
scientist to be in a position to be able to ask about X, to examine how X works, and what causes
it, she must first be conscious of X. Phenomenology investigates how that happens. In later
chapters, we discuss some phenomenological ﬁndings that are directly related to the study of
consciousness and the cognitive sciences – that perception is always egocentric and embodied,
that it is always from a perspective that delivers the perceived thing in an incomplete series of
proﬁles, that it always has an intentional structure, that it is never momentary, etc. – as well as
different aspects of memory, imagination, judgement, etc.
But how do phenomenologists manage to accomplish all of this? In addition to the epoché and
phenomenological reduction, phenomenology adds two further instruments to its toolbox of
methods. The ﬁrst is called eidetic variation. Philosophers have always been on the lookout for
what Plato called the eidos or essence of things. In developing his phenomenological method,
Husserl proposed a way that would draw out the essential and invariant characteristics of the
things that we experience. Quite simply, it involves using our imagination to strip away the
unessential properties of things. If the object that I am examining happens to be a book, what
features of it can I imaginatively vary without destroying the fact that it is a book. I can change
the colour and design of the cover; I can imaginatively subtract from the number of pages, or add
to them; I can change the size and weight of the book; I can vary the binding. In all of this, I can
use my previous experience of books, and I can imagine further variations. The result is that the
core set of properties that resist change – those properties that belong to the book per se and
which, once changed, would make the object cease being a book – constitute the essence, the
‘what makes a book a book’.
‘But wait,’ you say. ‘That’s nice, but the cognitive scientist doesn’t want to study books – at
least in this sense.’ Right. But we can also do the same kind of eidetic analysis of the act of
cognition through which I experience the book. For example, if I am remembering the book, 
what can I change about the process of remembering and still have memory; what is it that I
cannot change and that remains essential to the cognitive activity of remembering? The 
phenomenologist can do the same with perception, face recognition, decision making, social
perception, and so on. Certainly this would be interesting, and of use, to the cognitive scientist.
It would in fact give her a good idea of the kinds of things – the cognitive acts – that she wants
to study.
METHODOLOGIES
27

It is important not to mystify eidetic variation. The idea is not that we, by merely gazing passively
at the object, can obtain infallible insights into its invariant structure. In fact, when it came to the
realm of cognitive phenomena, Husserl was quite explicit about all of them being characterized
by an essential vagueness, and he consequently argued that any attempt to classify and deﬁne
them with the same kind of exactness and precision that one might ﬁnd in, say, geometry would
do violence to them. ‘The vagueness of such concepts, the circumstances that their spheres of
application are ﬂuid, does not make them defective; for in the spheres of knowledge where they
are used they are absolutely indispensable, or in those spheres they are the only legitimate
concepts’ (Husserl 1976/1982, p. 155). Thus, when Husserl mentions the eidetic variation as
one of the phenomenologist’s tools, this is not to be understood as any claim to the effect that
phenomenologists can intuit the eternal and immutable essence of, say, memory or imagination.
The phenomenological investigation of these highly complex topics involves demanding analyses
that in many cases are defeasible – which means that the phenomenologist is not infallible. This
fact makes another tool at the phenomenologist’s disposal extremely important.
This other tool is simply the fact that phenomenologists do not have to do their pheno-
menological analyses alone. Descriptions allow for intersubjective corroboration. And again, the
quest for invariant, essential structures of experience is not narrowly tied to the peculiarities of
my own experience. We can and should compare our phenomenological descriptions with those
of others. Of course this is not a straightforward process, any more than the heteropheno-
menological interpretation of reports is. But it is no messier than science, and in this process we
are guided by the methodological steps we follow.
The method of phenomenology can get more specialized, depending on the kind of experience
that is being studied. But these four steps are the basic ones:
(1) The epoché or suspension of the natural attitude.
(2) The phenomenological reduction, which attends to the correlation between the object of
experience and the experience itself.
(3) The eidetic variation, which keys in on the essential or invariant aspects of this correlation.
(4) Intersubjective corroboration, which is concerned with replication and the degree to which
the discovered structures are universal or at least sharable.
NATURALIZING PHENOMENOLOGY
One of the contentious issues about whether the phenomenological method can be used in the
experimental natural sciences of the mind (the cognitive sciences) is centred on the fact that
Husserl constantly emphasized the limitations of a naturalistic account of consciousness. His
own phenomenological method was introduced as precisely a non-naturalistic alternative. He
intended phenomenology to be a transcendental inquiry. In general, a transcendental study is
one that is concerned with the necessary, a priori conditions of experience. We can think of this
just in the terms that we have already discussed: the ability to do science presupposes
consciousness (cognition, the mind). Consciousness is a sine qua non, an a priori condition for
doing science. A natural scientiﬁc study of consciousness, then, presupposes the very thing that
28
METHODOLOGIES

it studies. We have to be conscious (in a ﬁrst-person subjective way) to study consciousness as
an object. A transcendental study focuses on consciousness, not as an object, but as subjectivity.
It can ask, ‘What limitations does consciousness, in its subjective structure and in the way that
it operates, place on the practice of science?’ In fact, as we have noted, this was Husserl’s motive
for developing phenomenology – and in this regard, he was motivated by some of the same
concerns as Descartes and Kant in attempting to provide an epistemological foundation for the
proper practice of science. 
But is it even possible to provide this kind of foundation? There are debates about this even
within phenomenology, but this is not a question we need to be concerned with here. Rather the
issue we want to address is simply whether phenomenology can be put to work in experimental
science. In the following chapters, we will offer plenty of evidence that this is the case. We will
demonstrate to what extent phenomenology addresses issues and provides analyses that are
crucial for an understanding of the true complexity of consciousness and cognition and which
are nevertheless frequently absent from current debates, and show how it can offer a conceptual
framework for understanding the mind that might be of considerably more value than some of
the models currently in vogue in cognitive science. Let us end this chapter, however, by brieﬂy
reviewing three recent and quite general proposals in regard to how phenomenology can work
with science rather than in opposition to it. 
Phenomenology is a philosophical enterprise; it is not an empirical discipline. This doesn’t rule
out, of course, that its analyses might have ramiﬁcations for and pertinence to an empirical study
of consciousness and cognitive sciences, even if this was not the primary aim of Husserl and his
followers. Husserl and phenomenology are not anti-scientiﬁc, even if they are anti-scientistic. In
fact, since one of Husserl’s primary concerns in developing phenomenology was his worry about
doing science properly, one can understand phenomenology as designed to support science. And
in terms of whether we can put the insights gained in transcendental phenomenology to use in
science, Husserl himself puts it this way: ‘every analysis or theory of transcendental
phenomenology – including . . . the theory of the transcendental constitution of an objective
world – can be developed in the natural realm, by giving up the transcendental attitude’
(1950/1999, p. 159). That is, just as we can move through methodological steps into the
phenomenological stance, we can also take the insights developed in that stance and carry them
back into science. 
In regard to the issue of naturalizing phenomenology, it is important to realize that this
catchphrase has taken on several different meanings; a development not unrelated to the fact
that both terms involved are equivocal. On some readings, a commitment to naturalism simply
amounts to taking one’s departure in what is natural (rather than supernatural). But it is fair to
say that the use of the term in current discourse mainly signals an orientation towards natural
science, and further that many contemporary naturalists endorse a form of scientism according
to which natural science is the measure of all things. In other words, on a dominant reading
naturalism is committed to the idea that the only legitimate way to study the mind is by means
of objective natural science.
As for the term ‘phenomenology’, it is also used in several different ways. As we noted in
Chapter 1, one can distinguish between a non-technical and technical use of the term. According
to the former, ‘phenomenology’ is merely another word for experience. To discuss whether
METHODOLOGIES
29

phenomenology can be naturalized is consequently to discuss the metaphysical question of
whether experiences can be naturalized. Is it possible, for instance, to identify experience with
the biological (neurological) processes that occurs in the organism (brain)? This is precisely the
kind of question that will not be of any major concern for the approach outlined in this book.
According to the more technical use of the term, ‘phenomenology’ refers to the philosophical
tradition and methodology we have been discussing. To ask whether this kind of phenomenology
can be naturalized might then mean a number of different things, as we shall see. The simplest
idea however is that a naturalized phenomenology, in this sense, should recognize that the
phenomena it studies are part of nature and are therefore also open to empirical investigation.
Insofar as phenomenology concerns itself with such phenomena, it should be informed by the
best available scientiﬁc knowledge, and vice versa, so that our best account of experience will
involve some integration of phenomenology and science. How best to accomplish this integration
and how far it should go remain contentious issues.
A formal affair
One approach suggests that the way to naturalize phenomenology is to translate the results of
phenomenological analysis into a language that is clearly understood by science, namely,
mathematics. We’ll look at two versions of this approach. The ﬁrst one has been proposed by the
phenomenologist Eduard Marbach. He suggests that by formalizing the language of pheno-
menological description, scientists and phenomenologists will be better able to communicate
about mental phenomena. The second proposal has been made by an interdisciplinary group of
researchers at the Centre de Recherche en Epistémologie Appliquée (CREA) in Paris, including
Jean Petitot (a mathematician), Jean-Michel Roy (a philosopher), Bernard Pachoud (a psychiatrist),
and the late Francisco Varela (a neurobiologist). They write, ‘It is our general contention . . . that
phenomenological descriptions of any kind can only be naturalized, in the sense of being
integrated into the general framework of natural sciences, if they can be mathematized. We see
mathematization as a key instrument for naturalization . . .’ (Roy et al. 1999, p. 42). 
The very ﬁrst question that this kind of approach raises is whether it is possible for mathematics
to capture the lived experience described by phenomenology. To the extent that a linguistic
description can express lived experience, Marbach (1993) argues, we simply need to formalize
that description. For him, this is a strategy to deal with the problem of word meaning and scientiﬁc
communication. In contrast to Dennett’s idea of heterophenomenology, where we simply treat
first-person reports as texts for interpretation, Marbach proposes to start with methodically
controlled phenomenological descriptions and then to appeal to formalized and intersubjectively
shareable meanings. Indeed, this is usually the way it is done in scientific contexts, where
terminological problems are addressed through the use of formalized language systems such as
one ﬁnds in mathematics. Marbach thus attempts to develop a formalized language, a pheno-
menological notation, to express phenomenological ﬁndings.
Marbach’s phenomenological notation expresses, not the content of experience, but the formal
structure of experience. It reﬂects how various mental activities can be different from one another
and yet also related to one another. Marbach shows, for example, how episodic memory depends
30
METHODOLOGIES

upon perception. The precise phenomenological description of memory requires the notion of
‘re-presentation’ (Vergegenwärtigung – literally, to make something present again). In contrast
to perception, which establishes intentional reference to something present and is therefore an
activity of ‘presentation’, memory refers to something that is absent. To establish conscious
reference to something, however, an activity that involves presentation is required. For something
like memory or imagination, Marbach suggests, consciousness establishes reference to that
which is not present in such a way that it is ‘as if’ it were given to me in perception (1993, p. 61).
The ‘as if’ indicates a modiﬁcation of the perceptual element, which Marbach, following Husserl,
calls a re-presentation. To explicate and clarify the structure of such a representational act,
Marbach develops his notation. An act of actually perceiving some object, x, is signiﬁed as 
(PER)x
The representation of x in an act of episodic memory involves (PER)x, not as an actual and occur-
rent act of perception, but as a re-enactment of a past perception which Marbach designates as
[PER]x
The fact that in memory it is a re-enactment rather than just an imaginary enactment means,
according to Marbach, that there is an element of belief involved (signiﬁed by |– , the belief-
stroke). That is, episodic memory involves a belief that at some point in the past I actually did
perceive x, and this differentiates it from imagination. The fact that the perception of x is in the
past rather than in the future, that is, the fact that it is an act of memory rather than expectation,
can be indicated by the letter p. So Marbach formalizes an act of memory, that is, a re-presentation
of x by means of ‘a perceiving of x bestowed with the belief of it having actually occurred in the
past’, as follows:
(REP p |– [PER])x
Things get more complicated, of course, but one can see the virtue of formulating a notation like
this. The notation helps to clarify, or at least to show the complexity of, consciousness and the
explication of that complexity provided by phenomenological reﬂection. It also helps to suggest
alternative structures that might be implicated, for example, in various memory systems. If, as
Marbach, following Husserl, contends, memory involves, in some fashion, a re-enactment of
perception, one would expect precisely the kind of neural activity associated with memory that
Damasio describes as occurring in ‘the same early sensory cortices where the ﬁring patterns
corresponding to perceptual representations once occurred’ (1994, p. 101). As Marbach’s
notation makes clear, phenomenological analysis conﬁrms and supports this neuroscientiﬁc
model of memory; and reciprocally, the neurological evidence supports Marbach’s description.6
Furthermore, it seems quite possible that neuroscience could develop a formal notation that
would express this model of memory, albeit a notation that would express something about the
sub-personal, neuronal level. One could then hypothesize that at some suitable level of
abstraction, the phenomenological and the neurological notations would turn out to be consistent.
METHODOLOGIES
31

This brings us to the proposal made by Roy, Petitot, Pachoud, and Varela, which carries things a
bit further. 
Mathematics represents a formal and therefore neutral realm within which to set out results
that are either first-person (phenomenological) or third-person (natural scientific). While
mathematics is a common tool in science, phenomenologists might object that even if we can
formalize phenomenological descriptions in Marbach’s notation, ﬁrst-person data cannot be fully
reduced to mathematical formula. Indeed, Husserl, himself a trained mathematician, argued
that, technically, mathematical formula are incapable of capturing phenomenological results. Roy
et al. argue that although this may have been true of the mathematics of Husserl’s time, the
development of dynamic systems theory has made Husserl’s objection obsolete (1999, p. 43).
To the extent that the mathematics of dynamical systems can be applied to the mind, it provides
an explanatory framework that can integrate first-person and third-person data. To put it
differently, the idea is that a sufﬁciently complex mathematics can facilitate the translation of
data from phenomenological and naturalistic realms into a common language. See Figure 2.1.
Something like this happened in the ﬁeld of classical mechanics:
Thanks to an appropriate mathematical interpretation (requiring in fact the highly
sophisticated techniques of integral and differential calculus, of Poincaré’s qualitative
dynamics, of complex dynamical systems theory, and of symplectic geometry) concepts
can be transformed into algorithms capable of generating a diversity of constructed
(computed) phenomena that can then be placed in relation (right up to complete
coincidence) with the data of observation.
(Roy et al. 1999, p. 47)
The claim is that we are ready to do the same kind of translation in the ﬁeld of mental experience,
with the primary idea being that this can be extended to phenomenological data.7 Indeed, as Roy
et al. suggest, the ﬁrst step of the translation to mathematics involves eidetic variation, insofar
as it involves a degree of abstraction from the natural psychophysical dimension of individual
embodied lived experience.
32
METHODOLOGIES
Formal theory
Experimental
science –
third-person data
Phenomenological
description –
first-person data
Mathematization
Mathematization
FIGURE 2.1 Formal integration of experimental science and phenomenology

Perhaps what is most important in the contemporary proposal outlined by Roy et al. is that
the mathematical (computational) models of traditional cognitive science will not do. Speciﬁcally,
if mathematical formalization involves an abstraction from experience, it is important to
understand precisely what full-bodied, dynamic experience is and to start with that. In other
words, the starting point, on the phenomenological side, is with embodied, in-the-world experi-
ence, rather than with an intellectualized version of experience. Similarly, in terms of under-
standing the physical side of mental processes, we need the recently developed dynamical
models of the brain. Once we have these starting points right, we quickly learn that the
computational models of traditional cognitive science are inadequate. ‘Embodiment, thus, 
implies that sensori-motor coupling modulates (but does not determine) an ongoing [neurological]
activity that it conﬁgures into meaningful world items in an unceasing ﬂow. This makes it naturally
framed in the tools derived from dynamical systems, which [this approach] shares with
connectionism’ (ibid., p. 61). Jean Petitot provides a good example of this approach in his analysis
of spatial perception (Petitot et al. 1999), as does Varela in his dynamical analysis of time-
consciousness (Gallagher and Varela 2003; Varela 1999). For our purposes, we will return to this
kind of analysis in the chapter on time-consciousness. Right now, however, with the promise of
avoiding the higher mathematics this entails, we will look at an example of how phenomenology,
experimental brain science and dynamical systems theory can be integrated in Varela’s more
speciﬁc proposal for a neurophenomenology.
Neurophenomenology
So far, proposals to formalize phenomenological description seem to lend themselves to 
the task of developing scientiﬁc models. Phenomenology itself, however, has always tried to 
stay closer to experience than to theory. So it is important to ask whether there is a way for
phenomenology to contribute directly to scientiﬁc experimentation. Neurophenomenology, 
as espoused by Varela (1996), ﬁlls this order. Neurophenomenology attempts to integrate 
three elements: (1) phenomenological analysis of experience; (2) dynamical systems theory; 
and (3) empirical experimentation on biological systems (see Thompson 2007, Ch. 10). Neuro-
phenomenology follows Husserl in understanding phenomenology to be a methodologically
guided reﬂective examination of experience, and it maintains that, for purposes of studying 
consciousness and cognition, both empirical scientists and experimental subjects ought to
receive some level of training in phenomenological method. Varela proposes that this training
would include learning to practise the epoché and phenomenological reduction, that is, 
the setting aside or ‘bracketing’ of opinions or theories that a subject may have about experi-
ence or consciousness, and focusing on the way things are experienced. If an approach that
involves training experimental subjects in this method might at ﬁrst seem methodologically
impractical, remember that experimental psychologists often spend good amounts of time
training chimps and monkeys to do experimental tasks. Should it be much more difﬁcult 
to train human subjects in phenomenological method? In any case, Lutz et al. (2002) have
done it, and have shown its practicality with some success. So let’s take a look at their 
work, which is an exemplary instance of neurophenomenology in that it combines the three
METHODOLOGIES
33

elements just mentioned: phenomenology, dynamical systems theory, and experimental brain
science.8
In many empirical testing situations that target speciﬁed cognitive tasks the brain activity
associated with successive responses to repeated and identical stimulations, recorded for
example by EEG, is highly variable. The source of this variability is presumed to reside mainly in
ﬂuctuations that may be due to a variety of cognitive parameters deﬁned by the subject’s attentive
state, for example distractions, spontaneous thought-processes, strategy decisions for carrying
out the task, etc. In other words, experimental subjects sometimes get distracted from the
experimental tasks, and sometimes by their own thoughts. For our purposes, let’s call the cause
of these distractions subjective parameters. Experimental control of subjective parameters is
difﬁcult. As a result, they are usually classiﬁed as unintelligible noise (Engel et al. 2001) and
ignored or neutralized by a method of averaging results across a series of trials and across
subjects. Lutz and his colleagues decided to approach the problem of subjective parameters in
a different way. They followed a neurophenomenological approach that combined ﬁrst-person
data and the dynamical analysis of neural processes to study subjects exposed to a 3D perceptual
illusion (see the box overleaf – Figure 2.2). They used the ﬁrst-person data not simply as more
data for analysis, but as contributing to an organizing analytic principle. 
In preliminary trials, Lutz et al. presented subjects with visual stimuli and asked them to report
on some detail that appeared in the stimuli. Subjects were phenomenologically trained to develop
their own descriptions of the subjective parameters (distractions, etc.) that occurred as they did
the task. The language used to describe these experiences was formalized and then used in the
main experimental trials. In the main trials, reports of subjective parameters were correlated
with reaction times for the response as well as with EEG measures of brain activity. 
To be clear, phenomenological training in this experiment did not involve teaching subjects
about the philosophical work of Husserl or the phenomenological tradition. Rather, as described
by Lutz et al., following Varela (1996), it consisted in training subjects to employ the epoché, and
to deliver consistent and clear reports of their experience. Speciﬁcally, Varela (1996) identiﬁed
three steps in phenomenological method that correspond closely to the method as we described
it above:
(1) suspending beliefs or theories about experience (the epoché)
(2) gaining intimacy with the domain of investigation (focused description)
(3) offering descriptions and using intersubjective validations (intersubjective corroboration).
The epoché can be either self-induced by subjects familiar with it, or guided by the experimenter
through open questions – questions not directed at opinions or theories, but at experience.
Rather than employing pre-deﬁned categories, and asking, ‘Do you think this experience is like
X or Y or Z?’, the open question asks simply, ‘How would you describe your experience?’9 In the
context of this experiment, questions posed immediately after the task help the subject to redirect
her attention towards the implicit strategy or degree of attention she implemented during the task.
Subjects can be re-exposed to the stimuli until they ﬁnd ‘their own stable experiential invariants’
to describe the speciﬁc elements of their experiences. These invariants then become the deﬁning
elements that are used as analytic tools in the main trials.
34
METHODOLOGIES

METHODOLOGIES
35
A neurophenomenological experiment
In Lutz et al. (2002) the trials were clustered according to ﬁrst-person descriptive reports
concerning the experience of subjective parameters, and for each cluster separate
dynamical analyses of electrical brain activity, recorded by EEG, were conducted. The
results were different and signiﬁcant in comparison to a procedure of averaging across
trials.
The phenomenological part of the experiment involved the development of des-
criptions (refined verbal reports) of the subjective parameters through a series of
preliminary or practice trials, using a well-known depth perception task – see Figure 2.2. 
Subjects are shown random-dot static images on a digital monitor. ‘At an auditory
signal the subjects were asked to fuse two squares at the bottom of the screen (Figure
2.2a), and to remain in this eye position for seven seconds. The random-dot pattern was
then changed to a slightly different random-dot pattern with binocular disparities (an
autostereogram). Subjects were then able to see a 3D illusory geometric shape
(represented in Figure 2.2b). They were instructed to press a button with their right hand
as soon as the shape had completely emerged. The subjects then gave a brief verbal
report of their experience.’
In the preliminary training process, subjects became knowledgeable about their 
own experience, deﬁned their own categories descriptive of the subjective parameters,
and could report on the presence or absence or degree of distractions, inattentive
moments, cognitive strategies, etc. Based on the subject’s own trained reports,
descriptive categories were defined a posteriori and used to divide the trials into
FIGURE 2.2 A neurophenomenological experiment. Source: Lutz et al. (2002), reprinted with
permission.
(a)
(b)
continued

36
METHODOLOGIES
phenomenologically-based clusters. For example, with regard to the subject’s experi-
enced readiness for the stimulus, the results speciﬁed three readiness states: 
•
Steady readiness (SR): subjects reported that they were ‘ready’, ‘present’, ‘here’,
or ‘well-prepared’ when the image appeared on the screen and that they responded
‘immediately’ and ‘decidedly’. 
•
Fragmented readiness (FR): subjects reported that they had made a voluntary effort
to be ready, but were prepared either less ‘sharply’ (due to a momentary ‘tiredness’)
or less ‘focally’ (due to small ‘distractions’, ‘inner speech’, or ‘discursive thoughts’). 
•
Unreadiness (SU): subjects reported that they were unprepared and that they saw
the 3D image only because their eyes were correctly positioned. They were surprised
by it and reported that they were ‘interrupted’ by the image in the middle of an
unrelated thought.
Subjects were then able to use these categories as a kind of shorthand during the
main trials when the experimenters recorded both the electrical brain activity and the
subject’s own report of each trial. The reports during the main trials revealed subtle
changes in the subject’s experience due to the presence and variation in the subjective
parameters. The clustered ﬁrst-person data were correlated with both reaction times
(Figure 2.3) and dynamic descriptions of the transient patterns of local and long-distance
synchrony occurring between oscillating neural populations, specified as a dynamic
neural signature (DNS) (Figure 2.4). According to the dynamical systems approach to
FIGURE 2.3 Correlation of behavioural responses and phenomenological clusters. 
Note: for four subjects, reaction times were faster in SR, slower in FR, and slowest in SU. 
Source: Lutz et al. (2002), reprinted with permission. 
Behavioural responses
Phenomenological clusters
FR
SR
200
400
600
800
SU
S1
Reaction
time
(msec)
S2
S3
S4

States of
preparation:
Stable
readiness
Cluster (SR)
Spontaneous
unreadiness
Cluster (SU)
Ongoing dynamics/Phenomenal context
Motor response (SR)
Motor response (SU)
Time (ms)
[-5200, -4200] msecs
[-3200, -2200] msecs
[-1200, -200] msecs
[0, 100] msecs
[250, 350] msecs
[450, 550] msecs
~3000 msecs
V
E
R
B
A
L
R
E
P
O
R
T
S
FIGURE 2.4 Dynamical neural signature for Subject 1 during SR (154 trials) and SU (38 trials).
Note: Colour-coding indicates scalp distribution of time-frequency gamma power around 35Hz normalized compared to distant
baseline B0 average for trials and for time windows indicated by an arrow. Black and white lines correspond to signiﬁcant
increase and decrease in synchrony, respectively.
Source: Lutz et al. (2002), reprinted with permission.
continued

In this way, the experimental protocol used in Lutz et al. (2002) might be said to employ a form
of phenomenological reduction. The subjects are asked to provide a description of their own
experience using an open-question format, and thus without the imposition of pre-determined
theoretical categories. They are trained to gain intimacy with their own experience in the domain
of investigation. The descriptive categories are intersubjectively and scientiﬁcally validated and
used to interpret results that correlate with objective measurements of behaviour and brain
activity. As indicated (see the box above), the experiments showed that distinct subjective
parameters, described in the subjects’ trained phenomenological reports, correlated to distinct
dynamic neural signatures just prior to presentation of the stimulus and that these dynamic
signatures then differentially conditioned the behavioural and neural response to the stimulus.10
Front-loading phenomenology
A third view of a phenomenologically enlightened experimental science is what has been called
‘front-loaded phenomenology’ (Gallagher 2003a). Rather than starting with the empirical results
(as one would do in either heterophenomenology or the formal mathematical approach), or with
the training of subjects (as one would do in neurophenomenology), this approach starts with the
experimental design. The idea is to front-load phenomenological insights into the design of
experiments, that is, to allow the insights developed in phenomenological analyses to inform the
way experiments are set up. The phenomenological insights might be found in Husserlian
transcendental investigations, or in the more empirically oriented phenomenological analyses
found, for example, in Merleau-Ponty (1962), or developed in neurophenomenological experi-
ments. To front-load phenomenology, however, does not mean to simply presuppose or accept
38
METHODOLOGIES
neuroscience, the neural activation that underlies our experience is not localized in a
speciﬁc brain area, but involves the rapid and transient integration of functionally distinct
and widely distributed brain areas. This kind of integration is effected by the dynamic
links among the different areas. Thus, using the sophisticated mathematics and models
of dynamical systems theory, the neurophenomenologist investigates the neural
correlates of experience in terms of these emergent and changing patterns of integration,
here captured in the concept of a DNS – a measure of the transient patterns of
synchronous oscillations between different populations of neurons (see Thompson 2007;
Varela et al. 2001).
The experimenters were able to show that distinct subjective parameters, described
in the subjects’ trained phenomenological reports, correlated to distinct DNSs just prior
to presentation of the stimulus. For example, characteristic patterns of phase synchrony
recorded in the frontal electrodes prior to the stimulus depended on the degree of
preparation as reported by subjects. 

the phenomenological results obtained by others. Rather it involves testing those results and more
generally it incorporates a dialectical movement between previous insights gained in pheno-
menology and preliminary trials that will specify or extend these insights for purposes of the
particular experiment or empirical investigation. An example may be helpful to see how this
works.
First, however, let’s note that according to this approach, one can incorporate the insights of
phenomenology into experimental protocols without training subjects in the method. This is not
meant as a rejection of the neurophenomenological approach. As indicated, phenomenological
insights developed in neurophenomenological experimentation can be front-loaded into the
design of subsequent experiments. Front-loaded phenomenology, however, can address certain
limitations involved in neurophenomenological procedures that involve training. Speciﬁcally, not
every psychological experiment can be designed to allow for the training of subjects. In some
cases one wants the subject to be naïve about what is being tested, for example. In other cases
one might be testing subjects who are unable to follow phenomenological method, as when
subjects might be suffering from pathologies. In such cases, it may still be possible to front-load
the phenomenology. 
In this particular example, the phenomenological analysis concerns a distinction between the
sense of agency that I may have for my action, and the sense of ownership I feel for my own body
and its movement. In the normal experience of intentional action, these two aspects are close
to indistinguishable. But consider the phenomenology of involuntary action. If, for example,
someone pushes me from behind, I sense that it is my body that is moving – it is my movement,
not someone else’s, so I experience ownership for the movement – but I do not experience
agency for the movement since I have no sense that I intended or caused the movement. That
is, in the case of involuntary movement, I directly experience the movement as happening to me
(sense of ownership), but not as caused by me (no sense of agency).
If neuroscience accepts this phenomenological distinction, then one of its tasks is to deter-
mine what neurological processes generate these first-order phenomenal experiences.
Furthermore, if this distinction is in fact implicit in first-order phenomenal experience rather 
than being the product of second-order introspective attribution, then this suggests that neuro-
scientists should look for a more basic set of primary processes that are activated in motor
control mechanisms rather than in areas that may be responsible for higher-order cognitive
processes.
This phenomenologically-based supposition is not only empirically testable, it has already
informed the design of several recent experiments that attempt to distinguish the neural
correlates of the sense of agency for one’s own actions (self-agency) in contrast to the sense 
that the action belongs to someone else (other-agency) (e.g. Chaminade and Decety 2002; Farrer
and Frith 2002; Farrer et al. 2003). We discuss these experiments in some detail in Chapter 8.
For now, however, we simply want to note that in the experiments subjects can remain perfectly
naïve about the phenomenological details of their own experience. They are not even required
to give a report of their experience. Yet in these experiments the phenomenological description
of the sense of agency both informs the experimental design (the experiments are set up to 
ﬁnd the neural correlates of precisely this experiential component) and is part of the analytic
framework for interpreting the results. Moreover, these experiments do not simply presuppose
METHODOLOGIES
39

the phenomenological description. Rather the experiments test and attempt to corroborate that
description.
CONCLUSION
We conclude by emphasizing once more that the phenomenological analysis of the ﬁrst-person
perspective is much more than a mere compilation of descriptive ﬁndings. When speaking of a
ﬁrst-person perspective, or of a dimension of ﬁrst-person experiencing, it would be a mistake to
argue that this is something that exclusively concerns the type of access a given subject has to
her own experiences. It would be a mistake to argue that access to objects in the common world
is independent of a ﬁrst-person perspective, precisely in that it involves a third-person perspective.
This line of thought will not do; obviously, I can be directed at intersubjectively accessible objects,
and although my access to these objects is of the very same kind available to other persons, this
does not imply that there is no first-person perspective involved. Rather, intersubjectively
accessible objects are intersubjectively accessible precisely insofar as they can be accessed
from each ﬁrst-person perspective. There is no pure third-person perspective, just as there is no
view from nowhere. To believe in the existence of such a pure third-person perspective is to
succumb to an objectivist illusion. This is, of course, not to say that there is no third-person
perspective, but merely that such a perspective is exactly a perspective from somewhere. It is a
view that we can adopt of the world. It is a perspective founded upon a ﬁrst-person perspective,
or to be more precise, it emerges out of the encounter between at least two first-person
perspectives; that is, it involves intersubjectivity.11
Phenomenological analysis also goes beyond a narrow contribution to issues of relevance for
philosophy of mind. In fact, the systematic import of the analysis can only be fully appreciated
the moment the link to the overarching transcendental philosophical considerations is made
visible. In this regard, it entails a showdown with metaphysical realism and scientism. 
One way to deﬁne metaphysical realism is to say that it is guided by a certain conception of
knowledge. Knowledge is taken to consist of a faithful mirroring of a mind-independent reality.
It is taken to be knowledge of a reality which exists independently of that knowledge, and indeed
independently of any thought and experience (Williams 2005, p. 48). If we want to know true
reality, we should aim at describing the way the world is, not just independently of its being
believed to be that way, but independently of all the ways in which it happens to present itself to
us human beings. An absolute conception, on this view, would be a dehumanized conception, a
conception from which all traces of ourselves had been removed. Nothing would remain that
would indicate whose conception it is, how those who form or possess that conception experience
the world, and when or where they ﬁnd themselves in it. It would be as impersonal, impartial, and
objective a picture of the world as we could possibly achieve (Stroud 2000, p. 30). 
Metaphysical realism assumes that everyday experience combines subjective and objective
features and that we can reach an objective picture of what the world is really like by stripping
away the subjective. It consequently argues that there is a clear distinction to be drawn between
the properties things have ‘in themselves’ and the properties which are ‘projected by us’. Whereas
the world of appearance, the world as it is for us in daily life, combines subjective and objective
40
METHODOLOGIES

features, science captures the objective world, the world as it is in itself. But to think that science
can provide us with an absolute description of reality, that is, a description from a view from
nowhere; to think that science is the only road to metaphysical truth, and that science simply
mirrors the way in which nature classifies itself, is according to the phenomenologists an
objectivist and scientistic illusion (cf. Zahavi 2003e). We cannot hold all our current beliefs about
the world up against the world and somehow measure the degree of correspondence between
the two. It is, in other words, nonsensical to suggest that we should try to peel our perceptions
and beliefs off the world, as it were, in order to compare them in some direct way with what they
are about. 
Phenomenology endorses a this-worldly conception of objectivity and reality and seeks to
overcome the scepticism that argues that the way the world appears to us is compatible with the
world really being completely different (Husserl 1950/1999, p. 117; Heidegger 1986/1996, p.
229). Phenomenology also rejects the view – currently endorsed by many naturalists – according
to which natural science is the measure of all things, of what is that it is, and of what is not that
it is not (cf. Sellars 1963, p. 173). For phenomenology, science is not simply a collection of
systematically interrelated justified propositions. Science is performed by somebody; it is a
speciﬁc theoretical stance towards the world. This stance did not fall down from the sky; it has
its own presuppositions and origins. Scientiﬁc objectivity is something to strive for, but it rests
on the observations and experiences of individuals; it is knowledge shared by a community of
experiencing subjects and presupposes a triangulation of points of view or perspectives. In short,
if we wish to understand knowledge, truth, objectivity, meaning, and reference we will have to
investigate the forms and structures of intentionality that are employed by the cognizing and
acting subjects. Failing to do so, failing to effect the reflective move of transcendental
phenomenology, would be to succumb to a naïve objectivism. Thus, according to this view, rather
than being a hindrance or obstacle, subjectivity turns out to be a far more important requisite
for objectivity and the pursuit of scientiﬁc knowledge than, say, microscopes and scanners, which
are of no use unless the scientist is an experiencing subject. At the same time, it is important to
recognize that, although phenomenology involves a transcendental critique of scientism, it by
no means entails a rejection of science. Rather, as we have seen from the discussion of
naturalizing phenomenology, it offers unique resources that can enhance or complement the
natural science of the mind. 
NOTES
1 The term ‘neurophenomenology’, for example, was originally deﬁned by Francisco Varela (1996) to
signify an approach to the neuroscience of consciousness that incorporates the phenomenological
methodology outlined in the Husserlian tradition. In recent years, however, the term has been used
in a much looser sense to signify any kind of appeal to ﬁrst-person data in combination with data from
neuroscience. See, for example, Metzinger (2003).
2 See the Special Issue of Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences (2007, 6, 1–2) on hetero-
phenomenology. Dennett (2007, p. 252), in his response to this issue, insists that hetero-
phenomenology describes how empirical science already does what it does, but he rejects the
METHODOLOGIES
41

characterization of heterophenomenology as ‘averaging out’ ﬁrst-person data. But if averaging out is
not the correct way to put it, then perhaps the ‘elimination’ of ﬁrst-person data might be a more apt
phrasing. After all, Dennett does claim that consciousness does not have the ﬁrst-person phenomenal
properties it is commonly thought to have (Dennett 1991, p. 365). That something has subjective or
experiential reality for the subject just means that the subject believes in it (Dennett 1993b, p. 139).
There are the public reports we utter, there are the episodes of propositional thinking, and then there
is, as far as introspection is concerned, darkness (Dennett 1979, p. 95). Indeed, for Dennett, our
stream of consciousness consists of nothing but propositional episodes (ibid. 1979, pp. 94–95, 109). 
3 Of course, developments in physics, particularly the rise of relativity theory and quantum physics,
have called this fundamental assumption into question. It is, however, questionable whether the full
theoretical implications of Einstein’s and Bohr’s ideas – the exact interpretation of which is still
debated – have yet been absorbed by standard science and reﬂected in its understanding of reality.
On a side note, it is worth mentioning that the outstanding mathematician Herman Weyl who was one
of Einstein’s colleagues in Zürich, and who contributed decisively to the interpretation and further
development of both the general theory of relativity and the ﬁeld of quantum mechanics, not only
drew quite extensively from Husserl’s criticism of naturalism, but was also deeply influenced by
Husserl’s transcendental idealism (see Ryckman 2005). 
4 For a recent, quite similar claim, cf. Noë (2004, p. 179).
5 A proper understanding of the phenomenological analyses of consciousness must recognize their
transcendental philosophical character. Some still ﬁnd this claim controversial when it concerns the
work of Heidegger and Merleau-Ponty. For a defence of such a reading, which emphasizes the
commonality between the three phenomenologists, see Zahavi (2006, 2008b).
6 Further support for the Husserlian view that memory involves the re-enactment of a previous perceptual
experience is to be found in neurological differences involved in illusory versus veridical memory. See
Schacter et al. (1996).
7 It’s important to note how controversial this proposal is from a strict Husserlian viewpoint. As Husserl
writes in the very beginning of Ideen I: ‘One cannot define in philosophy as in mathematics; any
imitation of mathematical procedure in this respect is not only unfruitful but wrong, and has most
injurious consequences’ (Husserl 1976/1982, p. 9). See Yoshimi (2007) for support of the position
outlined by Roy et al. For some critical remarks see Zahavi (2004e).
8 The following summary is based on Gallagher (2003a), but see Thompson (2007) for a more developed
account.
9 ‘To train the subjects, open questions were asked to try to redirect their attention towards their own
immediate mental processes before the recordings were taken. . . . For example: Experimenter: “What
did you feel before and after the image appeared?” Subject S1: “I had a growing sense of expectation,
but not for a speciﬁc object; however when the ﬁgure appeared, I had a feeling of conﬁrmation, no
surprise at all”; or subject S4: “it was as if the image appeared in the periphery of my attention, but
then my attention was suddenly swallowed up by the shape”‘ (Lutz et al. 2002, p. 1587).
10 For further theoretical and methodological discussion of this experiment, see Lutz (2002), Lutz and
Thompson (2003) and Thompson et al. (2005). In his recent book, Thompson makes it clear that the
phenomenological methods employed in experimental neurophenomenology are not necessarily
limited to those found in the Husserlian tradition of phenomenology. They can include ‘any systematic
project of investigating and describing experience. So understood, phenomenology includes Asian
42
METHODOLOGIES

traditions, in particular the various Buddhist and Hindu philosophical analyses of the nature of the
mind and consciousness, based on contemplative mental training’ (Thompson 2007, p. 474).
11 For a more elaborate argument, cf. Zahavi (2001b).
FURTHER READING
Natalie Depraz, Francisco Varela & Pierre Vermersch, On Becoming Aware. Amsterdam: John Benjamins,
2003.
Owen Flanagan, Consciousness Reconsidered. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992.
Aron Gurwitsch, Studies in Phenomenology and Psychology. Evanston: Northwestern University Press,
1966.
Anthony Jack & Andreas Roepstorff (eds), Trusting the Subject I. Special double issue of Journal of
Consciousness Studies 10/9–10, 2003.
Eduard Marbach, Mental Representation and Consciousness: Towards a Phenomenological Theory of
Representation and Reference. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1993.
Dermot Moran, Introduction to Phenomenology. London: Routledge, 2000.
Alva Noë (ed.), Dennett and Heterophenomenology. Special double issue of Phenomenology and the
Cognitive Sciences 6/1–2, 2007
Jean Petitot, Francisco J. Varela, Bernard Pachoud & Jean-Michel Roy (eds), Naturalizing Phenomenology:
Issues in Contemporary Phenomenology and Cognitive Science. Stanford: Stanford University Press,
1999.
Robert Sokolowski, Introduction to Phenomenology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000. 
Evan Thompson, Mind in Life: Biology, Phenomenology, and the Sciences of Mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 2007.
Francisco Varela, Evan Thompson & Eleanor Rosch, The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and Human
Experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991. 
Donn Welton (ed.), The New Husserl: A Critical Reader. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2003. 
Dan Zahavi, Husserl’s Phenomenology. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2003.
METHODOLOGIES
43


Consciousness and 
self-consciousness
After putting in a long day’s work, I climb into my sleek new hybrid, make my way onto the highway
and head for home. It was an amazing waste of time, I think to myself, to go to all those meetings
today. Nothing ever gets accomplished at them. And that jerk who suggested that Plan A was
beyond budget sounded like he never had a course in economics. But that new person seemed
to know what she was talking about. I wonder whether she would like to get a drink sometime. 
. . . Ah, here I am. I pull into my driveway and I’m home. That didn’t take long. Actually, now that
I think of it, I hardly remember making the trip home. I remember pulling onto the highway, and
the next thing I knew I was here. Let me think – which route did I actually take? Hmm. I can’t recall
anything about the actual driving I must have been doing. I must have been on automatic pilot.
Does this mean that I was not conscious of my driving?
The situation we have just described is a version of what has become known in the literature
as the ‘long-distance truck driver’ problem (Armstrong 1968). Can I have unconscious perceptions
and perform unconscious actions? Can I perceive events in the world without being conscious
of my perceptions? If so, what difference does it make, if any, when the perceptions are in fact
conscious? And what perceptions and actions should we call conscious? If conscious perceptions
are perceptions that in addition to being conscious of something in the world, are also themselves
something one is conscious of, would they then entail a form of self-consciousness? We are here
faced with the large philosophical issue concerning the relation between consciousness and
self-consciousness. What is the right way to think about these concepts? 
In this chapter, we discuss some central problems that have to be addressed by any account
of consciousness. We’ll focus on a phenomenological account and compare it with other
accounts. Like any other tradition, the phenomenological tradition spans many differences, yet
even if phenomenologists disagree on important questions concerning methods and focus, they
are in nearly unanimous agreement when it concerns the relation between consciousness and
self-consciousness. Literally all of the major ﬁgures in phenomenology defend the view that a
3

minimal form of self-consciousness is a constant structural feature of conscious experience.
Experience happens for the experiencing subject in an immediate way and as part of this
immediacy, it is implicitly marked as my experience. For the phenomenologists, this immediate
and ﬁrst-personal givenness of experiential phenomena must be accounted for in terms of a
‘pre-reﬂective’ self-consciousness. 
By calling the type of self-consciousness in question ‘pre-reﬂective’, we wish to emphasize
that it does not involve an additional second-order mental state that in some way is directed in
an explicit manner towards the experience in question. Rather, the self-consciousness must be
understood as an intrinsic feature of the primary experience. Moreover, it is not thematic or
attentive or voluntarily brought about; rather it is tacit, and very importantly, thoroughly non-
observational (that is, it is not a kind of introspective observation of myself) and non-objectifying
(that is, it does not turn my experience into a perceived or observed object). I can, of course, reﬂect
on and attend to my experience, I can make it the theme or object of my attention, but prior to
reﬂecting on it, I wasn’t ‘mind- or self-blind’. The experience was already present to me, it was
already something for me, and in that sense it counts as being pre-reﬂectively conscious. 
CONSCIOUSNESS AND PRE-REFLECTIVE SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS 
When I look out my window I see the car that I have just parked in the driveway. In this case, it
makes sense to say that I am conscious of the car, or that I have a ﬁrst-order consciousness of
it. I can tell you what it looks like, and I can tell you that, yes, there it is, located in the driveway.
But can I be conscious of the car, and can I be in a position to tell you what I am conscious of,
unless I am also, somehow, familiar or acquainted with my very experience of the car? Since the
latter would amount to a consciousness of myself being conscious, we would say that it is a form
of self-consciousness. The question would then be, what precisely is the nature of this self-
consciousness? And is it right to say that in all cases of being conscious of something, we are
also conscious that we are conscious of something, or wouldn’t this generate an inﬁnite regress?
Husserl, for example, contends that the individual’s stream of experience is characterized by
a self-appearance or self-manifestation (1959, p. 189). He argues that self-consciousness, rather
than being something that occurs only during exceptional circumstances, namely whenever we
pay attention to our conscious life, is a feature characterizing the experiential dimension as such,
no matter what worldly entities we might otherwise be conscious of and occupied with. As he puts
it, ‘To be a subject is to be in the mode of being aware of oneself’ (Husserl 1973a, p. 151).
We ﬁnd very similar ideas in other phenomenologists. Heidegger, for example, argues that the
self is present whenever one is conscious of something. Every worldly experience involves a
component of self-acquaintance and self-familiarity; every experiencing is characterized by the
fact that ‘I am always somehow acquainted with myself’ (Heidegger 1993, p. 251), or as he puts
it – this time adopting a more traditional terminology – ‘Every consciousness is also self-
consciousness’ (Heidegger 2001, p. 135).
Phenomenologists refer to the idea that our consciousness is of or about something as the
intentionality of consciousness (more on this in Chapter 6). Sartre, probably the best-known
defender of a phenomenological theory of self-consciousness, also claimed that each intentional
46
CONSCIOUSNESS AND SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

experience is characterized by self-consciousness. Sartre took pre-reﬂective self-consciousness
to constitute a necessary condition for being conscious of something. To perceive a withering oak,
a dance performance, or a red pillow consciously without being aware of perceiving it, i.e. without
having a sense that I am experiencing it or being acquainted with the experience in question, is,
according to Sartre, a manifest absurdity (1956, pp. l–lxii; 1967). An experience does not simply
exist, it exists in such a way that it is implicitly self-given, or as Sartre puts it, it is ‘for itself’. This
self-givenness of experience is not simply a quality added to the experience, a mere varnish; it
rather constitutes the very mode of being of the experience. This line of thought is elaborated in
the important introduction to Being and Nothingness, where Sartre claims that an ontological
analysis of consciousness – that is, an analysis of the very being of consciousness – shows that
it always involves self-consciousness – the mode of being of intentional consciousness is to be
for-itself (pour-soi), that is, self-conscious: ‘This self-consciousness we ought to consider not as
a new consciousness, but as the only mode of existence which is possible for a consciousness
of something’ (Sartre 1956, p. liv).
These claims should not be misunderstood. The phenomenologists are not advocating a
strong thesis concerning total and infallible self-knowledge; rather, they are calling attention to
the constitutive link between experiential phenomena and ﬁrst-personal givenness. As we shall
see in a moment, many analytic philosophers have more recently made similar claims.
Husserl, Heidegger, Sartre, and others all emphasize the importance of considering the ﬁrst-
person perspective when elucidating phenomenal consciousness. When speaking of a first-
person perspective it is important to be clear about the distinction between having or embodying
such a perspective and being able to articulate it linguistically (we’ll call this a weak and strong
ﬁrst-person perspective, respectively). Whereas the latter presupposes mastery of the ﬁrst-person
pronoun and entails the actual adoption of a position or perspective on oneself (as in ‘I am angry’
or ‘I would like some coffee’), the former is simply a question of the ﬁrst-personal, subjective
manifestation of one’s own experiential life. Although both capabilities deserve to be investigated,
phenomenologists have mainly been accentuating the signiﬁcance of the former. To emphasize
the importance of the first-person perspective should consequently not be seen as an
endorsement of a perceptual model of self-knowledge, as if our acquaintance with our own
experiences literally came about through a speciﬁc perspective-taking. Rather, the point is simply
that there is a distinctive way experiential episodes present themselves to the subject whose
episodes they are. Experiential episodes have, to use Searle’s terminology, a ﬁrst-person ontology
from the start, i.e. even before the subject acquires the conceptual and linguistic skills to classify
them as his own.
Different forms of self-consciousness
Despite the consensus among the philosophers we have just named, the term ‘self-con-
sciousness’ is notoriously ambiguous, and the philosophical, psychological, and neuroscientiﬁc
literatures are ﬁlled with competing, conﬂicting, and complementary deﬁnitions. Let us take a
quick look at some of the main candidates:
CONSCIOUSNESS AND SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS
47

•
In philosophy, many have sought to link self-consciousness to the ability to think ‘I’-thoughts.
A recent defence of such an approach can be found in Baker, who has argued that all sentient
beings are subjects of experience, that they all have perspectival attitudes, and that they all
experience the world from their own egocentric perspective. In doing so, they show that they
are in possession of what Baker calls weak ﬁrst-person phenomena (2000, pp. 60, 67).
Merely having a subjective point of view, however, is not enough for having self-con-
sciousness. In order to be in possession of self-consciousness, what Baker calls strong ﬁrst-
person phenomena, one must be able to think of oneself as oneself. It is not enough to have
desires and beliefs, it is not enough to have a perspectival attitude, nor is it enough to be
able to distinguish between self and nonself; one must also be able to conceptualize this
distinction. Baker consequently argues that self-consciousness presupposes the possession
of a ﬁrst-person concept. One is only self-conscious from the moment one can conceive of
oneself as oneself and has the linguistic ability to use the ﬁrst-person pronoun to refer to
oneself (Baker 2000, pp. 67–68; cf. Block 1997, p. 389). Given this definition, self-con-
sciousness is obviously taken to be something that emerges in the course of a developmental
process, and that depends upon the eventual acquisition of concepts and language.
•
Another popular and related philosophical move has been to argue that self-consciousness,
in the proper sense of the term, requires consciousness of a self. In other words, for a creature
to be self-conscious it is not sufﬁcient that the creature in question is able to self-ascribe
experiences on an individual basis without recognizing the identity of that to which the
experiences are ascribed. Rather, the creature must be capable of thinking of the self-
ascribed experiences as belonging to one and the same self. Thus, genuine self-con-
sciousness requires that the creature is capable of being conscious of its own identity as the
subject, bearer, or owner of different experiences (cf. Cassam 1997).
•
If we shift terrain and move into social psychology, we will frequently encounter the claim,
famously defended by George Herbert Mead, that self-consciousness is a matter of becoming
an object to oneself in virtue of one’s social relations to others, i.e. that self-consciousness
is constituted by adopting the perspective of the other towards oneself (Mead 1962).
According to this account, self-consciousness is per se a social phenomenon. It is not
something you can acquire on your own. As Mead wrote: ‘Consciousness, as frequently used,
simply has reference to the ﬁeld of experience, but self-consciousness refers to the ability to
call out in ourselves a set of deﬁnite responses which belong to the others of the group.
Consciousness and self-consciousness are not on the same level. A man alone has,
fortunately or unfortunately, access to his own toothache, but that is not what we mean by
self-consciousness’ (Mead 1962, p. 163; cf. pp. 171–172).
•
Within developmental psychology, the so-called mirror-recognition task has occasionally
been heralded as the decisive test for self-consciousness. Chimps (and a few other animals)
are able to recognize themselves in the mirror, and humans begin to do so around the age
of 18 months. Hence, it has been argued that self-consciousness is only present from the
moment the child is capable of recognizing itself in the mirror (cf. Lewis 2003). 
•
Some, however, have raised the stakes even further and have argued that self-consciousness
presupposes possession of a theory of mind. Roughly, the idea is that self-consciousness
48
CONSCIOUSNESS AND SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

requires the ability to be aware of experiences as experiences, which in turn requires
possession of a concept of experience. However, this concept cannot stand alone. It gets its
signiﬁcance from being embedded in a network of theoretical concepts. In particular, to think
of experiences as experiences requires one to have the conception of objects or states of
affairs that are capable of being experienced but that can exist even if they are
unexperienced. This motivates some to argue that children do not gain self-consciousness
until around the age of four, and that one can test the presence of self-consciousness by using
classical theory of mind tasks, such as the false-belief task or the appearance-reality task
(see Chapter 7). 
•
Finally, narrative theorists suggest that a fully-ﬂedged self-consciousness comes about only
on the basis of being in command of our own life story. Self-consciousness is tied to our
ability to develop self-narratives, to tell stories about ourselves, and to make sense out of
our own life in a narrative way.
There are kernels of truth in all of these deﬁnitions in the sense that they all capture various
important aspects of the phenomenon of self-consciousness, yet none of them have much to do
with the idea of a minimal, pre-reﬂective self-consciousness. Rather, the phenomenological line
of thought can be construed as follows: self-consciousness is not merely something that comes
about the moment one scrutinizes one’s experiences attentively (let alone something that only
comes about the moment one recognizes one’s own mirror image, refers to oneself using the ﬁrst-
person pronoun, or is in possession of a theory of mind, or an identifying knowledge of one’s own
life story). Rather, self-consciousness comes in many forms and degrees. It makes perfect sense
to speak of self-consciousness whenever I consciously perceive an external object – a chair, a
chestnut tree, or a rising sun – because to consciously perceive something is not simply to be
conscious of the perceptual object, but also to be acquainted with the experience of the object.
In its most primitive and fundamental form, self-consciousness is simply a question of the ongoing
ﬁrst-personal manifestation of experiential life.
PRE-REFLECTIVE SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS AND ‘WHAT IT IS LIKE’
The notion of pre-reﬂective self-consciousness is related to the idea that experiences have a
subjective ‘feel’ to them, a certain (phenomenal) quality of ‘what it is like’ or what it ‘feels’ like to
have them. As it is usually expressed outside of phenomenological texts, to undergo a conscious
experience necessarily means that there is something it is like for the subject to have that
experience (Nagel 1974; Searle 1992). However, there is more to experience than the fact that
what it is like to perceive a black triangle is subjectively distinct from what it is like to perceive a
red circle (cf. Nagel 1974). Not only is what it is like to perceive red different from what it is like
to perceive black, but what it is like to perceive red is different from what it is like to remember
or imagine red. Furthermore, all of these phenomenal experiences involve a reference to a subject
of experience. In perceiving or imagining an object consciously, one is aware of the object as
appearing in a determinate manner to oneself. When I consciously imagine Santa Claus, desire
CONSCIOUSNESS AND SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS
49

a hot shower, anticipate my next holiday, or reﬂect on Aristotle’s notion of an unmoved mover, all
of these intended objects are given in correlation to a variety of subjectively distinct intentional
experiences. One reason these experiences are said to be subjective is because they are
characterized by a subjective mode of existence, in the sense that they necessarily feel like
something for somebody. Our experiential life can consequently be said to entail a primitive form
of self-referentiality or for-me-ness.
So although I live through various different experiences, there is also something experiential
that in some sense remains the same, namely, their distinct ﬁrst-personal givenness. When I am
aware of a current pain, perception, or thought, the experience in question is given immediately,
non-inferentially, and non-criterially as mine. I do not ﬁrst have a neutral or anonymous experience
only to infer in a subsequent move that it is mine. In fact, if I am dizzy I can neither be in doubt
nor mistaken about who the subject of that experience is, and it is nonsensical to ask whether I
am sure that I am the one who is dizzy, or to demand a speciﬁcation of the criteria being used by
me in determining whether or not the felt dizziness is really mine. In effect, all of my experiences
are characterized implicitly by a quality of mineness, that is, as having the quality of being
experiences I am undergoing or living through. This is not to say that I always attend to this quality,
or that I am always thematically aware of my experiences as being mine. But we need an account
that can explain how I can return to an experience and remember it as my experience even
though it might not have been given thematically as mine when it was originally lived through.
Had the experience in fact been completely anonymous, had it lacked ﬁrst-personal mineness
altogether when originally lived through, such a subsequent appropriation would be rather
inexplicable. 
Furthermore, it is also important to point to the special nature of this mineness. It is not meant
to suggest that I own the experiences in a way that is even remotely similar to the way I possess
external objects of various sorts (a car, my trousers, or a house in Sweden). Nor should it be seen
primarily as a contrastive determination. When young children start to use the possessive
pronoun, it frequently means ‘not yours’. But as Husserl observes in one of his manuscripts,
when it comes to the peculiar mineness (Meinheit) characterizing experiential life, this can and
should be understood without any contrasting others (Husserl 1973b, p. 351), although it may
form the basis of the self–other discrimination. To put it differently, the for-me-ness in question
is not a quality like yellow, salty, or spongy. It doesn’t refer to a speciﬁc content of experience, to
a speciﬁc what, but to the unique mode of givenness or how of experience. It refers to the ﬁrst-
personal givenness of experience; it refers to the fact that experiences I am living through present
themselves differently (but not necessarily better) to me than to anybody else. It could
consequently be claimed that anybody who denies the mineness or for-me-ness of experiences
simply fails to recognize an essential constitutive aspect of experience. Indeed, to stress the
intimate link between consciousness and self-consciousness as we have been doing is simply
to take the subjectivity of experience seriously.
It is thus crucial not to misconceive of the ubiquitous pre-reﬂective self-consciousness as if it
was something distinct from phenomenal consciousness as such, something that could and
should be found in addition to the ordinary phenomenal consciousness of sweet oranges or hot
coffee. Rather, the claim is that pre-reﬂective self-consciousness is a constitutive feature and
integral part of phenomenal consciousness. 
50
CONSCIOUSNESS AND SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

As already noted, one ﬁnds similar views in analytic philosophy as well. Consider the following
quotes from Frankfurt and Goldman, respectively:
What would it be like to be conscious of something without being aware of this
consciousness? It would mean having an experience with no awareness whatever of its
occurrence. This would be, precisely, a case of unconscious experience. It appears, then,
that being conscious is identical with being self-conscious. Consciousness is self-
consciousness. The claim that waking consciousness is self-consciousness does not
mean that consciousness is invariably dual in the sense that every instance of it involves
both a primary awareness and another instance of consciousness which is somehow
distinct and separable from the first and which has the first as its object. That would
threaten an intolerably inﬁnite proliferation of instances of consciousness. Rather, the self-
consciousness in question is a sort of immanent reﬂexivity by virtue of which every instance
of being conscious grasps not only that of which it is an awareness but also the awareness
of it. It is like a source of light which, in addition to illuminating whatever other things fall
within its scope, renders itself visible as well.
(Frankfurt 1988, p. 162)
[Consider] the case of thinking about x or attending to x. In the process of thinking about
x there is already an implicit awareness that one is thinking about x. There is no need for
reﬂection here, for taking a step back from thinking about x in order to examine it. . . . When
we are thinking about x, the mind is focused on x, not on our thinking of x. Nevertheless,
the process of thinking about x carries with it a non-reﬂective self-awareness.
(Goldman 1970, p. 96)
Related views have been defended by Owen Flanagan, who not only argues that consciousness
involves self-consciousness in the weak sense that there is something it is like for the subject to
have the experience, but has also spoken of the low-level self-consciousness involved in
experiencing my experiences as mine (1992, p. 194). Arguing along similar lines, Uriah Kriegel
has more recently claimed that peripheral self-consciousness is an integral moment of
phenomenal consciousness. As he writes, ‘It is impossible to think or experience something
consciously without thinking or experiencing it self-consciously, i.e. without being peripherally
aware of thinking or experiencing it’ (Kriegel 2004, p. 200). Thus, in his view, unless a mental
state is self-conscious, there will be nothing it is like to undergo the state, and it therefore cannot
be a phenomenally conscious state (Kriegel 2003, pp. 103–106).1
To avoid misunderstandings, it is however important to emphasize that the phenomenologists
don’t endorse the strong view that consciousness and self-consciousness are identical; rather,
the claim is merely that (phenomenal) consciousness entails (a weak or thin) self-consciousness.
Compare three different experiences: the smelling of crushed basil leaves, the seeing of the full
moon, and the hearing of Bartok’s Music for Strings, Percussion & Celesta. Although all three
experiences are characterized by the same kind of pre-reflective self-consciousness, they
nevertheless differ in what it is like to have or undergo them. This should be sufﬁcient to show
that consciousness and self-consciousness cannot simply be identiﬁed. 
CONSCIOUSNESS AND SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS
51

First-order and higher-order accounts of consciousness
The claim that there is a close link between consciousness and self-consciousness is less
exceptional than might be expected. In fact, it could even be argued that such a claim is part of
current orthodoxy since it is a claim defended by various higher-order theorists. Consider that in
the current debate about consciousness it has become customary to distinguish between two
uses of the term ‘conscious’, a transitive and an intransitive use. On the one hand, we can speak
of somebody being conscious of something, be it apples, lemons, or roses. On the other, we can
speak of somebody (or a mental state) being conscious simpliciter (rather than non-conscious).
This latter use of the term ‘conscious’ is obviously connected to the notion of phenomenal
consciousness, to the idea that there is something (rather than nothing) it is like to be in a certain
mental state. Now, for the past two or three decades, a dominant way to account for intransitive
consciousness in cognitive science and analytical philosophy of mind has been by means of
some kind of higher-order theory (cf. Armstrong 1968; Carruthers 1996; Lycan 1987; Rosenthal
1986). According to these authors, the difference between conscious and non-conscious mental
states rests upon the presence or absence of a relevant meta-mental state. As Carruthers puts
it, the subjective feel of experience presupposes a capacity for higher-order awareness; ‘such self-
awareness is a conceptually necessary condition for an organism to be a subject of phenomenal
feelings, or for there to be anything that its experiences are like’ (1996, p. 152). 
One way to illustrate the guiding idea of this approach is to compare consciousness to a
spotlight. Some mental states are illuminated; others do their work in the dark. What makes a
mental state conscious (illuminated) is the fact that it is taken as an object by a relevant higher-
order state. It is the occurrence of the higher-order representation that makes us conscious of
the first-order mental state. In short, a conscious state is a state we are conscious of, or as
Rosenthal puts it, ‘the mental state’s being intransitively conscious simply consists in one’s being
transitively conscious of it’ (1997, p. 739). Thus, intransitive consciousness is taken to be a non-
intrinsic, relational property (ibid., pp. 736–737), that is, a property that a mental state has only
in so far as it stands in the relevant relation to something else. 
There have generally been two ways of interpreting this. Either we become aware of being in
the ﬁrst-order mental state by means of some higher-order perception or monitoring (Armstrong
1968; Lycan 1997), or we become aware of it by means of some higher-order thought, that is,
the state is conscious just in case we have a roughly contemporaneous thought to the effect that
we are in that very state (Rosenthal 1993a, p. 199). Thus, the basic divide between the higher-
order perception (HOP) and the higher-order thought (HOT) models has precisely been on the issue
of whether the conscious-making meta-mental states are perception-like or thought-like in
nature.2 In both cases, however, consciousness has been taken to be a question of the mind
directing its intentional aim upon its own states and operations. Self-directedness has been
taken to be constitutive of (intransitive) consciousness, or to put it differently, higher-order theories
have typically explained (intransitive) consciousness in terms of self-consciousness. 
But one might share the view that there is a close link between consciousness and self-
consciousness and still disagree about the nature of the link. And although the phenomenological
view might superficially resemble the view of the higher-order theories, we are ultimately
confronted with two radically divergent accounts. In contrast to the higher-order theories,
52
CONSCIOUSNESS AND SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

phenomenologists explicitly deny that the self-consciousness that is present the moment I
consciously experience something is to be understood in terms of some kind of reﬂection, or
introspection, or higher-order monitoring. It does not involve an additional mental state, but is
rather to be understood as an intrinsic feature of the primary experience. That is, in contrast to
the higher-order account of consciousness that claims that intransitive consciousness is an
extrinsic property of those mental states that have it, a property bestowed upon them externally
by some further states, phenomenologists typically argue that intransitive consciousness is an
intrinsic property and constitutive feature of those mental states that have it. Moreover, not only
do they reject the view that a mental state becomes conscious by being taken as an object by a
higher-order state, they also reject the view – generally associated with Franz Brentano –
according to which a mental state becomes conscious by taking itself as an object.
According to Brentano, as I listen to a melody I am aware that I am listening to the melody. He
acknowledges that I do not have two different mental states: my consciousness of the melody is
one and the same as my awareness of hearing it; they constitute one single psychical
phenomenon. On this point, and in opposition to higher-order representation theories, Brentano
and the phenomenologists are in general agreement. But according to Brentano, by means of
this unified mental state, I have an awareness of two objects: the melody and my auditory
experience:
In the same mental phenomenon in which the sound is present to our minds we
simultaneously apprehend the mental phenomenon itself. What is more, we apprehend
it in accordance with its dual nature insofar as it has the sound as content within it, and
insofar as it has itself as content at the same time. We can say that the sound is the
primary object of the act of hearing, and that the act of hearing itself is the secondary
object.
(Brentano 1973, pp. 127–128)
Husserl disagrees on just this point, as do Sartre and Heidegger: pre-reﬂectively, my experience
is not itself an object for me. I do not occupy the position or perspective of an observer, spectator,
or in(tro)spector who attends to this experience. That something is experienced, ‘and is in this
CONSCIOUSNESS AND SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS
53
Franz Brentano (1839–1917) was an influential philosopher and psychologist of the
nineteenth century. Husserl attended his seminars in Vienna – and so did Freud and
several of the founders of gestalt psychology. The novelist Franz Kafka also visited
Brentano’s seminars. Brentano wrote books on psychology, but also on Aristotle’s
metaphysics. Whereas his work Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint was of decisive
importance for Husserl, his book On the Several Senses of Being in Aristotle greatly
inﬂuenced Heidegger.

sense conscious, does not and cannot mean that this is the object of an act of consciousness,
in the sense that a perception, a presentation or a judgement is directed upon it’ (Husserl 2001a,
I, p. 273). In pre-reﬂective or non-observational self-consciousness, experience is given, not as
an object, but precisely as subjective experience. On this view, my intentional experience is lived
through (erlebt), but it does not appear to me in an objectiﬁed manner, it is neither seen nor heard
nor thought about (Husserl 1984, p. 399; Sartre 1957, pp. 44–45). 
We have emphasized that pre-reflective self-consciousness is not a matter of taking an
intentional or objectifying stance, and consequently it is neither some kind of inner perception,
nor more generally a type of conceptual knowledge. David Chalmers has recently argued that
having an experience is automatically to stand in an intimate epistemic relation to the experience;
a relation more primitive than knowledge that might be called ‘acquaintance’ (1996, p. 197). The
phenomenologists would concur. In their view, pre-reﬂective self-consciousness doesn’t amount
to ﬁrst-person knowledge; it is a necessary but not sufﬁcient condition. This is, for instance, why
Sartre carefully distinguishes self-consciousness (conscience de soi) from self-knowledge
(connaissance de soi). Although, as pre-reflectively self-aware of my experience I am not
unconscious of it, I tend to ignore it in favour of its object. In my everyday life, I am absorbed by
and preoccupied with projects and objects in the world, and as such I do not attend to my
experiential life. Therefore, it’s clear that my pervasive pre-reﬂective self-consciousness is not to
be understood as complete self-comprehension. Thus, one should distinguish between the claim
that consciousness as such involves an implicit self-consciousness and the claim that
consciousness is characterized by total self-transparency. One can easily accept the ﬁrst and
reject the latter (Ricoeur 1966, p. 378). 
If I am engaged in some conscious activity, such as the reading of a story, my attention is
neither on myself nor on my activity of reading, but on the story. If my reading is interrupted by
someone asking me what I am doing, I immediately reply that I am (and have for some time
been) reading; the self-consciousness on the basis of which I answer the question is not
something acquired at just that moment, but a consciousness of myself which has been implicit
in my experience all along. To put it differently, it is because I am pre-reﬂectively conscious of my
experiences that I am usually able to respond immediately, i.e. without inference or observation,
if somebody asks me what I have been doing, or thinking, or seeing, or feeling immediately prior
to the question.
Sartre emphasized quite explicitly that the self-consciousness in question is not a new
consciousness (1956, p. liv). It is not something added to the experience, an additional mental
state, but rather an intrinsic feature of the experience. Thus, when he spoke of self-consciousness
as a permanent feature of consciousness, Sartre was not referring to what he called reﬂective
self-consciousness. Reﬂection (or higher-order monitoring) is the process whereby consciousness
directs its intentional aim at itself, thereby taking itself as its own object. According to Sartre,
however, this type of self-consciousness is derived; it involves a subject–object split, and the
attempt to account for self-consciousness in such terms is, for Sartre, bound to fail. It either
generates an inﬁnite regress or accepts a non-conscious starting point, and he considered both
of these options to be unacceptable (ibid., p. lii).
On the view espoused by most phenomenologists, the weak self-consciousness entailed by
phenomenal consciousness is not intentionally structured; it does not involve a subject–object
54
CONSCIOUSNESS AND SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

relation. It is not just that self-consciousness differs from ordinary object-consciousness; rather
it is not an object-consciousness at all. When one is pre-reﬂectively self-conscious one does not
take oneself as an intentional object, one is not aware of oneself as an object that happens to
be oneself, nor is one aware of oneself as one speciﬁc object rather than another. Rather, my
ﬁrst-person, pre-reﬂective self-experience is immediate and non-observational. It involves what
has more recently been called either ‘self-reference without identiﬁcation’ (Shoemaker 1968) or
‘non-ascriptive reference to self’ (Brook 1994). 
What is the actual argument for these claims, however? When it comes to defending the
existence of a tacit and non-thematic self-consciousness, the argument is occasionally an indirect
argument by elimination and consists in a rejection of the two obvious alternatives.
Phenomenologists ﬁrst deny that we could consciously experience something without in some
way being aware of or being acquainted with the experience in question. They then argue that
this ﬁrst-personal awareness of one’s own experiences amounts to a form of self-consciousness.
Secondly, they reject the suggestion that we are attentively conscious of everything that we
experience, including our own experience, i.e. they would argue that there are unnoticed or
unattended experiences. For example, I may be driving my car in trafﬁc and paying close attention
to the car in front of me, which is weaving in and out of trafﬁc lanes. By attending to that car,
however, there are many things that I am not attending to, including the precise way that I am
perceiving the car. I could start to do that by reﬂecting on my perceptual experience, although it
might be dangerous to do so in this kind of circumstance. But the point is that, even if at some
level I am aware that I am watching the car in front of me, I am not aware of it in the manner of
paying attention to the watching. By rejecting these two alternatives, the notion of pre-reﬂective
self-consciousness seems to be the only feasible way to explain how experience works. That
phenomenal consciousness entails a minimal or thin form of self-consciousness doesn’t imply
that I in daily life am aware of my own stream of consciousness in a thematic introspection, as
a succession of immanent marginal objects.
Another indirect line of argument for the existence of pre-reﬂective self-consciousness has
been that the higher-order account of consciousness generates an inﬁnite regress. This is, on
the face of it, a rather old idea. Typically, the regress argument has been understood in the
following manner: if an occurrent mental state is conscious only because it is taken as an object
by an occurrent second-order mental state, then the second-order mental state, if it is to be
conscious, must also be taken as an object by an occurrent third-order mental state, and so
forth ad inﬁnitum. The standard reply to this argument has been that the premise – that the
second-order mental state is a conscious one – is false and question begging. In other words,
the easy way to halt the regress is to accept the existence of non-conscious mental states.
Needless to say, this is precisely the position adopted by the defenders of a higher-order theory.
For them, the second-order perception or thought does not have to be conscious. It will be
conscious only if it is accompanied by a (non-conscious) third-order thought or perception (cf.
Rosenthal 1997). However, the phenomenological reply to this ‘solution’ is rather straightforward.
The phenomenologists would concede that it is possible to halt the regress by postulating the
existence of non-conscious mental states, but they would maintain that such an appeal to the
non-conscious leaves us with a case of explanatory vacuity. That is, they would be quite
unconvinced by the claim that the relation between two otherwise non-conscious mental
CONSCIOUSNESS AND SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS
55

processes can make one of them conscious; they would ﬁnd it quite unclear how a mental state
without subjective or phenomenal qualities can be transformed into one with such qualities, i.e.
into a subjective experience with ﬁrst-personal mineness, by the mere relational addition of a non-
conscious meta-state having the ﬁrst-order state as its intentional object.
To sum up, higher-order theorists and phenomenologists all seek to account for intransitive
consciousness in terms of some form of self-consciousness. But whereas the higher-order
theorists view self-consciousness as a form of meta-awareness that obtains between two distinct
non-conscious mental states, the phenomenologists argue that we best understand intransitive
consciousness in terms of a primitive form of self-consciousness that is integral and intrinsic to
the mental state in question. 
The claim that intransitive consciousness (and by implication self-consciousness) is an intrinsic
feature has come under attack by Rosenthal, who has argued that calling something intrinsic is
to imply that it is unanalyzable and mysterious, and consequently beyond the reach of scientiﬁc
and theoretical study: ‘We would insist that being conscious is an intrinsic property of mental
states only if we were convinced that it lacked articulated structure, and thus deﬁed explanation’
(1993b, p. 157). Although Rosenthal acknowledges that there is something intuitively appealing
about taking intransitive consciousness to be an intrinsic property, he still thinks that this
approach must be avoided if one wishes to come up with a non-trivial and informative account,
that is, one which seeks to explain conscious mental states by appeal to non-conscious mental
states, and non-conscious mental states by appeal to non-mental states (Rosenthal 1993b, p.
165; 1997, p. 735). 
In our view, however, it is a mistake to argue that one puts an end to any subsequent analysis
the moment one considers the explanandum intrinsic and irreducible. A good demonstration of
this can be found precisely in the highly informative analyses of various aspects of consciousness
provided by phenomenologists (see, for example, the analysis of time-consciousness in Chapter
4). But what about the issue of naturalization? Is a one-level account of consciousness committed
to some kind of supernatural dualism? Not at all. One can defend the notion of pre-reﬂective self-
consciousness while remaining quite neutral vis-à-vis the issue of naturalization. More speciﬁcally,
there is nothing in the rejection of a relational account of consciousness that rules out that the
emergence of consciousness requires a requisite neural substratum. One should consequently
avoid conﬂating two different issues. One concerns the relation between the neural level and the
mental level, the other the relation between different mental processes. The one-level account
doesn’t address the bottom-up issue concerning the relation between brain processes and
consciousness, it merely denies that a mental state becomes conscious by being taken as an
object by a relevant higher-order mental state. From the perspective of naturalism, it might even
be argued that the one-level account is simpler and more parsimonious than the relational higher-
order account, and that it is also in better accordance with a popular view in neuroscience,
according to which consciousness is a matter of hitting a certain threshold of neural activity.
Phenomenologists, as we have seen, claim that pre-reflective self-consciousness is non-
objectifying (that is, not to be construed as a form of object-consciousness) and therefore not the
result of any self-directed intentionality. It is true, however, that the plausibility of this claim to a
large extent depends on what we mean by ‘object’ (cf. Cassam 1997, p. 5). In order to understand
the phenomenological point of view, it is at this point crucial not to conﬂate issues of ontology
56
CONSCIOUSNESS AND SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

with issues of phenomenology. The claim is not that the object of experience must always differ
ontologically from the subject of experience, as if the subject and the object of experience must
necessarily be two different entities. Rather, the claim is simply that the experience itself is not
pre-reﬂectively experienced as an object. On our understanding, for something to be an object
is for that something to consciously appear in a speciﬁc manner. More speciﬁcally, for x to be
considered an object is for x to appear as transcending the subjective consciousness that takes
it as an object. It is to appear as something that stands in opposition to or over against the
subjective experience of it (cf. the German term Gegen-stand). It is against this background that
it has been denied that an experience is pre-reflectively given as an object. For whereas in
reﬂection we are confronted with a situation involving two experiences, where one (the reﬂected
upon) can appear as an object for the other (the reﬂecting), we are on the pre-reﬂective level only
dealing with a single experience, and one experience cannot appear as an object to itself, cannot
be experienced as transcending itself, cannot stand opposed to itself, in the requisite way.
An additional argument (found already in several of the post-Kantian German philosophers)
for why an experience cannot pre-reﬂectively be an object, if, that is, the experience in question
is to be considered my experience, was more recently revived by Shoemaker. He has argued that
it is impossible to account for first-personal self-reference in terms of a successful object-
identiﬁcation. In order to identify something as oneself one obviously has to hold something true
of it that one already knows to be true of oneself. This self-knowledge might in some cases be
grounded in some further identiﬁcation, but the supposition that every item of self-knowledge
rests on identiﬁcation leads to an inﬁnite regress (Shoemaker 1968, p. 561). This holds even for
self-identiﬁcation obtained through introspection. That is, it will not do to claim that introspection
is distinguished by the fact that its object has a property which immediately identiﬁes it as being
me, and which no other self could possibly have, namely, the property of being the private and
exclusive object of exactly my introspection. This explanation will not do because I will be unable
to identify an introspected self as myself by the fact that it is introspectively observed by me,
unless I know it is the object of my introspection, i.e. unless I know that it is in fact me who
undertakes this introspection, and this knowledge cannot itself be based on identiﬁcation, on
pain of inﬁnite regress (Shoemaker 1968, pp. 562–563).
Indeed, in complete support of Shoemaker’s point, the phenomenologist claims that this sort
of intimate acquaintance that tells me that it is I myself who am introspecting, or more generally
that it is I myself who am experiencing, is provided precisely by the pre-reflective self-
consciousness that is implicit in experience.
BLINDSIGHT
Higher-order theorists often refer to the case of blindsight as evidence in support of their theory,
so it will be helpful to consider blindsight to see if it offers an objection to the idea of a pre-
reﬂective self-consciousness and truly supports the higher-order representational view.
The condition of blindsight is a form of blindness caused, not by damage to the eyes, but by
damage to the primary visual cortex (V1). For example, as Weiskrantz et al. (1974) showed, damage
to area 17, the cortical projection from the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus of the visual cortex,
CONSCIOUSNESS AND SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS
57

with minimal damage to the surrounding tissue of the posterior cortical areas, can cause blindsight.
In the real cases, only part of the visual ﬁeld is blinded (the blind areas are called ‘scotomas’), and
this has to be taken into consideration in experiments (see the box overleaf). To simplify matters,
let’s assume that the patient is totally blind in this fashion. A blindsight patient’s eyes will deliver
visual information to his brain, but he will not have conscious visual perception because of the
brain damage. The information delivered by the eyes, however, may still register and be processed
in other parts of the brain. For example, a route from the retina to the mid-brain, which is different
from the route through V1, has been hypothesized as being a second pathway of visual information. 
Unfortunately, information travelling this other route does not allow the patient to have the
conscious experience of vision. The curious and unique thing about blindsight is that the patient
can nonetheless detect and locate visual stimuli if he is made to do so. If presented with visual
stimuli, the patient will say that he cannot see them, because, of course, he is blind. But if he is
made to guess about where precisely the stimuli are presented, or about the nature of the stimuli
– shape, position, etc. – he is correct in his guesses at a rate that is above chance. So the patient
reports that he is blind and cannot see anything, but his tested behaviour indicates that there is
some visual information informing his non-visual experience.
Blindsight subjects can also reach and grasp objects in their blind ﬁeld at around 80 per cent
of normal accuracy. They can even catch a ball thrown at them, all without conscious awareness
(see Weiskrantz 1997). They are thus said to be non-consciously perceiving the visual stimuli
(Marcel 1998; Weiskrantz 1986). Recent studies have shown abilities for non-conscious visual
discrimination in blindsight apply not only to relatively simple object discriminations, but also to
emotionally salient stimuli (Hamm et al. 2003). 
The signiﬁcance of blindsight for higher-order theorists is that the blindsight patient is in a non-
conscious mental state with regard to the stimulus that he cannot consciously see. The question
is then, what is it that makes this mental state different from a conscious mental state? Higher-
order theorists will supposedly claim that the non-conscious mental state of the blindsight subject
is the same as a conscious mental state of the normally sighted person, except that in the latter
case the subject has become aware of it through either a higher-order perception (HOP) or a
higher-order thought (HOT). The non-conscious sensory state is intentional, in the sense that it
is directed at a particular object (the presented stimulus). Rosenthal (1993c) even argues that
non-conscious mental states have qualitative properties that make them one kind of state rather
than another (e.g. perceptual state versus belief state, or perhaps visual state versus auditory
state) and that if the mental states are made conscious, the qualitative properties are what give
them their particular ‘what it’s likeness’.
For higher-order theory there is nothing intrinsic about the mental state that makes it conscious
rather than non-conscious. Rather, something other than the mental state itself must be
responsible for making it conscious. For Rosenthal, as we saw, this is the role of a HOT. Of course
the problem here is that if the mental or sensory state in question is more or less the same in
either case, it is not clear why the blindsight subject cannot simply direct a HOT at it and make
it conscious. It is curious (or it must seem so to the HOT theorist) that the blindsight subject, who
is certainly capable of higher-order thoughts, continues to complain that he cannot see the
stimulus. Indeed, one might argue, this complaint is itself a HOT that is directed at the non-
conscious sensory state, and yet, this does not make that sensory state conscious. One could
58
CONSCIOUSNESS AND SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

CONSCIOUSNESS AND SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS
59
Blindsight experiments
Weiskrantz et al. (1974) tested a 34-year-old man, DB. DB began to experience headaches
at age 14, preceded by the experience of a bright ﬂashing, oval-shaped light. This light
could be seen only in certain areas of his visual ﬁeld. When he was 26, a test showed that
he had a malformation at the right occipital lobe. The malformation was removed along
with a portion of his visual cortex. The removal resulted in partial blindness with a small
ﬁeld of vision remaining at the periphery of the upper quadrant. After the surgery the
headaches subsided. 
All experiments involved the testing of various stimuli in the blind ﬁeld of the patient.
The patient was asked to guess to the best of his ability about the visual stimuli with
which he was presented. During the course of the experimentation, DB was not told the
test results.
•
The first experiment tested whether DB could perceive the location of a visual
stimulus in his blind ﬁeld. He was told that a spot of light was going to be ﬂashed in
his blind ﬁeld. On verbal command, he was to move his eyes, but not his head, in the
direction from which he guessed the spot of light was coming. 
•
The second experiment also involved locating visual stimuli. This time DB was asked
to point with his hand in the direction that he believed a spot of light was located on
a horizontal meridian. His eyes and head were to remain in place throughout the
duration of this experiment.
•
The third experiment involved the identiﬁcation of images on a screen. The images
varied in size, contrast, duration, and type. Each test consisted of 30 trials, 15 with
one pair of stimuli and 15 with the other pair. A different random order of projections
was used in every test. DB was asked to distinguish between horizontal and vertical
lines, diagonal and vertical lines, and the letters X and O. He was asked to guess or
to report what he thought he might have seen on the screen. 
•
In the fourth experiment the task was to distinguish between images containing
diffraction gratings and those where there were no lines present. Testing was done
on DB’s intact vision ﬁeld for a control.
•
In the ﬁnal experiment, DB underwent ﬁve tests of 30 trials each. He was asked to
guess the colour of the light that was being projected in each of the tests. Brightness
levels of the stimulus were varied throughout the 30 trials. 
Results
DB was able to locate stimuli in the frontal plane, differentiate orientation of lines and
at least one pair of shapes in his defective ﬁeld. Larger stimuli and longer exposure time
yielded better results in the blind ﬁeld. The accuracy in some of the experiments was
continued

imagine the blindsight subject, having read up on blindsight theory in the latest braille publication,
saying, ‘I know I have this non-conscious sensory state, but no matter how much I think about it,
I don’t seem to be able to make it conscious.’ So the real question is: What is it about the non-
conscious sensory state that prevents higher-order access to it? There must be something that
differentiates it from a conscious sensory state, other than a HOT.3
Does the experience of the blindsight subject cause similar trouble for the phenomenological
account of pre-reﬂective self-consciousness? First, let’s note that the account of pre-reﬂective self-
consciousness was never meant to provide a causal account of what makes a mental state
conscious. It is not that there are mental states waiting to become conscious, and requiring only
the addition of pre-reflective self-consciousness. Rather, the account of pre-reflective self-
consciousness is a description of a constitutive aspect of a conscious mental state. If a mental
state is conscious, that mental state will involve a pre-reﬂective self-consciousness. So the claim
is not that if we simply add a pre-reﬂective self-consciousness to the non-conscious mental state,
it will suddenly become conscious. 
Second, what precisely do we mean by a non-conscious perception, non-conscious sensory
state, or non-conscious mental state, as these terms are used in reference to blindsight? Here,
perhaps to the surprise of phenomenologists and non-phenomenologists alike, the pheno-
menologists are better off appealing to the neuroscience of blindsight. After all, the most
reasonable explanation of the blindsight subject’s lack of visual experience is likely to be found
on the neuronal level rather than on the level of higher-order thought. In the case of blindsight,
the subject has brain damage in an area that is in some way essential for the generation of visual
consciousness, even though other brain areas continue to function in the processing of visual
information, which still informs the subject’s motor behaviours and his guesses. We are faced
with a kind of non-conscious perception not unrelated to the one we also find in subliminal
priming effects.4 Information about the world is being processed in the brain, but in a way that
does not result in conscious experience. Indeed, we don’t have to appeal to the exotic cases of
blindsight or experimental studies of masked priming effects, because these kinds of processes
go on all the time in our everyday existence. Many aspects of motor control are the result of this
kind of non-conscious processing of information about the world. When I reach to grasp a glass,
60
CONSCIOUSNESS AND SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS
remarkable. DB scored well over 50 per cent on each test, ruling out a chance pheno-
menon. The patient’s reaction, after he was given the results of his testing, was that of
astonishment. He stated that he was surprised and insisted that he was just ‘guessing’.
He stated that he saw nothing at all, however sometimes he had a ‘feeling’ about a certain
stimulus. He was very accurate in the experiment where he was directed to point to the
stimulus, however not so accurate when told to move his eyes in the direction of the
light. He was able to differentiate between a vertical and horizontal line and the letters
X and O. He was successful in distinguishing the grating of vertical bars from a
homogeneous ﬁeld, when the lines were wide. There was, however, not enough evidence
to show the ability to differentiate between red and green. 

the visual information that controls the shape of my hand is processed non-consciously (see
Jeannerod 1997). This is certainly a case of non-conscious visual perception. Should we call this
a non-conscious mental state? Perhaps in this case it is even clearer that we are talking about
neurological processes that are not organized in a way that would generate a consciousness of
this motor control. I am simply not conscious of the visual information that shapes my grasping
action; nor can I make this process transparent by directing a HOT toward the process. At best,
I can become aware, by observing my own behaviour, that my hand shapes itself, and I can come
to understand that it is guided by the visual information that is processed non-consciously – but
my real knowledge about this can only be found through third-person scientiﬁc accounts and
experiments. And such accounts, if they do generate higher-order thoughts, do not do so in a way
that could then allow me to experience the neurological processes as conscious mental states.
Indeed, in cases of conscious mental states, I don’t have to go looking for a mental state to think
about. I’m already there, so to speak. Being pre-reﬂectively self-conscious of my own experience
– for example, that I am getting a drink by picking up the glass – is not a qualitative property that
might change from one kind of experience to another; it is the common structural feature of any
conscious state. If indeed different kinds of conscious states have different qualitative properties
that may be due to differences in their modalities or intentional content, it is precisely the feature
of pre-reﬂective self-consciousness that makes it possible for these differences in qualitative
properties to express themselves in qualitative feels of ‘what it’s like’ for me, to see, to hear, to
remember, to judge, etc. about a shape, a colour, a sound, an event, etc. 
SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS AND REFLECTION
In contrast to pre-reﬂective self-consciousness, which provides us with an implicit sense of self
at the experiential level (we will return to the notion of self in Chapter 10), reflective self-
consciousness is an explicit, conceptual, and objectifying awareness that takes a lower-order
consciousness as its attentional theme. I am able at any time to attend directly to the cognitive
experience itself, turning my experience itself into the object of my consideration. Whereas pre-
reflective self-consciousness is an intrinsic and non-relational dimension of the experience,
reﬂection is a complex form of self-consciousness that operates with a duality of moments and
which involves a kind of self-ﬁssion. Reﬂection occasions a certain kind of inner pluralization. It
makes subjective life thematic in a way that involves self-division or self-distanciation (see
Asemissen 1958/1959, p. 262).
In reﬂection we can distinguish the reﬂecting experience and the experience reﬂected-on. The
ﬁrst takes the latter as its object. The experience reﬂected-on is already self-conscious prior to
reﬂection, and as we have seen, this prior self-consciousness is of a non-reﬂective and non-
positional (non-observational) kind, i.e., it does not have a reﬂective structure, and it does not
posit that which it is aware of as an object. As Sartre wrote: ‘[T]here is no inﬁnite regress here,
since a consciousness has no need at all of a reﬂecting consciousness in order to be conscious
of itself. It simply does not posit itself as an object’ (1957, p. 45). 
We could say, following Sartre, that consciousness has two possible modes of existence, pre-
reﬂective and reﬂective. The former has priority since it can exist independently of the latter,
CONSCIOUSNESS AND SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS
61

whereas reﬂective self-consciousness always presupposes pre-reﬂective self-consciousness. As
Sartre wrote, ‘reﬂection has no kind of primacy over the consciousness reﬂected-on. It is not
reﬂection which reveals the consciousness reﬂected-on to itself. Quite the contrary, it is the non-
reﬂective consciousness which renders the reﬂection possible’ (1956, p. liii). 
This preliminary differentiation between reﬂective and pre-reﬂective is not a sufﬁcient account
of reﬂection. A more detailed examination of the precise relation between reﬂective and pre-
reﬂective self-consciousness is called for. The methodological pertinence of this issue should be
obvious: to what extent will reﬂection enable us to disclose the structures of lived experience?
Phenomenological method depends on reflection, as we saw in the previous chapter. If, for
example, reﬂection distorts ﬁrst-order, pre-reﬂective experience, then we need to take this into
consideration. This is an important issue for both phenomenologists and cognitive scientists in
regard to using phenomenological (reflective) methods to get at a veridical description of
experience.5
Husserl and the phenomenologists hold that our experiences are tacitly self-conscious, but
they are also available for us to reﬂect upon. They can be reﬂected upon and thereby brought to
our attention only because we are pre-reflectively conscious of them. An examination of the
particular intentional structure of this process can substantiate this claim. Reflective self-
consciousness is often taken to be a thematic, articulated, and intensiﬁed self-consciousness,
and it is normally initiated in order to bring the primary intentional experience into focus. As
Husserl points out, it is in the nature of reﬂection to grasp something which was already being
experienced prior to the grasping. Reﬂection is characterized by disclosing, and not by producing
its theme:
62
CONSCIOUSNESS AND SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS
Point of clariﬁcation
Sartre occasionally writes that we are pre-reﬂectively aware of our experiences and that
there is a pre-reﬂective consciousness of self (in French, the term for self-consciousness
– conscience de soi – literally means consciousness of self). He thereby seems to suggest
that even pre-reﬂective self-consciousness takes an object. But as Sartre explicitly points
out, it is only the necessity of syntax that compels him to use such phrasings. Thus,
Sartre readily admitted that the use of the ‘of’ (or ‘de’) is unfortunate since it suggests
that self-consciousness is simply a subtype of object-consciousness, as if the manner
in which we are aware of ourselves is structurally comparable with the manner in which
we are aware of apples and clouds. We cannot avoid the ‘of’, but in order to show that it
is merely there in order to satisfy a grammatical requirement, Sartre placed it inside
parentheses, and frequently speaks of a ‘conscience (de) soi’ and of a ‘conscience (de)
plaisir’, etc. (Sartre 1956, p. liv). Thus, Sartre was quite keen to avoid any phrasing that
might misleadingly suggest that we, in order to have conscious mental states, must be
aware of them as objects.

When I say ‘I’, I grasp myself in a simple reflection. But this self-experience [Selbst-
erfahrung] is like every experience [Erfahrung], and in particular every perception, a mere
directing myself towards something that was already there for me, that was already
conscious, but not thematically experienced, not noticed.
(Husserl 1973b, pp. 492–493)
The experience to which we turn attentively in reﬂection becomes accentuated (herausge-
hoben); reﬂection, as Husserl suggests, discloses, disentangles, explicates, and articulates all
those components and structures which were contained implicitly in the lived experience (Husserl
1966a/1991, p. 129; 1966b/2001, p. 205; 1984, p. 244; also, for example, see the various
analyses in Chapters 4 and 6 of this book). Reﬂection reveals not a formless or structureless
ﬂuctuating unity of lived experiences but on the contrary, a morphological structure and internal
differentiation which are accessible to conceptual articulation. Of course, by paying attention to
something, by accentuating or articulating it, we do change the way in which it appears. This also
holds true when it comes to reﬂection. Reﬂection does not merely copy or repeat the original
experience; rather, it transforms it. This transformation, however, does not necessarily introduce
elements or aspects that are not already present in the ﬁrst-order experience, even if it changes
the way in which those aspects appear. Reﬂective articulation is not necessarily imposed from
without; it is not necessarily foreign to the experience in question. As Husserl puts it, in the
beginning we are confronted with a dumb experience, which must then – through reﬂection – be
made to articulate its own sense (Husserl 1950/1999, p. 77). This articulation requires a
practised interpretation that is informed by the phenomenological method (see Chapter 2). 
Heidegger argues in a similar fashion. He also insists that our lived experience is imbued with
meaning. It has an inner articulation and rationality and is, importantly, in possession of a
spontaneous and immediate self-understanding, which is why it can ultimately be interpreted from
itself and in terms of itself. Phenomenological investigation must build on the familiarity that the
experiential dimension already has with itself; it must draw on the implicit, pre-reﬂective self-
referential dimension, the persistent care of self that is built into the very stream of con-
sciousness. A true phenomenological description does not constitute a violation of experience,
or attempt to impose a foreign systematicity on the experiential dimension, rather it is something
that is rooted in and motivated by experiential life itself (Heidegger 1993, p. 59; 1994, p. 87).
How should one appraise the reﬂective appropriation of lived consciousness? Can reﬂection
make the pre-reﬂective dimension accessible to us or does it rather distort it radically? Does the
reﬂective modiﬁcation involve a necessary supplementation or an inevitable loss? On the one
hand, we have the view that reﬂection merely copies or mirrors pre-reﬂective experience faithfully,
and on the other, we have the view that reﬂection distorts lived experience. The middle course
is to recognize that reﬂection involves a gain and a loss. For Husserl, Sartre, and Merleau-Ponty,
reﬂection is constrained by what is pre-reﬂectively lived through. It is answerable to experiential
facts and is not constitutively self-fulfilling. At the same time, however, they recognized that
reﬂection qua thematic self-experience does not simply reproduce the lived experiences unaltered
and that this is precisely what makes reflection cognitively valuable. This is not to say that
phenomenologists would claim that reﬂection is always trustworthy. Rather, the point they are
making is merely that reﬂection does not necessarily have to be untrustworthy.
CONSCIOUSNESS AND SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS
63

One way to put this is to say that the relation between reﬂection and the pre-reﬂective experi-
ence that is reﬂected upon involves a back-and-forth interpretive process. Since the experience
that is reflected upon already involves pre-reflective self-consciousness, it has resources to
conﬁrm or disconﬁrm our reﬂective reading of it. A misreading of experience can be corrected by
further experience and renewed reﬂection. In this regard there is nothing guaranteed or facile
about reﬂection. In addition, to the extent that phenomenological reﬂection can be balanced
with intersubjective reports and empirical investigations, a variety of techniques can help to
confirm or disconfirm the particular results of reflection, including convergences (or dis-
convergences) between reﬂective reports and behavioural and physiological measures (see, for
example, Schooler and Schreiber 2004, pp. 22ff., who review evidence from studies of imagining
tasks, mind-wondering, and hedonic appraisal). 
For example, we can note that reﬂective self-consciousness involves a form of self-division or
self-fragmentation that we do not encounter on the level of pre-reﬂective self-consciousness.
This observation has at least three signiﬁcant implications that span ontological, methodological,
and normative dimensions:
•
If reﬂection involves a kind of self-ﬁssion, it remains necessary to explain how such a fractured
self-consciousness can arise out of a supposedly uniﬁed pre-reﬂective self-consciousness.
As Sartre poignantly reminds us: the problem is not to ﬁnd examples of pre-reﬂective self-
consciousness, they are everywhere, but to understand how one can pass from this self-
consciousness that constitutes the being of consciousness to the reﬂective knowledge of self,
which is founded upon it (Sartre 1967). Thus, it will not do to conceive of pre-reﬂective self-
consciousness in such a manner that the transition to reﬂective self-consciousness becomes
incomprehensible. Sartre was, by no means, trying to deny the difference between a reﬂective
and a pre-reflective self-consciousness, yet he insisted that the two modes of self-
consciousness must share a certain affinity, a certain structural similarity. Otherwise, it
would be impossible to explain how pre-reﬂective experience could ever give rise to reﬂection.
It is a signiﬁcant feature of our lived experience that it allows for reﬂective appropriation; a
theory of self-consciousness that can only account for pre-reﬂective self-consciousness is not
much better than a theory that only accounts for reﬂective self-consciousness. To phrase it
differently, it is no coincidence that we speak of a pre-reﬂective self-consciousness; the very
choice of words indicates that there remains a connection. The reason why reﬂection remains
a permanent possibility is precisely that pre-reﬂective self-consciousness already entails a
temporal articulation and differentiated infrastructure (Sartre 1956, pp. 153–155). Thus,
most phenomenologists (Michel Henry is a notable exception) would argue that pre-reﬂective
self-consciousness must be conceived not as a static self-identity, but as a dynamic and
temporal self-differentiation. We will return to the issue of temporality in the next chapter.
•
If reflection is characterized by a kind of self-fragmentation, there will always remain an
unthematized spot in the life of the subject. Every reﬂection will contain a moment of naïveté
since it is necessarily prevented from grasping itself (Husserl 1962, p. 478). Experiential life
can thematize and disclose itself, but it can never do so exhaustively and completely. This
insight was repeated by Merleau-Ponty, when he wrote that our temporal existence is both
64
CONSCIOUSNESS AND SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

a condition for and an obstacle to our self-comprehension. Temporality contains an internal
fracture that permits us to return to our past experiences in order to investigate them
reﬂectively, yet this very fracture also prevents us from fully coinciding with ourselves. There
will always remain a difference between the lived and the understood (Merleau-Ponty 1962,
pp. 344–345). Thus, both Husserl and Merleau-Ponty questioned the absolute power of
reﬂection.
•
Reﬂection is a precondition for self-critical deliberation. If we are to subject our different
beliefs and desires to a critical, normative evaluation, it is not sufﬁcient simply to have ﬁrst-
personal experience of the states in question. It is not enough to be immediately and implicitly
aware of them. Rather, when we reﬂect, we step back from our ongoing mental activities and,
as Richard Moran has recently pointed out, this stepping back is a metaphor of distancing
and separation, but also one of observation and confrontation. This reﬂective distancing is
what allows us to relate critically to our mental states and to put them into question; it
ultimately forces us to act for reasons (Moran 2001, pp. 142–143).6
CONCLUSION: DRIVING IT HOME
Finally, let’s get back in our car and see if we can understand how we got here:
If you have driven for a very long distance without a break, you may have had experience
of a curious state of automatism, which can occur in these conditions. One can suddenly
‘come to’ and realize that one has driven for long distances without being aware of what
one was doing, or, indeed, without being aware of anything. One has kept the car on the
road, used the brake and the clutch perhaps, yet all without any awareness of what one
was doing.
(Armstrong 1981, p. 12)
It is often the case that Armstrong’s example of the driver who seemingly drives unconsciously
(Armstrong would say that the driver non-consciously perceives the road) and forgets how he got
home is mentioned as a case that is similar to blindsight (see, for example, Carruthers 2005).
But the kinds of experiences involved are clearly different. If we can say that in the case of
blindsight we ﬁnd non-conscious perception, and the justiﬁed claim by the subject that he is
simply not conscious of the visual stimuli, this is not so in the case of driving home. When I drive,
I do not do so unconsciously (pace Armstrong, Carruthers, et al.). If my friend in the passenger
seat asks whether I see that car weaving in and out of trafﬁc, my response is not likely to be, ‘No,
sorry, I don’t see any cars, and I’m not sure where the road is.’ Had I answered like this, it is
rather unlikely that I would ever have obtained a driving licence. 
As we drive home we are clearly conscious of the trafﬁc, and even if we are lost in thought we
are not necessarily lost en route. So why can’t we remember how we got home? One way to
explain this is to appeal to evidence that shows that in some circumstances it is quite possible
to be conscious but to quickly forget that of which one has been conscious (Wider 1997, p. 167).
The driving case can consequently be explained as one of consciousness-plus-quick-forgetting.
CONSCIOUSNESS AND SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS
65

What about self-consciousness? Armstrong denies that the driver is self-conscious. But as we
have suggested in this chapter, if the driver is conscious, she is also pre-reﬂectively self-conscious.
When driving home, I know what I am doing and I can easily respond to questions about the
trafﬁc. But why don’t I remember the details of my trip? This is not a matter of a lack of attention.
Rather, it is an essential aspect of pragmatic action, that if we are self-conscious of what we are
doing, our awareness and what we remember are speciﬁed at the most appropriate reportable
pragmatic level. We’ll see (in the chapter on embodiment) that for some aspects of our actions
we are not aware of the perceptual-motor details involved, for example the shape my hand takes
in reaching from the steering wheel to the gearstick. For other aspects of our actions we are
necessarily aware of environmental objects (e.g. cars and roads) and minimally self-conscious
of our own movement. The latter type of awareness, which is speciﬁed at a much lower level of
description, is necessarily forgotten, and the quicker the better. It is a natural component of most
motor (and motoring) behaviour that we quickly forget the details. Consider what would happen
if we did not. Our attention could easily drift back to the details of what we have previously
accomplished in the driving process. For example, I manoeuvre a difﬁcult overtaking of another
vehicle on a curve. Having accomplished that, I don’t want to rehearse or reconsider my actions
in the following minutes. Rather I need to attend to new trafﬁc patterns. If I had to process every
detail of my actions along the route for episodic memory, my mind would be full of useless
information that could interfere with my current driving activity. For best performance I need to
let the details of my previous experience go, and I need my cognitive energy to keep my attention
ﬁxed on the current situation. There is no doubt that I will be able to tell you that I have just driven
home from the ofﬁce (the most appropriate pragmatic level for that action), but there is good
reason that I will be unable to tell you the details, how many cars I passed, or even to remember
traversing my normal route. This is a level of conscious and self-conscious experience that exists
at the time of my actions, but that I do not keep in mind for purposes of recollection.
It would be a mistake to think that the defence of the existence of a primitive form of pre-
reﬂective self-consciousness constitutes the entirety of the phenomenological investigation of
consciousness and self-consciousness. On the contrary, the phenomenological investigation of
the relation between consciousness and self-consciousness is characterized by the fact that it
is integrated into and can be found in the context of a simultaneous examination of a number of
related issues, such as the nature of intentionality, embodiment, action, selfhood, temporality,
attention, sociality, etc. As part of their analysis of the structure of consciousness, the
phenomenologists also discuss – to mention just a few of the topics – (1) whether one should
opt for an egological or non-egological account of consciousness, i.e. whether or not every episode
of experiencing always involves a subject of experience; (2) how to understand the temporality
of the stream of consciousness; (3) whether pre-reﬂective self-consciousness is characterized
by an internal differentiation or infrastructure; (4) to what extent self-consciousness is always
embodied and embedded; (5) how social interaction might change the structure of self-
consciousness; (6) whether reflection is able to disclose the structure of pre-reflective
consciousness or whether it necessarily distorts its subject matter; and (7) to what extent self-
consciousness, although not being itself a form of object-consciousness, nevertheless pre-
supposes the intentional encounter with the world. We will return to many of these issues in
subsequent chapters.
66
CONSCIOUSNESS AND SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

NOTES
1
For some critical comments on the more speciﬁc details of Kriegel’s account, cf. Zahavi (2004c).
2
For an informative comparison of the HOT and HOP models, see Van Gulick (2000), whose own HOGS
(Higher-Order Global State) model could arguably be seen as a hybrid between standard higher-order
accounts and a more phenomenologically oriented account.
3
Rosenthal (1997, p. 737) stipulates that we should regard mental states as conscious only if we are
conscious of them in some suitably unmediated way, namely directly or non-inferentially. Otherwise,
an unconscious mental process would qualify as conscious, simply because we could infer that we
would have to have it. Whether this is a justiﬁable move – a move fully warranted by the HOT framework
– is a question we can leave for the HOT and HOP theorists to discuss.
4
Subliminal priming effects refer to the effects of stimuli presented in such a way that they do not
reach the threshold of consciousness. Visual stimuli presented momentarily and removed extremely
fast do not register consciously, but can still have an effect on the subsequent behaviour of subjects.
A well-known experiment in the auditory domain is known as the two-channel experiment. Subjects
wear headphones and are presented with two simultaneous streams of information, one in the left
ear and one in the right. They are then asked to attend to only one of these, and to shadow it, that is,
to repeat aloud whatever they hear in that ear. This calls for such high demands on attention that the
subjects apparently remain unaware of what is presented to the other ear. Thus, they are not able to
identify, report, or recall anything being said in this other ear. However, various findings seem to
demonstrate that even in the absence of any conscious awareness of these non-attended stimuli, their
meaning can affect the hearer and even inﬂuence the interpretation of the attended messages. For
instance, in what sounds like a somewhat barbaric experiment, certain words previously associated
with electric shocks continued to produce changes in galvanic skin response when presented to the
non-attended ear. This even occurred with words which were semantically related to the conditioned
words (Velmans 2000, p. 199; also see Marcel 1983, for some classic experiments).
5
For an excellent discussion of this issue from an empirical standpoint, see Schooler and Schreiber
(2004).
6
We have in the previous paragraphs talked of pre-reﬂective self-consciousness and contrasted it with
the kind of self-consciousness that can be obtained through reﬂection. One slightly confusing factor
is the presence in the current debate of another set of terms, namely, the concepts of reﬂexivity and
reﬂexive self-consciousness. In a recent article, for instance, Van Gulick writes that some degree of
reflexive intentionality seems inescapably required by the experiential presence of phenomenal
consciousness, and that the unity of world and the unity of self are mutually interdependent, for which
reason both unities must involve a substantial degree of reﬂexive higher-order intentionality and self-
understanding (2006, pp. 28–30). Are reﬂection and reﬂexivity the same thing? As far as we can
judge, whereas the term ‘reﬂection’ is used pretty much in the same way by most authors, the term
‘reﬂexivity’ is by no means unequivocal and is in fact used by some to designate completely different
phenomena. Some use the terms reﬂexive and reﬂective synonymously. Others use the term reﬂexivity
– and this is obviously what is confusing, particularly since reﬂection is called Reﬂexion in German –
to designate the kind of pre-reﬂective self-awareness that we have been discussing. This is how the
term is used by Mohanty, who deﬁnes reﬂexivity as the pre-reﬂective transparency of consciousness,
CONSCIOUSNESS AND SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS
67

and distinguishes it from reﬂection which is a higher-order intentional act (1972, pp. 159, 164, 168).
We suspect this is also how Frankfurt is using the term in the passage quoted earlier. In his recent
book, The Idea of Self, Jerrold Seigel writes that whereas reﬂexivity has to do with something automatic,
something involuntary, something like a reﬂex, reﬂection is usually considered something intentional
and wilful (something that can also establish a distance between consciousness and its content).
Thus, in his view, the two terms indicate two distinct forms of self-reference, one passive and one active
(2005, pp. 12–13). We ﬁnd this clariﬁcation helpful, but ultimately no consensus on the issue seems
forthcoming. To some extent, one simply has to be aware of this ambiguity. 
FURTHER READING
José Luis Bermúdez, The Paradox of Self-consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998.
Natalie Depraz, La conscience: Approches croisées des classiques aux sciences cognitives. Paris: Armand
Colin, 2001.
Henry Ey, Consciousness: A Phenomenological Study of Being Conscious and Becoming Conscious.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1978.
Manfred Frank (ed.), Selbstbewußtseinstheorien von Fichte bis Sartre. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp,
1991.
Uriah Kriegel & Kenneth Williford (eds), Self-representational Approaches to Consciousness. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 2006.
Jean-Paul Sartre, Being and Nothingness. Trans. H. E. Barnes. New York: Philosophical Library, 1956.
Jean-Paul Sartre, Consciousness of self and knowledge of self, in Readings in Existential Phenomenology,
N. Lawrence and D. O’Connor (eds). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1967, 113–142. 
Evan Thompson (ed.), The Problem of Consciousness: New Essays in Phenomenological Philosophy of
Mind. Calgary: University of Calgary Press, 2003.
Max Velmans & Susan Schneider (eds), The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Oxford: Blackwell,
2007.
Dan Zahavi, Self-awareness and Alterity: A Phenomenological Investigation. Evanston: Northwestern
University, 1999.
Philip D. Zelazo, Morris Moscovitch & Evan Thompson (eds), The Cambridge Handbook of Consciousness.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
68
CONSCIOUSNESS AND SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS

Time
Think about how we experience the world. In our everyday activities we move through the world
without bumping into things. For example, I may see an attractive person walking towards me in
a narrow hallway. I anticipate that there will be a point at which we will need to avoid bumping
into each other; we seem capable of anticipating each other’s movements and we usually have
no problem in smoothly passing each other by. At the same time I may be thinking that this
person looks very familiar. Where have I seen her before? Yes, of course, I remember that she
was at the philosophy lecture last night. As she has just now moved past me, I stop and turn
around and say, ‘Hey, weren’t you at the philosophy lecture last night?’ She actually seems to
understand my sentence, stops and answers, ‘Why do you want to know?’ I immediately start to
wonder where this conversation will lead.
This kind of everyday encounter, and indeed any and every sort of activity in which we engage,
is permeated with aspects of temporality. We anticipate certain things that are about to happen
– for example, the point at which we will manoeuvre around an oncoming person in the hallway.
We remember certain things that happened in the past – e.g. at the philosophy lecture last night.
But we also have to maintain a working sense of what has just occurred – e.g. I know that this
person, having just passed me, is now just behind me, and I still have a perceptual sense of
what she looks like. When I turn to speak, I anticipate that she will still be there. The formulation
of my sentence, and her ability to understand it and respond require the abilities to produce and
to grasp units of meaning that are spread out over short amounts of time. My expectations, if I
have any in regard to this person, and whether they are fulﬁlled or dashed, are projected into a
future that has not yet taken shape.
We live in a coherent and meaningful world precisely because we are able to navigate through
a stream of experience without getting lost – and our other abilities, like our ability to move
through space, or to find our way into relationships in the social world, fully depend on our
temporal navigations. Consider what would happen if the temporal structures of our experience
4

were disrupted. Let’s consider a disruption that would be similar to this in a very narrowly
circumscribed area of our experience – vision. Neuronal structures in the medial temporal cortex
(MT) are specialized for visual detection of motion. If this part of the cortex is damaged, by stroke
for example, visual perception of form and colour may be preserved, but perception of motion is
disrupted, resulting in a condition called motion blindness or motion agnosia. Someone who
suffers from motion agnosia experiences the world as seemingly without motion, frozen in place,
for several seconds. Things in the world may then suddenly seem to rearrange themselves in new
positions. Motion agnosia patients have profound difﬁculty dealing with their environments, even
though they may have clear vision for shape, distance, colour, etc. Imagine crossing a busy street
where you see cars and know they are moving, perhaps by auditory clues, but simply can’t see
their movement (see Schenk and Zihl 1997; Zihl et al. 1983).
The disruption of the visual experience of movement in motion agnosia plays havoc with the
person’s abilities to make sense out of the world and to act in it. Aristotle noted the close
connection between movement and time. And it is true that normally our perceptions of
movement and our own movements have a coherence that stretches through all three temporal
dimensions, and yet in a continuous and seemingly seamless ﬂow. Temporal continuity seems
absolutely essential for making sense out of our everyday experience. This is not to deny that there
is discontinuity too. We can shift rapidly from one activity to another, we can move from one
situation into a completely different one, and we can even experience disruptions and breakdowns
where the ﬂow of information or activity becomes quite confused. Ultimately, if we are to restore
sense to these experiences, we have to take them up into a more cohesive temporal framework.
Despite difficulties with the perception of motion, the motion agnosia subject is still able to
function because the greater part of her experience retains some anchor in a cohesive temporal
structure. 
Consider an even more profound disruption of temporal experience. What if our ongoing,
present experience lacked a temporal coherence? What if, for example, I was unable to keep the
just previous moment of experience in mind long enough to write it down, or was unable to
anticipate events in the next second? Would my experience make any sense at all? Would I be
able to, or even be motivated to, turn around and speak to the woman who just brushed past, or
would she be out of sight and entirely out of mind? If she spoke to me, would I be able to hold in
mind the ﬁrst words of the sentence so that I could understand the sentence as a whole? Or would
my experience lack meaning if it lacked temporal integration?
THE DEFAULT ACCOUNT
One of the core ﬁndings of memory research – an area of research that involves many different
disciplines, including cognitive psychology, cognitive neuroscience, and neuropathology – is that
memory is not a single faculty of the mind. Rather, it is composed of a variety of distinct and
dissociable processes. There is memory involved when we are able to hold information for brief
periods of time, when we learn skills and acquire habits, when we recognize everyday objects,
and when we retain conceptual information, and there is of course memory involved when we
recollect speciﬁc incidents in the past (Schacter 1996, p. 5). Standard textbooks will distinguish
70
TIME

episodic memory, working memory, procedural memory, and semantic memory, i.e. they will
distinguish our recollection of a past summer holiday, from our ability to read and retain an eight-
digit phone number long enough to press the buttons on the phone, from our memory of how to
ride a bike (a skill we acquired years ago), from our memory of the name of the current general
secretary of the United Nations (a name we once learned). 
What motivates the distinction between different types of memory? The differentiation can
be substantiated both phenomenologically and conceptually. But in standard literature the appeal
is frequently to neuropathology and to the ﬁndings of different brain imaging techniques. If one
scans the brains of people asked to engage in different memory tasks, different parts of their
brains appear to be particularly active depending on the type of memory task they are engaged
in. More interesting is perhaps pathological ﬁndings, where people with different types of brain
damage might lose one type of memory while retaining others.
In the case of anterograde amnesia or memory loss, new events are not held in mind long
enough to be captured in episodic memory. A person with anterograde amnesis does not
remember anything about his experience once his attention shifts to some new event. An
interesting example of this was provided in the ﬁlm Memento. Leonard, the main character, is
trying to solve a crime, but has to write everything down as he is experiencing it, because he is
constantly forgetting what has happened, and even the fact that he is trying to solve a crime. He
has important information and a list of projects tattooed on his skin so that he doesn’t forget them.
The disruption of his past also disrupts his future – what projects could count as important for
him are determined by his past experience, so if his past experience is entirely wiped out, so is
a meaningful future. 
A famous real-life case concerns the patient HM. He suffered from severe epilepsy, and as a
result it was decided to remove the front two-thirds of his hippocampus as well as the amygdala.
When HM woke up after the operation he couldn’t remember what had happened during the
previous two years (he was at that time 27). He had normal memory for events until around the
age of about 25, but there was nothing after that. But not only was HM unable to remember his
recent past, everything that he experienced after the operation would only stay with him for a few
minutes and would then fade away.1 So HM was in effect trapped in a small time capsule. His
personal life ended when he was 25. Later in life, when asked, he tells people that he is a young
man. He talks about friends and family members who have been long dead as if they were still
alive. When given a mirror he is horriﬁed to see the face of an old man looking back at him. The
only consolation he has (although he does not know it) is that within a few minutes he will have
forgotten the episode. Every time he meets a person, it is as if it were for the ﬁrst time. He never
complains about having to complete tedious psychological tests, because to him they are all
new. HM, however, retains procedural memory. He is able to acquire new motor skills, although
he has no recollection of ever having learnt them (Schacter 1996, pp. 137–139, 164). 
A related case story concerns a patient with severe retrograde and anterograde amnesia. He
lacked episodic memory, but he was an avid golf player, and he not only retained semantic
memory that allowed him to employ technical terms like par, birdie, and wedge, but also retained
procedural memory and the ability and skill to play well. But due to his lack of episodic memory
he would be unable to ﬁnd the ball if the search was delayed. He would simply forget where it
had landed (ibid., p. 135).
TIME
71

The devastating effects of various memory disorders can serve as illustration of a more
fundamental point, namely that temporality, and certain temporal structures, are absolutely
essential to experience, to perception, and to action. Indeed as Merleau-Ponty would put it, by
analyzing time we will gain access to the concrete structures of subjectivity (1962, p. 410). If we
are to do justice to the dynamic character of our experiences, we cannot ignore the role of time.
What is this temporal structure, and how does it work? In developing an answer to these
questions, there are several issues that need to be sorted out. First, experiences never occur in
isolation. We are not faced with a mere aggregate of temporal atoms. The stream of
consciousness is an ensemble of experiences uniﬁed both at any one time, and over time, both
synchronically and diachronically. We have to account for this temporal unity and continuity.
Moreover, not only are we able to recollect earlier experiences and recognize them as our own,
we are also able to perceive enduring, i.e. temporally extended, objects and events, such as
songs and sentences, and we are therefore faced with the question of how consciousness must
be structured in order for it to be conscious of something like identity over time. We also have to
consider that our present experiences and cognitive processes are shaped and influenced
conjointly both by our past experiences and our future projects and expectations. 
We can start out by quickly sketching what might be considered a simple default account of
the temporality of experience, or what phenomenologists call ‘time-consciousness’. In daily life,
we all assume that we do have a direct experience of change and persistence. We can hear a
melody, just as we can see an immobile pyramid or the ﬂight of a bird. However, if we at any given
moment were only aware of what is perceptually present to us right here and now in the narrow
moment, how could we ever perceive – not to speak of imagine, remember, or judge – temporally
extended objects? One natural suggestion is that we should simply recognize that our perceptions
(auditory, visual, etc.) are themselves temporally extended processes. The perception of the
melody starts when the melody starts, and comes to an end at exactly the same moment as the
melody ends (see Figure 4.1).
Unfortunately, however, things are not quite that simple. If a perception has its own duration,
it will contain temporal phases of its own. That is, there will be a time when the ﬁrst couple of
moments of perception (A and B) are past, when a third moment (C) is present, and a future
72
TIME
Consciousness
A
B
C
D
Temporal object
a
Past
Future
b
c
d
FIGURE 4.1 An enduring consciousness

moment (D) doesn’t yet exist. So when C is present and occurring, there will be an awareness of
the note c, the present slice of the temporal object (e.g. one note of a melody). But that just
means that at every moment we are aware of what is present, and nothing else.
Moreover, on closer consideration, it is obvious that a mere succession of such conscious
phases will not as such provide us with a consciousness of succession. To actually perceive an
object as enduring over time, the successive phases of consciousness must somehow be united
experientially, and the decisive challenge is to account for this temporal binding without giving
rise to an infinite regress, i.e. without having to posit yet another temporally extended
consciousness whose task is to unify the ﬁrst-order consciousness, and so forth ad inﬁnitum. In
order to avoid this problem, many theorists have been tempted to adopt a principle that Dainton
has recently called the Principle of Simultaneous Awareness (2000, p. 133). According to this
principle, I am simultaneously aware of more than just the present slice of a temporal object;
indeed, a sequence or succession of temporal slices of the object is experienced only as a
sequence or succession if it is apprehended simultaneously by a single momentary act of
consciousness (Figure 4.2). This is an idea developed by a number of nineteenth-century
psychologists (e.g. Lotze 1887) and taken up also by William James (1950).
The Principle of Simultaneous Awareness is usually accompanied by the claim that the
perception of the temporal object is not itself stretched out in time, but is momentary. Why do
we need to postulate a momentary act of perception which embraces the full temporal sequence?
We need a momentary act because, if it were extended, we would once again be confronted with
the problem that an enduring consciousness is not as such a consciousness of duration. When
we are aware of something temporally extended, something that includes the immediate past,
the awareness itself must consequently be located in the present; it must be point-like and
momentary (Dainton 2000, p. 133). The Principle of Simultaneous Awareness obviously doesn’t
deny that there is a difference between hearing three succeeding tones and hearing the three
tones simultaneously. The principle simply claims that the succession, in order to be apprehended
as a succession, must be apprehended as a whole in a single momentary awareness; an
awareness that is located in the pure now understood as an indivisible point or instant.
If one opts for this model, one has to make a choice between different versions of it. One
option is to hold that a momentary act of awareness directly apprehends a succession of content
with real temporal extension. On this view, an act of awareness may be momentary, but its scope
TIME
73
Consciousness
A
B
C
D
Temporal object
a
b
c
d
FIGURE 4.2 Principles of simultaneous awareness

is not. But this version is faced with a difﬁculty that has been dubbed the problem of repeated
contents. Because the scope of any act of awareness must be limited, let us suppose for the sake
of argument that it is limited to the apprehension of two succeeding notes, and let us then take
the awareness of the sequence of the three tones Do-Re-Mi as an example. First, we will have an
act (C) that apprehends Do-Re and then another act (D) that apprehends Re-Mi. If in line with the
Principle of Simultaneous Awareness we suppose that these two momentary acts are distinct,
the same content ends up being experienced twice, once in C and once in D (Figure 4.3). But that
of course is not true to experience. We don’t hear Re twice, we only hear it once (ibid., p. 141).
Another option is to take the view that the contents apprehended by momentary acts of
awareness are themselves simultaneous with the momentary act. But this is obviously
problematic since the different temporal slices of a temporally extended object are not given
simultaneously. We are led, then, to the following idea. Whereas the current slice of the object
can be given perceptually, the former slice of the object is no longer present, and must therefore
instead be re-presented when the current slice occurs. Thus, whereas we seem to be directly
aware of temporally extended occurrences, we are in reality only aware of the representations of
such occurrences (Dainton 2003, p. 8). One conclusion drawn by many advocates of this position
is that a genuine perception of a temporal process is impossible. Our awareness of a temporal
sequence is always representational. It is based on the simultaneous givenness of a manifold
of contents that function as representations of a temporally extended object. The representation
of a temporally distributed object consequently lacks the directness and immediacy that
characterize perceptual presentations. This version of the Principle of Simultaneous Awareness
can then avoid the problem of repeated content by appealing to temporal modes of givenness.
One and the same content is never given twice in the same manner; rather, every time it is given
in different temporal modes, ﬁrst as now, then as just-past, then as further-past, etc. Thus, rather
than repeatedly experiencing the same content in the same temporal mode of presentation, we
experience it as sinking smoothly into the past. However, despite this attempt at a solution, the
question is ultimately whether an account that denies that we have a direct experience of change
and succession can be satisfactory. Keep in mind that any perceptually experienced slice of an
object will itself necessarily have a certain, if ever so short, temporal extension – e.g. one note
of a melody itself has duration. So ultimately the position just outlined seems forced to deny the
very possibility of perception of anything but an instantaneous present. We would not even be
able to hear a full musical note. This seems to contradict our experience (see Gallagher 2003c).
74
TIME
Consciousness
C
D
Temporal object
Re
Mi
Do
FIGURE 4.3 The problem of repeating content

So far the suggestions considered don’t seem too promising. Let’s take a look at an alternative
model, one that was worked out by Husserl, who, in his phenomenology, attempts to do justice
to the way that we experience things. 
A PHENOMENOLOGY OF TIME-CONSCIOUSNESS
It is close to standard practice to begin any discussion of time by quoting Augustine’s famous
words from his Confessions (Book 11, Ch. 14): ‘What, then, is time? If no one asks me, I know
what it is. If I wish to explain it to him who asks me, I do not know.’ Husserl follows this practice
when he lectured on the problem of time-consciousness, and then added that ‘we get entangled
in the most peculiar difﬁculties, contradictions, and confusions’ the moment we seek to account
for time-consciousness (1966a/1991, p. 4). In fact, the analysis of time-consciousness is
frequently considered to constitute one of the most difﬁcult topics in phenomenology. 
Husserl’s main claim is that a perception of a temporally extended object as well as the
perception of succession and change, would be impossible if consciousness provided us only
with a momentary or pure now-slice of the object and if the stream of consciousness itself was
a series of unconnected points of experiencing, like a line of pearls. If our perception were
restricted to being conscious of that which exists right now, it would be impossible to perceive
anything with temporal extension and duration, for a succession of isolated, punctual, conscious
states does not, as such, enable us to be conscious of succession and duration. Since we
obviously do experience succession and duration, we must acknowledge that our consciousness,
one way or the other, can encompass more than that which is given right now – it must be co-
conscious of that which has just been, and that which is just about to occur. The crucial question
remains: how can we be conscious of that which is no longer or not yet? Some have suggested
that imagination or memory might play a crucial role, and that these faculties allow us to
transcend the punctual now. We perceive that which occurs right now, and remember that which
is no longer and imagine that which has not yet occurred. But according to Husserl, we need to
distinguish between directly experiencing change and duration and merely imagining or
remembering it. In his view, we have an intuitive presentation of succession. Thus, Husserl would
insist that there is a manifest phenomenological difference between seeing a movement (that
necessarily extends in time) or hearing a melody, and remembering or imagining either. Moreover,
he would deny that the apprehension of a present representation of the just-past can provide us
with an intuitive awareness of something just-past. 
In his own analysis, Husserl emphasized the ‘width’ or ‘depth’ of the presence: when I
experience a melody, I don’t simply experience a knife-edge presentation of one note, which is
then completely washed away and replaced with the next knife-edge presentation of the next note.
Rather, consciousness retains the sense of the ﬁrst note as I hear the second note, a hearing
that is also enriched by an anticipation of the next note (or at least, in case I do not know the
melody, of some next auditory event). To illustrate: let us imagine that we are hearing a sequence
consisting of the tones C, D, and E. If we focus on the last part of this perception, the one that
occurs when the tone E sounds, we do not ﬁnd a consciousness which is exclusively conscious
TIME
75

of the tone E, but a consciousness which is still conscious of the two former notes, D and C. This
does not mean that there is no difference between our consciousness of the present tone E and
our consciousness of the tones D and C. D and C are not simultaneous with E; on the contrary,
we experience a temporal succession. D and C are tones which have been, they are perceived
as sinking into the past, which is why, rather than experiencing isolated tones that replace each
other abruptly, we can actually experience the sequence in its temporal duration.2 In other words,
according to Husserl, the reason we are able to perceive melodies is because consciousness is
so structured as to allow for this temporal presentation. When I am experiencing something,
each occurrent moment of consciousness does not simply disappear at the next moment but is
kept in an intentional currency, thereby constituting a coherency that stretches over an
experienced temporal duration. To adopt some Jamesian terms, the basic unit of lived presence
is not a ‘knife-edge’ present, but a ‘duration-block’, i.e. a temporal ﬁeld that comprises all three
temporal modes of present, past, and future (cf. James 1950). See Figure 4.4.
Husserl employs three technical terms to describe this temporal structure of consciousness.
There is (1) a ‘primal impression’ narrowly directed toward the strictly circumscribed now-slice of
the object. The primal impression never appears in isolation and is an abstract component that
by itself cannot provide us with a perception of a temporal object. The primal impression is
accompanied by (2) a ‘retention’, or retentional aspect, which provides us with a consciousness
of the just-elapsed slice of the object thereby furnishing the primal impression with a past-directed
temporal context, and by (3) a ‘protention’, or protentional aspect, which in a more-or-less
76
TIME
E-Protention
F-Protention
F
E
D
C
rC
rD
rE
rrC
rrD
rrrC
FIGURE 4.4 The structure of 
time-consciousness. 
Note: This ﬁgure is a modiﬁed
version of a diagram found in one 
of Husserl’s manuscripts on time
(Husserl 2001b, p. 22). The
horizontal line designates the 
series of sounded notes (C, D, E, F);
the vertical lines designate phases
of consciousness, consisting of
protentions (above the horizontal),
primal impression (where horizontal
and vertical meet), and retentions
(below the horizontal). The diagonal
line (e.g. rC, rrC, rrrC) illustrates
how a speciﬁc note (C) remains 
the same in an ever-growing
retentional train. 

indeﬁnite way intends the slice of the object about to occur thereby providing a future-oriented
temporal context for the primal impression (Husserl 1962/1977, p. 202). If we listen to a
conversation, it is the retentional aspect which keeps the intentional sense of the words of a
sentence available even after the auditory signals are no longer there. Furthermore, when I utter
a sentence, I have some anticipatory sense of where the sentence is going, or at the very least,
that the sentence is heading to some kind of ending. This sense of knowing where the sentence
(the thought) is heading, even if not completely deﬁnite, seems essential to the experience I have
of speaking in a meaningful way. It is the protentional aspect of consciousness which provides
us with this intentional anticipation of something about to happen. As Husserl also points out, it
is protention which allows for the experience of surprise. If I am listening to a favourite melody
and someone hits the wrong note, I am surprised or disappointed. If someone fails to complete
a sentence, I experience a sense of incompleteness, in part because consciousness involves an
anticipation of what the imminent course of experience will provide, and in these cases, what
actually happens fails to match my anticipation. The content of protention, however, is not always
completely determinate, and may approach the most general sense of ‘something has to happen
next’.3
According to Husserl’s account, retention is not a particular thing in consciousness that we
perceive; rather, we hear the just-past tone as just-past because it is retained. There is no
simultaneity between the retentional aspect of consciousness (which is current) and that which
is retained (which is just-past). The just-past tone doesn’t remain present in consciousness, like
some reverberation; rather, it is presented to consciousness as just-past. The retention does not
retain real contents (the just-past tone is in no sense physically present); rather, consciousness
retains it as an intentional content. It retains the sense of what has just consciously passed. Thus,
retention must be appreciated as a peculiar form of intentionality. Unlike the primal impression,
the retention intends the past. Unlike episodic memory, the retention presents the past; it does
not merely re-present it. In short, it provides us with a direct intuitive grasp of the just-past, and
is not a special apprehension of something present. As Husserl writes, ‘retention is not a
modiﬁcation in which impressional data are really [reell] preserved, only in modiﬁed form: on the
contrary, it is an intentionality – indeed, an intentionality with a speciﬁc character of its own’
(1966a/1991, p. 118). To emphasize this once again, being retentionally aware of the just-past
slice of the object or event doesn’t entail having the just-past slice sensuously co-present in
some strange distorted way. 
Let’s take a concrete example: if we look at a pedestrian who is crossing the street, our
perception will not be restricted to capturing the durationless now-slice of his movement.
Perceptually, it is not as if the pedestrian suddenly appeared as out of nowhere; and further, we
do not have to engage in an explicit act of remembering in order to establish the temporal context
of his current position. Nor, however, will it be the case that all the previous slices of his movement
are perceptually present in the same way as his current position. If that were the case, the
pedestrian would perceptually ﬁll the entire space he has just traversed. But we also have to avoid
the idea that the past slices of his movement remain visually present in some vague ghostly
manner. Temporal ‘fading’ into the past is not equivalent to the fading of a fading image that
remains perceptually present. Retention retains the sense of my just-past experience of seeing
TIME
77

the pedestrian, but it does not do so by keeping a faded image in consciousness. Rather, what
we mean by retention is that at any moment what we perceive is embedded in a temporal horizon.
Its meaning is inﬂuenced by what went before, which is still intentionally retained. For the just-
past tone to be intentionally retained is for its meaning or signiﬁcance to be retained as just-past. 
Rather than being a memory that re-presents the object in question, retention provides us with
an intuition of the just-past sense of the object (Husserl 1966a/1991, p. 41). This is precisely
what is required if perception of succession is to be possible. Husserl would agree that the mere
succession of conscious states doesn’t guarantee consciousness of succession, but this doesn’t
entail the impossibility of a perception of duration and succession unless one also accepts the
idea that perception is reduced to the grasping of a mere now-point, and that is precisely the idea
that Husserl rejects. A perception cannot merely be a perception of what is now; rather, any
perception of the present slice of an object includes a retention of the just-past slice and a
protention of what is about to occur (1966b/2001, p. 315). Perceptual presence is therefore not
punctual; it is a ﬁeld in which now, not-now, and not-yet-now are given in a horizonal gestalt. This
is what is required if perception of an enduring object is to be possible.
Given that the retention constitutes the temporal horizon of the present – given that it
constitutes what might be metaphorically considered the temporal equivalent of the visual
periphery – it should be considered as part of perceptual consciousness rather than as a form
of memory as typically understood. As James once put it, an ‘object which is recollected, in the
proper sense of that term, is one which has been absent from consciousness altogether, and now
revives anew. It is brought back, recalled, ﬁshed up, so to speak, from a reservoir in which, with
countless other objects, it lay buried and lost from view’ (1950, I, p. 646). We can only remember
something which has been present and now has become past. Given this deﬁnition, retention
cannot be said to be a form of memory, since it is involved in the very process of making something
present for the ﬁrst time. Admittedly, however, this point presupposes a rather narrow deﬁnition
of what memory amounts to. On a more liberal reading, memory is involved whenever information
is retained over time, and on such a reading retention would constitute a form of (working)
memory.
According to Husserl’s analysis, experience of any sort (perception, memory, imagination, etc.)
has a common temporal structure such that any moment of experience contains a retentional
reference to past moments of experience, a current openness (primal impression) to what is
present, and a protentional anticipation of the moments of experience that are just about to
happen. Consciousness is the generation of a field of lived presence. The concrete and full
structure of this ﬁeld is determined by the protention-primal impression-retention structure of
consciousness. Although the speciﬁc experiential contents of this structure from moment to
moment progressively change, at any given moment this three-fold structure is present
(synchronically) as a uniﬁed whole. This analysis provides an account of the notion of the extended
now found in James, Broad, and others. In the latter authors, the fact that we experience more
than just a knife-edge present is offered as a solution to the problem of temporal perception, but
is not itself explained. Husserl’s analysis is an improvement on this since, rather than simply
considering the lived presence as a brute given, it offers a phenomenological account of the
dynamics involved in its constitution through a detailing of the retentional – primal impressional
– protential structure of consciousness (see Gallagher 1998).
78
TIME

THE MICRO-STRUCTURE OF CONSCIOUSNESS AND SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS
As we have mentioned, it is important to distinguish retention and protention, which are structural
features of any conscious act, from recollection and expectation, understood as speciﬁc types
of mental acts. There is a clear difference between, on the one hand, retaining notes that have
just sounded and protending notes about to sound while listening to a melody, and on the other
hand, remembering a past holiday or looking forward to the next vacation. Whereas recollection
and expectation presuppose the work of retention and protention, protention and retention are
intrinsic components of any occurrent experience (be it a perception, a recollection, a fantasy
etc.) one might have. Unlike recollection and expectation, they are passive (involuntary) and
automatic processes that take place without our active or deliberate contribution. If we compare
retention with recollection, retention is an intuition, but an intuition of something absent, of
something which has just been, whereas recollection is a representation of a completed past
event. When I recollect, the past event is reproduced in my present experience, but the recollected
event is not presented as occurring at this time. It is exactly given as past – over and done with
in relation to the present. If it is to be experienced as past, it must be given as past together with
and in contrast to that which is now present. The experience of this distance or difference is
essential for recollection. If it is missing, if the past event is relived as if it were present, we would
not be recollecting, but hallucinating. 
Retention and protention are invariant structural features that make possible the temporal ﬂow
of consciousness as we know and experience it. In other words, they are a priori conditions of
possibility of there being ‘syntheses of identity’ in experience at all: if I move around a tree, for
instance, in order to gain a fuller perceptual presentation of it, then the different proﬁles of the
tree – its front, sides, and back – do not appear as disjointed fragments, but are perceived as
synthetically integrated moments. Temporal synthesis is a precondition for the perceptual
synthesis with its entailed semantic integration. Thus time-consciousness must be regarded as
a formal condition of possibility for the perception of any object.
Husserl’s analysis of the structure of inner time-consciousness serves a double purpose,
however. It is not only meant to explain how we can be aware of objects with temporal extension,
but also how we can be aware of our own stream of experiences. To put it differently, Husserl’s
investigation is not only meant to explain how we can be aware of temporally extended units, but
also how consciousness uniﬁes itself across time.4 As we have seen, the retention of, say, past
notes of a melody is accomplished, not by a ‘real’ or literal re-presentation of the notes (as if I
were hearing them a second time and simultaneously with the current note), but by a retention
of my just-past experience of the melody. Each phase of consciousness involves a retention of
the previous phase of consciousness. Since the previous phase includes its own retention of a
previous phase, there is a retentional continuum that stretches back through prior experience.
At the same time that I am aware of a melody, for example, I am co-aware of my ongoing
experience of the melody through the retentional structure of that very experience (cf. Zahavi
2003b). 
There are thus two important aspects to this retentional continuity. The ﬁrst, the ‘longitudinal
intentionality’ (Längsintentionalität) of retention, provides for the intentional unification of
TIME
79

consciousness itself, since retention is the retention of previous phases of consciousness.
Second, since the prior phases of consciousness contain their respective primal impressions of
the experienced object, the continuity of that experienced object is also established. Husserl
refers to this as the ‘transverse intentionality’ (Querintentionalität) of retention (1966a/1991,
p. 85). Although protention is asymmetrical with retention in many regards (Gallagher 1979;
Varela 1999), there is clearly a longitudinal aspect to protention. That is, my anticipatory sense
of the next note of the melody, or of where my sentence is going, or that I will continue to think,
etc., is also, implicitly, an anticipatory sense that these experiences will be experiences for me,
or that I will be the one listening, speaking, or thinking. In effect, protention involves an anticipatory
sense of what I am about to do or experience. 
It is this implicit, non-observational, pre-reflective self-consciousness which allows the
experience to be felt as part of my stream of consciousness. The sense of ownership or mineness
for the experience thus involves no reflective, second-order, metacognition. On the contrary,
Husserl’s account of the structure of inner time-consciousness (protention-primal impression-
retention) is precisely to be understood as an analysis of the (micro)structure of pre-reﬂective self-
consciousness (cf. Chapter 3 and Zahavi 1999, 2003b). It is called inner time-consciousness
because it belongs to the innermost structure of the act itself. This is why no inﬁnite regress is
generated:
The ﬂow of the consciousness that constitutes immanent time not only exists but is so
remarkably and yet intelligibly fashioned that a self-appearance of the ﬂow necessarily
exists in it, and therefore the ﬂow itself must necessarily be apprehensible in the ﬂowing.
The self-appearance of the flow does not require a second flow; on the contrary, it
constitutes itself as a phenomenon in itself.
(Husserl 1966a/1991, p. 83)
TIME-CONSCIOUSNESS AND DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS THEORY
To relate the phenomenological analysis of time-consciousness to the cognitive sciences, several
theorists have explored the idea that the protentional-retentional process might be best explained
as a self-organizing dynamical system (Van Gelder 1999; Varela 1999). Every cognitive experi-
ence, from perceptual-motor behaviour to human reasoning, arises through the concurrent
participation of several functionally distinct and topographically distributed regions of the brain
and their sensorimotor embodiment (Varela et al. 2001). The integration of these different
neuronal contributories involves a process that is best understood as an integration of three
different scales of duration (Pöppel 1988; Varela 1999; Varela et al. 1981), the ﬁrst two of which
are directly relevant to protentional-retentional processes.
(1) the elementary scale (the 1/10 scale, varying between 10 and 100 milliseconds)
(2) the integration scale (the 1 scale, varying from 0.5 to 3 seconds)
(3) the narrative scale involving memory (the 10 scale).
80
TIME

Evidence for the ﬁrst scale is found in the minimum amount of time needed for two stimuli to
be consciously perceived as non-simultaneous, a threshold which varies with each sensory
modality. Neurophysiologially this timeframe corresponds to the intrinsic cellular rhythms of
neuronal discharges within the range of 10 milliseconds (the rhythms of bursting interneurons)
to 100 milliseconds (the duration of an excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP)/inhibitory
postsynaptic potential (IPSP) sequence in a cortical pyramidal neuron). Such processes are then
integrated into the second scale, corresponding to the experienced living present, the level of a
fully constituted, normal cognitive operation. At the neurophysiological level, this involves the
integration of cell assemblies, distributed subsets of neurons with strong reciprocal connections
(see Varela 1995; Varela et al. 2001). In terms of a dynamical systems model, the cell assembly
must have a relaxation time followed by a bifurcation or phase transition, that is, a time of
emergence within which an experience arises, ﬂourishes, and subsides, only to begin another
cycle. Integration, Varela suggests, is due to neural activity forming transient aggregates of phase-
locked signals coming from multiple regions. Thus we have neuronal-level basic events that have
a duration on the 1/10 scale, synchronizing (via phase-locking) and thereby forming aggregates
that manifest themselves as incompressible but complete cognitive acts on the 1 scale.5 The
completion time is not dependent on a ﬁxed integration period measurable by objective time, but
rather is dynamically dependent on a number of dispersed assemblies. This temporal window
is necessarily ﬂexible (0.5 to 3 seconds) depending on a number of factors: context, fatigue,
sensory modality, age of subject, and so on. Varela (1999) suggests that this integration–
relaxation process at the 1 scale level corresponds to the living present, and is describable in
terms of the protentional-retentional structure.
The outcome of this neuronal integration manifests itself at a global level as a cognitive action
or behaviour. The self-organization involved is not an abstract computation, but an embodied
behaviour subject to initial conditions (speciﬁed, for example, as what the experiencing subject
intends to do or has just done), and non-speciﬁc parameters (for example, changes in perceptual
conditions or attentional modulation) (Gallagher and Varela 2003; Thompson 2007; Thompson
and Varela 2001; Varela 1999). As Thompson puts it: ‘the emergence of any cognitive act requires
the rapid coordination of many different capacities (attention, perception, memory, motivation,
and so on) and the widely distributed neural systems subserving them. The neurophysiological
substrate for this large-scale coordination is assumed to be a neural assembly, which can be
deﬁned as a distributed subset of neurons with strong reciprocal connections’ (2007, p. 331). 
The data and the dynamical models show that the integrating synchronization is dynamically
unstable and will thus constantly and successively give rise to new assemblies (these
transformations define the trajectories of the system). Each emergence bifurcates from the
previous ones in a way that is determined by its initial and boundary conditions. The preceding
emergence is still present in (still has an effect on) the succeeding one as the trace of the
dynamical trajectory (corresponding to retention on the phenomenological level). The initial
conditions and boundary conditions are important here. They are defined by the embodied-
experiential context of the action, behaviour, or cognitive act. The boundary conditions shape the
action at the global level and include the contextual setting of the task performed, as well as the
independent modulations arising from the contextual setting where the action occurs (e.g. new
stimuli or endogenous changes in motivation) (Varela 1999). 
TIME
81

The dynamical system described here accords neither with the classical notion of stability
that derives from a mechanical picture of the world, nor with a computational picture of cognition.
Stability in the latter case means that initial and boundary conditions lead to trajectories
concentrated in a small region of phase space where the system remains, a point attractor or a
limit cycle. In contrast, biological systems demonstrate instability as the basis of normal
functioning – constitutional instabilities are the norm (see Varela 1999 for a summary of the
empirical evidence). This instability accounts for the ongoing formal ﬂow property of experience.
Nonlinear systems provide a self-movement that does not depend (within a range of parameters)
on the content of the system. In other words, whether the experiential content of my visual percept
is a person or a pyramid, the intrinsic or immanent dynamic is generically the same, a self-
propelled motion. The self-constituting flow of consciousness involves a perpetual change
punctuated by transient aggregates underlying momentary acts (at the 1 scale of duration).
Changes in initial and boundary conditions drive this ﬂow by motivating transformations to new
dynamical phases, in a way that is not predictable along pre-determined trajectories. 
Just here, protention plays an important role in the self-movement of the flow. On the
neurological level, the sort of mechanism that underlies protention is more appropriately thought
of in terms of widely distributed and dynamical processes than in terms of localized functions.
Protention is linked to the subjective affective tonality reflective of the embodied and con-
textualized situation; as such, it helps to deﬁne speciﬁc boundary and initial conditions for the
neurodynamics just described (Thompson 2007; Varela and Depraz 2000). In the initiation of
an intentional cognitive act, for example if I decide to look for a particular object in the environ-
ment, I induce a transformation coloured by an affective disposition that anticipates the change
in perception. In the anticipation of a certain experience, I introduce exogenous order parameters
that alter the geometry of the phase space.6
The now phase of consciousness, which includes the retained just-past and the protended just-
about-to-occur, is a dynamical now that corresponds to the (variable) window of the 1 scale,
within which it incorporates elementary events of the 1/10 scale. ‘It is therefore precisely not a
knife-edge present, but a duration-block, having forward and rearward ends, a bow and a stern.
According to Varela, this neurodynamical “now” is the neural basis for the present cognitive
moment. In other words, the temporal structure of experience, speciﬁcally the rearward and
forward looking “now,” depends on the way the brain dynamically parses its own activity’
(Thompson 2007, p. 334).
IS CONSCIOUSNESS OF A TEMPORAL PROCESS ITSELF TEMPORALLY
EXTENDED?
Is consciousness of a temporal process itself temporally extended and measurable in objective
time? On the one hand, psychologists often try to measure temporal experience by the clock, even
though they also recognize that time can pass slowly or quickly depending on certain cognitive
aspects of the experience (see, for example, Friedman 1990). On the other hand, many
phenomenologists have questioned whether the objective time of the clock can do justice to the
time that we actually experience. To mention just one simple example: think of the way in which
82
TIME

the experience of time (for instance the interplay between the three different temporal dimen-
sions) is differently articulated in such diverse states as hope, anxiety, insomnia, and boredom.
Think of the way in which the ‘same’ 30 minutes can be experienced differently depending on
whether you are anxious, bored, or captivated. This is not to say that a stopclock cannot measure
something, but the question is what precisely it is that is being measured. Is the serial ‘time of
the clock’ a form of temporality that is native to the experiences in question or is it derivative, the
result of a subsequent objectiﬁcation?
Ever since Aristotle noted an essential paradox about time, namely that the ‘now’ both changes
and remains the same, philosophers who have considered the problem of time have been trying
to resolve it. It is always now, and relative to this now, there is always a past and a future. That
structure of time does not change. And yet each now seems to continually slip away, and we say
that one now follows another, so that any particular now moves into the past, further and further.
The British philosopher McTaggart (1908), writing around the same time as Husserl, tried to
resolve the paradox by distinguishing between the A-series (past–present–future) – a
psychological experience of succession that involves constant becoming (things constantly
coming to the present and then moving into the past and then even further past), even though
it maintains the same structure; and the B-series (before–now–after), a succession that maintains
permanent relations among events (the Vikings discovered America before Columbus did, and
that temporal relation will not change). McTaggart, and many others, defend the idea that time
is really a B-series, and that the A-series is not objectively real – it is rather a subjective or
psychological phenomenon.
Husserl addresses this basic question differently at different points in his career. In 1904, he
writes: ‘the consciousness of a time itself [requires] time; the consciousness of a duration,
duration; and the consciousness of a succession, succession’ (1966a/1991, p. 192; cf.
1966a/1991, p. 22). But if the experiential duration and unity of a tonal sequence is constituted
by consciousness, and if our consciousness of the tonal sequence is itself given with duration
and unity, are we then not forced to posit yet another consciousness to account for the givenness
of this duration and unity, and so forth ad infinitum (Husserl 1966a/1991, p. 80)? Husserl
eventually became aware of these problems, and as he wrote: 
Is it inherently absurd to regard the ﬂow of time as an objective movement? Certainly! On
the other hand, memory is surely something that itself has its now, and the same now as
a tone, for example. No. There lurks the fundamental mistake. The ﬂow of the modes of
consciousness is not a process; the consciousness of the now is not itself now. The
retention that exists ‘together’ with the consciousness of the now is not ‘now,’ is not
simultaneous with the now, and it would make no sense to say that it is.
(Husserl 1966a/1991, p. 333)
Temporal experience is not an object occurring in time, but neither is it merely a consciousness
of time; rather, it is itself a form of temporality, and ultimately the question is whether it makes
sense to ascribe temporal predicates to time itself. Perhaps this worry can explain some of
Husserl’s somewhat enigmatic statements. Even if we ascribe some kind of temporality to the
stream of consciousness due to its dynamic and self-differentiating character, we should not
TIME
83

conﬂate the temporality that is intrinsic to consciousness itself with the kind of temporality that
pertains to the objects of consciousness. Husserl would reject the claim that there is a temporal
match between the stream of consciousness and the temporal objects and events of which it is
conscious. The relations between protention, primal impression, and retention are not relations
among items located within the temporal flow; rather, these relations constitute the flow in
question. In short, we have to distinguish the objects that are constituted as temporal objects
by the way they are structured by protention, retention, and primal impression from the relation
between the constituting structures of consciousness. Just as my experience of a red circle is
neither circular nor red, there is a difference between the temporal givenness of the intentional
object and the temporal givenness of the experience itself. They are not temporal in the same
manner. It makes, as Husserl writes, no sense to say of the time-constituting phenomena (the
primal impressions, retentions, protentions) that they are ‘present’, ‘past’, or ‘future’ in the way
empirical objects are (1966a/1991, pp. 75, 333, 375–376). Rather, it is their very conjunction
which makes possible the senses of present, past, and future. 
Occasionally, Husserl speaks of time-consciousness as an unchangeable form of presence (as
a nunc stans) (2002, p. 384). It stands – to use James’ metaphor – permanent like the rainbow
on the waterfall with its own quality unchanged by the events that stream through it (James 1950,
I, p. 630). But it is noteworthy that Husserl explicitly denies that this standing presence is to be
understood as referring to merely one of the three temporal modalities (Husserl 2002, p. 384)
– rather, it encompasses all three temporal modes. And while from a ﬁrst-person perspective it
certainly makes sense to say that I had an experience of joy, or a perception of a ﬂower, and that
these experiences endured and have now ceased and become past – after all, it would otherwise
hardly make sense to say that I can remember a former experience – the very structure of
protention-primal impression-retention, and hence the very ﬁeld of experiencing that allows for
presence and absence, cannot itself become past and absent for me.
Given the task of describing the stream of consciousness, a certain way of expressing it either
captures it or does not, sinks or swims, so to speak, and this is something to be worked out, in
part, in an intersubjective way. In our view, the notion of retention is a phenomenologically
legitimate descriptive abstraction rather than a theoretical solution. The phenomenology of
listening to a piece of music is such that when a series of notes in a melody are played, for
example, I hear the melody and not just one note and now another, and now another, etc.
Previously sounded notes are retained in the intentional experience so that as I hear the note
that is now being sounded I hear it as part of a continuity of notes. This happens without persisting
sense-data and without my having to activate a memory of previous notes. We ﬁnd, in Husserl’s
texts, phenomenological descriptions of just such experience, which seem to be very much on
the mark. Based on the experience and the descriptions of it, Husserl proposes the idea of
retention as an attempt to characterize just such aspects of experience. It’s a descriptive
abstraction, and the only relevant question for the phenomenologist is whether it captures or
distorts the experience. Occasionally, Husserl does describe things in a way that is too reiﬁed –
the cross-section of consciousness, and individual retentions and protentions as if they were
elements that we could directly experience. In such cases the task is to try to pull such
abstractions back closer to the experience by ﬁnding a more appropriate way of phrasing it, or
by introducing various qualiﬁcations. This might be the beginning of a theorizing process, but it
84
TIME

is one that is phenomenologically generated. In any case, Husserl always intended
phenomenology to be an intersubjective enterprise, open to corrections. In that spirit, he would
welcome any improvements.
HISTORICITY 
Our everyday experiences are normally permeated with a kind of temporal super-glue – they are
held together in the very short term by a strong and pragmatically important structure. As I walk
down a hallway my experience of my own movement through the environment is coherent, as is
my encounter with another person and our short conversational exchange. This is what the
retentional-primal impressional-protentional structure of consciousness explains. But there is
more to our lives than brief encounters and passing experiences, and there is more to the
temporality of human existence than the interplay between protentions and retentions. 
Memory, for example, with a weaker sort of glue, provides, sometimes explicitly and sometimes
implicitly, a larger but sometimes less coherent framework for making sense out of our
experiences. Our past knowledge of situations and events is activated continually and effortlessly
as we make sense of what we experience. We may, however, remain unaware of inferences based
on this knowledge, and sometimes they creep into our recollections and distort our memories.
In fact, it is obvious that our memories can be distorted. This is why many psychologists and
cognitive scientists, from Bartlett (1932) to Schacter (1996), have urged us to abandon the myth
that memories are passive or literal recordings of reality. They are, as Schacter (ibid., p. 5) puts
it, not like ‘a series of family pictures stored in the photo album of the mind’. 
One important source of error is due to impaired source memory. You might be right in
remembering having seen or heard or experienced a certain event before, but you are wrong about
the source of your recollection. You might for instance see a headline about a well-known person
in a dubious magazine in a supermarket. Several months later you discuss the person’s honesty
and you remember the negative story, but no longer what its source was. The fact that you have
forgotten that it came from a dubious source makes you more inclined to believe the story. So
failures in source memory can open the door for the formation of unwarranted beliefs (Schacter
1996, pp. 116–117). This is just one example of how our cognitive systems are shaped (and
sometimes mis-shaped) both by the limitations and by the effects of our past experiences.
Phenomenologists have certainly recognized the influence of implicit memory, i.e. those
situations where people are inﬂuenced by past experience without any explicit awareness that
this is the case. Even what appears as the most immediate experience may be permeated and
influenced by earlier experiences and by acquired knowledge, as well as by a background
knowledge that is shaped by the larger forces of culture and language. As Dilthey once put it, we
are historical beings ﬁrst, before we are observers of history, and only because we are the former
do we become the latter (Dilthey 1992, pp. 277–278). Continuing along the same line, Dilthey
would also claim that the richness of human nature only unfolds in history. To say that we are
historical is to say that we are in history as we are in the world. I don’t simply exist in the present
and happen to have the capacity to envisage the future and remember the past. Rather, human
reality is characterized by a kind of temporal stretch. The past continually serves as the horizon
TIME
85

and background of our present experience, and when absorbed in action, our focus, the centre
of our concern, is not on the present, but on the future goals that we intend or project. The future
is salient while the present and the past constitute its background. To be human is already to be
situated in the world, born (or thrown – as some phenomenologists say) into it without having
chosen to be so, to be present to my surroundings, to be ahead of oneself in future projects (cf.
Heidegger 1986/1996). 
Human existence is characterized by historicity in the sense that the temporal horizon forms
and shapes the present. Historicity means not simply that I am located at a certain point in
history, but that I carry my history around with me; my past experience has an effect on the way
that I understand the world and the people I encounter in the world. I have been among others
as long as I remember, and my anticipations are structured in accordance with inherited forms
of apperception and comprehension (cf. Husserl 1973a, pp. 117, 125; 1973b, p. 136). I see
things the way others see them. I learn what is normal from others, and I thereby partake in a
common tradition which stretches back through a chain of generations into a dim past. Normality
is reﬂected in a set of norms that is set by a tradition. This is why Husserl claims that any normal
person is historical as a member of a historical community (1973b, pp. 138–139, 431). I
understand myself as the inheritor and continuer of a tradition, or as Husserl puts it:
I am a ‘child of the times’; I am a member of a we-community in the broadest sense – a
community that has its tradition and that, for its part, is connected in a novel manner with
the generative subjects, the closest and the most distant ancestors. And these have
‘inﬂuenced’ me: I am what I am as an heir.
(Husserl 1973a, p. 223)
Human time, in this sense, is neither the subjective time of consciousness, nor the objective time
of the cosmos. Rather, it bridges the gap between phenomenological and cosmological time.
Human time is the time of our life stories. It is a narrated time, a time structured and articulated
by the symbolic mediations of narratives (Ricoeur 1988, p. 244). The beginning of my own story
has always already been made for me by others and the way the story unfolds is only in part
determined by my own choices and decisions. In fact, the story of any individual life is not only
interwoven with the stories of others (parents, siblings, friends, etc.), it is always embedded in a
larger historical and communal meaning-giving structure. We will return to the issues of sociality
and narrative in Chapters 9 and 10.
NOTES
1
One can encounter the same type of symptoms in massive cerebral tumours and in what is known as
Korsakov’s syndrome (a profound destruction of neurons due to excessive intake of alcohol).
2
The precise span of perception can vary and depends upon our interest. If we are listening to a (short)
melody we can claim to perceive the entire melody in its temporal extension, but if we are paying
attention to the individual notes, one tone will cease being perceived the moment it is replaced by a
new one (Husserl 1966a/1991, p. 38).
86
TIME

3
Husserl’s analysis of the role of retention is much more detailed than his analysis of the role of
protention, which is one reason why the secondary literature has mainly been focusing on the former.
For recent overviews and discussions of Husserl’s actual treatment of protention, however, see
Rodemeyer (2006).
4
A more detailed account can be found in Husserl (1966a/1991). For an extended analysis of Husserl’s
model and its similarities and differences from James’ notion of the specious present, see Gallagher
(1998).
5
This currently has the status of a working hypothesis in neuroscience. Thompson summarizes:
‘integration happens through some form of temporal coding, in which the precise time at which
individual neurons ﬁre determines whether they participate in a given assembly. The most well-studied
candidate for this kind of temporal coding is phase synchrony. Populations of neurons exhibit oscillatory
discharges over a wide range of frequencies and can enter into precise synchrony or phase-locking
over a limited period of time (a fraction of a second). A growing body of evidence suggests that phase
synchrony is an indicator (perhaps a mechanism) of large-scale integration. . . . Animal and human
studies demonstrate that speciﬁc changes in synchrony occur during arousal, sensorimotor integration,
attentional selection, perception, and working memory’ (2007, p. 332).
6
Empirical evidence for this can be found in studies of intentional movement. The intention to carry
out a movement is coupled with a change in affective tone that varies in degree. One well-known case
involves the readiness potential that precedes an intentional movement. For an intended finger
movement, for example, a large slow electrical potential can be measured over the entire scalp,
preceding by a fraction of a second the beginning of the motion. This is not a correlate of an intention,
but it gives some indication of how vast a reconﬁguration of a dynamical landscape is involved in the
anticipation of a fully constituted act. Such diffuse effects are in accord with mechanisms associated
with neurotransmitters that condition the modes of response at the neuronal level (Gallagher and
Varela 2003).
FURTHER READING
David Carr, Time, Narrative, and History. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1986.
Barry F. Dainton, Stream of Consciousness: Unity and Continuity in Conscious Experience. London:
Routledge, International Library of Philosophy, 2000.
William J. Friedman, About Time: Inventing the Fourth Dimension. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000.
Shaun Gallagher, The Inordinance of Time. Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1998. 
Martin Heidegger, Being and Time. Trans. J. Stambaugh. Albany: SUNY Press, 1996.
Edmund Husserl, On the Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Internal Time (1893–1917). Trans. J.
Brough. Collected Works IV. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1991. 
Toine Kortooms, Phenomenology of Time. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002. 
Paul Ricoeur, Time and Narrative III. Transl. K. Blamey and D. Pellauer. Chicago: Chicago University 
Press, 1988.
TIME
87


Perception
The Primacy of Perception, the title of one of Merleau-Ponty’s most famous talks, gives us a hint
as to how most phenomenologists view perception. It is considered fundamental. The
phenomenological dictum ‘to the things themselves’ can be seen as a call for a return to the
perceptual world that is prior to and a precondition for any scientific conceptualization and
articulation. It can consequently be interpreted as a criticism of scientism, as a rejection of the
view that ‘science is the measure of all things, of what is that it is, and of what is not that it is
not’ (Sellars 1963, p. 173). This criticism is by no means to be interpreted as a rejection of
scientific rationality. The idea is not that a scientific exploration of reality is false, invalid, or
superﬂuous. The target of the criticism is not science itself, but a certain inﬂated self-interpretation
of science. As both Merleau-Ponty and Husserl point out, there is a more original relation to the
world than the one manifested in scientiﬁc rationality. In our pre-scientiﬁc perceptual encounter
with the world, the world is given concretely, sensuously, and intuitively. In daily life, we do not
interact with ideal theoretical objects, but with tools and values, with pictures, statues, books,
tables, houses, friends, and family (Husserl 1952/1989, p. 27), and our life is guided by practical
concerns. We should never forget that our knowledge of the world, including our scientific
knowledge, arises from a ﬁrst-person perspective, and that science would be meaningless without
this experiential dimension. Scientific discourse is embedded in the world of experience, in 
the experiential world, and if we wish to comprehend the performance and limits of science, we
have to investigate the original experience of the world of which science is a higher-order
articulation (Merleau-Ponty 1962, pp. viii–ix). Even the most exact and abstract scientiﬁc results
presuppose the intuitively given subject-relative evidence of the lifeworld – a form of evidence
which does not merely function as an unavoidable, but otherwise irrelevant, way-point towards
scientific knowledge, but as a permanent and quite indispensable source of meaning and
justiﬁcation (Husserl 1970, p. 139). The standardizations of procedures and the development
of instruments that provide precise measurements have facilitated the generation and
5

accumulation of third-person data and the establishment of intersubjective consensus. But
without conscious subjects to interpret and discuss them, meter settings, computer printouts,
x-ray pictures, and the like, remain meaningless. Scientiﬁc knowledge depends (although, of
course, not exclusively) on the observations and experiences of individuals: it is knowledge that
is shared by a community of experiencing subjects.
With regard to cognition and action generally, perception is basic and primary. Because of that
it is always ﬁrst on the phenomenologist’s list. Husserl, for instance, frequently distinguishes
between signitive, imaginative (pictorial), and perceptual ways of intending an object or state of
affairs: I can talk about a withering oak which I have never seen, but which I have heard is standing
in the backyard, I can see a detailed drawing of the oak; or I can perceive the oak myself.1
Similarly, I can talk about how terrible it must be for homeless people to sleep on the streets, I
can see a television programme about it; or I can experience it myself. For Husserl, these different
ways of intending are not unrelated. On the contrary, there is a strict hierarchical relation between
them, in the sense that the modes can be ranked according to their ability to give us the object
as directly, originally, and optimally as possible. The object can be experienced more or less
directly, that is, it can be more or less present.
The lowest and most empty way in which the object can be intended is in the signitive act. These
(linguistic) acts certainly have a reference, but apart from that, the object is not given in any
ﬂeshed out manner. The imaginative (pictorial) acts have a certain intuitive content, but like the
signitive acts, they intend the object indirectly. Whereas signitive acts intend the object via a
contingent representation (a linguistic sign), pictorial acts intend the object via a representation
(picture) which bears a certain resemblance to the object as seen from a certain perspective. It
is only the actual perception, however, which gives us the object directly. This is the only type of
intention which presents us with the object itself in its bodily presence (leibhaftig), or, as Husserl
says, in propria persona. Thus, on the Husserlian account, perception does not confront us with
pictures or images of objects – except, of course, in so far as we are perceiving paintings or
photographs – but with the objects themselves. When we say that something appears per-
ceptually, this should consequently not be understood in the sense that the perceptually given
is a picture or sign of something else (Husserl 2003, p. 107).
We can also speak of different epistemic levels. To talk about a notebook, to see an image of
it, or to write in it, is not to be confronted with three different notebooks but with one and the same
notebook given in three different ways. If I am looking for my notebook and ﬁnd it, we are dealing
with a situation where the found notebook, or to be more exact, the perceptually given notebook,
satisﬁes or fulﬁls my intention. Whereas at ﬁrst I had a mere signitive intention, it is now being
fulﬁlled by a new intention, where the same object is given perceptually. That which was ﬁrst
thought is now also seen. Husserl likens the relation between the empty linguistic intention and
its fulfilment in perception to the classical relation between concept/thought and intuition
(Husserl 2001a, II, p. 184).
The idea of perceptual fulﬁlment has a large scope. It is not the case of an either/or. Either
there is (absolute) fulﬁlment, or there is none. On the contrary, there can be various degrees of
fulﬁlment. Its range can vary, but so can its clarity. If I see a withering oak from afar, then I am
certainly confronted with the oak itself; the oak is intuitively present. But it is not as optimally
given as if I stood closer by and could discern more details (Husserl 2001a, II, p. 238; 1976/1982,
90
PERCEPTION

pp. 143–144). At the same time it should also be emphasized that Husserl does not deﬁne the
optimal givenness by means of parameters like light and spatial presence. It might be difﬁcult
to see most things in the dark, but stars are among the exceptions. Husserl usually understands
optimal givenness as the kind of givenness that offers us the object with as much information
and in as differentiated a manner as possible (Husserl 1966b/2001, p. 205).
Husserl and Merleau-Ponty both consider linguistic intentions to be less original and
fundamental than perceptual intentions. They would both claim that the former are rooted in a
prelinguistic and prepredicative encounter with the world, and they would consequently counter
the suggestion that all meaning is propositional in nature.2 To detach sense and the sensuous
(Sinn and Sinnlichkeit) from each other, to deny the continuity between the perception of an
object and its predicative expression, would be the product of an intellectualistic abstraction
that would make it incomprehensible how the perceived could ever function as a guideline for
linguistic articulation. To deny the existence of prelinguistic cognition, and to claim that every
apprehension of something as something presupposes language-use would make it incom-
prehensible how we ever acquire language in the ﬁrst place. To use the preﬁx pre- in this context
does not only refer to the fact that the experiences in question are temporally prior to language
(or language-acquisition), but also to the fact that our perceptual acquaintance with the world is
a permanent condition of and a source for linguistic meaning. Even though a person might know
terms like ‘crimson’, ‘scarlet’, and ‘vermillion’, he would lack a proper knowledge of the involved
concepts if he were blind, and therefore unable to see these colours.
One of the characteristic features of the phenomenological approach to perceptual
intentionality is the emphasis on its direct or unmediated nature. As Husserl puts it, all types of
re-presentation (Vergegenwärtigung) – be it memory or imagination – are derived from a proper
presentation (Gegenwärtigung), which is the intuitive mode of experience par excellence (Husserl
2001a, II, p. 260; 1976/1982, pp. 90–91). Phenomenologists have consequently been rather
dismissive of representative theories of perception. According to one classical formulation of
this view, our mind cannot on its own reach all the way to the objects themselves, and the typical
claim has therefore been that we need to introduce some kind of interface between the mind
and the world if we are to understand and explain perception. The typical claim has been that
our cognitive access to the world is mediated by some kind of mental representations. These inner
representations are then supposed to relate to the everyday objects we ordinarily claim to
perceive, as inner effects to external causes. To perceive the world is to generate some kind of
representational structure within the mind – something like a picture or a map that represents
external reality. At the extreme, perception is viewed as a kind of point-for-point descriptive
representation of the world generated in the mind, a coherent reorganization of the collection of
atomistic sensations, or a collation of the constantly changing patterns of retinal stimulations.
To illustrate, let us assume that I am looking at a red rose. In this case, I have an experience of
the rose, but of course, this cannot mean that the rose qua physical object is physically present
in my consciousness. The representative theory of perception claims that the rose affects my
sensory apparatus, and that this causes a mental representation of the rose to arise in my
consciousness. According to this theory, then, every perception implies (at least) two different
entities, the extra-mental object and the intra-mental representation. First, let’s consider the
classical expression of this kind of representationalism:
PERCEPTION
91

I pretend not to teach, but to inquire; and therefore cannot but confess here again that
external and internal sensations are the only passages that I can ﬁnd of knowledge to the
understanding. These alone, as far as I can discover, are the windows by which light is let
into this dark room. For, methinks, the understanding is not much unlike a closet wholly
shut from light, with only some little opening left, to let in external visible resemblances,
or ideas of things without; would the pictures coming into such a dark room but stay there,
and lie so orderly as to be found upon occasion, it would very much resemble the
understanding of a man in reference to all objects of sights and the ideas of them.
(Locke 1975, pp. 162–163)
How would phenomenologists appraise this attempt to clarify the mind–world relation? We
can admit that nothing might seem more natural than to say that the objects I am aware of are
outside my consciousness. And when my experiences, be they perceptions or other kinds of
mental acts, present me with objects, how could this possibly happen except by way of some
representational mediation? The objects of which I am conscious are outside my consciousness,
but inside my consciousness I ﬁnd representations (pictures and signs) of these objects, and
these internal objects enable me to be conscious of the external ones. But as Husserl points out,
this theory is not only empirically false, it is completely nonsensical. It conceives of consciousness
as a box containing representations that resemble external objects, but it forgets to ask how the
subject is supposed to know that the representations are in fact representations of external
objects. Some have argued that a picture is something that resembles what it depicts, and that
it is the resemblance which imbues the picture with its representational quality. This is known
as the resemblance theory of pictorial representation. But in order for me to understand that x
represents y by resembling it, I must have an access to y that is not mediated by x, so that I can
compare the two in order to see the resemblance. If I know only the representation, I cannot
know that it resembles the object represented. In addition, if one conceives of the mental
representations as being like everyday representations (photos, paintings, symbols), one is
immediately faced with the so-called homunculus problem: 
The ego is not a tiny man in a box that looks at the pictures and then occasionally leaves
his box in order to compare the external objects with the internal ones, etc. For such a
picture-observing ego, the picture would itself be something external; it would require its
own matching internal picture, and so on ad inﬁnitum.
(Husserl 2003, p. 106)
Furthermore, Husserl denies that a picture or a sign is an object, which in addition to its other
qualities, such as form, size, and colour also has an intrinsic picture quality or sign quality.
According to Husserl, a picture or a sign must be apprehended as a picture or a sign in order to
function as a representation of something else (2003, pp. 106–107). It only acquires its
representational quality by means of a special cognitive apprehension. If x is to represent y, x
needs to be interpreted as being a representation of y. It is exactly the interpretation, i.e. a
particular form of intentionality, which confers x with its representative function. More speciﬁcally,
if x (a painting, a photo, an icon, a symbol, etc.) is to serve as a representation of something else,
92
PERCEPTION

we ﬁrst need to perceive x in order then to confer its representational quality upon it. This is yet
another reason why the representational theory of perception must be rejected. It presupposes
that which it seeks to explain. 
One could object, however, that this classical and rather crude theory of representation is not
the contemporary version of representationalism. After all, the Lockean account of perception,
with its reference to internal pictures, has to a large degree been abandoned. In reply, however,
we might add, mainly by philosophers. Some version of this view (mediated through the work of
Hermann von Helmholtz) is still endorsed by numerous neuroscientists. Compare for instance
the following quote by Damasio:
When you and I look at an object outside ourselves, we form comparable images in our
respective brains. We know this well because you and I can describe the object in very
similar ways, down to ﬁne details. But that does not mean that the image we see is the
copy of whatever the object outside is like. Whatever it is like, in absolute terms, we do
not know.
(Damasio 1999, p. 320)3
Similar ideas have been propounded by Francis Crick, who in his description of the so-called
binding problem claims that one of the striking features of our internal picture of the visual world
is how well organized it is (1995, p. 232), and that although we know how the visual parts of the
brain take the picture (the visual ﬁeld) apart, we still don’t know how the brain puts it all together
(ibid., p. 22). More generally, many vision scientists still conceive of vision as a process where
we, on the basis of what is proximally present, namely images in the head or eye, seek to discover
(by way of inference) what is present out there, in the world. As Richard Gregory writes: ‘We are
given tiny distorted upside-down images in the eye, and we see solid objects in surrounding
space. From patterns of stimulation on the retinas we perceive the world of objects, and this is
nothing short of a miracle’ (1997, p. 9). 
As long as this kind of view is meant to suggest that we actually perceive internal pictures, it
is open to phenomenological criticism; not only is it not in accordance with phenomenological
evidence, but the view also entails a highly problematic use of the notions of both ‘perception’
and ‘picture’. Rather than saying that the perceiving brain constructs an internal representation
of the perceived world, it would be far less controversial simply to claim that our brain enables
us to see a visual scene. If the claim by contrast is that in order to explain our perceptual
experience of external objects we must make reference to various representational processes
on the sub-personal level, the phenomenological criticism might at ﬁrst seem to lose hold. After
all, how could phenomenologists possibly be in a position to specify what goes on at the sub-
personal level? But perhaps this actually underestimates some of the force of the pheno-
menological arguments. Not only is there the question of what precisely representation might
mean on the sub-personal level, but more importantly, even if we (reluctantly) accepted that it is
coherent to speak of sub-personal representations, it is still an open question whether the
existence of such entities would count in favour of a representationalist account of perception.
It is one thing to argue that sub-personal representations are among the internal enabling
PERCEPTION
93

conditions for perception, and something quite different to argue that perception itself is repre-
sentational in character.
In Chapter 6, which deals more broadly with the concept of intentionality, we will consider
some further arguments against the representationalist account of the mind. For now, let it
simply sufﬁce to say that phenomenologists would insist on the presentational – rather than
representational – character of perceptual experience. A rather neat articulation of such an
alternative non-representionalist view of perception has recently been offered by Noë:
This claim about the world-involving character of perceptual experience – that experience
is an encounter with things and situations – is not compatible with any old metaphysical
or empirical picture of perception and its nature. For in presenting perceptual experience
as a kind of involvement with or entanglement with situations and things, the
phenomenology presents experience as something that could not occur in the absence
of situations and things. Phenomenology reveals perceiving, then, to be a condition whose
nature depends essentially on the presence and involvement of the world encountered.
If there were no object, or no situation, then there could be no contact with or involvement
with them, which is just to say that there could be no perceptual experience.
(Noë 2007, p. 235)
PERCEPTUAL HOLISM
Phenomenology’s emphasis on the primacy of perception might remind one of empiricism, but
on closer examination it should be clear that there are numerous differences. In the eighteenth
century, the French philosopher Condillac proposed a thought experiment. He suggested that we
think of a statue bereft of any perceptual abilities, and then add one sensory modality at a time
in order to consider the effects of perceptions in the visual, tactile, auditory, etc. domains. The
question however is whether a statue, i.e. an immobile entity, would ever be able to enjoy
perceptual experiences. Moreover, Condillac presupposed that it would make sense to construct
sensory experience one modality at a time. As an empiricist, he thought that we could make
sense out of sensing by considering how isolated sensory data organized themselves into object
perception. Both phenomenology and science tell us that this is not the way it works. We should
not think of perception as being built up out of small atoms of sense data; nor can we think of it
as a collection of separate sense modalities. Indeed, we have good reason to think that perception
is itself part of a larger whole. Let us look at each of these claims in turn.
In Phenomenology of Perception, Merleau-Ponty criticized the empiricist idea that perception
is composed by sensations, taken as units of experience. As he points out, we simply do not
experience sensations per se – ‘this notion corresponds to nothing in our experience’ (1962, 
p. 3). Or, as Heidegger points out, 
We never really first perceive a throng of sensations, e.g. tones and noises, in the
appearance of things . . . rather we hear the storm whistling in the chimney, we hear the
94
PERCEPTION

three motored plane, we hear the Mercedes in immediate distinction from the Volkswagen.
Much closer to us than all sensations are the things themselves. We hear the door shut
in the house and never hear acoustical sensations of even mere sounds. In order to hear
a bare sound we have to listen away from things, divert our ear from them, i.e. listen
abstractly.
(Heidegger 1964, p. 656)
Rather than being true elementary components of perceptual experiences, sensations are
theoretical constructs. Consider the simplest experience of a patch of white colour against a
background:
All the points in the patch have a certain ‘function’ in common, that of forming themselves
into a ‘shape’. The color of the shape is more intense, and as it were more resistant than
that of the background; the edges of the white patch ‘belong’ to it, and are not part of the
background although they adjoin it: the patch appears to be placed on the background
and does not break it up. Each part arouses the expectation of more than it contains, and
this elementary perception is therefore already charged with a meaning.
(Merleau-Ponty 1962, pp. 3–4)
It might be objected that each point of the patch contributes to, adds to, the ﬁnal composition,
and so it is only by sensing each point that we achieve perception of the whole. As Merleau-Ponty
points out, however, this is to ignore the fact that we perceive each point within a gestalt, against
a background – ‘the perceptual “something” is always in the middle of something else, it always
forms part of a “ﬁeld”’ (Merleau-Ponty 1962, p. 4). In addition, empiricism also forgets the subject
of perception, yet the perceived object is always contextualized, not just by its physical
surroundings, but by the particular projects and interests of the perceiver, the particular actions
and potential actions that the perceiver is engaged in or could be engaged in, and other aspects
of experience that are constituted across sense modalities and in emotions. Only in relation to
such intermodal experiences, emotions, actions, and contexts can we capture the nature of
perception; ‘The structure of actual perception alone can teach us what perception is’ (ibid.). 
The role of perceptual and pragmatic contexts, along with the ‘collaboration’ of sensory and
motor systems in a complex and variable neurophysiological processing, generates stability
within the instabilities of perception. In that stability and in the processes of integration we ﬁnd,
not the isolated datum of sensation, but ‘a formation already bound up with a larger whole,
already endowed with a meaning’ (ibid., p. 9). This phenomenological critique of sensation theory
– a theory that ignores the context and pragmatic purposes of the perceiver – implies a larger
set of questions about how to do cognitive science. As we experiment and build theories, we run
the risk of positing theoretical mechanisms that aren’t really there. A science that tries to account
for experience in objective terms ‘introduces sensations which are things, just where experience
shows that there are meaningful patterns. . . . It requires that two perceived lines, like two
[objectively measurable] lines, should be equal or unequal . . . without realizing that the perceived,
by its nature, admits of the ambiguous, the shifting, and is shaped by its context’ (ibid., p. 11).4
PERCEPTION
95

Think of the well-known Müller-Lyer lines (Figure 5.1).
Why do these lines, which are objectively of equal length,
appear to be of different lengths? The fact that they are
drawn with arrows or tails changes them so that they are
not perceptually equal. If these lines were physical objects
that I could pick up and use, iron rods for example, I would
necessarily treat them as unequal, both in terms of how I
would grab them, and in terms of what I could do with
them. My perception reads these pragmatic aspects into
its visual estimations. If we erased the arrows and tails,
we would have two identical things, and could easily see their equal lengths. ‘That is to say, an
isolated, objective line, and the same line taken in a ﬁgure, cease to be, for perception [which
means, for action, and for pragmatic purposes] the same line’ (ibid.). 
In the ‘Ebbinghaus illusion’ (Figure 5.2), the centre circle to the left is perceived as smaller than
the centre circle to the right. They are, however, objectively of equal diameters. How should we
describe and interpret this finding? It is usually presented as an example of a robust visual
illusion, and in that sense, we might say that we perceive incorrectly. But an alternative
interpretation would be that we perceive these circles in precisely the right way, and that we are
simply confronted with a vivid illustration of the classical gestalt principle according to which the
context inﬂuences the parts. Indeed, if one were to perceive the two centre circles as being of
equal size, this would be a misperception, a failure of perception, rather than an accurate and
veridical one, because one would fail to perceive the available perceptual gestalt.5
Another reason why the attempt to explain perception in terms of an amalgam of sensory data
fails, is that we see both more and less than what is sensorially given. This is a curious thought,
but one we ﬁnd developed in the basic analysis of perception provided by Husserl. When I perceive
an object, say an armchair, the object is never given in its totality but always incompletely, in a
certain restricted proﬁle or adumbration. It is never the entire armchair, including its front, backside,
underside, and inside, which is given intuitively, not even in the most perfect perception. Despite
this, the object of my perception is exactly the appearing object and not the adumbration. I perceive
the chair, for example, and not the perspectivally given surface of the front or the back, seat, and
legs of the chair. Of course, I can change my focus to intend the surface of the leg (instead of the
whole chair), but that will be given in proﬁles as well. Our perceptual consciousness is consequently
characterized by the fact that we persistently transcend the perspectivally appearing proﬁle in
order to grasp the object itself. That is, perception
furnishes us with a full object-consciousness,
even though only part of the perceived object is
intuitively given (Husserl 1973c/1997, pp. 49–
50).6 The central question is: How is this possible?
According to Husserl, the reason why we perceive
the armchair itself, although it is actually only a
single profile which is intuitively present, is
because of the contribution of what he terms
horizonal intentionality. Husserl claims that our
96
PERCEPTION
FIGURE 5.1 Müller-Lyer illusion
FIGURE 5.2 Ebbinghaus illusion

intuitive consciousness of the present proﬁle of the object is always accompanied by an intentional
consciousness of the object’s horizon of absent proﬁles (Husserl 1970, p. 158). Were we only
directed towards the intuitively given, no perceptual consciousness of the very object would be
possible:
The improperly appearing objective determinations are co-apprehended, but they are not
‘sensibilized,’ not presented through what is sensible, i.e. through the material of
sensation. It is evident that they are co-apprehended, for otherwise we would have no
objects at all before our eyes, not even a side, since this can indeed be a side only through
the object.
(Husserl 1973c/1997, p. 55)
Every spatiotemporal perception (ordinarily termed ‘external perception’) can be
deceptive, although it is a perception that, according to its own meaning, is a direct
apprehension of the thing itself. According to its own meaning it is anticipatory – the
anticipation [Vorgriff] concerns something cointended – and, in such a radical fashion,
that even in the content of that which is perceptually given as itself, there is, on closer
inspection, an element of anticipation. In fact, nothing in perception is purely and
adequately perceived.
(Husserl 1959, p. 45)
The meaning of the presented proﬁle is dependent upon its relation to the absent proﬁles of
the object, and no perceptual awareness of the object would be possible if our awareness were
restricted to the intuitively given. In other words: in order for a perception to be a perception-of-
an-object, it must be permeated by a horizonal intentionality which intends the absent proﬁles,
bringing them to a certain appresentation (Husserl 1970, p. 158; 1962/1977, p. 183; see below
for more on this concept of appresentation). This is not only the case in vision but also in, say,
tactile perception. When, without looking, I hold an object larger than my hand, the surface of
my hand covers only part of the object, but I nevertheless have the sense that the object is
composed of more than just the surfaces that I touch (Noë 2004, p. 60). Moreover, my perception
of an object is also inﬂuenced by other objects in the background, by what can be called the outer
horizonal structure. 
We not only see more than we see, in the sense just outlined, we also see less than we think
we see. If someone holds a bright red apple behind me and gradually moves it into the periphery
of my visual ﬁeld, my ordinary assumption might be that I would certainly be able to identify the
colour of the object as it enters my peripheral ﬁeld. In fact, as Dennett (1991) points out, we are
unable to discern colour in the peripheral visual ﬁeld, and it is only when the apple is moved closer
to the focal point of vision that we are able to perceive the colour, and the apple as such. Our
visual awareness is consequently not as fully detailed as we may think it is. Focus your attention
on this word: gorilla. If you don’t move your eyes (no peeking, please) you will not be able to
process many other words on the page (including these), although they certainly seem to be
there in your visual ﬁeld (ibid., p. 49). One possible interpretation of this ﬁnding is that we have
to go after the information, and that we do so as we need it. It’s not all there in our mind. If it were
PERCEPTION
97

we could close our eyes and read the rest of the page off of the representation that we supposedly
have. Try it and see how far you get. Other experiments show that we are often incapable of
seeing things happen right before our eyes. This is referred to as change blindness or inattentional
blindness.7 In these experiments, we discover that in observing a scene that gradually changes,
or even one that dramatically changes, whether we are attending to some feature in speciﬁc, or
even looking for what precisely is changing, our ability to notice changes is extremely poor.
We are pragmatic perceivers. We don’t have to clutter up our minds with representations or
internal models that we would need to constantly update, since the information we need is easily
available all around us.8 Of course, we do have to go after it, selectively. We have to move our
eyes; we have to turn our heads; we have to re-posture our bodies; we have to reach and grab
and pull things closer to us and manipulate them so we can examine them, or if they are too big,
we have to walk over to them.
The phenomenology of perception supports what has become known as the enactive theory
of perception. The idea of enactive perception has been around for some time, although recently
it has drawn on both scientiﬁc and phenomenological resources to make it a viable alternative
to representationalist views. John Dewey, in his 1896 essay, ‘The Reflex Arc Concept in
Psychology’, maintained against sensation theory that we begin in perception
not with a sensory stimulus, but with a sensorimotor coordination . . . it is the movement
which is primary, and the sensation which is secondary, the movement of body, head and
eye muscles determining the quality of what is experienced. . . . [In audition] the sound
is not a mere stimulus, or mere sensation; it again is an act. . . . It is just as true to say
that the sensation of sound arises from a motor response as that the running away is a
response to [a scary] sound.
(Dewey 1896, p. 358)
In effect, perception is not a passive intake of information or the mechanistic processing and
collating of information into complete and stable representations. Perception involves activity –
for instance, the movement of our body. As Gibson (1986, pp. 53, 205) points out, we see with
mobile eyes set in a head that can turn and is attached to a body that can move from place to place;
a stationary point of view is only the limiting case of a mobile point of view. What we see and hear
and touch and taste and smell (or avoid smelling, etc.) is shaped by what we do, and what we are
capable of doing – our pragmatic possibilities and the sensorimotor capacities of our bodies. In
ordinary experience, perception and movement are always united. I touch something by moving
the arm. I see something by moving the head and eyes. That which is perceived is perceived as
nearby or further way, as something that can be approached and explored. 
Husserl, for example, pointed to the close connection between perception and kinaesthesia
(sense of movement). Our embodied movement participates in seeing, touching, hearing, etc.
thereby informing our perceptual grasp on the world. Our perceptual organs (eyes, hands, ears,
etc.) function together with our body’s kinaesthetic experience. My movement, my doing
something, is ‘bound together in a comprehensive unity’. The way that objects appear in per-
ception is not independent of the kinaesthetic dimension; they work together to produce the
fulﬁlled meaning of the objects (see Husserl 1970, p. 106).
98
PERCEPTION

We can illustrate Husserl’s idea with a concrete example. I am taking a look at my friend’s new
dual-fuel vehicle, and am standing in front of it. Whereas the front of the car is correlated with
my particular bodily position, the horizon of the cointended but momentarily absent proﬁles of
the car (its back, sides, bottom, etc.) is correlated with my kinaesthetic horizon, i.e. with my
capacity for possible movement. The absent profiles are linked to an intentional ‘if-then’
connection. If I move in this way, then this proﬁle will become visually or tactually accessible. The
back of the car which I do not see has the meaning of ‘the back of the same car I am currently
perceiving’ because it can become present through the execution of a quite specific bodily
movement on my part. One should consequently say that perceptual intentionality presupposes
a moving and therefore embodied subject (Husserl 1973c/1997, p. 176). In short, the crucial point
made by Husserl is not that we can perceive movement, but that our very perception presupposes
movement (see Husserl 1970, p. 161; 1966b/2001, p. 15). To understand perception is 
to understand the intentionality of our own body (Husserl 1962/1977, pp. 196–197). 
Perceptual experience is not determined simply by neuronal states that are activated by
sensory input, although speciﬁc ‘canonical’ neurons that are activated when we grasp some-
thing are also activated when we simply see something like a hammer, or observe any
manipulable object (Rizzolatti et al. 2000). Nor is it fully determined by neuronal processes in
the dorsal visual pathway that perceptually prime the body for movement and action. It also
depends on the sensorimotor skills of the perceiver and the possibilities afforded by the
environment. As a rule, perception is an embodied coping with the environment. Merleau-Ponty
claims that vision and perception more generally are forms of action (1962, p. 377), and this 
is just the view that is expressed by proponents of enactive perception. Consider, for instance,
the following programmatic statement by Alva Noë, in the very start of his book, Action 
in Perception:
Perception is not something that happens to us, or in us. It is something we do. Think of
a blind person tap-tapping his or her way around a cluttered space, perceiving that space
by touch, not all at once, but through time, by skilful probing and movement. This is, or at
least ought to be, our paradigm of what perceiving is. The world makes itself available to
the perceiver through physical movement and interaction. . . . [A]ll perception is touch-
like in this way: Perceptual experience acquires content thanks to our possession of bodily
skills. What we perceive is determined by what we do (or what we know how to do); it is
determined by what we are ready to do. In ways I try to make precise, we enact our
perceptual experience; we act it out.
(Noë 2004, p. 1)
Where the action is, for enactive theorists, isn’t in the brain. Vision isn’t a representation that
emerges in a network of neurons. Rather, it’s the action of the organism as a whole, exploring
the environment. If we are in the world and can access the environmental detail relevant to our
needs, there is no need to create an internal representation that would be a redundant copy of
that detail. Just as when I need to talk to a friend, and she is standing right in front of me, it would
be odd to call her on the phone, so it is odd to think that although the environment is immediately
present, we need a representational model of it to perceive it. A nice illustration of how the
PERCEPTION
99

environment can aid our cognitive capacities is found in a recent study comparing novice and
expert bartenders. When receiving the cocktail order, the experts would select and array
distinctively shaped glasses. They would then use these persistent cues to help recall and
sequence the order. In tests where uniform glassware was used, the performance of the experts
would plummet, whereas the performance of novices would remain unaffected (Gibbs 2006, p.
143). For a more mundane example, just think of how you determine whether you need to
purchase more milk: by remembering the number of bottles you have bought, and subtracting
all the ones you have emptied, or simply by looking in the refrigerator (Haugeland 1998). 
To emphasize that perception is action, however, should not exclude consideration of more
passive aspects of perception. Perception is not entirely action, although it certainly always
involves my possible action. There are passive aspects of perception that are due to the fact that
the environment is not neutral in regard to how my body gears itself into the world. Our perception
of the world, as Heidegger’s notion of the ‘ready-to-hand’ and Gibson’s notion of affordances
show, is of an environment that affects us and elicits our action. This is consistent, too, with the
concept of ‘forcible presence’, as explicated in the enactive theory of perception:
Forcible presence is the fact that, contrary to other mental states like my knowledge of
history, for example, a sensory experience imposes itself upon me from the outside, and
is present to me without my making any mental effort, and indeed is mostly out of my
voluntary control.
(Myin and O’Regan 2002, p. 30)
The world is given in a bodily presence. This is another way of saying that I am in-the-world, and
that my experience is shaped by the insistence of the world as much as it is by my embodied and
enactive interests.
Husserl distinguishes between activity and passivity. Activity, making a positive cognitive
move, is apparent in acts of attending, judging, valuing, wishing, and so forth. Passivity concerns
the experience of involuntary inﬂuence, when things happen to me. But Husserl makes a second
distinction between receptivity and affectivity. Receptivity involves responding to something that
is passively affecting me; it presupposes a prior affection (see Zahavi 1999, p. 116). Affection
concerns affect and the feeling of being inﬂuenced or perturbed. In perception, whatever becomes
noticeable to you must already have been affecting you; it must have pre-established an affective
force that manifests itself as it captures your attention. Movements and loud noises in the
environment are like this. They are perceptually salient; they capture our attention whether we
want them to or not.
THE ROLE OF OTHERS
My perception of an object as within a context is not a perception of an object plus perception
of a context; it is always perception of an object-in-context. But is perception something that can
be accomplished by a single moving subject, or is the context in question always also social? Is
perception a process that by deﬁnition also involves other subjects?
100
PERCEPTION

This question has been pursued by a number of phenomenologists. Some have tried to ﬁnd
a place for sociality in the public nature of perceptual objects. As Merleau-Ponty argues, the
perceptual world is not only experienced as my world, as the correlate of my own consciousness,
but as the correlate of any consciousness I may ever encounter (1962, p. 338). If I enter into
conversation with someone else, I am not conversing with ‘a ﬂow of private sensations indirectly
related to mine through the medium of interposed signs’; rather, I am speaking with someone
who ‘has a living experience of the same world as mine’, who is present together with me in this
world, and ‘with whom I am in communication through that world’ (p. 405). Hence it is not the
case that each of us has her own private world. Instead, if I were over there where the other is,
then I would experience what the other experiences, and conversely, the other would experience
what I experience if she were here at this moment. Thus my own perspective on the world does
not have determinate boundaries, but spontaneously slips into and overlaps that of the other
(Merleau-Ponty 1968, pp. 61, 142). This observation eventually makes Merleau-Ponty claim that
I have no perceptual monopoly on being; rather, the objects only display themselves to me
partially, and thus have a right to ‘many other witnesses besides me’ (Merleau-Ponty 1964, pp.
15–16, 170). In other words, my perceptual objects are not exhausted in their appearance for
me; rather, each object always possesses a horizon of co-existing proﬁles, which although being
momentarily inaccessible to me – I cannot see the front and the back of a chair simultaneously
– could very well be perceived by other subjects. Since the perceptual object is always there for
others too, whether or not such other subjects do, in fact, appear on the scene, the object refers
to those other subjects, and is for that very reason intrinsically intersubjective. It does not exist
solely for me, but refers to intersubjectivity, and so does my intentionality whenever I am directed
at intersubjectively accessible objects.9
Let us try to clarify the argument. As we have already seen, in perceiving an object we appresent
or co-intend the absent proﬁles; they are correlated to possible perceptions. If one attempts to
follow up on this systematically, two possible accounts seem viable:
(1) The absent proﬁles are appresented as proﬁles correlated with my past or possible future
perceptions. Thus, the back of the lamp is appresented as the side which I either have seen
or which I would be able to perceive in a future perception. 
(2) A different possibility is that the absent proﬁles are appresented as the correlates of ﬁctitious
co-present perceptions. They are correlated with the perceptions which I would have had, if
it had been possible for me to be there now (instead of here). Thus, the co-intended back of
the lamp is ﬁctitiously given as the side which I would have seen, if I were facing the back
now. In this case we are dealing with a ﬁctitious and not an actualizable possibility, since the
front and the back of the lamp are in principle incapable of being given perceptually for the
same consciousness simultanously.10
On closer examination, it should be clear, however, that neither of these accounts are really
satisfying. The ﬁrst account conceives of the object as a unity in a series of temporally separated
proﬁles. This conception, however, does not match with our experience. When I perceive the
lamp, I am not perceiving something which at that very moment possesses one actual proﬁle,
and which previously possessed and will subsequently possess various others. The present front
PERCEPTION
101

is not a front with respect to a past or future back, but is determined through its reference to a
present co-existing back. Consequently, it belongs to the very notion of the transcendence of the
object that it, at any given moment, possesses a plurality of co-existing proﬁles. 
This objection also affects the second account, however. Although perception only gives us a
partial presentation of the object, the entire object is experienced as real, and we do not do
justice to this reality if we let the object be composed of a number of ﬁctitious slices. 
Is there any alternative account? Consider the following: the absent co-intended proﬁles are
correlated with possible perceptions. As we have seen, these possible perceptions must be
compatible with my own actual perception, since they must be simultanously actualizable; my
horizonal appresentation of the absent proﬁles of the object must preserve their character as
actual co-existing proﬁles. Yet, both my ﬁctitious as well as my previous or subsequent perceptions
lack this compatibility. As a consequence, the absent profiles cannot be correlated with my
possible perceptions. But as Husserl then suggests, the absent proﬁles can be correlated with
the possible perceptions of others (cf. Zahavi 1997). As Sartre writes, summing up Husserl’s
view: 
Thus each object [e.g. a table, a wall] far from being constituted as for Kant, by a simple
relation to the subject, appears in my concrete experience as polyvalent; it is given
originally as possessing systems of reference to an indeﬁnite plurality of consciousnesses;
it is [by this object,] the table, the wall, that the Other is revealed to me as that to which
the object under consideration is perpetually referred – as well as on the occasion of the
concrete appearances of Pierre or Paul.
(Sartre 1956, p. 233; translation revised)
Thus, the basic idea is that an analysis of the horizonal givenness of perceptual objects refers
us to the perceptions (intentions) of a plurality of possible subjects, or as Husserl calls it, to an
‘open intersubjectivity’:
Thus everything objective that stands before me in experience and primarily in perception
has an apperceptive horizon of possible experience, own and foreign. Ontologically
speaking, every appearance that I have is from the very beginning a part of an open
endless, but not explicitly realized totality of possible appearances of the same, and the
subjectivity belonging to this appearance is open intersubjectivity.
(Husserl 1973a, p. 289; cf. 1973b, p. 497)
But isn’t perception always an activity undertaken by a factual, individual subject? This seems
difﬁculty to deny. When I perceive an object on my own, the object is perceived by me alone. The
claim is, however, that I am able to perform this activity only because my horizonal intentionality
entails structural references to the perceptions of possible other perceivers, and precisely for that
reason, the structure of my horizonal intentionality is incompatible with any solipsism which, in
principle, would deny the possibility of a plurality of subjects. As Merleau-Ponty declares: ‘into
each perception and into each judgement I bring either sensory functions or cultural settings
which are not actually mine’ (1962, p. 358). The objects that I perceive and intend are char-
102
PERCEPTION

acterized by a transcendence and a horizonal manner of appearance that reveal their being for
other subjects. Since my object of perception always possesses proﬁles that can be perceived
by other subjects, it refers to them continually and is, as a result, intrinsically intersubjective:
The perceived world is not only my world, but the one in which I see the behavior of other
people take shape, for their behavior equally aims at the world, which is the counterpart
not only of my consciousness, but of any consciousness which I can possibly encounter.
(Merleau-Ponty 1962, p. 338)
If there are important differences between perceiving another person and perceiving an object
(see Chapter 9), it is nevertheless also the case that these two kinds of perception are
interdependent. When I perceive someone, I am not only perceiving another living body situated
‘there’, but also perceiving her as a perceiver of the same world that I inhabit. Sartre gives this
a dramatic formulation when he writes that my relationship to things undergoes a fundamental
change when I experience somebody else observing these very same things:
Thus suddenly an object has appeared which has stolen the world from me. Everything
is in place; everything still exists for me; but everything is traversed by an invisible ﬂight
and fixed in the direction of a new object. The appearance of the Other in the world
corresponds therefore to a ﬁxed sliding of the whole universe, to a decentralization of the
world which undermines the centralization which I am simultaneously effecting.
(Sartre 1956, p. 255)
As soon as the other appears on the scene, the world appears to me as alienated, for it is given
to me as already looked at – indeed, as ‘furrowed, explored, worked over’ on all fronts. In this
way the presence of the other has the function of revealing complexes of sense that are already
given (Sartre 1956, p. 520). But at the same time, when the world centered on me is experienced
by an other, it is decentered as well, since the other lends the instrumental things of my world
an order that points back to the other as a new center of reference (ibid., p. 255). The other is
experienced not simply as another object in the world, but as a subject for the world. 
From a developmental perspective, others are present from the very start. When we first
perceive objects we learn to perceive them in joint attention, and we learn to perceive them as
being involved in some purpose. Something is ready-to-hand or an affordance not only because
of how it is relative to our embodied possibilities for action, but because we have learned our
actions and what things are for, from others. Something is ready to hand, something affords me
possibilities, only because I have seen some of those possibilities actualized by others; others
who pick things up and use them, and others who offer me things for play or for work. My
perception is then shaped by these experiences; the others do not cease to exist when I am
alone, and although they may not be perceptually present, they are potentially and implicitly
involved in the very structure of my perception. The world that we perceive is not only physically
contextualized (characterized by inner and outer horizons) but also socially contextualized.
For this reason, it would not be enough to give Condillac’s statue all of the standard sense
modalities. If the statue were suddenly made better than a sophisticated robot, that is, if it were
PERCEPTION
103

suddenly transformed to have an animal nature and could see and hear and touch and taste and
smell as well as sense its own body and its movement through the world, would it be able to
perceive the world as anything more than a façade, or a representation, or a grand illusion
generated within its own system? Humans are born and are raised by others who already act and
perceive in the world. Our sense of the reality of the world, and of the things that we perceive,
depends on this. 
NOTES
1 We discuss these three modes, but other important forms are imaginative fantasy and recollection.
Although pictorial consciousness and fantasy both imply a consciousness of something absent, there
remains an obvious difference between the two. In pictorial consciousness I intend something via
something else. This representative function is not a part of fantasy. If I imagine a dancing faun, this
faun is not taken to be a representation of a real faun. On the contrary, we are dealing with an
intentional object which is not taken to be real, but which merely appears as if it were real (Husserl
1959, pp. 112–113).
2 One objection often voiced against Husserl’s idea of prelinguistic experience is that in seeking an
immediate level of experience prior to every interpretation, Husserl overlooked the fact that all
experience involves interpretation. This hermeneutical criticism itself, however, makes the mistake
of thinking that all interpretation is linguistic. But, as both Husserl and Heidegger have shown,
interpretation itself can be prelinguistic (cf. Heidegger 1976, pp. 144–145); it might for instance
manifest itself in our practices. One and the same object can be used in various ways; this difference
in use, this difference in how we take the object, amounts to a form of practical interpretation. But
even more fundamentally, whenever we perceive objects, we co-intend the absent proﬁles of the
object, and thereby go beyond the merely given. This is why every perception according to Husserl
entails an aspect of ‘Hinausdeutung’ or interpretation (1966b/2001, p. 19); see below for more on
this aspect of perception. 
3 To take this to the extreme and to say that all we know are representations and that they are generated
by a causal inﬂuence on our sense organs and brain, is to overlook, not only the non-phenomenological
and speculative character of this account, but also the circularity implied. If such an extreme
representationalism is to be consistent, it must naturally claim that our sense organs and brain (which
are after all only known to us through perception) are also only known as representations, wherefore
the origins of representations are explained by the causal impact of something unknown on
representations. As an explanation this will hardly do.
4 Although today only a very few people in philosophy or psychology support a sense-data theory of
perception (but see Maund 1995; O’Shaughnessy 1985; Robinson 1994), the more general point
about the problem of conceiving of subjective experience in objective terms is still relevant given the
various mechanistic, reductionist, computationalist, and representationalist approaches in cognitive
science. 
5 We should note that in this case, and in contrast with how our motor system would treat the Müller-
Lyer illusion, the Gestalt effect in the Ebbinghaus illusion does not bias our ability to reach and grab
the two circles, which our motor system treats as being of equal size. The difference has to do with
104
PERCEPTION

precisely the elements that we would grasp and manipulate; in the ﬁrst case the equal length lines
come with their tails and arrows, and in the second case, the centre circles are grasped without the
surrounding circles.
6 For a fuller presentation of Husserl’s early concept of perception, see Zahavi (1992).
7 Simons and Chabris’ (1999) ‘gorillas in our midst’ experiment may be the most well-known example
of inattentional blindness. They show that when subjects are asked to perform a task that requires
visual attention on speciﬁc dynamical events in the environment (in this case, a video of a group of
people throwing or playing catch with a ball), other events that should be extremely apparent (such
as someone dressed in a gorilla suit walking through the ball-playing group and waving at the camera)
are rarely noticed. Change blindness is the failure to notice signiﬁcant changes occurring in full view.
8 The claim here is a phenomenological one and does not justify any particular inference to what
happens on the sub-personal level. In this regard it remains an open question whether one should
interpret what goes on in the brain in terms of representations, or what precisely representation would
mean on that level.
9 For a more extensive presentation of this line of argumentation, cf. Zahavi (1997, 2001b, 2003c).
10 To claim that it is possible to see the backside simultaneously, namely in a mirror, is of course to
overlook the fact that what is seen is a mirror image and not the backside of the object.
FURTHER READING
P. Sven Arvidson, The Sphere of Attention: Context and Margin. Dordrecht: Springer, 2006.
Susan L. Hurley, Consciousness in Action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1998. 
Edmund Husserl, Thing and Space: Lectures of 1907. Trans. R. Rojcewicz. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 1997.
Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Phenomenology of Perception. Trans. C. Smith. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1962.
Maurice Merleau-Ponty, The Primacy of Perception. Trans. W. Cobb. Evanston: Northwestern University
Press, 1964. 
Alva Noë, Action in Perception. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004.
A. David Smith, The Problem of Perception. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002.
PERCEPTION
105


Intentionality
As you read these words you are conscious of something. Maybe you are conscious of the words,
or maybe you are mainly conscious of the meaning of the words as your eyes skim over the lines
of the text. If you look up you will ﬁnd yourself in some kind of environment. Perhaps you are sitting
with this book at your desk; or maybe you are reading this book as you soak in the tub sipping a
glass of champagne. Indeed, you may be studying your philosophy in extraordinary style. In any
case, if you look up you will see something. For our purposes, it doesn’t matter what. We know
that whether you are reading the text or looking around the room or tasting your champagne or
hearing a noise in the next room, you are conscious of something, because that is the way
consciousness works. If you were conscious of nothing, as Sartre once put it, you would be
unconscious. In the phenomenological tradition, this idea, that consciousness is always
consciousness-of-something, is referred to as the intentionality of consciousness. In this chapter
we want to make clear why this is an important concept for understanding cognition.
Let’s start with this question: must a theory of consciousness include a discussion of
intentionality, and if so, why? In his book The Conscious Mind, David Chalmers introduced what
has become a much discussed distinction between the ‘hard problem’ and the ‘easy problems’
of consciousness. The easy problems are those concerned with the question of how the mind
can process information, react to environmental stimuli, and exhibit such conscious capacities
as discrimination, categorization, and introspection (Chalmers 1996, p. 4; 1995, p. 200). All of
these abilities are impressive, but they are, according to Chalmers, not metaphysically bafﬂing,
since they can all be tackled by means of the standard repertoire of cognitive science and
explained in terms of computational or neural mechanisms. This task might still be difﬁcult, but
science has the means to address it. In contrast, the hard problem – also known as the problem
of consciousness (Chalmers 1995, p. 201) – is the problem of explaining the phenomenal or
experiential aspect of the mind. 
6

Chalmers later clariﬁed his position by suggesting that such notions as attention, memory,
intentionality, etc. contain both easy and hard aspects (Chalmers 1997, p. 10). A full and com-
prehensive understanding of intentionality, for example, would consequently entail solving the
hard problem, or to put it differently, an analysis of thoughts, beliefs, categorizations, etc. that
ignored the experiential side would merely be an analysis of what could be called pseudo-thoughts
or pseudo-beliefs (ibid., p. 20). This clariﬁcation ﬁts well with an observation that Chalmers made
already in The Conscious Mind, namely, that one could operate with a deflationary and an
inﬂationary concept of belief, respectively. Whereas the ﬁrst concept is a purely psychological
(functional) concept that does not involve any reference to conscious experience, the second
concept entails that conscious experience is required for true intentionality (Chalmers 1996, p.
20). In 1997, Chalmers admits that he is torn on the issue, and that over time he has become
increasingly sympathetic to the second concept, and to the idea that consciousness is the primary
source of meaning. He is thus led to the idea that intentional content may in fact be grounded in
phenomenal content, but he thinks the matter needs further examination (Chalmers 1997, p. 21). 
We welcome this clariﬁcation, but we also ﬁnd it slightly surprising that Chalmers is prepared
to concede this much since the very distinction between the easy problems and the hard problem
of consciousness becomes questionable the moment one opts for the inﬂationary concept. Given
this concept, there would in effect be no easy problems of consciousness. The truly easy problems
would all be problems about pseudo-intentional states, that is, about non-conscious informa-
tion processing. A treatment of these issues should not be confused with an explanation of the
kind of conscious intentionality that we encounter in human beings. In other words, we will not
understand how human beings consciously intend, discriminate, categorize, react, report, and
introspect, etc. until we understand the role of subjective experience in those processes (cf.
Hodgson 1996).
Although Chalmers’s discussion of the hard problem identiﬁes an aspect of consciousness
that cannot be ignored, the original way of deﬁning and distinguishing the hard problem from the
easy problems is indebted to the very reductionism that Chalmers opposes. If one thinks that
cognition and intentionality are basically a matter of information processing and causal co-
variation that could in principle just as well go on in a mindless computer – or to use Chalmers’
own favoured example, in an experienceless zombie – then one is left with the impression that
all that is really distinctive about consciousness is its qualitative or phenomenal aspect. But this
suggests that with the exception of some evanescent qualia everything about consciousness,
including intentionality, can be explained in reductive (computational or neural) terms; and in this
case, one might easily end up embracing epiphenomenalism – the idea that consciousness is
just a by-product and has no causal role to play in behaviour or cognition.
Chalmers’ distinction between the hard and the easy problems of consciousness shares a
common feature with many other recent attempts in analytic philosophy to defend consciousness
against the onslaught of reductionism: they all grant far too much to the other side. Reductionism
has typically proceeded with a classical divide-and-conquer strategy. There are basically two
sides to consciousness: intentionality and experience. We don’t currently know how to reduce
the latter aspect, so let us separate the two sides, and concentrate on the ﬁrst. If we then succeed
in explaining intentionality reductively, the experiential aspect cannot be all that signiﬁcant. Many
non-reductive materialists have uncritically adopted the very same strategy. They have
108
INTENTIONALITY

marginalized subjectivity by identifying it with epiphenomenal qualia and have then claimed that
it is this aspect which eludes reductionism.
The dominant tendency in phenomenology has been to question the partition and to argue
that the problems of experience and intentionality are intimately connected. Indeed, as we will
see in the following, according to phenomenologists it is not possible to investigate intentionality
properly without taking experience, the ﬁrst-person perspective, ﬁrst-person semantics, etc. into
account. And vice versa: it is not possible to understand the nature of subjectivity and experience
if we ignore intentionality. To think otherwise is to run the risk of reinstating a Cartesian
subject–world dualism that ignores everything captured by the phrase ‘being-in-the-world’.
WHAT IS INTENTIONALITY? 
The concept of intentionality has a long history that stretches back at least as far as Aristotle. It
played a central role in medieval scholastic epistemology, but the modern revival of the term
‘intentionality’ is due to Brentano. In his inﬂuential work Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint,
1874, Brentano sought to establish a clear demarcation between the realm of psychology and
the realm of natural science. As he writes, psychology is the science of the psychical phenomena,
whereas natural science is the science of the physical phenomena (1973, pp. 97–100). What is
the difference between these two classes of phenomena? 
Every mental phenomenon is characterized by what the Scholastics of the Middle Ages
called the intentional (or mental) inexistence of an object, and what we might call, though
not wholly unambiguously, reference to a content, direction toward an object (which is not
to be understood here as meaning a thing), or immanent objectivity. Every mental
phenomenon includes something as object within itself, although they do not all do so in
the same way. In presentation something is presented, in judgement something is afﬁrmed
or denied, in love loved, in hate hated, in desire desired and so on. This intentional in-
existence is characteristic exclusively of mental phenomenon. No physical phenomenon
exhibits anything like it. We can, therefore, deﬁne mental phenomena by saying that they
are those phenomena which contain an object intentionally within themselves.
(Brentano 1973, pp. 88–89)
According to Brentano, all psychical, i.e. mental, phenomena exhibit intentionality, no physical
phenomena do, which is why he can claim not only that intentionality is the deﬁning mark of the
mental, but also that the physical and the psychical are distinct realms. The sense of ‘intentional’
in this context should not be confused with the more familiar sense of having a purpose in mind
when one acts, which is only one kind of intentionality in the phenomenological sense. Rather,
‘intentionality’ is a generic term for the pointing-beyond-itself proper to consciousness (from the
Latin intendere, which means to aim in a particular direction, similar to drawing and aiming a
bow at a target). Intentionality has to do with the directedness or of-ness or aboutness of
consciousness, i.e. with the fact that when one perceives or judges or feels or thinks, one’s
mental state is about or of something.
INTENTIONALITY
109

Brentano’s thesis has been inﬂuential; his description and characterization of intentionality,
however, are not only somewhat puzzling, they are also rather unfortunate. As Chisholm later
argued, Brentano’s description contains a tension between an ontological and a psychological
thesis (Chisholm 1967, p. 6). On the one hand, Brentano apparently adopts a scholastic
terminology and speaks of the object’s intentional ‘(in)existence’ in consciousness, where
‘inexistence’ should be read as ‘existence within’ or ‘inner existence’. The object of consciousness
is contained immanently in the psychical act, and the existential mode of this object, its
ontological status, is therefore called intentional. On the other hand, Brentano also claims that
the psychical phenomenon is characterized by its directedness at or reference to an object
(1973, p. 97). Thus we can alternately speak of the intentional inexistence of the object, and of
the intentional directedness of the mental act. Although these two features are by no means
identical, they are nevertheless brought together in Brentano’s (early) theory of intentionality,
insofar as he claims that consciousness is intentionally directed at an intentionally (in)existing
object. Thus, Brentano seemed to focus on the mind’s ability to refer to or be directed at objects
existing solely in the mind.
We will return to this tricky issue concerning the ontological status of the intentional object in
a moment, but for now, one can simply observe that Brentano’s discussion has given rise to
heated debate. 
Brentano regarded intentionality as an irreducible feature of the mind and sought on this
basis to establish psychology as an autonomous science. By contrast, one can roughly discern
three distinct approaches to intentionality in analytic philosophy and cognitive science:
•
The first language-philosophical approach tried to throw light on the intentionality of
consciousness through a careful examination of the logical properties that characterize
sentences used to describe psychological phenomena.1
•
The second approach, which has been dominated by such ﬁgures as Quine, Dennett, Fodor,
Dretske, the Churchlands, etc., has mainly been occupied with the question of how to
naturalize intentionality, i.e., with the question of how to account for intentionality in terms
of non-intentional mechanisms. As Fodor writes, ‘It’s hard to see . . . how one can be a Realist
about intentionality without also being, to some extent or other, a Reductionist. . . . If
aboutness is real, it must be really something else’ (1987, p. 97). The assumption has
consequently been that you either naturalize intentionality by downward reduction of
intentional states to behaviour, neurophysiology, and ultimately physics, or you argue that
such reduction is impossible and then conclude that the intentional vocabulary is empty talk
and should be eliminated from our scientiﬁc discourse. 
•
The ﬁnal approach is one that can be found in recent work by, for instance, Searle, Strawson,
Siewert, and Crane. They all consider it necessary to include the ﬁrst-person perspective in
their investigation and argue that a careful description of the structures of intentionality is
an indispensable part of a philosophical investigation of consciousness.
The phenomenological account of intentionality differs from the ﬁrst two ways of approaching
the issue of intentionality. The phenomenologists are primarily interested in intentionality as a
decisive feature of consciousness. Moreover, they are speciﬁcally focusing on an account of
110
INTENTIONALITY

intentionality from the ﬁrst-person perspective, that is, from the subject’s point of view. In fact,
none of the phenomenologists are engaged in a naturalization of intentionality, if that is
understood as an attempt to explain intentionality reductively by an appeal to non-intentional
mechanisms and processes. If one thinks that a theory of intentionality must result in a reductive
account one will be bound to ﬁnd the phenomenological treatment of intentionality disappointing.
What is the aim of the phenomenological account of intentionality, then? First and foremost,
to provide a descriptive analysis of the structures of conscious intentionality. In doing so, however,
the phenomenologists also seek to clarify the relation between mind and world (rather than the
relation between mind and brain). This latter investigation, which basically intends to demonstrate
the world-involving character of the mind and rejects the view that consciousness is a subjective
sphere that exists independently from the world that is revealed through it, has some more
overarching philosophical implications. We will discuss those in the last part of the present
chapter. 
RESEMBLANCE, CAUSATION, AND MENTAL REPRESENTATION
Before going into more detail about the phenomenological account of intentionality, let us brieﬂy
consider some of the non-phenomenological alternatives. To clear away a potential mis-
understanding, we need to start out with some remarks about the very term ‘representation’. In
both analytic philosophy and in the cognitive sciences there are frequent references to so-called
mental representations. How does this use of the term ‘representation’ relate to the
phenomenological use of the term? As we have already seen, when phenomenologists use the
term, they typically put the emphasis on the ﬁrst syllable. A representation is something that re-
presents; it is something that provides us with a derivative and mediated contact with the object
represented. As illustration, let us consider the difference between perceiving the Eiffel Tower,
and looking at a photo of the Eiffel Tower. In both cases, arguably, we are intentionally directed
at the same object, namely the Eiffel Tower, but whereas in the ﬁrst case we are directly confronted
with the tower itself, the second case exempliﬁes a form of indirect intentionality; we are directed
at the Eiffel Tower through an intermediate entity, namely a picture or pictorial re-presentation
of the tower.
As we saw in our discussion of perception in the previous chapter, some authors have indeed
had a kind of intermediate mental entity in mind when they talked of ‘a mental representation’,
but today most simply use the term to designate a mental state that exhibits intentionality. Smoke
can represent ﬁre, a ﬂag can represent a nation, a rose can represent love, and a perception can
represent (be about, be directed at) various objects in the physical environment. Although the
term might indeed have somewhat confusing connotations, there is as such nothing in this use
of the term ‘representation’ that commits one to the idea that our cognitive contact with the
world involves some intermediate entities, be they mental images, sense data, or the like. 
Now, as just mentioned, much effort has been devoted to the attempt to naturalize inten-
tionality, that is, provide a reductive explanation of how a mental state can be about (represent)
something. The aspiration has been to explain intentionality in terms of non-intentional
mechanisms, and reduce mental states to complex information-processing events housed in
INTENTIONALITY
111

the brain. There are currently a number of highly technical proposals on the market – though none
that so far has managed to gain general acceptance. Since it would lead too far aﬁeld if we were
to attempt to do justice to all the different suggestions,2 we will instead quite brieﬂy outline the
two standard proposals – which in fact have a long ancestry – namely, the attempt to explain
representation in terms of either resemblance or causation.
Resemblance might at ﬁrst seem a rather likely candidate for a natural form of representation.
Think of the way in which a mirror image represents what it reflects, or a picture or photo
represents what it depicts. But contrary to appearance, resemblance is not a sufﬁcient condition
for representation. (It is obviously not necessary either, since words can represent without
resembling what they represent.) A forest contains numerous trees that resemble each other, but
that does not make one tree represent the other. Every object resembles itself, but every object
does not represent itself. Furthermore, whereas resemblance is a reciprocal relation,
representation is not; that is, whereas the Danish queen might resemble her portrait, she is not
a representation of it. 
If we want to naturalize intentionality, if we want to reduce it to naturally occurring forms of
representation, causation seems another promising candidate. Think of how smoke represents
ﬁre, and red spots represent rubella. In both cases, we are not dealing with a mere conventional
relation between the representation and that which is represented. Rather, there is something
about the smoke and the red spots that naturally relate them to ﬁre and rubella, respectively.
Indeed, in both cases there is a causal relation between the represented and the representation
(which, by the way, is why it might be more appropriate to designate both as signs of something,
rather than as signs for something). Couldn’t it be that causality is also the glue that connects
mind and world, so that a conscious state can be said to represent (be directed at) an object if,
and only if, it is connected to the object in question by ‘a causal chain of the appropriate type’.
If so, it would indeed be possible to naturalize intentionality. However, this rather crude causal
account faces some obvious difﬁculties. One problem has to do with specifying what is meant
by ‘appropriate’ (or ‘relevant’) without begging the question. When I look at a distant hill through
binoculars, we would ordinarily say that the object of my perception is the hill. However, although
(light reﬂected from) the hill might be causally inﬂuencing my visual system, it would certainly not
be the only cause, but merely a rather distal one. Why don’t I perceive (represent) the lenses of
the binoculars, not to speak of the proximal stimulation of my retina? Another problem is that
the notion of causality seems too coarse-grained to be able to capture the aspectual nature of
intentional reference. One is never conscious of an object simpliciter, one is always conscious
of an object in a particular way, be it from a certain perspective, or under a certain conception
or particular description.
Furthermore, real existing spatial objects in my immediate physical surrounding, things that
seem to have real causal force, only constitute a very small part of what I can be conscious of.
When I am sitting at my desk, I can think not only about the backside of the moon, I can also think
about square circles, unicorns, next Christmas, or the principle of non-contradiction. But how are
these absent objects, impossible objects, ﬁctive objects, future objects, or ideal objects supposed
to have causal inﬂuence on my thinking? The fact that it is possible to intend objects which do
not exist seems a decisive argument against a theory which claims that an object must inﬂuence
me causally if I am to be conscious of it. Finally, it is crucial for a theory of representation to be
112
INTENTIONALITY

able to account for misrepresentation and the possibility of error as well, since one of the central
features of representations is that they have truth values and truth conditions. They can be true
or false, and there are conditions under which they are true and others under which they are not.
But this presents a problem for the causal theory. If x represents y if and only if x has been caused
in the appropriate way by y, misrepresentation is pretty much ruled out. More sophisticated forms
of causal theories have subsequently been developed in order to tackle these various difﬁculties,
but so far there is no general agreement that they have succeeded in doing so.
THE POSITIVE ACCOUNT
Husserl’s Logical Investigations contains the first proper phenomenological investigation of
intentionality. Like Brentano, Husserl argues that one does not merely love, fear, see, or judge,
one loves a beloved, fears something fearful, sees an object, and judges a state of affairs.
Regardless of whether we are talking of a perception, thought, judgement, fantasy, doubt,
expectation, or recollection, all of these diverse forms of consciousness are characterized by
intending objects, and cannot be analysed properly without a look at their objective correlate,
i.e. the perceived, doubted, expected object. The converse is also true: the intentional object
cannot be analysed properly without a look at its subjective correlate, the intentional act. Neither
the intentional object nor the mental act that intends it can be understood apart from the other.
Acts of consciousness and objects of consciousness are essentially interdependent: the relation
between them is an internal rather than an external one. That is to say, one cannot ﬁrst identify
the items related and then explore the relation between them. Rather, one can identify each
item in the relation only by reference to the other item to which it is related.
Brentano considered intentionality a dyadic relation holding between an experience and an
object. His assumption was that the intentional relation is what we might call an ordinary relation
that presupposes the existence of both relata, and he specifically introduced the notion of
intentional in-existence in order to solve the problem of our directedness towards non-existing
entities. When I am imagining a faun, or when I am hallucinating a pink elephant, I remain
intentionally directed, but neither the faun nor the pink elephant exists in reality. The dyadic
approach is consequently forced to claim that the faun and the pink elephant are objects with a
very peculiar form of (intentional in-)existence. In itself this is not a very satisfying solution, and
given the need for a uniﬁed theory of intentionality, it also causes grave problems when we are
to account for veridical perceptions. For example, when seeing a blooming apple tree, am I then
in reality seeing an intentional object with a very peculiar ontological status (something with the
same status as the object that I would be seeing if I were merely hallucinating the apple tree),
and is the only difference between hallucinating and perceiving the apple tree the (phenomenally
undetectable) fact that, in the latter case, the extraordinary intentional object corresponds to a
real ordinary object?
Husserl develops a concept of intentionality that does not run into this problem. For him,
intentionality is not an ordinary relation to an extraordinary object, but a special kind of relation
to an ordinary object; a special ‘relation’ that can hold, even if the object doesn’t exist; and that
can persist even if the object ceases to exist. When it comes to intentions that are directed
INTENTIONALITY
113

towards ‘unreal’ objects, they are in his view just as much characterized by their directedness as
are ordinary perceptions. In contrast to normal perceptions, however, the referent does not exist,
neither intra-mentally, nor extra-mentally. In the case of a hallucination, the pink elephant exists
neither inside nor outside of consciousness, but the hallucination is still about a pink elephant.
This account dispenses with the need for ascribing a special kind of existence (or intentional in-
existence) to the hallucinated object in order to preserve the intentionality of the act. As Husserl
writes:
If I represent God to myself, or an angel, or an intelligible thing-in-itself, or a physical thing
or a round square etc., I mean the transcendent object named in each case, in other
words my intentional object: it makes no difference whether this object exists or is
imaginary or absurd. ‘The object is merely intentional’ does not, of course, mean that it
exists, only in an intention, of which it is a real (reelles) part, or that some shadow of it
exists. It means rather that the intention, the reference to an object so qualiﬁed, exists,
but not that the object does. If the intentional object does exist, the intention, the
reference, does not exist alone, but the thing referred to exists also.
(Husserl 2001a, II, p. 127)
In short, although one of the peculiar features of the mind is its ability to think about objects that
do not exist, we shouldn’t accept the reality of non-existent objects. To claim that some intentional
objects do not exist is not to say that there are non-existing objects, i.e. that some non-existent
intentional objects exist; rather, it simply means that intentional states can refer to – be about
– something, even when the referent doesn’t exist.3
The intentional object is not a special kind of object, but rather the answer to the question of
what a certain intentional state is about. If the answer refers to some non-existing object, the
intentional object doesn’t exist. If the answer refers to some existent thing, then the intentional
object is that real thing. So if I look at my fountain pen, then it is this real pen which is my
intentional object, and not some mental picture, copy, or representation of the pen (Crane 2001,
p. 26; Husserl 1976/1982, pp. 207–208; 1979, p. 305).
Let us try to specify the features of the intentional directedness further. It is customary to
speak of intentional ‘relations’ as being aspectual or perspectival. One is not simply conscious
of an object, one is always conscious of an object in a particular way. One always has a certain
perspective or point of view on the object; the object is always presented in a certain way or
under a certain aspect for the subject. More speciﬁcally, however, we need to distinguish the
intentional object in ‘the how of its determinations’ and in ‘the how of its givenness’ (Husserl
1976/1982, pp. 303–304). To take a simple example, let us consider a perception of a red
sports car. We always see the car from one perspective or another; we never see it in its totality
all at once. Furthermore, the car always appears to us in a certain illumination and with a certain
background. Moreover, it also appears in a certain context with a determinate meaning.
Depending on my previous experiences and current interests, I might see the car as a necessary
means of transportation, as a source of enjoyment, as a headache and economic drain (because
it is not working and I have to take it to my mechanic), as a vicious product of late capitalism, as
contributing to the problem of global warming, etc. Rather than portraying this as a case where
114
INTENTIONALITY

raw perceptual content is completed by external thoughts that, so to speak, are added on top of
it, phenomenologists have stressed the continuity between perception and thinking as well as
the inherent meaningfulness of perception. In the above cases, it is consequently better to say
that my perception of the car is in various ways informed by valences, feelings, past experiences,
and frameworks of reference and interest, and that they shape the way I actually see things. But
apart from intending different properties of the object, apart from varying what the object I am
intending is presented as, I might also vary the very form of intentionality itself. Instead of
perceiving the car, I can also imagine it, judge about it, remember it, etc. 
In effect, every intentional experience possesses two different, but inseparable, moments.
Every intentional experience is an experience of a speciﬁc type, be it an experience of judging,
hoping, desiring, regretting, remembering, afﬁrming, doubting, wondering, fearing, etc. Husserl
called this aspect of the experience, the intentional quality of the experience. Every intentional
experience is also directed at something, it is about something, be it a deer, a cat, or a mathematic
state of affairs. Husserl called the component that speciﬁes not only which object is intended,
but also what the object is apprehended or conceived as, the intentional matter of the experience
(Husserl 2001a, II, pp. 119–120). Husserl’s distinction between the intentional matter and the
intentional quality consequently bears a certain resemblance to the contemporary distinction
between propositional content and propositional attitudes (though it is important to emphasize
that Husserl by no means took all intentional experiences to be propositional in nature).
Needless to say, the same object can be combined with different forms of presentation, and
the same form of presentation can be combined with different intentional objects. It is possible
to doubt that ‘inﬂation will continue’, to doubt that ‘the election was fair’, or to doubt that ‘one’s
next book will be an international bestseller’, just as it is possible to deny that ‘the lily is white’,
to judge that ‘the lily is white’, or to question whether ‘the lily is white’. 
Interestingly, Husserl furthermore considered these cognitive differences to be experiential
differences. There is an experiential difference between afﬁrming that Hegel was the greatest of
the German idealists, and denying that same idea, just as there is an experiential difference
between expecting and doubting that Denmark will win the next FIFA World Cup. What it is like
to be in one type of conscious intentional state differs from what it is like to be in another type
of conscious intentional state.4 Similarly, the different intentional objects, as they are experienced,
contribute to the phenomenal character of the experience. There is an experiential difference
between denying that ‘the Eiffel Tower is higher than the Empire State building’ and denying that
‘North Korea has a viable economy’, just as there is an experiential difference between believing
that ‘justice will prevail’ and believing that ‘When an equal amount is taken from equals, an
equal amount results’. Husserl would consequently reject the currently widespread view that
only sensory and emotional states have phenomenal qualities. In his view, there is something it
is like to be in a conscious state, regardless of whether it is sensory or cognitive. In fact, to reduce
phenomenality to the ‘raw feel’ of sensation marginalizes and trivializes phenomenal con-
sciousness, and is detrimental to a correct understanding of its cognitive signiﬁcance.5
Someone may deny, however, that there is a distinct phenomenality to thoughts. The argument
might go like this: abstract thoughts are accompanied by mental imagery and the phenomenal
qualities to be encountered in abstract thought are in fact constituted by this imagery and not
by the thoughts themselves. However, from time to time, the thoughts we are thinking, for instance
INTENTIONALITY
115

a thought like ‘every algebraic equation of uneven grade has at least one real root’, will in fact
not be accompanied by any imagery whatsoever, but this doesn’t entail that the thought in
question completely lacks phenomenality. Moreover, consider the case where we ﬁrst listen to
a certain string of meaningless noises, and compare this to the case where we hear the very same
string but this time understand and grasp its meaning. Who would deny that there is a marked
phenomenal difference between the two (Husserl 2001a, I, pp. 193–194). Husserl takes this as
evidence in favour of a distinct cognitive phenomenality; one that cannot simply be reduced to
the phenomenality of sensory states or mental images. As he writes,
Let us imagine that certain arabesques or ﬁgures have affected us aesthetically, and 
that we then suddenly see that we are dealing with symbols or verbal signs. In what 
does this difference consist? Or let us take the case of an attentive man hearing some
totally strange word as a sound-complex without even dreaming it is a word, and 
comparethis with the case of the same man afterwards hearing the word, in the 
course of conversation, and now acquainted with its meaning, but not illustrating it
intuitively. What in general is the surplus element distinguishing the understanding of 
a symbolically functioning expression from the uncomprehended verbal sound? What is
the difference between simply looking at a concrete object A, and treating it as a
representative of ‘any A whatsoever’? In this and countless similar cases it is the act-
characters that differ.
(Husserl 2001a, II, p. 105)6
Throughout this kind of analysis, phenomenology contends that consciousness is char-
acterized by an intrinsic intentionality, and resists the attempt to provide a reductive account of
intentionality, for example trying to explain it by appeal to non-intentional factors such as causality.
But how exactly does intentionality work? How do we intend objects? This is where the notion of
meaning becomes central. For the phenomenologists, intentionality is a question of meaning.
We intend an object by meaning something about it (Husserl 2001a, I, p. 201).7
INTENTIONALISM
We have so far been considering object-directed intentionality, but many experiences are 
not object-directed – for example, feelings of pain and nausea, and moods such as anxiety,
depression, and boredom. Philosophers whose conception of intentionality is limited to object-
directedness deny that such experiences are intentional (e.g. Searle 1983). Phenomenologists,
however, in distinguishing between intentionality as object-directedness and intentionality as a
pointing-beyond, as an openness to that which is other than the subject, have a broader
conception. It is true that pervasive moods such as sadness, boredom, nostalgia, and anxiety
must be distinguished from intentional feelings such as the desire for an apple or the admiration
for a particular person. Nevertheless, moods are not without a reference to the world. They do
not enclose us within ourselves, but are lived through as pervasive atmospheres that deeply
inﬂuence the way the world is disclosed to us. Moods such as curiosity, nervousness, or happiness
116
INTENTIONALITY

disclose our embeddedness in the world and articulate or modify our existential possibilities. They
are taken up into the intentional structure of our experiences. As Heidegger argued, moods,
rather then being merely attendant phenomena, are fundamental forms of disclosure: ‘Mood has
always already disclosed being-in-the-world as a whole and ﬁrst makes possible directing oneself
toward something’ (Heidegger 1986/1996, p. 129).
What about pain? Sartre’s classic analysis of eyestrain in Being and Nothingness is illuminating
in this case. Imagine that you are sitting late at night trying to ﬁnish reading a book. You have
been reading most of the day and your eyes hurt. How does this pain originally manifest itself?
According to Sartre, not initially as a thematic object of reﬂection, but by inﬂuencing the way in
which you perceive the world. You become restless, irritated, and have difﬁculties in focusing and
concentrating. The words on the page become blurry. The pain is not yet apprehended as such,
but that does not mean that it is either cognitively absent or unconscious. Rather, it is informing
the very structure of your intentional experience of the world:
[W]hen the eyes become tired in reading, the reader does not perceive his fatigue ﬁrst,
but that the light is too weak or that the book is really boring or incomprensible. . . .
Patients do not primarily establish which bodily functions are disturbed, but they complain
about the fact that ‘nothing works right anymore,’ ‘the work does not succeed,’ that the
environment is ‘irritating,’ ‘fatiguing.’
(Buytendijk 1974, p. 62)
The pain is not yet reﬂected-upon as a mental experience, but given rather as a certain way the
world is experienced, as an affective atmosphere that inﬂuences the intentional interaction with
the world (see Sartre 1956, pp. 332–333). 
Recently a number of analytical philosophers have criticized the view that phenomenal
qualities are in and of themselves non-intentional, and have instead defended what might be
called an intentionalistic interpretation of phenomenal qualities. The point of departure has
been the observation that it can often be quite difﬁcult to distinguish a description of certain
objects from a description of the experience of these very same objects. Back in 1903, G. E. Moore
called attention to this fact, and dubbed it the peculiar diaphanous quality of experience: when
you try to focus your attention on the intrinsic features of experience, you always seem to end up
attending to what the experience is of. And as Tye argues, the lesson of this transparency is that
‘phenomenology ain’t in the head ’ (1995, p. 151). To discover what it is like, you need to look at
what is being intentionally represented. Thus, as the argument goes, experiences do not have
intrinsic and non-intentional qualities of their own; rather, the qualitative character of experience
consists entirely, as Dretske writes, in the qualitative properties objects are experienced as having
(1995, p. 1). The loudness of a sound, the smoothness of a surface, the sweetness of a taste,
the pungency of a smell are not qualities of experiences, they are qualities of things represented.
Differences in what it is like are actually intentional differences. Thus an experience of a red
apple is subjectively distinct from an experience of a yellow sunﬂower in virtue of the fact that
different kinds of objects are represented. Experiences simply acquire their phenomenal
character by representing the outside world. As a consequence, all phenomenal qualities are as
INTENTIONALITY
117

such representational. There are no non-intentional experiences. Thus, for Tye pain is nothing but
a sensory representation of bodily damage or disorder (1995, p. 113). 
Dretske’s and Tye’s interpretation of phenomenal qualities has the great advantage of staying
clear of any kind of sense-data theory. As already mentioned, it also bears a certain resemblance
to views found in phenomenology. As Merleau-Ponty points out, colours, like red or green, ‘are
not sensations, they are the sensed, and quality is not an element of consciousness, but a
property of the object’ (1962, p. 4). To think that the sensed are components of consciousness
is to commit the ‘experience error’, and to make perceptions out of things perceived (ibid., p. 5).
A particularly radical criticism of this mistake can be found in Sartre’s interpretation of
intentionality. To afﬁrm the intentionality of consciousness is, according to Sartre, to deny the
existence of any kind of mental content (including any kind of sense-data or qualia) (1956, p. lix).
There is nothing in consciousness, neither objects nor mental representations. It is completely
empty. Thus, for Sartre, the being of intentional consciousness consists in its revelation of
transcendent being (ibid., p. lxi). Sartre consequently takes the phenomenal qualities to be
qualities of worldly objects, and certainly not to be located within consciousness. However, from
the fact that consciousness is nothing apart from its revelation of transcendent being (or as Tye
and Dretske would probably say, from the fact that it exhausts itself in its representation of
external reality), Sartre would never infer that intentional consciousness is therefore no problem
for scientiﬁc reductionism. 
Both Tye and Dretske explicitly criticize the attempt to draw a sharp distinction between the
intentional or representational aspects of our mental lives and their phenomenal or subjective
or felt aspects. But interestingly enough, their reason for attacking the separation is exactly the
opposite of ours. By proposing an intentionalistic or representationalistic interpretation of
phenomenality they hope to avoid the hard problem altogether. Why? Because if phenomenality
is basically a question of intentionality, and if intentionality can be explained reductively in terms
of functional or causal relations, one can accept the existence of phenomenality (neither Dretske
nor Tye are eliminativists) and still remain a physicalist (Tye 1995, pp. 153, 181).
This conclusion seems wrong. The decisive difﬁculty for reductionism is not the existence of
epiphenomenal qualia, qualia in the sense of atomic, irrelational, ineffable, incomparable, and
incorrigible mental phenomena. And the hard problem does not disappear if one (rightfully)
denies the existence of such entities, and if one, so to speak, relocates the phenomenal ‘outside’
rather than ‘inside’. The hard problem is not about the existence of non-physical objects of
experience, but about the very existence of subjective experience itself; it is about the very fact
that objects are given to us (cf. Rudd 1998). 
Furthermore, Tye and Dretske fail to realize that there are two sides to the question of the ‘what
it is like’. There is a difference between asking about the property the object is experienced as
having (what does the object feel like to the perceiver, e.g. how does the surface of a table feel
differently from the surface of an ice cube) and asking about the property of the experience of
the object (what does the perceiving feel like to the perceiver, e.g. how does perceiving the ice
cube feel differently from imagining the ice cube). Both questions pertain to the phenomenal
dimension, but whereas the ﬁrst question concerns a worldly property, the second concerns an
experiential property.8 Contrary to what both Dretske and Tye are claiming, we consequently
need to distinguish between (1) what the object is like for the subject, and (2) what the experience
118
INTENTIONALITY

of the object is like for the subject (cf. Carruthers 1998; McIntyre 1999). It is worth noticing that
even G. E. Moore seems to have recognized this. After stating that consciousness seems to
vanish if we try to ﬁx our attention upon it, and that if we try to introspect the sensation of blue
all we can see is blue since the sensation itself is as if it were diaphanous, Moore continues: ‘Yet
it can be distinguished if we look enough, and if we know that there is something to look for’ (1903,
p. 450).
As phenomenologists would argue, we are never conscious of an object simpliciter, but always
of the object as appearing in a certain way; as judged, seen, described, feared, remembered,
smelled, anticipated, tasted, etc. We cannot be conscious of an object (a tasted lemon, a smelt
rose, a seen table, a touched piece of silk) unless the experience through which this object is
made to appear (the tasting, smelling, seeing, touching) is self-given. This is not to say that our
access to, say, the lemon is indirect, or that it is mediated, contaminated, or blocked by our
awareness of the experience, since the experience is not, itself, an object on a par with the lemon,
but instead constitutes the very access to the appearing lemon. But the same object, with the
exact same worldly properties, can present itself in a variety of manners. It can be given as
perceived, imagined, or recollected, etc. When I am phenomenally acquainted with various
objects, I am not mind- or self-blind. The objects are there for me in different modes of givenness
(as imagined, perceived, recollected, anticipated, etc.), and it makes little sense to suggest that
this ‘for me’ quality, this mineness of experience, is an external feature of the object presented.
Indeed, contrary to the claim of Tye and Dretske, we should recognize that phenomenality is not
merely world-presenting, it is also self-involving.
In short, the wrong conclusion to draw from an intentionalistic interpretation of phenomenal
qualities is that there is no hard problem of consciousness but only the easy problem of
intentionality (considered as reducible to information processing). The right conclusions to draw
are that intentionality has a ﬁrst-person aspect to it that makes it part of the hard problem, and
that it resists reductive explanation to the same extent as phenomenality does.
INTENTIONALITY AND CONSCIOUSNESS
Even if it is true that intentionality and phenomenality are related, the nature of this relation still
remains open for discussion. Is it intrinsic or extrinsic? Is it essential or merely contingent? To
claim that it is contingent, that is, to claim that intentionality is indifferent to whether it takes place
in a conscious or unconscious medium is to subscribe to something McGinn has called the
Medium Conception. According to this view, the relation between consciousness and intentionality
is like the relation between a medium of representation and the message it conveys. On one side,
we have the medium of sound, shape, or experience, and on the other, the content of meaning
and reference. Each side can be investigated separately from the other since their relation is
completely contingent. Thus, according to this view, consciousness is nothing but a (rather
mysterious) medium in which something relatively mundane, namely intentionality, is contingently
embedded (McGinn 1991, p. 35). But is this really convincing?
On the face of it, what the experience is like and what it is of are by no means independent
properties. Phenomenologists have typically argued that every appearance is an appearance of
INTENTIONALITY
119

something for someone. McGinn makes the same point, and argues that experiences are Janus-
faced: they have a world-directed aspect, they present the world in a certain way, but at the same
time they also involve presence to the subject, and hence a subjective point of view. In short, they
are of something other than the subject and they are like something for the subject, and as
McGinn then continues: 
But these two faces do not wear different expressions: for what the experience is like is
a function of what it is of, and what it is of is a function of what it is like. Told that an
experience is as of a scarlet sphere you know what it is like to have it; and if you know
what it is like to have it, then you know how it represents things. The two faces are, as it
were, locked together. The subjective and the semantic are chained to each other.
(1991, pp. 29–30)
In other words, the intentional/semantic content of an experience stands in an intimate relation
to its phenomenal character and vice versa. But if what we are aware of is inextricably bound up
with how it appears to us, phenomenal consciousness is not epiphenomenal, but rather
cognitively indispensable. 
This raises the question about the possibility of non-conscious intentionality. If the intimate
relation between intentionality and phenomenality entails that all conscious states display some
form of intentionality, does it also entail that consciousness is not only sufficient but also
necessary for true intentionality? Does that mean it is impossible to have an unconscious belief?
Of course, it is possible to ﬁnd a variety of different views on the matter. Some would say that
only consciousness is in possession of genuine intentionality, and that any other ascription of
intentionality is either derived or metaphorical (Searle 1998, pp. 92–93). According to such a
view, pictures, signs, symbols, posters, words do refer. They are about something. But the
intentionality they display is not original or intrinsic to the pictures or signs; it is derived. They owe
their intentionality to the fact that they are interpreted by minds. Their intentionality is bestowed
upon them by minds. The reason why the mind is able to accomplish this is because it – by
contrast – possesses an intrinsic or underived form of intentionality. Its intentionality is not
merely a manner of speech or derived from others’ interpretative stance towards it (otherwise,
we would face an inﬁnite regress). One line of argumentation in favour of such a view would be
a line stressing the intrinsic connection between experience, meaning, and intentionality. As
Galen Strawson puts it: 
[M]eaning is always a matter of something meaning something to something. In this
sense, nothing means anything in an experienceless world. There is no possible meaning,
hence no possible intention, hence no possible intentionality, on an experienceless planet
[. . .]. There is no entity that means anything in this universe. There is no entity that is about
anything. There is no semantic evaluability, no truth, no falsity. None of these properties
are possessed by anything until experience begins. There is a clear and fundamental
sense in which meaning, and hence intentionality, exists only in the conscious moment
[. . .].
(1994, pp. 208–209)
120
INTENTIONALITY

Strawson consequently claims that experience is a necessary condition for genuine aboutness,
and he suggests that there is an analogy between the sense in which a sleeping person might
be said to be in possession of beliefs, preferences, etc. and the sense in which a CD might be
said to contain music when it is not being played by a CD player. Considered merely as physical
systems, neither of them is intrinsically about one thing rather than another, neither of them has
any intrinsic (mental or musical) content. Strictly speaking, ‘it is no more true to say that there
are states of the brain, or of Louis, that have intrinsic mental content, when Louis is in a dreamless
and experienceless sleep, than it is true to say that there are states of a CD that have intrinsic
musical content as it sits in its box’ (ibid., p. 167). A phenomenologist like Husserl would concur
with this view, and would also consider consciousness to be the source of intentionality and
meaning.
However, apart from outright denying the existence of genuine non-conscious intentionality,
there is also another option open. One might accept the existence of a non-conscious form of
intentionality, but still argue that non-conscious intentionality and conscious intentionality have
nothing (or very little) in common, for which reason an elucidation of the ﬁrst type of intentionality
throws no light upon the kind of intentionality that we ﬁnd in conscious life. It is not possible to
account for the intentionality of my experience without accounting for the phenomenal aspect
of the experience as well, and it is impossible to account for the phenomenal aspect of the
experience without referring to its intentionality. Any discussion of intentional consciousness
that left out the question of phenomenal consciousness (and vice versa) would be severely
deﬁcient. In short, when it comes to conscious intentionality we need an integrated approach. 
There are of course many additional problems that have been left untouched. To mention a
few: there is the question about the existence of the unconscious, and about so-called
dispositional beliefs. How do they fit into the framework presented above?9 What about the
objection that the attempt to argue for an intimate relation between intentionality and experience
implies some subtle form of psychologism? To claim that there is a special experience of
understanding is bound to provoke the Wittgensteinians. How should one defuse their criticism?
Finally, there is also a huge discussion concerning internalism and externalism with respect to
mental content. Externalists typically claim that differences in thought can be extraphenomenally
deﬁned. If this is true, what implications does it have for the relation between intentionality and
experience? Then there is the question of how an intentionalistic interpretation of phenomenal
qualities can handle cases of hallucinations. All of these questions are topics in need of further
treatment, but to bring this chapter to a conclusion we will conﬁne our considerations to how the
phenomenological account of intentionality relates to the debate between internalists and
externalists.
PHENOMENOLOGY, EXTERNALISM, AND METAPHYSICAL REALISM
‘Internalism’ and ‘externalism’ are umbrella terms. It is consequently not enough to ask in general
whether somebody is an internalist or an externalist, since the answer will depend on the speciﬁc
kind of internalism or externalism one has in mind. In the present context, however, internalism
will be understood as the view that a subject’s beliefs and experiences are wholly constituted by
INTENTIONALITY
121

what goes on inside the mind of that subject, so that factors in the subject’s natural and cultural
environment have no bearing on their content. Thus, according to this view, mental states depend
for their content upon nothing external to the subject whose states they are, i.e. the mind is taken
to have the referential powers it has quite independently of how the world is. This is not to deny
that some of our mental states, for instance our perceptions, might be causally dependent upon
external factors; the point is simply that the internal states – regardless of how they are being
caused – determine what we are conscious of. By contrast, externalism argues that mental states
are externally individuated. What we think about, what we refer to, depends upon what actually
exists in the (physical, social, and cultural) environment; our experience depends upon factors
that are external to the subject possessing the mental states in question.
Where should one place phenomenology on the internalism–externalism scale? There has
been a widespread tendency to argue that whereas Husserl was a classical Cartesian internalist,
existential phenomenologists like Heidegger, Sartre and Merleau-Ponty favoured a form of
externalism since they were all fully committed to the view that the mind is essentially determined
by its intentional relationship to the world (cf. Dreyfus 1991; Keller 1999; McClamrock 1995;
Rowlands 2003). Although it is quite true that later phenomenologists to a somewhat larger
extent than Husserl emphasized the importance of practical and bodily forms of intentionality –
as we will see in some of the subsequent chapters, Heidegger speaks of a form of directed
comportment towards entities that are ready-to-hand, and Merleau-Ponty stresses the importance
of motor-intentionality and argues that consciousness is not primarily an ‘I think’, but an ‘I can’
– this interpretation remains too simplistic. It ignores plenty of evidence suggesting that
Husserlian phenomenology has afﬁnities with a certain kind of externalism (cf. Zahavi 2004a,
2008a). At the same time, however, it is by no means obvious that Heidegger or Merleau-Ponty
can be classiﬁed as straightforward externalists. Although Heidegger, for instance, by using the
term ‘being-in-the-world’ wished to stress the fundamental world-involvement of the self – Dasein
(human existence) is in the world, not by being in it like water in a glass, but ecstatically by means
of a fundamental form of self-transcendence – he also spoke repeatedly of the self-sufﬁciency
(Selbstgenügsamkeit) of (experiential) life (cf. Heidegger 1993, p. 261), and denied that a
perception only becomes intentional if its object somehow enters into a relation with it, as if it
would lose its intentionality if the object didn’t exist. As a perception it is, as Heidegger writes,
intrinsically intentional regardless of whether the perceived is in reality on hand or not (Heidegger
1979, p. 40). Heidegger later adds that it is a decisive error to interpret intentionality as a relation
between a psychical subject and a physical object. The truth of the matter is that Dasein is
intentionally structured within itself. Intentionality does not ﬁrst arise through the actual presence
of objects but lies in the perceiving itself, whether veridical or illusory (Heidegger 1975/1982,
pp. 83–85). As we understand Heidegger, the underlying assumption behind these statements
is (1) that even misperceptions, illusions, and hallucinations remain world-involving intentional
acts, and (2) that the world-involvement in question, rather than being added from without, is
something intrinsic to the acts themselves.
But this brief outline leaves us with something of a puzzle. Should we conclude that
phenomenological accounts of the mind–world relation are in general characterized by features
that point in the directions of both internalism and externalism? Does that reﬂect a confusion,
or does it suggest that phenomenologists opt for a dual component theory that seeks to reconcile
122
INTENTIONALITY

internalist and externalist intuitions? Or rather, does it point to the fact that the very alternative
between internalism and externalism – an alternative based on the division between inner and
outer – is inapplicable when it comes to phenomenological conceptions of the mind–world
relation? 
To get closer to an answer, let us return to the issue of meaning. If externalism denies that
intentionality is determined by meaning and conditioned by subjectivity, but rather holds that it
is reducible to some kind of causal co-variation, none of the phenomenologists would count as
externalists. But this is not the only way to deﬁne externalism. Just like internalism, externalism
can hold that meaning determines reference as long as the meaning in question is externally
embedded or world-involving. McDowell has explicitly argued that an externalist account of
meaning should be complemented by an externalist account of the mind. Putnam is famous for
having argued that meanings ‘just ain’t in the head’ (1977, p. 124), but as McDowell adds, neither
is the mind (1992, p. 36). The moment both mind and meaning are taken to be environmentally
embedded, there is nothing mysterious in ascribing an intrinsic referentiality or world-directedness
to the mind: ‘The need to construct a theoretical “hook” to link thinking to the world does not arise,
because if it is thinking that we have in view at all – say being struck by the thought that one hears
the sound of water dripping – then what we have in view is already hooked on to the world; it is
already in view as possessing referential directedness at reality’ (ibid., p. 45). One can ﬁnd a
comparable view in McCulloch, who has argued that we need to reject the dualism between a
self-contained mind and a mindless world. The subjective is not inside the mind and the objective
is not outside of it. Echoing McDowell, McCulloch writes that meanings ain’t in the head, they are
in the mind, but the mind just ain’t in the head (2003, pp. 11–12). In his view, there is no tension
between phenomenology and externalism as long as both are understood properly (ibid., p. 12). 
Although it ‘ain’t’ correct grammar, there is some truth to this. Phenomenologists (and that
includes Husserlian phenomenologists) would be sympathetic to some of the ideas espoused
by McDowell and McCulloch, and it is clear that they all have common enemies. Not only do they
reject the kind of internalism known as Cartesian materialism, i.e. the view that the mind can be
identiﬁed with the brain, and that the brain is a self-contained organ that can be understood in
isolation from the world, but they would also oppose the kind of externalism that seeks to reduce
intentionality and reference to brute causal mechanisms. 
Although Husserl does argue that meaning determines reference, it would be a mistake to think
that his theory is only geared towards handling those types of reference where the meaning-
content prescribes a certain object by detailing its properties descriptively. On the contrary,
Husserl claims that the available meaning includes components that allow us to refer to
particulars independently of deﬁnite descriptions. This is precisely the case for demonstrative
reference. So, already early on, Husserl was aware that the word ‘this’ refers directly, rather than
attributively, and what is even more important, he also realized to what extent perception involves
a demonstrative content of sense. When I see a red ball, the ball is my intentional object, not
because it satisﬁes the general meaning ‘the red ball’, but because it satisﬁes the demonstrative
content ‘this red ball’. To perceive an object is not simply to perceive a certain type of object, that
is, any object having the type of properties prescribed by the content, rather it is to perceive this
particular object. Some would argue that the direct character of demonstrative reference is due
to the fact that it is based not on meaning but on causality. That assumes that the only way for
INTENTIONALITY
123

meaning to ‘capture’ particulars is by doing so attributively, i.e. on the basis of definite
descriptions. But Husserl’s point is exactly that ‘this’ is a non-descriptive meaning, and that it
refers directly and non-attributively. For him, the directness of demonstrative reference is founded
on the immediacy of intuition.
A natural way to present the choice between internalism and externalism is by asking the
following question: Is intentionality determined by factors internal to the mind or by factors
external to the mind? However, this apparently straightforward way of presenting the available
options is, on closer inspection, quite inadequate, for whereas internalism typically postulates
a gap between mind and world, externalism argues precisely that the world is not external to the
mind. But the moment externalism is seen as arguing that mind and world are inseparable, it
could also quite easily be deﬁned as a position that takes intentionality to be determined by
factors internal to this whole. Thus deﬁned, externalism is difﬁcult to distinguish from the kind
of internalism that insists that intentionality is determined by factors internal to the mind, but
which conceives of the mind in sufﬁciently broad terms. On one reading, Husserl’s philosophy
might be said to constitute exactly such an attempt to undermine any commonsensical divide
between mind and world. As we saw in our discussion of introspection in Chapter 2, already in
the Logical Investigations Husserl rejected the facile divide between inside and outside as being
pertinent for an understanding of intentionality, and as he writes in a later text, ‘Thus, object,
objective being, and consciousness belong a priori inseparably together’ (Husserl 2003, p. 73).10
A related point can be found in Heidegger, who denies that the relation between Dasein and
world can be grasped with the help of the concepts ‘inner’ and ‘outer’:
In directing itself toward . . . and in grasping something, Dasein does not ﬁrst go outside
of the inner sphere in which it is initially encapsulated, but, rather, in its primary kind of
being, it is always already ‘outside’ together with some being encountered in the world
already discovered. Nor is any inner sphere abandoned when Dasein dwells together with
a being to be known and determines its character. Rather, even in this ‘being outside’
together with its object, Dasein is ‘inside’ correctly understood; that is, it itself exists as
the being-in-the-world which knows. Again, the perception of what is known does not take
place as a return with one’s booty to the ‘cabinet’ of consciousness after one has gone
out and grasped it. Rather, in perceiving, preserving, and retaining, the Dasein that knows
remains outside as Dasein.
(1986/1996, p. 62)
The notions of internalism and externalism remain bound to the inner–outer division, but this is
a distinction that phenomenology puts into doubt. 
Considering the way in which phenomenologists conceive of intentionality, of the mind–world
relationship, it is questionable whether it really makes much sense to classify their views as
being committed to either internalism or externalism. Avoiding the two terms obviously won’t
solve all the problems, but it might at least permit us to avoid letting our investigation be guided
by misleading metaphors. The mind is neither a container nor a special place. Hence it makes
little sense to say that the world must be either inside or outside of the mind. Ultimately, we
should appreciate that the phenomenological investigations of the structures and conditions of
124
INTENTIONALITY

possibility for phenomena are antecedent to any divide between interiority and exteriority, since
they are investigations of the dimension in which any object – be it external or internal – manifests
itself (cf. Heidegger 1986/1996, p. 419; Waldenfels 2000, p. 217). Rather than committing the
mistake of interpreting the phenomena mentalistically, as being part of a mental inventory, we
should see the phenomenological focus on the phenomena as an attempt to question the very
subject–object split, that is, as an attempt to stress the co-emergence of mind and world. The
take-home message might be precisely that phenomenology can teach us that the forced choice
between internalism and externalism is misguided. There are other options available.11
In his book Expressing the World, Anthony Rudd introduced a distinction between realist
externalism and Kantian externalism (2003, p. 44). Both forms of externalism take intentionality
seriously. Both deny the self-contained nature of the mind and argue that it is tied to the world.
But Kantian externalism then adds a twist by arguing that the reverse also holds true. In his
refutation of idealism, Kant argued that I can be aware of myself only when I am aware of the
world around me. But the world to which the mind is bound is the phenomenal world, which is
equally bound to the mind. This move allowed Kant to reject the scepticism that sought to drive
a wedge between mind and world, but since Kant – at least according to a standard interpretation
– went on to distinguish the phenomenal world and the noumenal reality of the things in
themselves, he might be said to have simply relocated the sceptical problem (Rudd 2003, p. 5).
A more radical move was made by the phenomenologists, who rejected the notion of the
noumenal Ding an Sich as unintelligible and nonsensical (cf. Heidegger 1975/1982, p. 422;
Husserl 1950/1964, p. 38). In their view, mind and world are not distinct entities; rather, they
are bound constitutively together. As Merleau-Ponty puts it:
The world is inseparable from the subject, but from a subject which is nothing but a project
of the world, and the subject is inseparable from the world, but from a world which the
subject itself projects. The subject is a being-in-the-world and the world remains
‘subjective’ since its texture and articulations are traced out by the subject’s movement
of transcendence.
(1962, p. 430)
In other words, phenomenologists would typically argue that the relation between mind and world
is an internal relation, a relation constitutive of its relata, and not an external one of causality
(cf. Rudd 2003, pp. 53, 60). Not surprisingly, there are some rather obvious similarities between
the phenomenological account and the one proposed by the enactive view of cognition, since
the latter has the explicit goal of negotiating a middle path between the Scylla of cognition as a
recovery of a pregiven outer world (realism), and the Charybdis of cognition as the projection of
a pregiven world (idealism) (Varela et al. 1991, p. 172).
To insist on the interdependence of mind and world doesn’t amount to any form of pheno-
menalism, metaphysical idealism, or panpsychism. If we look closer at reality, we won’t find
consciousness all over the place. If we analyse a physical object, it does not dissolve into
consciousness, it dissolves into atoms and molecules. Thus, it is not as if statements about
botanical or geological states of affairs are henceforth to be reinterpreted as statements about
mental content. But any claim to the effect that ‘there is a real object’ or ‘that there is a reality’
INTENTIONALITY
125

refers back to certain epistemic connections, to certain conscious operations, and it is in
reference to these that the being of objects and all objective states of affairs acquire their
meaning (Husserl 2003, pp. 28–29). What we ﬁnd in phenomenology – and this brings us back
to some of the more overarching philosophical implications discussed in Chapter 2 – is a
deliberate blurring of the distinction between ontology and epistemology, and by implication a
clear rejection of metaphysical realism. 
NOTES
1 It was discovered that the ordinary principles of ‘substitutivity of ordinarily co-referential expressions’
and ‘existential generalisation’ don’t hold true in a number of sentences involving psychological verbs.
Whereas the following two arguments are valid:
Fido is a dog
There exists a dog
And
Fido is a dog
Fido is owned by the butcher
The butcher owns a dog
The two following arguments are invalid
John thinks that Fido is a dog
There exists an object which John thinks is a dog
And
John thinks that Fido is a dog
Fido is owned by the butcher
John thinks that the butcher owns a dog.
2 A popular and much discussed recent theory is the so-called teleosemantic account, which, according
to a standard reading, argues that the semantic content of a mental representation is determined by
its proper function or purpose, i.e. what through evolution or learning it has been designed to represent.
However, according to one of its foremost defenders, the teleosemantic account doesn’t actually
explain intentionality, if understood as the property of ‘ofness’ or ‘aboutness’. As Ruth Millikan writes,
‘When the bare teleosemantic theory has been spent, the central task for a theory of intentional
representation has not yet begun. Teleosemantic theories are piggyback theories. They must ride on
more basic theories of representation, perhaps causal theories, or picture theories, or informational
theories, or some combination of these’ (2004, p. 66).
3 This view might superﬁcially resemble internalism – the view that the mind has the referential powers
it has quite independently of how the world is, since mental states depend for their content upon
nothing external to the person whose states they are. But as we will see shortly, things are more
126
INTENTIONALITY

complicated, and one should not conﬂate the view that we can refer to objects that do not exist with
the view that we can refer to objects quite independently of whether or not there is a world.
4 Using a decidedly Husserlian jargon, Siewert has recently spoken of noetic phenomenal features
(1998, p. 284). Sticking to the distinction between propositional content and attitude, one could argue
that there is what one could call a qualitative feel to the different propositional attitudes.
5 For further attempts to argue in defence of a broader notion of phenomenal consciousness, cf. Smith
(1989), Flanagan (1992), Van Gulick (1997), and Siewert (1998).
6 For a more recent similar line of argument, cf. Strawson 1994, pp. 5–6.
7 Let us here introduce Husserl’s technical term ‘noema’. There has been a huge amount of scholarly
discussion about the proper way to interpret the Husserlian notion of the noema (see Drummond
2003, for an overview). The discussion concerns the relation between the object-as-intended (the
noema) and the object-that-is-intended (the object itself) – the wine bottle-as-perceived (as felt and
seen) and the bottle itself. According to one reading, the noema is a type of representational entity,
an ideal sense or meaning that mediates the intentional relation between the mental act and the
object. On this reading, consciousness is directed towards the object by means of the noema and thus
only achieves its openness to the world in virtue of this intermediary ideal entity (Smith and McIntyre
1982, p. 87). According to a competing interpretation, intentional experiences are intrinsically self-
transcending; their being is constituted by being of something else, and they do not ﬁrst achieve a
reference to the world by virtue of some intermediate representational entity. As a consequence, it is
argued that the noema is neither to be understood as an ideal meaning, a concept, or a proposition,
it is not an intermediary between subject and object, it is not something that bestows intentionality
on consciousness (as if consciousness prior to the introduction of the noema would be like a closed
container with no bearing on the world); rather, it is the object itself considered in the phenomenological
reﬂection, i.e. precisely as experienced. The noema is the perceived object as perceived, the recollected
episode as recollected, the judged state-of-affair as judged, etc. This does not imply, however, that
there is no distinction (within the reﬂective stance) between the object-as-it-is-intended and the object-
that-is-intended, but this distinction is exactly a structural difference within the noema (Drummond
1990, pp. 108–109, 113). In so far as an investigation of the noema is an investigation of any kind
of object, aspect, dimension, or region, considered in its very manifestation, in its very signiﬁcance
for consciousness, the object and the noema turn out to be the same differently considered. On this
background, the first interpretation has been criticized for confusing what is an ordinary object
considered abstractly in a non-ordinary (phenomenological) attitude with a non-ordinary abstract entity
(Drummond 1992, p. 89). It would take us too far aﬁeld to review the twists and turns of this debate,
so we shall simply state for the record that we, for a variety of reasons, think the ﬁrst representationalist
interpretation of the noema to be mistaken (see Zahavi 2003a, pp. 53–68; 2004a).
8 To speak of worldly properties in this context should not be misunderstood; it does not entail any
metaphysical claims concerning the subject-independent existence of the said properties. The claim
being made is merely that the properties in question are properties of the experienced objects and
not of the experience of the objects. 
9 Flanagan has proposed a distinction between ‘experiential sensitivity’ and ‘informational sensitivity’.
Somebody may be experientially insensitive but informationally sensitive to a certain difference. When
we are merely informationally sensitive to something, we are not conscious of it, that is, pure
informational sensitivity, or to use a better expression, pure informational pickup and processing, is
INTENTIONALITY
127

non-conscious. It is a processing without phenomenal awareness (Flanagan 1992, pp. 55–56, 147).
One could think of blindsight as an example in a speciﬁc sensory domain. Subjectivity has to do with
experiential sensitivity, and it is only the latter that lets us have phenomenal access to the object. But
although it might be appropriate to operate with a notion of non-conscious informational processing,
one should be careful not to assume that the informational sensitivity provides us with a non-
phenomenal version of the exact same information as the experiential sensitivity. To suggest
something like that is once again to ﬂirt with the view that consciousness is cognitively epiphenomenal.
10 Let us anticipate an obvious objection. Isn’t Husserl (in)famous for not having ruled out the existence
of a worldless mind? As Husserl writes in the notorious § 49 in Ideas I, ‘pure’ consciousness can be
considered an independent realm of being, and even though consciousness would be modiﬁed if the
world of objects were annihilated; it would not be affected in its own existence (1976/1982, pp.
104–105). But one should note that Husserl’s imagined annihilation of the world has nothing to do
with global scepticism. Husserl is not trying to drive a wedge between the world as we experience it
and the real world. He is not claiming that it makes sense to suppose that the phenomenologically
given could remain the same while the world itself ceased to exist. Quite to the contrary, in fact, since
he quite explicitly states that such a proposal is nonsensical (Husserl 2002, p. 402). Husserl’s point
is rather that our experiences might conceivably cease to be ordered in a harmonious and coherent
fashion; further, he argues that we in such a case would no longer have any reason to believe in the
existence of a coherent world. Thus, Husserl is certainly not arguing that every type of experience is
compatible with the absence of the world or that every type of experience would remain the same even
if the world didn’t exist. All he is saying is that some form of consciousness might be possible even in
the absence of an ordered and objective world.
11 For further discussions of internalism and externalism in phenomenological perspective, cf. the special
issue of Synthese (Zahavi 2008a).
FURTHER READING
Franz Brentano, Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint. Trans. A. C. Rancurello, D. B. Terrell & L. L.
McAlister. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1973.
Tim Crane, Elements of Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001.
John J. Drummond, Husserlian Intentionality and Non-foundational Realism. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 1990. 
Edmund Husserl, Logical Investigations I–II. Trans. J. N. Findlay. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 2001.
Edmund Husserl, Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy. First
Book. Trans. F. Kersten. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1982.
John Searle, Intentionality: An Essay in the Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1983.
David W. Smith & Ronald McIntyre, Husserl and Intentionality. Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1982.
128
INTENTIONALITY

The embodied mind
Let’s start with a fully cognizing human being who is complete in body and mind, and ask what
we could subtract while still retaining a cognizing mind. Such thought experiments may help us
to home in on precisely what a cognitive system or mind actually is.
Let’s take as our example any one of us who happens to be complete in body and mind,
understanding that in an ordinary and everyday way. Of course, some of us may not be bodily
complete. One of you who is holding this book in your hand right now may be missing the other
hand, perhaps as a result of an accident and amputation. In any case, let’s take as our example
someone with all her limbs. Now we can ask, would it make any difference in regard to her ability
to think or imagine or remember, or to engage in most cognitive exercises if she were missing
one or even several of her limbs? Right, it doesn’t seem that we need all our limbs to engage in
cognizing. So let’s get rid of them. While we’re at it, we may as well get rid of all the other
extraneous body parts – those that we don’t seem to need in order to do our thinking. As these
kinds of thought experiments go, we usually end up with just our brains, since even sensory input
can be provided artificially. For example, we can directly stimulate the parts of the brain
responsible for registering sensory information and thereby, supposedly, have exactly the same
experience we would have if our sensory organs were delivering that information. This common
thought experiment is referred to as the brain-in-the-vat, and the image is of a brain ﬂoating
around in a vat of chemicals, kept alive by artiﬁcial nourishment, and kept informed by various
electrodes that carry information about the world, or about whatever the mad scientist running
this experiment wants to feed it. 
Dennett (1981) has taken this thought experiment one step further. He tells the story of being
sent on a mission that involved removing his brain, storing it in a vat, but remaining connected
with the body via radio waves. Dennett’s mission, however, is a dangerous one, and in the process
his body ceases its biological functioning and, in effect, dies. His brain, however, is still alive in
the vat. Understandably, he gets upset:
7

Waves of panic and even nausea swept over me, made all the more horrible by the
absence of their normal body-dependent phenomenology. No adrenaline rush of tingles
in the arms, no pounding heart, no premonitory salivation. I did feel a dread sinking feeling
in my bowels at one point, and this tricked me momentarily into the false hope that I was
undergoing a reversal of the process that landed me in this fix – a gradual undis-
embodiment. But the isolation and uniqueness of that twinge soon convinced me that it
was simply the first of a plague of phantom body hallucinations that I, like any other
amputee, would be all too likely to suffer.
(1981, p. 225)
As time goes on, Dennett is provided with a new body, which he ﬁnds difﬁcult to master, but
which, after a period of adjustment, seems just fine. He thinks perhaps this is similar to
undergoing extensive plastic surgery or a sex-change operation. Dennett subsequently learns,
however, that the technicians had copied his brain’s functional structure and all of the information
in it to a computer program, and that he is doubly connected – to his brain, and, with the ﬂick of
a toggle switch, to the computer running his artiﬁcial brain. He is able to ﬂip a switch between
brain and computer, but is unable to tell the difference in his experience. 
The moral of this story, if we were to follow Dennett’s line of reasoning and put this story
together with the standard line of thought about brains-in-vats, is that not only is the body
unnecessary for experience and cognition, but we don’t even need the brain, as long as we have
the program and information running on the right kind of hardware. This constitutes a functionalist
perspective according to which artiﬁcial neural-net processing of information can generate the
same mental experiences as can be generated by the brain alone. What’s important is not the
physical instantiation (although this is certainly a consideration, since it would likely make a
difference if we tried to run the software on a MAC or a PC rather than on a sophisticated neural-
net computer); rather, what is important is the software program and the information that
constitutes the essential part of a system required to generate me, and my cognitive life. Once
we have the right information and the proper brain-replicating syntax, we should be able to
generate your cognitive experience in any machine that can run the program. 
Does this mean that the body contributes nothing of importance to the cognitive system? Of
course, we can say that the brain is important in all normal cases where we do not have a back-
up artiﬁcial brain. And even Dennett suggests that to do anything, to take action in some way,
one might need some kind of body. But we could think that a robotic body could do just as well,
as long as it were properly connected (by radio transmitters) to the artiﬁcial brain. 
The image of the brain-in-the-vat is surprisingly inﬂuential even for opponents of functionalism.
Thus, Searle, who takes an anti-functionalist view, and emphasizes the importance of
neurobiology, nonetheless, in defending a radical form of internalism, appeals to the same image:
Even if I am a brain in a vat – that is, even if all of my perceptions and actions in the world
are hallucinations, and the conditions of satisfaction of all my externally referring
Intentional states are, in fact, unsatisﬁed – nonetheless, I do have the Intentional content
that I have, and thus I necessarily have exactly the same Background that I would have
if I were not a brain in a vat and had that particular Intentional content. That I have a
130
THE EMBODIED MIND

certain set of Intentional states and that I have a Background do not logically require that
I be in fact in certain relations to the world around me. . . .
(Searle 1983, p. 154)
This kind of denial of the cognitive signiﬁcance of the body has a long tradition. Compare the
following statement in Plato’s dialogue, Phaedo:
It seems that so long as we are alive, we shall continue closest to knowledge if we avoid
as much as we can all contact and association with the body, except when they are
absolute necessary, and instead of allowing ourselves to become infected with its nature,
purify ourselves from it until God himself gives us deliverance.
(Plato 1985, 67a)
Such a disembodied view on the mind was also found in classical cognitive science, since it
examined intelligent behaviour as if it were independent of any speciﬁc bodily form. Indeed, until
recently, insofar as neuroscientists considered the body, it was only qua its representation in the
somatosensory cortex. 
Now one might think that it is incumbent on the phenomenologist, or on the theorists of
embodied cognition, to show that there is no cognition without embodiment. But there are two
questions here. First, the in-principle question of whether the notion of a disembodied brain (a
brain in a vat) is at all intelligible; and second, regardless of what the answer is to the ﬁrst question,
we can ask whether human cognition de facto is disembodied. We can answer the second
question (in the negative) without having to demonstrate that the brain-in-the-vat thought
experiment is an unintelligible thought experiment. It just is an empirical fact that we are indeed
embodied, that our perceptions and actions depend on the fact that we have bodies, and that
cognition is shaped by our bodily existence. This is, we might say, a ‘no-brainer’. But we can note
the following in response to the ﬁrst question. The brain-in-the-vat thought experiment actually
shows that perception and action do require some kind of embodiment. Even the pure brain-in-
the-vat requires absolutely everything that the body normally provides – for example, sensory input
and life support. Indeed, the importance of the body can be measured in considering precisely
what it would take to sustain a disembodied brain and the supposed experience that goes along
with it. What is possible for a brain-in-the-vat is only possible if it is provided with a properly
balanced nutrition, a properly balanced mix of hormones and neurotransmitters, and a complex
stream of sensory information, properly adjusted for the temporal differentiations that are in fact
involved in intermodal binding. If we consider only the visual input, we would have to assume that
any poking around in the visual cortex that would replicate our human visual experience would
have to be so speciﬁed in its details, that an analogue or digital input mechanism would have to
be as complicated, as chemically complex, and as enactive as the human eye. That is, the full
and extraordinary support system that would be required to allow a brain-in-a-vat to experience
things as we experience them, or in other words, to allow a brain-in-a-vat to be phenomenologically
in-the-world and not just physically in-a-vat, would have to replicate the bodily system that already
supports our ordinary existence. 
THE EMBODIED MIND
131

Whether or not a brain-in-the-vat is a real possibility, it is certain that our cognitive experience
is shaped by an embodied brain. Indeed it is increasingly accepted that the brains we have are
shaped by the bodies we have, and by our real world actions. Cognition is not only embodied, it
is situated and, of course, it is situated because it is embodied.
The fact that we stand upright is distinctive for the human species, and this biological fact,
which comes along with many other biological facts, has far-reaching consequences with respect
to perceptual and action abilities, and by implication, with respect to our entire cognitive life. Erwin
Straus, for example, points out that ‘the shape and function of the human body are determined
in almost every detail by, and for, the upright posture’ (1966, p. 138). Consider a brief list:
•
First, in regard to human anatomy and skeletal structure, the upright posture requires a
speciﬁc shape and structure of the human foot, ankle, knee, hip, and vertebral column, as
well as the proportions of limbs, and all of this demands a speciﬁc musculature and nervous
system design. In terms of evolution, the shaping of the body for the upright posture also
permits the speciﬁcally human development of shoulders, arms, hands, skull, and face. The
important point here is that these anatomical structures deﬁne our capabilities and therefore
define what counts as the world. Gibson (1986) developed the idea that objects in the
environment can afford different kinds of action, given the kind of body that we have. Such
affordances are closely tied to our bodily shape and our action capabilities. A chair affords
sitting precisely because the human body bends at the knees, etc. Capabilities to sit or to
adopt some other posture are ﬁrst of all motor; but they extend to the most abstract and
rational capacities for cognition, such as counting and the development of mathematics
(see Johnson 1987, 2007; Lakoff and Johnson 1980; Lakoff and Nuñez 2001; Sheets-
Johnstone 1990).
•
Second, in terms of development, attaining the upright posture is delayed in humans. The
infant is required to learn it in a struggle against gravity. This calls for a basic conscious
wakefulness: if you fall asleep, you fall. Posture and movement are directly related to
biological states of sleep and wakefulness. Prior to standing, early crawling behaviour
inﬂuences the development of perception and cognition (Campos et al. 1992). The change
of posture that comes with standing and walking equally affects what we can see, what we
can attend, what we can grasp and manipulate.
•
Third, in terms of how we are related to things and other people, with the upright posture we
maintain distance and independence – distance from the ground; distance from things; and
some degree of independence from other people. In standing, the range of vision is extended,
and accordingly, the environmental horizon is widened and distanced. The spatial frameworks
for perception and action are redeﬁned. Standing frees the hands for reaching, grasping,
manipulating, carrying, using tools, and pointing. Both phylogenetically (with respect to
evolution) and ontogenetically (with respect to individual development), these changes
introduce complexities into brain structure, complexities that eventually help generate
rational thought (Paillard 2000). 
•
With respect to our perceptual abilities, which in turn shape all other cognitive abilities, in
evolutionary terms, attaining the upright posture means that the olfactory sense declines in
importance; seeing becomes primary. We are able to see far ahead of where we are currently
132
THE EMBODIED MIND

located, and this grants foresight and allows for planning. While our hands are liberated for
more proﬁcient grasping and catching, our mouths are liberated for other purposes, since
olfactory mechanisms (required for ﬁnding our way around when close to the ground) shrink
and no longer dominate facial structure. The jaw structure not only deﬁnes what we eat, but
along with the development of the more subtle phonetic muscles, enables the development
of vocal language. And if you ask Aristotle, he’ll tell you that this means the development of
both politics and rationality.
Add to this the idea that the body ‘pre-processes’ and ﬁlters incoming sensory signals, and ‘post-
processes’ and limits efferent signals that contribute to motor control. Comparative anatomy
shows that the shape and relative locations of the ears, for example, allow us to determine the
direction of a sound (Chiel and Beer 1997). Bodily movements are not fully determined at brain
level; rather, they are re-engineered by the design and ﬂexibility of muscles and tendons, their
geometric relations to other muscles and joints, and the prior history of their activation (Zajac
1993). Thus, ‘the nervous system cannot process information that is not transduced by the
periphery, nor can it command movements that are physically impossible for that periphery’
(Chiel and Beer 1997, p. 554). These observations are part of a larger story about what shapes
the body and how that also shapes cognition. But they are sufﬁcient to indicate that the biological
body (what it enables and excludes by its structure, basic posture, and motor capacity) is the body
that shapes the way that we perceive and think about the world.
ROBOTIC AND BIOLOGICAL BODIES
These are lessons hard won, not by means of thought experiments, where you seemingly can think
many aspects of the system away, but in the ‘real world’ of the biological sciences, as well as in
advanced robotics. Roboticists, like Rodney Brooks at MIT, have discovered that the traditional
approaches of trying to develop robots from the top down, i.e. starting with a disembodied syntax
and trying to add a functional artificial body that would heed the commands from a central
intelligence computer, just don’t work. Rather, their more recent initiatives are attempts to design
robots from the bottom up, building simple, pragmatically-ordered, biologically-inspired, sen-
sorimotor machines that can move around environments by using information gathered in real-
time from the environments themselves. Such robots are ‘physically grounded’, which means they
are physical entities embedded in their physical environments, but in a way in which their
representations pragmatically reference the real world; they are enactive perceiving machines,
grasping the world in terms of projects to be accomplished.
Nouvelle AI is based on the physical grounding hypothesis. This hypothesis states that to
build a system that is intelligent it is necessary to have its representations grounded in
the physical world. Our experience with this approach is that once this commitment is
made, the need for traditional symbolic representations soon fades entirely. The key
observation is that the world is its own best model. It is always exactly up to date. It always
contains every detail there is to be known. The trick is to sense it appropriately and often
THE EMBODIED MIND
133

enough. To build a system based on the physical grounding hypothesis it is necessary to
connect it to the world via a set of sensors and actuators.
(Brooks 1990, p. 5)
Brooks comes to this important realization, however, not by thinking of robots as bodies, but by
thinking of bodies as robots:
The body, this mass of biomolecules, is a machine that acts according to a set of
speciﬁable rules. . . . We are machines, as are our spouses, our children, and our dogs. 
. . . I believe myself and my children all to be mere machines.
(Brooks 2002, pp. 173–175)
The philosophical background to this particular way of conceiving of the body is clearly Cartesian.
Descartes characterized animals as purely physical automata – robots devoid of consciousness.
This was extended to humans by a variety of philosophers, including La Mettrie (1745) and
Cabanis (1802), and was further explicated by Hodgson (1870) and Huxley (1874). Brooks seems
bound to follow in this tradition, perhaps topping it off by proposing that conscious-like intelligence
should emerge from this kind of system. An alternative philosophical backdrop to the concept of
embodied cognition, however, is alive and well. This is worked out in the phenomenological views
of Husserl and Merleau-Ponty, and updated by philosophers and scientists like Clark (1997)
Varela et al. (1991), Thompson (2007), Thompson and Varela (2001), Sheets-Johnstone (1990,
1999), Michael Wheeler (2005), and others. This alternative approach follows Merleau-Ponty in
rejecting the idea that the body is simply a ‘highly polished machine’ (1962, p. 76). So let’s dig
deeper into the meaning of embodiment, how it situates us and how it shapes our cognitive
experience.
134
THE EMBODIED MIND
Phenomenology of the body – a very short history
The best-known philosopher of embodiment is undoubtedly Merleau-Ponty. But Merleau-
Ponty was certainly not the only phenomenologist who devoted time and energy to a
painstaking analysis of the lived body. Not only are there other French phenomenologists
who have written extensively on the body, Sartre and Michel Henry, for example, but it
would also be a mistake to identify phenomenology of embodiment with French
phenomenology. Already in Husserl’s lecture course Thing and Space from 1907 one can
ﬁnd far-reaching phenomenological analyses of the moving and sensing body. And it is
well known that Husserl’s analysis of the body in the second volume of his Ideas served
as a decisive inspiration for Merleau-Ponty’s Phenomenology of Perception. Husserl’s
manuscript was only published posthumously in 1952, but Merleau-Ponty visited the
Husserl archives shortly before the outbreak of the Second World War – as one of its

The phenomenological investigation of the body is not the analysis of one object among others.
That is, it is not as if phenomenology in its investigation of a number of different ontological
regions (the domain of logic, mathematical entities, utensils, works of art, etc.) also stumbles upon
the body and then subjects it to a close scrutiny. On the contrary, the body is considered a
constitutive or transcendental principle, precisely because it is involved in the very possibility of
experience. It is deeply implicated in our relation to the world, in our relation to others, and in our
self-relation, and its analysis consequently proves crucial for our understanding of the mind–world
relation, for our understanding of the relation between self and other, and for our understanding
of the mind–body relation.
The phenomenological emphasis on the body obviously entails a rejection of Cartesian
mind–body dualism. But it should be just as obvious that this does not entail an endorsement
of some kind of Cartesian materialism. It is not as if the phenomenological way to ‘overcome’
dualism is by retaining the distinction between mind and body, and then simply getting rid of the
mind. Rather, the notion of embodiment, the notion of an embodied mind or a minded body, is
meant to replace the ordinary notions of mind and body, both of which are derivations and
abstractions. Merleau-Ponty famously speaks of the ambiguous nature of the body, and argues
that bodily existence is a third category beyond the merely physiological and the merely
psychological (1962, p. 350). The lived body is neither spirit nor nature, neither soul nor body,
neither inner nor outer, neither subject nor object. All of these contraposed categories are
derivations of something more basic. 
Phenomenologists object to the metaphysical division between res extensa and res cogitans.
If one accepted such a division, the only place for the body would seem to be on the side of the
res extensa. But phenomenologists deny that the body is a mere object in the world. The body
is not merely an object of experience that we see, touch, smell, etc. Rather, the body is also a
principle of experience, it is that which permits us to see, touch, and smell, etc. Obviously, the
body can also explore itself. It can take itself (or the body of another) as its object of exploration.
This is what typically happens in physiology or neurology, etc. But such an investigation of the
body as an object is not exhaustive. As Sartre famously points out, we should be careful not to
let our understanding of the lived body be determined by an external perspective that ultimately
has its origin in the anatomical study of the corpse (1956, p. 348; cf. Merleau-Ponty 1962, 
p. 351). As he continues in Being and Nothingness:
THE EMBODIED MIND
135
ﬁrst foreign visitors – and had on that occasion a chance to read Husserl’s unpublished
manuscript (cf. Zahavi 1994, 2006). But even Husserl might not have been the ﬁrst. Michel
Henry has argued that one can ﬁnd an implicit theory about the lived body in the most
famous dualist of them all, namely Descartes (Henry 1975, p. 139). And if one moves
forward in history, to the Napoleonic wars, one will encounter the work of another French
philosopher Maine de Biran who – and this is still according to Michel Henry – provides
a phenomenological account of the body that is superior to the ones subsequently to be
found in the writings of Husserl, Sartre, and Merleau-Ponty.

The problem of the body and its relations with consciousness is often obscured by the fact
that while the body is from the start posited as a certain thing having its own laws and
capable of being deﬁned from outside, consciousness is then reached by the type of inner
intuition which is peculiar to it. Actually if after grasping ‘my’ consciousness in its absolute
interiority and by a series of reﬂective acts, I then seek to unite it with a certain living
object composed of a nervous system, a brain, glands, digestive, respiratory, and
circulatory organs whose very matter is capable of being analyzed chemically into atoms
of hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, etc., then I am going to encounter insur-
mountable difﬁculties. But these difﬁculties all stem from the fact that I try to unite my
consciousness not with my body but with the body of others. In fact the body which I have
just described is not my body such as it is for me.
(Sartre 1956, p. 303)
The phenomenological contribution to a solution of the mind–body problem does not take the
form of a metaphysical theory of mental causation, nor does it consist in an explanation of how
the body interacts with the mind; rather, it seeks to understand to what extent our experience of
the world, our experience of self and our experience of others are formed by and inﬂuenced by
our embodiment. But through this change of focus, it also rethinks and questions some of the
distinctions that deﬁne the mind–body problem in the ﬁrst place.
The ﬁrst and most basic phenomenological distinction to be made, and the one that allows
us to see that Brooks may be working with the wrong concept of the body, is between the objective
body and the lived body (Husserl’s distinction between Körper and Leib, respectively; Merleau-
Ponty’s distinction between the Le corps objectif and the corps proper or corps vécu). This is a
phenomenological distinction rather than an ontological one. It is not meant to imply that each
of us has two bodies: one objective and one lived. Rather, it is meant to explicate two different
ways that we can experience and understand the body (Husserl 1973a, p. 57). Whereas the
latter notion captures the body understood as an embodied ﬁrst-person perspective, the former
focuses on the body as seen from an observer’s point of view, where the observer may be a
scientist, a physician, or even the embodied subject herself. I can view my own body as if from
the outside. I can look at my hand and think, ‘Hmm, how truly odd that this thing has ﬁve wiggling
digits’. The objective body is, in varying degrees of abstraction, and defined in a variety of
perspectives (neurological, physiological, anatomical), a perceived body; it is the objectiﬁcation
of a body which is also, nonetheless, lived. Looking at the body as a thing that can be analysed,
dissected, objectively understood, in the way that we might understand a machine or a robot, is
clearly important for making progress in the biological sciences, in medicine, and perhaps in
robotics. If we are taking this perspective on the body, we are taking a third-person perspective
– examining the body as something that we, as subjects, can observe as an object. 
In contrast, of course, the only way we can make such observations, or any observations, is
if we are in fact an experiencing, sensorimotor, living body – if we have eyes that see, hands that
are capable of haptic touch, ears that hear, and so forth. In this regard I do not observe or
contemplate my hand, I reach out with it and grab something. The body as subject, as experiencer,
as agent, rather than the body as object, as thing experienced – this is a basic distinction missed
by the Cartesian tradition. When Descartes – according to the standard interpretation – insists
136
THE EMBODIED MIND

that he is a thinking thing, and is not his body, which is an extended thing, he thinks that he can
think without his body thinking. In fact, however, Descartes was able to think such thoughts only
because he was a living body that included a highly inter- and intra-connected brain. As far as
we can tell, Descartes stopped thinking these thoughts in the early morning of 11 February 1650
when he died. An autopsy on his objective body would have shown a serious respiratory infection
as cause of death. 
A description of the lived body is a description of the body from the phenomenological
perspective. On the one hand, it is the way the body appears in experience. On the other hand,
it is much more than that – it is the way the body structures our experience. The body is not a
screen between me and the world; rather, it shapes our primary way of being-in-the-world. This
is also why we cannot ﬁrst explore the body by itself and then subsequently examine it in its
relation to the world. On the contrary, the body is already in-the-world, and the world is given to
us as bodily revealed (Husserl 1971/1980, p. 128). Indeed, as Sartre points out, the body is
operative in every perception and in every action. It constitutes our point of view and our point
of departure (1956, p. 326):
The case could not be otherwise, for my being has no other way of entering into contact
with the world except to be in the world. It would be impossible for me to realize a world
in which I was not and which would be for me a pure object of a surveying contemplation.
But on the contrary it is necessary that I lose myself in the world in order for the world to
exist and for me to be able to transcend it. Thus to say that I have entered into the world,
‘come to the world,’ or that there is a world, or that I have a body is one and the same thing.
(Sartre 1956, p. 318; cf. Merleau-Ponty 1962, p. 82)1
We have a sense of the body in what it accomplishes. I have a tacit sense of the space that I
am in (whether it is crowded, whether it is wide open, or whether it is closing in). Likewise, I have
a proprioceptive sense of whether I am sitting or standing, stretching or contracting my muscles.
Of course, these postural and positional senses of where and how the body is tend to remain in
the background of my awareness; they are tacit, recessive. They are what phenomenologists call
a ‘pre-reﬂective sense of myself as embodied’.2
This sense of embodiment is not simply spatial. I can feel sluggish (after eating a heavy dinner,
for example) or clumsy; or I can feel energetic and fully attuned to my surroundings (after exer-
cising or yoga, for example). If I am depressed by some bad news, I can feel that in my body; if I
am elated by good news or buoyed up by an impending challenge – these are feelings and moods
that I feel bodily. If I am angry or fearful or happy and comfortable, these are emotions that I feel
bodily. Moreover, all of these aspects of embodiment shape the way I perceive the world. If I’m
depressed, the world seems depressing; if I am elated, the world seems promising; if I am hungry,
as William James noted, an apple appears larger than when I am satiated. Since this is the lived
body with which I perceive and act, it is in constant connection with the world. And this connection
is not a mere surface-to-surface contact, as a corpse might lie on the surface of a table; rather,
my body is integrated with the world. To be situated in the world means not simply to be located
someplace in a physical environment, but to be in rapport with circumstances that are bodily
meaningful. It means something if the drink that I want is out of reach; if I am unable to sprint
THE EMBODIED MIND
137

as fast as I need to when I am being chased by a ferocious animal, or in danger of being run down
by a bus. Those possibilities that my body enables, and that deﬁne the environment as a world
of affordances, just as much as those activities that my body prevents or limits, and that deﬁne
what is possible or impossible – these are aspects of embodiment that I live with, and through,
and that deﬁne the environment as situations of meaning and circumstances for action.
Much more could be said about the body–environment relation, since the environment is not
simply a place where we perform our actions. The environment directly and indirectly regulates
the body, so that the body is in some sense the expression or reﬂection of the environment. The
environment calls forth a speciﬁc body-style so that the body works with the environment and is
included in it. The posture that the body adopts in a situation is its way of responding to the
environment. The body ﬁnds itself already with feelings, drive-states, kinaesthetic sensations, etc.
and they are partially defined by the environment in which it must function. The ‘internal
environment’ of the body, which functions homeostatically and automatically, and is constituted
by innumerable physiological and neurological events, is simply an internalized translation and
continuation of the ‘external’ environment. Changes in the ‘external’ environment are always
accompanied by changes in the ‘internal’ one, e.g. ‘changes induced in the blood by alterations
in the [external] environment, such as increased carbon dioxide or decreased oxygen tension in
the inhaled air, and alterations in the temperature of the environment are minimized by
appropriate alterations in circulation, respiration, and endocrine activity’ (Gellhorn 1943, p. 15).
All of these automatic regulations take place and are lived in bodily performances that are sub-
personal and anonymous, although the results of this anonymous living are surely reﬂected,
directly or indirectly, in the experience of the subject. It is also the case that when there are
changes in the ‘internal’ environment, the ‘external’ environment can suddenly take on a different
signiﬁcance – i.e. the environment can become experientially different. The onset of eyestrain
is a good example, as is the phenomenon of hallucination (see Gallagher 1986).
Nothing in this conception of embodiment should lead us to conceive of the body as something
static, as if it has a ﬁxed set of skills and abilities. The situation is quite different. Not only can
the body expand its sensorimotor repertoire by acquiring new skills and habits, it can even extend
its capacities by incorporating artiﬁcial organs and parts of its environment (Leder 1990, p. 30).
In acquiring new skills, for example, we may begin by paying close attention to certain rules of
performance, and when doing so we typically focus on and monitor our own bodily performance
to an unusually high degree. But a successful acquisition of this new ability will lead to
performance without explicit monitoring of bodily movement; the skill becomes fully embodied
and embedded within the proper context. As Leder has pointed out, ‘A skill is ﬁnally and fully
learned when something that once was extrinsic, grasped only through explicit rules or examples,
now comes to pervade my own corporeality. My arms know how to swim, my mouth can at last
speak the language. . . . A skill has been incorporated into my bodily “I can”’ (1990, p. 31). This
process of incorporation also has a marked temporal significance. Practice makes perfect
because it habitualizes the skill. That which is practised in the past becomes embedded in my
present bodily repertoire, and allows me to cope differently with new arising situations. 
It is also possible to extend the capacities of the lived body by means of artiﬁcial extensions.
Or to put it differently and perhaps even more strikingly, the lived body extends beyond the limits
of the biological body. It doesn’t stop at the skin. The classical example is the blind man’s cane
138
THE EMBODIED MIND

(a frequent example in the literature since Head (1920) ﬁrst mentioned it). When ﬁrst employing
such a cane one experiences it as an external object exerting an impact upon the hand. But as
the tool is mastered, one begins to feel through it to the experiential ﬁeld it discloses (Leder
1990, p. 33). As Merleau-Ponty writes: ‘The blind man’s stick has ceased to be an object for him,
and is no longer perceived for itself; its point has become an area of sensitivity, extending the
scope and active radius of touch, and providing a parallel to sight’ (1962, p. 143). Something
similar can happen with the use of far more complex technologies. Consider, for example, the
well-known experiments of Bach-Y-Rita with sensory substitution and the technology known as
Tactile Vision Sensory Substitution (TVSS) (see Bach-y-Rita et al. 1969, 2003; Gonzalez and
Bach-y-Rita 2003). The TVSS was designed to provide vision to blind subjects. It maps images
from a video camera to a vibrotactile belt worn on the back or abdomen. Because of the
intermodal nature of sensory perception, we can, with some learning, ‘see’ the environment
using tactile or auditory prostheses. The stimulation of the skin generates a quasi-visual
experience of the environment. In recent development of this technology similar experience is
generated by an electro-tactile tongue display unit. The intermodal sensory system of the body
translates tactile signals on the skin into something like a visual experience of the external
environment. Once the subject is habi-
tuated to the tactile stimulation the
technology itself ceases to be an object
and is incorporated into the body in a way
that discloses the world. Such techno-
logies, which are clearly objective pieces
of engineering, can capitalize on sensori-
motor contingencies and brain plasticity
and become part of the body that we live. 
Cole et al. (2000) provide another
example by describing a virtual reality set-
up that links a human agent to a NASA
robot, allowing the agent to steer the
robot’s arms by moving his own, and to
see the robot’s visual field through
cameras mounted in the robot’s head.
After a few minutes of practice with this
technology, the agent starts to have a
strong sense of embodiment with the
robot (Figure 7.1). As far as we know, and
this is in contrast to the claim that our
bodies are simply robots (Brooks), this
would not work the other way around. 
Thus, I can extend my set of skills and
potential actions. I can do this through
practice (as we can see in dance, athletics,
etc.) or through artificial augmentation 
THE EMBODIED MIND
139
FIGURE 7.1 Human agent controlling a NASA robot

(as we see in sensory substitution technologies or robotics). What we describe as the lived body
from the phenomenological perspective is exactly the same body as the biological body that we
study from an objective perspective. The lived body clearly has a physiological basis, and as such
it can be deﬁned as ‘a certain power of action within the framework of the anatomical apparatus’
(Merleau-Ponty 1962, p. 109). Accordingly, it can suffer losses as well as experience gains. Thus
brain lesions can occasion various forms of bodily self-alienation. One example is provided by the
condition known as anosognosia for hemiplegia. Many right-hemisphere stroke patients deny their
left-side paralysis. This denial typically remains despite the manifest demonstration of the paralysis.
In one case, a patient with left paralysis claimed that she could walk, could touch the doctor’s nose
with her left hand, and could clap, when instead all she was doing was making motions only with
her right hand (Ramachandran and Blakeslee 1998). When pressed, the patients may venture
completely out of the realm of reality in defending their ability to move, stating that the immobile
limb belongs to someone else, or is not a limb at all. One famous story tells of a patient who
claimed that his paralyzed hand belonged to the doctor. When the doctor showed the patient his
own two hands and asked how it was possible that he should have three hands, the patient calmly
replied, ‘A hand is the extremity of an arm. Since you have three arms, it follows that you must have
three hands’ (Bisiach 1988, p. 469).
A stroke in the right hemisphere of the brain might result in symptoms of unilateral neglect.
Patients fail to attend to the left side of their own body, or to respond to stimuli, objects, and even
people located to their left side. This neglect ﬁnds astonishing manifestations. For instance,
when served food, the patients will only eat the food that is on the right side of the plate, and will
then complain that the hospital is starving them, and that they are not given enough to eat. If
asked to copy a drawing, they will only copy one half of it. Furthermore, it was recently shown that
this neglect not only affects our visual power, but also our power of imagination and recollection,
thereby stressing the intricate interplay between these different forms of intentionality. During a
two-minute period, patients were asked to mention as many French cities as they could remember.
If these city names were subsequently marked on a map, it was discovered that all the mentioned
cities were located in the east of France. No cities in the west (or left) of France were mentioned.
In another experiment, patients from Milan were asked to think of the Piazza del Duomo, a place
they knew very well. They were asked to imagine ﬁrst that they were standing at the steps of the
cathedral looking away from it, and they were then asked to describe what they were visualizing.
They would only describe the right side of the square. They were then asked imaginatively to
move to the opposite side of the piazza. When asked to describe what they were visualizing when
they faced the cathedral, they would still only be describing the right side of the square. But, of
course, what this means is that they were now describing the parts of the square that they had
‘forgotten’ a moment ago, whereas the parts of the square that they had just described were now
lost to them (Bisiach and Luzzatti 1978).
These few references to pathology point to the important insight that core features of
subjectivity can be sharply illuminated through a study of their pathological distortions. Patho-
logical cases can function heuristically to make manifest what is normally simply taken for
granted. They serve as a means of gaining distance from the familiar, in order better to explicate
it. This is something phenomenology has long insisted upon, and it is no coincidence that
especially the area of clinical psychopathology has attracted a lot of attention from phenomeno-
140
THE EMBODIED MIND

logists, and that there exists a long-standing tradition of phenomenological psychiatry in France
and Germany. Important figures include Minkowski, Binswanger, Tatossian, Tellenbach, and
Blankenburg (cf. Parnas and Zahavi 2002; Parnas et al. 2002). 
Thus, we can best come to understand our form of embodied life as it exists for us not in
hypothetical or far-fetched thought experiments, but precisely in the ordinary cases of habit
formation, and in the extraordinary cases of sensory substitution and pathological loss. To
understand how the lived body works and how it shapes our cognition, we may be able to use
high technology and robotics, but we clearly need both phenomenology and biology.
HOW THE BODY DEFINES THE SPACE OF EXPERIENCE
One inﬂuential conception of knowledge, as we mentioned in Chapter 2, takes knowledge to be
a question of faithfully mirroring a mind-independent reality. If we want to know true reality, we
should aim at describing the way the world is, not just independently of its being believed to be
that way, but independently of all the ways in which it happens to present itself to us human
beings. What we have been suggesting, however, is that this goal is illusory and unattainable.
Even when doing science we have to start from an embodied perspective that we never fully
escape. As Merleau-Ponty (1962, p. 67) puts it, in response to a similar proposal for attaining a
view from nowhere made by Leibniz, ‘Is not to see always to see from somewhere?’ This is a
thought that is fully consistent with embodied and situated perception.
The ‘somewhere’ is a zero-point set by the perceiving body. Out of it a perspectival spatiality
opens up. Although the objective body can be given a position in this perspectival space, the lived
body cannot. ‘The outline of my body is a frontier which ordinary spatial relations do not cross.
This is because its parts are inter-related in a peculiar way: they are not spread out side by side,
but enveloped in each other’ (ibid., p. 98). This is something that we need to further explore. The
claim seems to be that the body inhabits its own kind of space, while at the same time being the
origination point for the perceptual space within which the things of the world appear. Are these
two different kinds of space? 
In fact, we need to distinguish three kinds of spatial frames of reference. The standard
distinction between allocentric and egocentric spatial frames of reference names two of them.
Allocentric space is purely objective space that can be deﬁned in terms of latitude and longitude
(the global positioning system operates in allocentric terms) or in terms of compass directions,
as when we say that Copenhagen is north of Rome, for example. Once you adopt the canonical
mapping of the earth, it doesn’t matter where you happen to be standing, in Copenhagen, or
Rome, or New York; Copenhagen is always north of Rome. Egocentric space, in contrast, is the
perspectival space of perception and action that is deﬁned relative to the perceiving or acting
body. My computer is in front of me; the window through which I hear the church bell is to my left,
and the door of my ofﬁce is to my right. If I turn 180 degrees, then all of this changes. My computer
is then behind me; the window is to the right and the door is to the left. This egocentric frame of
reference is really a body-centred frame of reference. Kant recognized the practical importance
of this egocentric, experiential spatial frame of reference:
THE EMBODIED MIND
141

[. . . T]he most precise map of the heavens, if it did not, in addition to specifying the
positions of the stars relative to each other, also specify the direction by reference to the
position of the chart relative to my hands, would not enable me, no matter how precisely
I had it in mind, to infer from a known direction, for example the north, which side of the
horizon I ought to expect the sun to rise. The same thing holds of geographical and, indeed,
of our most ordinary knowledge of the position of places. Such knowledge would be of no
use unless we could also orientate the things thus ordered, along with the entire system
of their reciprocal positions, by referring them to the sides of our body.
(1992, pp. 367–368)
Simply put, even if I know that Copenhagen is to my North, if I don’t know where north is relative
to the way I am facing, then I don’t know which way Copenhagen is. Even closer to home, so to
speak, I perceive the world as organized around my body – some things to the left, some things
to the right, some are up and some are down, some are in front of, and some behind me. When
I reach for something, I have to reach forward or backward, to my right or to my left, at a certain
angle relative to where my hand is currently positioned. Both perception and action are calibrated
in egocentric space, sometimes referred to by phenomenologists as lived space. But egocentric
space is still not the space of the body that Merleau-Ponty mentions. 
As perceivers and agents we are embedded and embodied agents. All perception and action
involves a component of bodily self-experience. I am sitting in a restaurant. I wish to begin to eat,
and so I need to pick up my fork. But how can I do that? In order to pick up the fork, I need to
know its position in relation to myself. That is, my perception of the fork must contain some
information about me, otherwise I would not be able to act on it. On the dinner table, the perceived
fork is to the left of me, the perceived knife is to the right of me, and the perceived plate and
wineglass in front of me. This self-referencing in perception registers sub-personally in the
sensorimotor system, but it also shapes my experience. Every perspectival appearance implies
that the embodied perceiver is herself the experiential zero-point, the indexical ‘here’ in relation
to which every appearing object is oriented. As an experiencing, embodied subject I am the point
of reference in relation to which all of my perceptual objects are uniquely related. I am the centre
around which and in relation to which (egocentric) space unfolds itself, or as Merleau-Ponty
would put it, when I perceive the world, the body is simultaneously revealed as the unperceived
term in the centre of the world toward which all objects turn their face. 
According to Merleau-Ponty, ‘the spatiality of the body must work downwards from the whole
to the parts, the left hand and its position must be implied in a global bodily design and must
originate in that design’ (1962, p. 99, translation modified). He cautions, however, that this
description is inadequate insofar as it remains tied to a static geometrical perspective. He suggests
that we ﬂesh this out in terms of pragmatic action: since my body is geared towards existing or
possible tasks, its spatiality ‘is not, like that of external objects or like that of “spatial sensations,”
a spatiality of position, but a spatiality of situation’ (ibid., p. 100).3 We should say, then, that in
connection with perception and action, there is a bodily spatial frame of reference that is innate
and, in its own way absolute. It is neither allocentric nor egocentric, but a frame of reference that
applies to the lived body as perceiver and actor. In precise terms, this is a non-perspectival,
proprioceptive frame of reference. Let’s try to map this bodily space out in further detail. 
142
THE EMBODIED MIND

The body, as Merleau-Ponty already indicated, is the origin of phenomenally experienced
spatiality: ‘far from my body’s being for me no more than a fragment of space, there would be no
space at all for me if I had no body’ (1962, p. 102). If one accepts the premise that sense perception
of the world is egocentrically organized by reference to the perceiver’s bodily position, the basis
for that reference cannot itself be in an egocentric frame of reference without the threat of inﬁnite
regress. I could not say, for example, that my body is to my right or to my left.4 This point is closely
tied to the notion of the experiential transparency of the body (the fact that when I experience the
world my experience of my body is highly attenuated), and is accurately stated by Merleau-Ponty:
I observe external objects with my body, I handle them, examine them, walk around them,
but as for my body, I do not observe it itself [in action or in the act of perception]: in order
to be able to do so, I should need the use of a second body which itself would be
unobservable.
(1962, p. 91, translation modiﬁed)
Whereas I can approach or move away from any object in the world, the body itself is always
here as my very perspective on the world. That is, rather than being simply another perspectivally
given object, the body itself is precisely that which allows me to perceive objects perspectivally
(see Sartre 1956, p. 329). In a primary sense, I am not conscious of my body as an intentional
object. I do not perceive it; I am it. As a perceiver and actor, I do not have observational access
to my body in perception or in action. I neither stand outside nor inside my own body – indeed,
whatever inside and outside mean in this case, they depend on me being my body (see Legrand
2006). 
Although I do not have observational access to my body in action, I can have non-observational
proprioceptive and kinaesthetic awareness of my body in action.5 Proprioception is the innate
and intrinsic position sense that I have with respect to my limbs and overall posture. It’s the ‘sixth
sense’ that allows me to know whether my legs are crossed, or not, without looking at them. It is
literally innate insofar as the proprioceptive system develops prenatally. What kind of spatial
frame of reference is involved in proprioceptive awareness? It is not egocentric since proprio-
ceptive awareness does not organize the differential spatial order of the body around a
perspectival origin. For example, whereas it may be that this book is closer to me than that book
over there, it is not the case that my foot is closer to me than my hand. As José Luis Bermúdez
points out, there is a ‘fundamental disanalogy between the bodily space of proprioception and
the egocentric space of perception and action. . . . In contrast with vision, audition, and the other
canonically exteroceptive modalities, there are certain spatial notions that do not seem to be
applicable to somatic proprioception’ (1998, pp. 152–153). Speciﬁcally he mentions distance
and direction. That is, we can ask about the distance and direction of a perceived object in terms
of how far away it is, and in what direction. But these spatial parameters are meaningful only in
relation to a frame of reference that has a perspectival origin. This does not apply to pro-
prioception. 
Of course it is possible to read egocentric registers into the body, and to say that bodily
sensation A is to the left of bodily sensation B, or that sensation A is further away from sensation
B than is sensation C. Relative to a certain task (e.g. scratching an itch) my hand may be further
THE EMBODIED MIND
143

away from my foot than from my knee, depending on posture. Someone might tell me to hold my
hands out in front of me, and I might comply by extending my arms so that my hands are in front
of my chest. But this is simply to adopt a certain convention or to make my chest something like
a temporary origin; quite literally, one cannot put one’s hands in front of one’s body since they
are part of the body and cannot be put in front of themselves. Being located on the front side of
my body (my nose, my toes, etc.) is not equivalent to being in front of my body. Left, right, centre,
and distance are spatial parameters that are completely relative in egocentric spatial perception.
What is to my right may be to your left. And what is to my right now will be to my left if I turn 180
degrees. But intrabodily, my right hand is proprioceptively just so, and always at the end of my
right arm, whether my right side is located to your left, or whether I turn from north to south. If I
move my left hand to touch my right shoulder, it does not become a second right hand because
it happens to move to that side of my body. If sensation A is just this distance from sensation B,
I cannot make them closer on the intrabodily map even if I contort my body to make them closer
objectively or pragmatically (in order to scratch one of them, for example). So intrabodily spatiality
is not egocentric.
One might think, then, that the proprioceptive frame of reference is an allocentric one. It is
certainly possible to conceive of body parts being located on an allocentric map, but to the extent
that allocentric means something like ‘independent of the perceiver’s position’, it is difﬁcult to
think of the proprioceptive mapping in those terms since it is precisely the perceiver’s body that
is at stake. Brian O’Shaughnessy (1995) suggests that proprioception is a system of spatial
ordering that is unique in that it is framed by and applies to only the body itself. He attributes
this to the immediacy of proprioception: the fact that proprioceptive awareness does not
attentively mediate the perception of the body; for if it did, it would require an ordering system,
a spatial frame of reference that would have to be independent of the body. Proprioception thus
involves neither an allocentric nor an egocentric frame of reference, but a non-perspectival
awareness of the body in an implicit spatial frame of reference.6
This proprioceptive frame of reference, then, is the necessary embodied basis for the
egocentric frame of reference. I perceive that something is to my right or to my left only by having
a proprioceptive sense of where my right is and where my left is, ‘knowing’ my right hand from
my left hand, my right leg from my left leg. Egocentric spatial order, then, always runs back to the
body of the perceiver/actor. As Merleau-Ponty tells us: ‘for us to be able to conceive space, it is
in the ﬁrst place necessary that we should have been thrust into it by our body, and that it should
have provided us with the ﬁrst model of those transpositions, equivalents and identiﬁcations
which make space into an objective system and allow our experience to be one of objects, opening
out on an “in itself”’ (1962, p. 142). Moreover, this bodily space, in contrast to perceived space,
is like ‘the darkness needed in the theatre to show up the performance’ (ibid., p. l00). 
THE BODY AS EXPERIENTIALLY TRANSPARENT
Let’s shine a little light into this ‘darkness,’ or what we might call the disappearing act of the body.
We have indicated that in action, when we are engaged in some project, sensory feedback about
our own body is attenuated (see Tsakiris and Haggard 2005). 
144
THE EMBODIED MIND

The bodily mediation most frequently escapes me: when I witness events that interest me,
I am scarcely aware of the perceptual breaks which the blinking of the eye-lids imposes
on the scene, and they do not ﬁgure in my memory. . . . [T]he body proper and its organs
remain the bases or vehicles of my intentions and are not yet grasped as ‘physiological
realities’.
(Merleau-Ponty 1963, p. 188, also see p. 217)
The body tries to stay out of our way so that we can get on with our task; it tends to efface itself
on its way to its intentional goal. We do not normally monitor our movements in an explicitly
conscious manner, although, as we indicated in Chapter 3, we have a pre-reﬂective awareness
of our body in very general terms. I can say whether I am running, walking, sitting, standing, and
what kind of effort or posture I am putting forth. But this pre-reﬂective awareness is not very
detailed. I can say that I am reaching to grasp a cup; but my sense of this is oriented toward the
goal or intentional project that I am involved in, and not toward the speciﬁcs of my movement. I
can’t say very much at all about how I shape my hand in order to pick up the cup. As Sartre puts
it, when I reach out to grasp something that has caught my attention, ‘my hand has vanished; it
is lost in the complex system of instrumentality in order that this system may exist’ (1956, p. 323).
He suggests that the lived body is invisibly present, precisely because it is existentially lived
rather than known (ibid., p. 324). When I play ping-pong, my movements are not given as
intentional objects. My limbs do not compete with the ball for my attention. If that were the case,
I would be unable to play efﬁciently. As we will elaborate in the next chapter, our attention, our
intentional focus, is normally on the task to be performed, the project to be accomplished, or on
some worldly event that seems relevant to our action. Our attention is not on our bodily movement.
Much of the action is controlled by body-schematic processes below the threshold of con-
sciousness. Our hand shapes itself when we are grasping, and it does so automatically and
without our explicit awareness. Our gait automatically adjusts itself to the terrain of the
environment. This kind of automaticity, however, is not simple reﬂex movement. It is part of our
intentional action which involves grasping something for some purpose, or choosing to stroll or
to rush to our destination. Furthermore, when I execute movements, even if certain details of the
control processes remain non-conscious, the movements themselves are not non-conscious, or
merely mechanical, or involuntary; rather, they are part of my functioning intentionality, and are
immediately and pre-reﬂectively felt (Henry 1975, p. 92; Merleau-Ponty 1962, p. 144). 
THE EMBODIED MIND
145
Body image and body schema 
Two concepts frequently used across a number of disciplines (both scientific and
philosophical) are the concepts of body image and body schema. Unfortunately the usage
of both concepts have been rather ambiguous and confusing. In the phenomenological
literature this situation has not been improved by the fact that Merleau-Ponty’s term
schéma corporel has been rendered as ‘body image’ in the English translation of
continued

This can be seen clearly in pathologies that involve body schematic processes. IW is a dramatic
example. At the age of 19, due to illness, he lost all sense of touch and proprioception from the
neck down (Cole 1995; Gallagher and Cole 1995). Shortly after the onset of his disorder, when
IW tried to move a limb or his entire body, he could initiate the movement, but had no control
over where the moving part ended up. If he reached for something the hands would miss or
146
THE EMBODIED MIND
Phenomenology of Perception (cf. Merleau-Ponty 1962, p. 98). We propose the following
characterization. A body image is composed of a system of experiences, attitudes, and
beliefs where the object of such intentional states is one’s own body. Studies that involve
body image frequently distinguish among three intentional elements:
(1) A subject’s perceptual experience of his/her own body.
(2) A subject’s conceptual understanding (including folk and/or scientiﬁc knowledge)
of the body in general.
(3) A subject’s emotional attitude toward his or her own body.
Conceptual and emotional aspects of body image are no doubt affected by various
cultural and interpersonal factors, but in many respects their content originates in
perceptual experience. 
By contrast, the concept of body schema includes two aspects: (1) the close-to-
automatic system of processes that constantly regulates posture and movement to serve
intentional action; and (2) our pre-reﬂective and non-objectifying body-awareness. So,
on the one hand, the body schema is a system of sensorimotor capacities and activations
that function without the necessity of perceptual monitoring. Body-schematic processes
are responsible for motor control, and involve sensorimotor capacities, abilities, and
habits that enable movement and the maintenance of posture. Such processes are not
perceptions, beliefs, or feelings, but sensorimotor functions that continue to operate,
and in many respects operate best, when the intentional object of perception is
something other than one’s own body. On the other hand, however, the body schema
(and this reﬂects Merleau-Ponty’s usage of the term) also includes our pre-reﬂective,
proprioceptive awareness of our bodily action. In either case, the emphasis is on the fact
that the normal adult, in order to move around and act in the world, neither needs nor
has a constant body percept that takes the body as an object. Rather, in the self-
movement of most intentional activities the body-in-action tends to efface itself and to
be experientially attenuated (see Gallagher 1986; Leder 1990). To the extent that one does
become explicitly aware of one’s own body in terms of monitoring or directing perceptual
attention to limb position, movement, posture, pleasure, pain, kinaesthetic experience,
and so on, such awareness constitutes aspects of a body image and presupposes the
tacit contribution of the body schema. 

overshoot wildly, and unless he kept an eye on his hands, they started ‘wandering’ without his
knowledge. His hands would no longer be where IW thought they were and could only be retrieved
through vision. IW’s lack of proprioceptive feedback has two effects. First, the normal pre-reﬂective
proprioceptive awareness of one’s bodily movement is no longer operative in IW. Second, his body
schematic system, responsible for motor control, is never updated, and in effect, his body cannot
gain the motor control it needs to perform action in the normal way. Subsequently IW learned to
control his movements, but only through intense mental concentration and constant visual
vigilance. That is, he learned to rely on a combination of visual proprioception and visual
perception of limb movements, and this enabled him to move around. His awareness of his own
body remains completely transformed, however. It is a reﬂective awareness rather than a pre-
reﬂective one. Every single movement has to be done attentively. Even to sit in a chair without
falling out of it requires constant attention. He can only initiate a standing position if he looks at
his feet, and, unless he freezes in place, he can easily fall if he closes his eyes or if the lights go
out. If he sneezes while walking his mental concentration is disrupted, and he could fall over. IW
demonstrates exactly how much we depend on our pre-reﬂective, proprioceptive-kinaesthetic
awareness of our bodily movement, and on body-schematic processes for the performance of
action. 
This body schematic aspect of embodiment constitutes what Husserl called the ‘I can’, that
is, the embodied capabilities for action that correlate with the affordances of the world. As we
saw in the chapter on perception, the hidden sides of objects can become present if certain
movements are executed. Whereas the proﬁle currently presented by the object is correlated to
my present bodily position, the absent proﬁles are all correlated to positions that I could adopt,
and this means, Husserl indicates, that they are correlated to my kinaesthetic (sensorimotor)
system. I would be unable to intend the absent proﬁles of the object, and consequently be unable
to perceive objects per se, if I were not in possession of a bodily, kinaesthetic, self-awareness in
the form of an ‘I can’. I ‘know’ my body ﬁrst as a set of abilities which are not fully present to con-
sciousness (Buytendijk 1974, p. 25) – certainly a prelinguistic and non-conceptual form of
knowledge, or know-how – the limits of which become more explicitly known when things go
wrong. 
Imagine that you are playing tennis. Your attention is directed at the ball, which is heading
towards you with high speed, as well as on the position of your opponent. Your body tightens in
order to return the ball in a masterful smash, but suddenly you feel a sharp and intense pain in
your chest. Your smashing opportunity is lost, and the pain is now demanding all your attention.
It attracts your attention whether you want it to or not. Everything that was important a moment
ago – the ball, the match, your opponent – lose signiﬁcance. There is nothing that reminds us of
our embodiment (our vulnerability and mortality) as much as pain. Moreover, the painful body
can occasionally be experienced as alien. This is so because in pain we often lose control over
the body; the ‘I can’ suddenly dissipates, and this disturbs the projects which deﬁne who we are
(Leder 1990). Something similar is also true for various forms of illness, whether they require us
to stay in bed, or observe a strict diet, or force us to visit the hospital for daily treatments.
As is frequently the case in life, it is the privation which teaches us to appreciate what we take
for granted. It is when it no longer functions smoothly that we realize the importance of the body.
Bernard Toussaint makes this point clearly:
THE EMBODIED MIND
147

The body shows itself precisely when my body limits do not accord with the possibilities I
project. . . . In such cases my body calls attention to itself as an obstacle, or as Plato
would say, a prison. Thus my body becomes like an object, something alien to my intention.
There arises a dichotomy between aspiration and my facticity, between project and limit.
This dichotomy, I suspect, may well be the phenomenological basis for the development
of the mind–body dualism.
(1976, p. 176)
The lived body does not live this dualism, but when this dualism is generated – when action
breaks down and our body suddenly seems to be an object in our way – we gain some pheno-
menological access to what generally goes unnoticed – the smooth functioning of our body in
perception and action as the constant and pervasive support system for our cognitive life. 
EMBODIMENT AND SOCIAL COGNITION 
We will have more to say about the relation between embodiment and intersubjectivity in Chapter
9, but let us end this chapter with at least some indications of the link. It should be obvious that
my bodily self-apprehension and the way I live my body can be inﬂuenced by my social interaction,
and by the way my body is perceived and apprehended by others – just think of categories like
gender and race. But perhaps even more basically, social interaction is as such an embodied
practice. 
To exist embodied is to exist in such a way that one exists under the gaze of the other,
accessible for the other. My bodily behaviour always has a public side to it. Thus the standard
question which is posed as ‘the problem of other minds’ – ‘How do I ﬁnd an access to the other’
– is mistaken. It signals that I am enclosed in my own interiority, and that I then have to employ
methods to reach the other who is outside. But this way of framing the problem fails to recognize
the nature of embodiment. 
Bodily behaviour, expression, and action are essential to (and not merely contingent vehicles
of) some basic forms of consciousness. Mental states do not simply serve to explain behaviour;
rather, some mental states are directly apprehended in the bodily expressions of people whose
mental states they are. As Hobson has recently put it: ‘We perceive bodies and bodily expressions,
but we do so in such a way that we perceive and react to the mental life that those physical forms
express’ (2002, p. 248; cf. 1993, p. 184). 
When presented with behaviour, it is not as if we are faced with mere bodily processes that
can then be interpreted any way one likes. Rather, it is more like being confronted with a language.
Even a foreign and incomprehensible language is perceived as meaningful and not simply as
physical noise. When you see somebody use a hammer, or feed a child, or clean a table you
don’t have a problem understanding what is going on. You don’t necessarily understand every
aspect of the action, but it is immediately given as a meaningful action (in a shared world). It is
not as if you are ﬁrst confronted with a perceived exterior, and then have to infer the existence
of an interior mental space. In the face-to-face encounter, we are neither confronted with a mere
body, nor with a hidden psyche, but with a uniﬁed whole. When I see another’s face, I see it as
148
THE EMBODIED MIND

friendly or angry, etc., that is, the very face expresses these emotions. This does not rule out that
some mental states are covert, of course, but not all mental states can lack an essential link to
behaviour if intersubjectivity is at all to get off the ground.
To take embodiment seriously is to contest a Cartesian view of the mind in more than one way.
Embodiment entails birth and death. To be born is not to be one’s own foundation, but to be
situated in both nature and culture. It is to possess a physiology that one did not choose. It is to
ﬁnd oneself in a historical and sociological context that one did not establish (see Merleau-Ponty
1962, p. 347). Birth is essentially an intersubjective phenomenon, not only in the obvious sense,
because I was born by somebody, but because this very event only has meaning for me through
others. My awareness of my birth, of my commencement, and of my mortality, is intersubjectively
mediated; it is not something I can intuit or remember on my own. I do not witness my coming
into being, but I always already ﬁnd myself alive (Merleau-Ponty 1962, p. 215; Ricoeur 1966, pp.
433, 438, 441). Ultimately, the issues of birth and death enlarge the scope of the investigation.
They call attention to the role of historicity, generativity, and sexuality.7 Indeed, rather than being
simply a biological given, embodiment is also a category of sociocultural analysis. What this
means, however, is that to gain a more comprehensive understanding of the embodied mind, one
needs to take a much wider scope, and the ﬁrst step in developing this expanded concept of the
mind is to consider the complexities of the circumstances in which more than one body is involved
and where there is intersubjective interaction. Before we look at interaction, however, it will be
helpful to look at action itself. Intersubjectivity is not found simply in the proximity of two or more
passive subjects, but is also an encounter between agents.
NOTES
1
For an illuminating discussion of Sartre’s analysis of the body, cf. Cabestan (1996).
2
This pre-reﬂective sense of our own embodiment contributes to our ability to identify our body in an
objective fashion. Subjects who view videos of moving ﬁgures wearing point-light displays in the dark
(the bodies are marked by lights positioned at joints so that when walking their gait is clearly visible)
are better at identifying themselves than they are at recognizing friends and colleagues. The puzzle
is how they are able to do so, since what they see is how their gait looks ‘from the outside’. And this
cannot be something they are perceptually well acquainted with, since people obviously see the gaits
of friends and colleagues more than they see their own (Gibbs 2006, p. 51). But one suggestion is
that their pre-reﬂective proprioceptive sense of their own embodiment cross-modally informs their
perception of the visual Gestalt of their gait. For more on the pre-reﬂective awareness of one’s body,
see Legrand (2006).
3
In his lectures at the Collège de France in the mid-1950s, for example, Merleau-Ponty describes
perception in this context in the following terms. When I perceive an object, I am aware of it in terms
of my implicit motor possibilities: ‘The thing appears to me as a function of the [actual and potential]
movements of my body. . . . My body is the absolute “here.” All the places of space proceed from it. .
. . The Absolute in the relative is what my body brings to me’ (2003, pp. 74–75). 
4
Cases of out-of-body experiences (OBEs) or autoscopy (AS), where an awake person apparently sees
his body from a position outside of it, are special cases where, to get the phenomenology correct, one
THE EMBODIED MIND
149

needs to distinguish between the lived or perceiving body and the objective or perceived body. Blanke
et al. (2004) suggest that OBE and AS involve a failure to integrate proprioceptive, tactile, and visual
information with respect to one’s own body, and a vestibular dysfunction that leads to an additional
disintegration between personal (vestibular) space and extrapersonal (visual) space.
5
Phenomenologists take pre-reflective body-awareness to be a question of how (embodied)
consciousness is given to itself not as an object, but as a subject. Whereas Bermúdez has recently
claimed that ‘somatic proprioception is a form of perception’ that takes ‘the embodied self as its
object’ (1998, p. 132), the phenomenologists would argue that primary body-awareness is not a type
of object-consciousness; it is not a perception of the body as an object at all (cf. Gallagher 2003b;
Zahavi 2002).
6
The proprioceptive register is thus not independent of the subject’s experience. The grid of a global
positioning system might map out my body as I lay in the sun at Cocoa Beach, but this is not the
system I use when I need to scratch my foot; nor do I have to ﬁgure out whether my foot is to the East
or West of my hand, even if in some languages I would have to ﬁgure out whether the foot was on my
South leg. ‘[S]peakers of Guugu Yimithirr (Australia) use only the last kind of description; . . . even to
describe the location of an object on a body part – a Guugu Yimithirr speaker would say “There’s an
ant on your south leg”’ (Majid et al. 2004, pp. 108–109). Majid et al., however, ignore the question
of how this knowledge is possible. Compass directions can only be dead reckoned from the ‘here’ of
my lived body in relation to some landmark. Directions are always directions away from me, where my
‘here’ deﬁnes the ‘ﬁrst co-ordinates’. Phenomenologically, I triangulate north, pointing to it from here,
with some implicit or explicit reference point of which I know the relative location. How do I know
whether the foot I want to scratch is on my south leg or my north leg? I have to determine whether my
right leg is to the north or south of my left leg, and to do that I ﬁrst have to know whether the northerly
direction is to my right or to my left (see Gallagher 2006).
7
Heidegger, who is not exactly known as a philosopher of the body, chose a neuter, ‘das Dasein’, as
the central term for human existence. And as Heidegger points out in the lecture course Metaphysische
Anfangsgründe der Logik im Ausgang von Leibniz from 1928, the neutrality of Dasein entails an
asexuality (eine Geschlechtslosigkeit) (Heidegger 1978, p. 172). Subsequent thinkers have questioned
the validity of this move, and have argued that the basic structures of our embodiment would not
remain the same if we were asexual creatures.
FURTHER READING
José Luis Bermúdez, Anthony Marcel & Naomi Eilan (eds), The Body and the Self. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1995.
Andy Clark, Being There: Putting Brain, Body, and World Together Again. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997.
Shaun Gallagher, How the Body Shapes the Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press/Clarendon Press, 2005. 
Michel Henry, Philosophy and Phenomenology of the Body. Trans. G. Etzkorn. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff,
1975.
Edmund Husserl, Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy.
Second Book. Trans. R. Rojcewicz and A. Schuwer. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1989.
Drew Leder, The Absent Body. Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1990.
150
THE EMBODIED MIND

Maxine Sheets-Johnstone, The Primacy of Movement. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 1999.
Francisco Varela, Evan Thompson & Eleanor Rosch, The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and Human
Experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991.
Bernard Waldenfels, Das leibliche Selbst. Vorlesungen zur Phänomenologie des Leibes. Frankfurt am
Main: Suhrkamp, 2001.
Kathleen V. Wider, The Bodily Nature of Consciousness: Sartre and Contemporary Philosophy of Mind.
Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1997.
THE EMBODIED MIND
151


Action and agency
To set the stage for the following discussion we begin by pointing out that our way of being in the
world, according to many phenomenologists, is characterized primarily in terms of practical
action. Our life is not driven by theoretical wondering, although some philosophers have
considered this as our ultimate talent. It is driven by practical concerns. In our everyday lives we
are pragmatists. To put it differently, our primary way of encountering worldly entities is by using
them rather than by theorizing about them or perceiving them in a detached manner. 
In his analysis of our being-in-the-world, Heidegger frequently emphasizes that the world,
rather than being simply a complex unity of objects characterized by substantiality, materiality,
and extension, is in fact a network of meaning. More precisely the world we live in, and the world
as we perceive it, is a world saturated by practical references of use. That the knife is lying there
on the table means that I can reach and grasp it. Indeed – and following up on our discussion in
the previous chapter – the spatiality of the lifeworld – of the world we live in – is a spatiality
captured not by geometrical measures, but structured by contexts of use. Whether something is
present or absent, near or remote is something that is determined by our practical concerns. What
is nearest is not necessarily that which is closest in geometrical terms, but what we are concerned
with, what we can reach for and use. A couple of examples can illustrate this idea:
•
Measured in centimetres I am closer to the glasses I wear than to the picture I inspect, just
as I am closer to the phone I am using than to the person I am talking to. But phenomeno-
logically speaking (in terms of meaning or signiﬁcance) the relation is the reverse.
•
A village which is 20 kilometres away and which can be reached on foot might be much
nearer than an inaccessible mountain top which is only a few kilometres away. An ‘objectively’
long but easily traversed way can be much shorter than an ‘objectively’ short but difﬁcult way
(Heidegger 1986/1996, p. 106). Geometrical measures are very exact, but their exactness
8

doesn’t guarantee that they are relevant and useful when it comes to capturing the spatiality
of practical concerns.
More generally speaking, Heidegger is famous for having argued that we are not ﬁrst and
foremost occupied with perceptual objects in a theoretical way, but with ‘handling, using, and
taking care of things’ (ibid., pp. 67, 68–69). The entities we encounter in this ‘taking care of
things’ Heidegger calls ‘useful things’, ‘gear’, or ‘equipment’ (each of these expressions has been
used to translate Zeug), and their unique mode of being he characterizes as readiness-to-hand.
Worldly entities are ﬁrst of all things we can grab or manipulate or use, or are such that they resist
usage. It is only because of this coping engagement with the ready-to-hand that something like
a theoretical exploration of such entities is possible. It is only because we use the hammer that
circumstances can arise where the hammer is dysfunctional, and it is precisely then that we
start to notice and scrutinize it as an object that possesses extension, weight, colour, etc.
According to Heidegger, it is consequently not in theoretical observation but in practical use that
worldly entities show themselves as what they are. More fundamentally speaking, it is not
cognition – understood in a narrow intellectual sense as a theoretical detached observation –
that establishes the relation between self and world. Rather, in cognition, the self acquires a new
relation to entities in an already disclosed world. Cognition is a secondary modiﬁcation of our
primary being-in-the-world, and is only possible and attainable because we already are in the
world. 
In daily life we do not interact with ideal theoretical objects, but with tools and objects of
practical or emotional or aesthetic or personal value (Husserl 1952/1989, p. 27). Our interest
is guided by practical and social concerns, just as our actions are guided and shaped by patterns
of normality, by how others act. When I use equipment or instruments, my goals are inter-
subjectively structured. Indeed, one of the decisive differences between a natural object and a
manufactured piece of equipment is precisely that there are right and wrong ways to use the latter;
the use is guided by norms. How I use things is inﬂuenced by how I have seen others use them
and by what other people expect me to do. More generally, action is always action in a particular
environment that is both physical and social, and such factors shape our intentions.1 The meaning
of action, therefore, is contextually complex and cannot be reduced to a mere stimulus–response
aggregate. 
Consider the following examples. You are sitting comfortably in your seat:
(1) For no apparent reason, I ask you to get up and open the door. You do.
(2) I ask you to open the door if you have a question. Perhaps this is a little silly, but then you
have a question, and you get up and open the door. 
(3) You hear a knock at the door and you are expecting a friend to visit, so you get up, walk to
the door and open it.
Are these three actions of yours equivalent? We think that the answer is obviously ‘yes’ and ‘no’.
In some narrow sense, yes, assuming that your physical starting point is the same in all three
cases, and you make the same movements to get the job done. We could say, yes, these
movements are ‘mechanically’ or motorically the same; they are the same in terms of the
154
ACTION AND AGENCY

movements involved. But, no, they are clearly different actions if we try to specify them in terms
of contexts and goals, or more generally, intentions. Under an intentional description we would
say that in (3) you are opening the door for a friend; in (1) you are simply following an abstract
instruction; and in (2) you are indicating that you have a question. The intentional action is
different in each case, but also the intentionality of consciousness – what you are aware of when
you are acting – is different.
In all of these actions you are acting for a reason. If I asked you why you are opening the door,
you could respond, ‘Because you asked me to’, or ‘Because I have a question’, or ‘Because I
want to let my friend in’. In (3), you want to do something or get something done. In (1), you have
been asked to do it, and perhaps you simply want to be cooperative, but there is nothing
meaningful in the movement itself; and in the case of (2), you are actually expressing or
communicating something by your movement. Discussions going back as far as Aristotle
distinguish between actions that have no goal other than themselves, and actions that have
goals that are more than the action itself. (1) comes close to an action without a goal, although
you may claim that the goal is simply to respond to my request or to keep me happy. Clearly (2)
and (3) are actions with goals – asking a question, or letting a friend in. It is also possible to
distinguish actions like these from mere movements. For example, if I hit your knee with a small
rubber hammer and your leg kicked out, we would not call that an action on your part. This reﬂex
movement was actually caused by me knocking on your knee. ‘Knee knocking’ leads to
movement, but such movement is something short of action. So what is it that makes a movement
an action? 
Before we answer that, let’s take a closer look at the different kinds of movements that can
be discerned in the range between reﬂex movement and intentional action. There are some
movements that are neither reﬂex nor intentional. O’Shaughnessey (1980, II, pp. 60ff.) describes
a class of movements that he calls ‘subintentional’. For example, I may be sitting listening to you
tell an exciting story about your last visit to Cincinnati and my foot may be wagging (not unlike
the wag of a dog’s tail) with enjoyment or anticipation, or whatever it is one wags a foot at. This
is neither a reﬂex movement nor an intentional action on my part. Further, it has no goal, nor does
it support anything like an intentional action. Nothing would be lost in regard to my intentional
action (of attending to your story) if I did not wag my foot, although it may serve some purpose
such as reducing some kind of tension; or it may be generated by a kind of restlessness. Other
movements are intentional movements even if they are not part of the proper description of the
full-blown intentional act, or what we might call the organizing intention. For example, I can
describe (3) as an intentional action of answering the door and letting my friend in. In performing
this action, of course, I have to get up out of my chair, walk across the room, and twist the
doorknob. All such movements subtend and support the intentional action of letting my friend
in; in that sense, they are organized by the intentional action; and as such they are all intentional
movements. If you stop me before I reach the door and ask me if I knew that I was walking across
the room and if I intended to do so, I would surely say yes – I have to do so to get to the door. 
There is one other class of movements located somewhere between subintentional movement
and intentional movement. It is somewhat difﬁcult to get at these movements because they
resemble intentional movements insofar as they serve and support an organizing intentional
action, but they differ in that if you stop me in the action I will likely not know that I was doing any
ACTION AND AGENCY
155

such movement, and I would be hard pressed to say that I intended to do the movement. Mark
Rowlands (2006, pp. 102ff.) calls these ‘preintentional’ movements; we might also call them
‘prenoetic’ because they happen without our knowledge or awareness. The difﬁculty in deciding
whether a movement is preintentional or intentional can be found in one of his examples.
Rowlands claims, we think mistakenly, that the movement of a pianist’s ﬁngers as they play, for
example, Chopin’s Fantasie Impromptu in C# Minor are preintentional movements. Clearly it is
the case that the profoundly proﬁcient and practised pianist does not have detailed awareness
of everything that her ﬁngers are doing as she is playing the piece. But if we stopped the pianist
in midstream and asked whether she knew that her ring ﬁnger had hit the C#, I think that she
would say, ‘Yes, of course, since I am trying to ﬁnish this Fantasie,’ in the same way that I would
say ‘Yes, of course I’m walking across the room; I want to answer the door.’ Finger action on the
piano is clearly intentional movement. 
That even very habitual or practised movements, which we don’t single out for attention, such
as walking or playing a musical instrument are intentional is also clear from those cases where
their execution is inhibited or in other ways fail to match our intentions. More generally speaking,
we are normally prepared to describe our habitual or practised movements as actions. I would
say that ‘I hit the ball’ or ‘I played one of Beethoven’s sonatas’, rather than ‘the arm (or ﬁngers)
changed position in space’. But in this case the movements are at some level conscious. They
are teleological actions which contain a reference to the objects at which they aim (Merleau-
Ponty 1962, p. 139). In order to comprehend these actions, we cannot simply give a description
of some objective changes in geometrical space, we have to take account of the lived situation
in which they occur (Straus 1966, p. 44). Such movements display an original intentionality. It is
original, both in the sense that it is intrinsic to the movements (it is not simply a question of
interpreting the movements as if they were intentional), but also in the sense that it is a very basic
form of intentionality, a form of our being-in-the-world, which is more original and fundamental
than the one encountered in our theoretical attitude (Merleau-Ponty 1962, p. 387).
Rowlands provides a much better example of preintentional movement: saccadic eye
movements. It’s been shown that such movements do serve and subtend intentional action.
Rowlands cites the work of Yarbus (1967), who showed that saccades are speciﬁed by the task
one is engaged in. If you are asked to view a certain group of people with the task of judging how
old the people are, versus remembering the clothing they are wearing, versus locating them vis-
à-vis certain objects in the room, etc., it turns out that your eyes saccade differently for each task.
These different ways of scanning the environment relative to task are not reﬂex, although they
are automatic and non-conscious. As a result, the eye movement happens in a way that totally
escapes my awareness so that if you stopped and asked me whether I knew that my eyes were
moving this way or that, and whether I intended them to move in such ways, I would certainly say
no. This kind of movement falls short of intentional movement, but it nonetheless serves my
intention to perform a speciﬁc task, in a way that subintentional movements do not.
For a movement to be an action it has to be goal-directed and intentional. A movement that
is a reﬂex, or passive, or subintentional, or preintentional is not an action, although it might be
interpreted as an action from the outside, that is, by some other person. If my ﬁnger slips on the
trigger, someone might suggest that I committed an act of murder, if the bullet kills someone. I
could claim that I did not do it intentionally, and under some legal systems I could be convicted
156
ACTION AND AGENCY

of accidental homicide or manslaughter, but not murder. Under some circumstances I might be
mistakenly sentenced for a movement rather than for an action (although in other circumstances
my sentence might be based on a rightful charge of negligence). Notice that on this view, there
is no such thing as an unintentional action, although there could be unintentional movement or
unintentional consequences of my action.
Now, let’s dig a little deeper, philosophically. And let’s note that a consideration of human
action will illustrate how the different themes we are considering in this book are interconnected,
since to understand the phenomenology of action, it will be necessary to draw on our previous
discussions of the phenomenology of pre-reﬂective consciousness, temporality, embodiment,
perception, and intentionality (just as we will also have to return to and amplify our treatment of
action in our subsequent chapters on sociality and selfhood).
What makes a movement intentional – what makes it an action? What does it mean to have
an intention to act? We said: all intentional movements – all actions – are goal directed. So to
have an intention to act means that we have some kind of goal in mind. But this raises other
questions. Where precisely do we locate the goal? If, as you start to get up to answer the door
for your friend, I stop you and ask, ‘Why are you pressing your hand against the arm of that chair?’
you could respond, ‘Because I’m getting up.’ It would be wrong-headed, however, to suggest that
the goal of your action is simply to rise out of the chair. As you start to move toward the door I
could ask: ‘What are you doing,’ and you could answer in any number of ways: ‘I’m getting the
door,’ or ‘I’m letting my friend in,’ or you could express a goal beyond that, assuming that your
friend is visiting for a reason. You could say, ‘Thor and I are going to practise our song.’ So obviously
you have to open the door to let Thor in. You might be able to identify more distant goals: you may
want to enjoy making music, or you and Thor may want to become pop singers, because you want
to make lots of money, because you really want to buy a house at the beach, because you
ultimately want to be happy, etc. The more distant one gets from the actual movement in question,
however, the less satisfying the answer is as an answer to the question. Just as the most
appropriate question about the goal of your action lies somewhere between ‘Why are you pressing
your hand against the arm of that chair?’ and ‘What do you ultimately want from life?’ the most
appropriate answer lies somewhere between ‘Because I am getting up’ and ‘Because I want to
be happy’.2
But are we assuming too much when we talk in this ordinary way about action? The assumption
is that action is intentional if I am acting with a goal in mind, or, to say it another way, if I am in
some sense deciding to act for a reason. 
This implies that to understand an action is to know not what caused it in a purely physical
sense, but rather what motivated or justiﬁed it, either in general or in the eyes of the agent. One
could explain the cause of an action in a number of different ways. For example, one could explain
the action in terms of its sub-personal causes – the neuronal processes that underpin motor
control and perception. When we ask someone why she did something, however, we don’t expect
this sort of explanation:
‘Why did you buy that dress?’ 
‘Because the neurons in my right prefrontal cortex were ﬁring!’
ACTION AND AGENCY
157

No. Rather, we expect something of a personal explanation, where the person gives some good
(or even not so good) reasons that we can count as motivation for acting as they do:
‘Because the style is perfect for the dance tonight’.
Explanations at the personal level, in terms of reasons, can be complicated by a good deal of con-
text shared by people living in the same cultural setting. For example, to understand what happens
when A hands B a small round metal disc, we need to know what money is and why it is used.
And if A is bribing B (or repaying a debt, or making a loan), we need to know a fair amount about
socio-economic arrangements in human society. No amount of neurophysiology will contribute
to that kind of explanation, just as no amount of neuroscience will explain why Neville Chamberlain
after the Munich Agreement in 1938 declared that peace had now been preserved. The rationality
of behaviour is not given a deeper explanation by specifying the involved neural facts.
THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF AGENCY
In its proper sense, we understand agency to depend on the agent’s consciousness of agency.
That is, if someone intentionally causes something to happen, that person is not an agent (even
if they are a cause) if they do not know that they have intentionally caused it to happen. A hurricane
may cause the electric system to fail, but we would not attribute agency to the hurricane in what
we take to be the normal use of the term ‘agency’. The kind of conscious knowledge involved in
agency does not have to be of a very high order; it could be simply a matter of a very thin, pre-
reﬂective awareness, and in most cases it is just that. Sometimes, however, there may be an
explicit consciousness of acting for reasons. It certainly seems that in many cases I act for a
reason, and that sometimes such actions are preceded by a decision-making process. And in such
cases, I have a developed awareness that I am the person in charge, the agent, of my actions.
The sense of agency (or self-agency) for my actions, then, may involve a thin, pre-reflective
awareness of what I am doing as I am doing it, or it may involve a more explicit consciousness
ﬁlled with well-developed reasons. Let’s take a close look at the sense of agency and how it
relates to the experience of having an intention to act. 
In a previous chapter we discussed the concept of intentionality, in the sense of consciousness
always being of or about something. One should be careful not to confuse this concept of
intentionality with the concept of having an intention to act. Having an intention to act is usually
associated with an exercise of the will. I intend to go shopping this afternoon, and when this
afternoon comes, I actually go shopping, and it can be said that actually going was the result of
my wilful decision to do it. Of course, the intentionality of consciousness seems to be fully involved
in such intentional action, so although we want to distinguish between the intentionality of
consciousness (its structure to be about something) and the kind of intention that leads to wilful
action, we also want to ask what the relationship is between these two aspects of experience. 
When I am engaged in intentional action, what precisely am I conscious of? Part of the problem
involved in answering this question concerns the parsing of action. For example, if I decide to go
shopping at my favourite shop, I have to leave my ofﬁce, and to leave my ofﬁce I have to open the
158
ACTION AND AGENCY

door; and to do that I ﬁrst have to get up out of my chair. Now it seems clear that I might engage
in some deliberation about the best time to go shopping, and as an outcome decide that it would
be best to go in about an hour, around 2pm. When my clock indicates 2pm, I get up from my chair,
open the door, leave my ofﬁce, and walk down the street to my favourite shop. I might do all of
this without much more than the thought that it’s time to go shopping. Yet there has to be some
connection between my action and the deliberative decision that I made an hour before. If, for
no reason at all, or without the thought of going shopping, I suddenly exited my ofﬁce and walked
toward the shop, in the manner of an automaton, that is, without being conscious of what I was
doing, then none of it would be intentional action, although it might look like intentional action
from the outside. Something like this may happen in pathological fugue states or in epileptic
automatism. Perhaps, finding myself now at the shop, I would say, ‘I hadn’t intended to go
shopping, but since I’m here, I may as well do some shopping.’ From that point on, one might
say, my shopping action would be intentional, because I would have made a decision to shop.
If there is deliberation and decision to do something, then it seems a clear-cut case of
intentional action. The intentionality involved – I am deliberating about something, I am thinking
of doing something – is apparent. But not all intentional actions are clearly predated by
deliberative decision. I might act before I have a chance to decide to act. If, upon approaching
the bus stop, I see the bus pulling away, I might start running to catch it. If you stop me and ask,
‘Are you trying to catch the bus?’ my answer would be yes, that was my intention. But it is not clear
that I had made any deliberation or decision to run after the bus. I might say, ‘I decided with my
feet,’ meaning, my decision was in my action, not something separate from it. John Searle (1983)
calls this ‘intention-in-action’. But this kind of intention-in-action is pervasive, even in action that
involves an explicit decision. I had decided to go shopping, and when the time came, I didn’t
actually make a further explicit decision to get up from my chair, open the door, leave my ofﬁce
and so on. Rather, my intention is in my action; and for anyone who is observing me, they would
see my intention expressed in my action. 
There is still the question of parsing. I intend to go shopping, and this is clear from my previous
decision and the intentionality of that decision making. But do I also intend to open the door on
my way out of the ofﬁce? Obviously I do, even though I did not make any explicit decision to open
the door. Opening the door involves an intention-in-action. We would still say it is intentional, and
I would certainly answer in the afﬁrmative if you asked me whether I intended to open the door
just then: ‘Of course, because I’m going shopping.’ I can give my reasons retrospectively, if I need
to. But I don’t explicitly (or even implicitly) think about why I am opening the door. So what is the
intentional content of my consciousness as I am engaged in an intentional action? 
As I open the door to leave my ofﬁce, I am likely thinking about what I need to buy when I get
to the shop. The one thing that I am likely not thinking about is the way that I am moving my feet
across the carpet, or the way that I am reaching for the doorknob. To be precise, I am not attending
to my movement, although I am certainly conscious that I am moving, opening the door, leaving
my ofﬁce, etc. I have a pre-reﬂective sense that I am moving, even as I am reﬂecting on what I
need to buy at the shop. What is the nature of this pre-reﬂective awareness? It is recessive and
rather vague, in the sense that it does not involve attention. I am not paying attention to the way
that I am putting one foot in front of another; I am not attending to the way my arm is reaching
for the door, or the way my grasp is shaping itself to conform to the shape of the knob. If you stop
ACTION AND AGENCY
159

me in the process of opening the door, and ask what I am doing, my answer would likely be, ‘I’m
going shopping.’ My attention is mainly directed toward the highest appropriate pragmatic level
of description – the level of my larger project. I would probably not say ‘I am reaching my arm to
grasp the knob.’ Nor would I say ‘I am extending my arm muscles and shaping my grasp.’ Although
in some sense all of these statements might be true. 
All of these issues – how we normally parse our actions, at what level of description we can
provide reasons for our actions, the intentional content of our awareness during our action, both
at the reflective and the pre-reflective level, and what makes our actions intentional – are
connected. In regard to the sense of agency, we also need to distinguish two ways in which the
notion of agency enters into intentional action. First, there is an experiential sense of agency that
comes along with action at the pre-reﬂective level, the ﬁrst-order level of consciousness – the level
at which I have a sense that I am moving, even if I am not aware of the precise details of my
movement. Second, there is the attribution of agency that I can make if asked about my action.
If I am asked whether I did something (Did you go shopping today?) I can respond, ‘Yes’. I thereby
attribute a certain action to myself. I might make the attribution on the basis of memory, but the
memory would not be there if originally I did not have an experiential sense of agency for the
action. So the experiential sense of agency is more basic than the attribution of agency, which
depends on it.
One way to get at the concept of an experiential sense of agency is to distinguish it from a sense
of ownership for movement. It is possible to experience myself moving and to have a sense of
ownership for it, and thus say that it is my movement, but have no sense of agency for the
movement, for example in normal reﬂex or involuntary movements. If someone is moving my
arm, or the doctor is knocking my knee, it is clearly my body that is moving, although I am not the
author of that movement.
It may help to refer to pathological cases (e.g. Anarchic Hand Syndrome or schizophrenia) to
disentangle certain aspects of agency that are less clear in non-pathological cases. In the
Anarchic Hand Syndrome, patients ﬁnd one of their hands performing complex, apparently goal-
directed movements that they are unable to suppress. These often unwanted and socially
unacceptable movements might include undoing the shirt buttons a moment after the other
hand has done them up, throwing uncracked eggs and unpeeled onions into the frying pan, or
taking leftovers off a neighbouring diner’s plate. Although the patient is kinaesthetically aware
of the movements of the hand and although the hand itself is felt as the patient’s own, the
movements it performs are explicitly disavowed by the patient.
In schizophrenic symptoms of delusions of control or thought insertion, the sense of ownership
is retained in some form, but the sense of agency is missing. The schizophrenic who suffers from
these delusions will claim that his body is moving but that someone else is causing the movement;
or that there are thoughts in his mind, but that someone else is putting them there. What we said
in regard to the sense of agency holds more generally for this distinction between sense of agency
and sense of ownership. Distinctions between self-agency and ownership of bodily movement
may be found both in ﬁrst-order phenomenal experience and higher-order, attributional levels of
consciousness. In regard to the latter, for example, Graham and Stephens (1994) work out an
account of introspective alienation in schizophrenic symptoms of delusions of control in terms
of two kinds of self-attribution:
160
ACTION AND AGENCY

•
Attributions of subjectivity (ownership): the subject reﬂectively realizes and is able to report
that he is moving. For example, he can say, ‘This is my body that is moving.’
•
Attributions of agency: the subject reﬂectively realizes and is able to report that he is the
author of his action. For example, he can say ‘I am initiating this action.’
This distinction is consistent but not identical with a similar distinction made in regard to the level
of ﬁrst-order phenomenal consciousness (Gallagher 2000a, 2000b).
•
Sense of ownership: the pre-reflective experience or sense that I am the subject of the
movement (e.g. the kinaesthetic experience of movement).
•
Sense of agency: the pre-reﬂective experience or sense that I am the author of the action
(e.g. the experience that I am in control of my action). 
The ﬁrst-order experiences of ownership and agency are embodied, non-conceptual experiences,
and are closely tied to the temporal structure of consciousness. For example, if I reach to pick up
a glass, there is information in my motor system that speciﬁes something about the present
position and immediate history of my hand position, and an anticipation that is built into my
movement as my hand shapes its grasp. This temporal structure of movement is mirrored in my
sense of control over the movement and so in my sense of self-agency. It seems reasonable to say
that the higher-order, conceptually informed attributions of ownership or agency may depend on
this ﬁrst-order experience of ownership or agency. So, having picked up the glass, if I am then
asked, did I pick up the glass, I can correctly attribute agency to myself: ‘Yes, I was the one who
picked up the glass,’ although, to be sure, this question is not one I usually pose to myself. Graham
and Stephens (1994; Stephens and Graham 2000), however, suggest that the sense of agency
may in fact be generated at the higher (conceptual) level of attribution. Following Dennett, they
propose an explanation of the sense of agency in terms of ‘our proclivity for constructing self-
referential narratives’ which allow us to explain our behaviour retrospectively: ‘such explanations
amount to a sort of theory of the person’s agency or intentional psychology’ (Graham and Stephens
1994, p. 101; Stephens and Graham 2000, p. 161). In regard to thinking, for example, if we
understand thinking to be an action on our part, then, on Graham and Stephens’ account, my sense
of agency for that thinking derives from the reﬂective attitude I take toward it:
[W]hether I take myself to be the agent of a mental episode depends upon whether I take
the occurrence of this episode to be explicable in terms of my underlying intentional
states.
(1994, p. 93)
This ‘radical top-down’ account3 depends on an approach according to which we reﬂectively
make sense of our actions in terms of our beliefs and desires. So, if a subject does or thinks
something for which she has no intentions, beliefs, or desires – mental states that would normally
explain or rationalize such actions – the ﬁrst-order movements or thoughts would not appear as
something she intentionally does or thinks. Thus, whether something is to count for me as my
action
ACTION AND AGENCY
161

[. . .] depends upon whether I take myself to have beliefs and desires of the sort that
would rationalize its occurrence in me. If my theory of myself ascribes to me the relevant
intentional states, I unproblematically regard this episode as my action. If not, then I must
either revise my picture of my intentional states or refuse to acknowledge the episode as
my doing. . . . [T]he subject’s sense of agency regarding her thoughts likewise depends
on her belief that these mental episodes are expressions of her intentional states. That
is, whether the subject regards an episode of thinking occurring in her psychological
history as something she does, as her mental action, depends on whether she ﬁnds its
occurrence explicable in terms of her theory or story of her own underlying intentional
states.
(Graham and Stephens 1994, p. 102; see Stephens and Graham 2000, pp. 162ff.)
On this approach, non-schizophrenic ﬁrst-order phenomenal experience appears the way it does
because of properly ordered second-order interpretations, and schizophrenic first-order
experience appears the way it does because of a second-order mis-interpretation.
It would follow that the sense of agency results from an inference made on the basis of higher-
order introspective or perceptual self-observations: ‘what is critical [in the case of delusions of
control or thought insertion] is that the subject ﬁnd her thoughts [or actions] inexplicable in terms
of beliefs about her intentional states’ (Graham and Stephens 1994, p. 105). 
An alternative, ‘bottom-up’ explanation starts with the ﬁrst-order phenomenology. As previously
indicated, the pre-reﬂective experience of agency can be distinguished from the pre-reﬂective
sense of ownership. I know that I am moving, even if the movement is involuntary – e.g. if I am
pushed from behind. So for involuntary movement, I have a sense of ownership in that I sense
my body moving, but I have no sense of self-agency for it. Part of what makes my movement
intentional, and therefore an action, is that I have a sense of self-agency for it, in addition to a
sense of ownership. That is, I feel that I am in some sense the author or the cause of my action.
EXPERIMENTING WITH THE SENSE OF AGENCY
In contrast to the radical top-down account, a radical bottom-up approach would suggest that the
sense of agency originates in neural processes responsible for the motor aspects of action. One
version of such an account proposes that efference signals (the signals the brain sends to the
muscles to make them move) or certain forward motor control mechanisms (i.e. processes that
keep our actions on track as they develop, and prior to getting any sensory feedback about them)
generate a phenomenal experience of agency (e.g. Blakemore et al. 2002; Frith et al. 2000;
Gallagher 2000a, 2000b; Marcel 2003; Wolpert and Flanagan 2001). On this account, problems
that develop at the neuronal level could lead to (1) the loss of the actual experience of agency,
and (2) the generation of an actual experience of the movement or thought as alien (i.e. as
caused by someone or something else), as in schizophrenic delusions. In support of this kind of
account, a number of neuroscientists have attempted to ﬁnd the neural correlates of the sense
of agency (e.g. Chaminade and Decety 2002; Farrer and Frith 2002; Farrer et al. 2003). Their
brain-imaging experiments are examples of ‘front-loaded’ phenomenology (see Chapter 2) insofar
162
ACTION AND AGENCY

as the experimental designs are based on the phenomenological distinction between the sense
of agency and the sense of ownership (as deﬁned in Gallagher 2000a).
A close reading of these experiments, however, raises some troubling, but nonetheless
interesting, questions. Troubling in the sense that the experimenters sometimes seem confused
about what they are testing. Interesting, nonetheless, because the experimental designs raise
a question about how we should understand the ﬁrst-order, pre-reﬂective sense of agency. The
question we want to explore here is this: should we think of the pre-reﬂective sense of agency as
belonging to the realm of motor control and body movement, or as belonging to the realm of
intentional action?
The distinction between the sense of agency and sense of ownership, which is referenced in
all of these experiments, relies on the logic of involuntary movement. Since in the case of
involuntary movement there is a sense of ownership and no sense of self-agency, and because
my awareness of my involuntary movement comes from afferent sensory-feedback (visual and
proprioceptive/kinaesthetic information that tells me that I’m moving), but not from motor
commands issued to generate the movement (so, no efference signals), it seems natural to
suggest that in ordinary voluntary movement the sense of ownership might be generated by
sensory feedback, and the sense of agency might be generated by efferent signals that send
motor commands to the muscle system. In a recent paper, Tsakiris and Haggard (2005; also see
Tsakiris 2005) provide empirical evidence to support this division of labour. In their paper they
also raise an objection to the three experiments that attempt to identify the neural correlates of
the sense of agency. In all three, the experimental design was meant to discriminate the sense
of self-agency from the sense that someone else is the agent of an action. In these experiments,
however, subjects are required to move in each trial in order to accomplish a task. The Tsakiris-
Haggard objection is that since the subjects are moving in each trial, efferent processes must
be generating a sense of agency for each trial, as well as a sense of ownership. What becomes
clear is that whereas Tsakiris and Haggard think of the sense of agency as closely tied to bodily
movement and motor control, the experimenters think of the sense of agency as tied to the
intentional accomplishment of a task. 
For example, in the PET study by Chaminade and Decety (2002), subjects moved a joystick to
control an icon on a computer screen in order to accomplish one of two tasks. 
Task A (Leader): Subject moved their own icon, and observed another subject’s icon
following it.
Task B (Follower): Subject followed another subject’s icon with their own.
The authors describe the experiment as involving ‘a computerized environment free of explicit
reference to body parts’ in order to indicate that the sense of agency is related to the intentional
aspect of the action, and not to motor control aspects (Chaminade and Decety 2002, p. 1977).
One assumption in the experiment is that A (leading) would generate a sense of agency, while B
(following) would not. One obvious objection is that in both cases (A and B) the subject may have
a sense of agency for the intentional aspect – i.e. accomplishing the task. The subject might say,
‘My task in A is to lead, and I have done so, and my task in B is to follow, and I have done so. I
am the agent of both of these actions, respectively (leading and following).’ So differential
ACTION AND AGENCY
163

activation of these brain areas (the pre-supplemental motor area (SMA) and the right inferior
parietal cortex as putatively responsible for generating the sense of self-agency, and in contrast,
activation of the left inferior parietal cortex and the right pre-central gyrus as putatively responsible
for other-agency) may be for something other than the difference between self-agency and other-
agency. The Tsakiris-Haggard objection, however, is somewhat different. It is that the subject will
necessarily have a sense of agency in both A and B because in both tasks the subject moves his
hand to control the joystick. Tsakiris and Haggard understand agency to be directly tied to motor
control, and in that regard, to efference signals, and this in contrast to Chaminade and Decety
who associate the sense of agency with the intentional aspect of action – the accomplishment
of the task. 
This same issue can be raised in regard to the other two experiments as well. So even if we
think that the sense of agency is present already in ﬁrst-order experience rather than at a higher-
order cognitive level, there is still a question about whether it is generated by motor processes
or by some awareness of the intentional aspect of action.
In a very similar experiment, Farrer and Frith, like Chaminade and Decety, associate the sense
of agency with the intentional aspect of action, i.e. whether I am having some kind of effect with
respect to the goal or intentional task. They ﬁnd that the anterior insula is activated in correlation
to the sense of self-agency. Once again, the Tsakiris-Haggard objection is that since in each task
the subject is required to move the joystick, a sense of agency for that movement must result.
Since Farrer and Frith clearly think of the sense of agency as something tied to the intentional
aspect of action and not to mere bodily movement, they could easily claim to sidestep the Tsakiris-
Haggard objection. Curiously and confusingly, however, when it comes to explaining why the
anterior insula should be involved in generating the sense of agency, Farrer and Frith revert to
an explanation more consistent with the Tskaris-Haggard objection, that is, they explain the
involvement of the anterior insula in terms of motor control:
The sense of agency (i.e. being aware of causing an action) occurs in the context of a
body moving in time and space. Damasio (1999) has suggested that the sense of agency
critically depends upon the experience of such a body. There is evidence that both the
inferior parietal lobe and the anterior insula are representations of the body . . . the
anterior insula, in interaction with limbic structures, is also involved in the representation
of body schema. . . . One aspect of the experience of agency that we feel when we move
our bodies through space is the close correspondence between many different sensory
signals. In particular there will be a correspondence between three kinds of signal:
somatosensory signals directly consequent upon our movements, visual and auditory
signals that may result indirectly from our movements, and last, the corollary discharge
[efference signal] associated with motor commands that generated the movements. A
close correspondence between all these signals helps to give us a sense of agency.
(Farrer and Frith 2002, pp. 601–602)
They also cite well-known evidence that the inferior parietal cortex, which they are associating
with a sense of other-agency, is responsible for a sense of body ownership – ‘patients with right
parietal lesion do not recognize their limbs as their own and perceive them as belonging to others’
164
ACTION AND AGENCY

(p. 601). If this is the case, then the fact that for each task the subject was moving does indeed
complicate things – as the Tsakiris-Haggard objection contends.
The third study (Farrer et al. 2003) involved a different paradigm – subjects moved their own
hand, but saw a virtual hand projected on screen at veridical or non-veridical angles. The less
the subject felt in control, the higher the level of activation in the right inferior parietal cortex. The
more the subject felt in control (the stronger the sense of agency), the higher the level of activation
in the right posterior insula. Notice here that there seems to be a clear shift away from the
assumption made in the previous experiments, in which the sense of agency was construed in
terms of an intentional task that went beyond mere bodily movement; rather, in this experiment,
the sense of agency is construed in terms of bodily movement and motor control. In this case
the Tskaris-Haggard objection seems to hold. If the sense of agency is generated by mere bodily
movement rather than task-related action (at least a kind of purposive action that goes beyond
simply moving one’s hand for the sake of an experiment) – and bodily movement does seem to
be the only thing at stake in this experiment – then the fact that the subject moves his own hand
in all trials in this experiment certainly does not provide any way to discriminate the sense of
ownership from the sense of agency, and suggests that the subject should have a sense of
agency for all movements of his body. 
In explaining their results, the authors seem to make a further confusion between sense of
agency and sense of ownership: ‘Lesions of the inferior parietal cortex, especially on the right
side, have been associated with delusions about the patient’s limb that may be perceived as an
alien object or as belonging to another person’ (Farrer et al. 2003, p. 329). Such delusions are
about ownership rather than agency, despite the fact that the authors are offering their ﬁndings
as relevant for an understanding of the sense of agency. In addition, in Tsakiris and Haggard
(2005), activity in the insula was also found in the absence of movement, which implies that this
area may in fact reﬂect body-ownership rather than agency. 
Finally, note that the results of this experiment, which indicate the involvement of the right
posterior insula, are not fully consistent with the study of Farrer and Frith (2002), which indicate
involvement of the anterior insula bilaterally. Noting this, Farrer et al. seem unable to explain the
discrepancy: ‘We have no explanation as to why the localization of the activated areas differ in
these studies, except that we know that these two regions are densely and reciprocally connected’
(Farrer et al. 2003, p. 331). Yet it seems clear that there were significant differences in
experimental design, task, and foci of attention (that is, phenomenological differences between
focusing on a task and focusing on the virtual representation of one’s own movement) that may
explain the differences in neural activity.
Where does all of this leave us? First, we want to note that the sense of agency is not reducible
to awareness of bodily movement or to sensory feedback from bodily movement. Consistent with
the phenomenology of embodiment, in everyday engaged action afferent or sensory-feedback
signals are attenuated, implying a recessive consciousness of our body (see, for example,
Merleau-Ponty 1962; Tsakiris and Haggard 2005). I do not attend to my bodily movements in most
actions. I do not stare at my hands as I decide to use them; I do not look at my feet as I walk; and
I do not attend to my arm movements as I engage the joystick. Most of motor control and body
schematic processes are non-conscious and automatic. It still may be the case, however, since
action is embodied, that just such processes contribute to a sense of agency, and without the
ACTION AND AGENCY
165

feeling of the embodied nature of action our sense of agency would be very different. In addition,
however, if our descriptions and explanations of what we are doing in action are cast at the
highest appropriate pragmatic level of description – ‘I’m helping my friend’, or ‘I am on my way
to the pub’, or whatever, rather than ‘I’m moving my hand’, or ‘I am walking’, then our sense of
agency for the action will be tied to that intentional aspect, and that aspect is where our attention
is directed – in the world, in the project or task that we are engaged in. So clearly a form of
intentional feedback, which is not afferent feedback about our bodily movements, but some
perceptual sense that my action is having an effect, must contribute to the sense of agency. 
We suggest, then, that the sense of agency, at the ﬁrst-order level of experience, is complex
because it is the product of several contributory elements: efferent signals, sensory (afferent)
feedback, and intentional feedback, which is perceptual in nature. If any of these contributory
elements fail, or fail to be properly integrated, then we can get a disruption in the sense of agency.
In general, then, we can identify three aspects of the sense of agency that are normally
integrated with each other:
•
Sense of agency as first-order experience linked to intentional aspect (task, goal, etc.)
(Chaminade and Decety 2002; Farrer and Frith 2002).
•
Sense of agency as ﬁrst-order experience linked to bodily movement (Farrer et al. 2003;
Gallagher 2000a, 2000b; Tsakiris and Haggard 2005).
•
Sense of agency as second-order, reﬂective attribution (Graham and Stephens 1994).
This also suggests that the loss of the sense of agency in various cases – including schizophrenia,
Anarchic Hand Syndrome, obsessive-compulsive behaviour, narcotic addiction, etc. – may in fact
be different sorts of loss. In any particular case the sense of agency might be disrupted in different
ways depending on what contributory element is disrupted. In this regard there are four
possibilities for explaining the pathological loss of the sense of agency:
•
Radical top-down: the sense of agency may be disrupted by problems with introspective
higher-order cognition (Graham and Stephens) – this may very well be the case in advanced
and involuted symptoms of schizophrenia.
•
Radical bottom-up: the sense of agency may be disrupted by problems with motor control
mechanisms – efference signals (Tsakiris and Haggard) or the integration of sensory and
motor signals in the insula (Farrer et al.).
•
Intentional theory: perceived lack of concordance between intention and effects of action
may generate a disturbance in the sense of agency (Chaminade and Decety; Farrer and Frith).
•
Multiple aspects: the sense of agency is complex, and based on the integration of efferent,
afferent, and intentional feedback (some sense that my action is having the intended effect
on the world), as well as a coherent higher-order sense of self, so a disturbance in any one
contributory may lead to a disturbance in the sense of agency.
The multiple aspects option would integrate the first three and may provide the best way to
understand pathological disruptions in the sense of agency.
166
ACTION AND AGENCY

MY ACTIONS AND YOURS
These experiments pursue the distinction between self-agency and other-agency, between my
actions and the actions of others. Just as my intentions are explicit in my actions, I understand
your intentions to be explicit in yours. Intentions are not hidden in the mind, but expressed in
behaviour, and this – to anticipate discussions in a subsequent chapter – has implications for
intersubjective understanding. 
A customary answer to the question of how we know what we are doing has been that we need
to recognize the difference, the epistemic asymmetry, between our knowledge of our own actions
and our knowledge of the actions of others. Whereas the latter knowledge is based on observation
and ‘outer’ sensory awareness, agents typically have knowledge of what they are doing ‘from
within’. What precisely does this amount to, however? Is it a question of having direct access to
my mental events of intending or trying, or a matter of being aware of my bodily movements from
within, that is, proprioceptively? And is it at all possible to divide action into two components, a
psychological component of trying, and a non-psychological component of bodily movement, or
is action on the contrary an indivisible unity? Does our knowledge of it bridge or deconstruct the
divide between inner and outer?
The attempt to explicate how we are aware of our own actions is heaped with difﬁculties. The
situation is not much different if we instead turn to the question of how we acquire knowledge
about the actions of others. Does perception present us only with information about bodily
movements, and do we then have to rely on inference? Do we have to postulate the existence of
hidden mental happenings, if we are to interpret someone’s bodily movement as, for example,
buying a ticket, gesturing goodbye, or expressing joy, or is it rather the case that intentions are
manifested directly in goal-directed movements? Contrary to what is being claimed by some
theorists, there is much to suggest that we do in fact directly and non-inferentially observe other
people acting with intent. When I am playing football, I do not need to draw any inferences to see
that you and I are ﬁghting for the same ball. Without the beneﬁt of such an immediate recognition,
action-coordination – and survival – would be much more cumbersome than it actually is (Dokic
2003, p. 332).
One thing to stay clear about in any such discussions is the difference between different kinds
of explanations. We indicated above that causal or neuronal explanations cannot give us an
adequate account of actions. The same can be said for neuronal accounts of action awareness
– my awareness of my own action or my awareness of yours. Georgieff and Jeannerod (1998),
for example, have offered the ‘who system’ as a neuronal model of action identiﬁcation. The
issue is an important one in terms of sub-personal processes that could account for how my
cognitive system identiﬁes my action as distinguished from your action. This is cashed out in
neurological terms in the kinds of experiments we discussed in the previous section. One question
arises in the realization that the same areas of my brain that are activated when I engage in
intentional action are also activated when I see you perform the same or similar intentional
action (not just mirror neurons in the premotor cortex, but ‘shared representations’ in several
areas; see Chapter 9 for further discussion of mirror neurons). It has on this background been
claimed that the activation is neutral in regard to who is doing the action (see, for example, de
ACTION AND AGENCY
167

Vignemont 2004; Gallese 2005; Hurley 2005; Jeannerod and Pacherie 2004). But if so, one
requires an additional sub-personal mechanism to specify who the agent is. This is precisely
what the ‘who system’ does. If we are able to point to speciﬁc areas of the brain that are activated
when I am the agent, in contrast to areas of the brain activated when you are the agent, this can
add to our understanding of how the brain speciﬁes action in regard to agency.
Difﬁculties arise, however, if we try to project what may be important sub-personal distinctions
onto the level of consciousness. Jeannerod and Pacherie (2004), for example, propose that the
step-wise distinctions found on the sub-personal neuronal level are also apparent on the
experiential level. They characterize the neutrality of shared representations as ‘naked intentions’
– that is, intentions or intentional actions for which agency is yet to be determined – and they
assume that an articulation at the level of neural activations, specifically between those
activations responsible for (1) registering the ‘naked’ intention of an action, and (2) specifying
the agent for the action, means that there is an articulation in experience between the perception
of intention and the perception of agency. They thus claim that we ‘can be aware of an intention,
without by the same token being aware of whose intention it is. [And that] . . . something more
than the sole awareness of a naked intention is needed to determine its author’ (ibid., p. 140).
If in fact the brain can process information about intentions without assigning agency to the
intentions, is it legitimate to say that our experience is similarly articulated? Jeannerod and
Pacherie answer in the afﬁrmative:
We claim that it is like this with the perception of intention: when Mary watches John
open the door, she is primarily aware of an intention to open the door, rather than being
primarily aware that John intends to open the door. Similarly, when Mary herself intends
to open the door, she is primarily aware of an intention to open the door, rather than
being primarily aware that she herself intends to open the door.
(2004, p. 116)
Phenomenologically (experientially), however, intentions in almost all cases come already fully
clothed in agency. The idea that we perceive naked intentions in another’s action, and secondarily
attribute agency, seems here to be based on an unjustiﬁed supposition of isomorphism between
sub-personal and personal-phenomenological levels. The ‘who’ question, which is rightly posed
at the neurological level, hardly ever comes up at the level of experience, because the neural
systems have already facilitated the answer. Even if I’m wrong about who the agent of an action
is (something that may happen in schizophrenic symptoms of delusions of control), I am still
experiencing or perceiving the intention as already specified in respect to agency. I don’t
experience actions without agents; I experience ‘X’s action’ where X is either you or me. Indeed,
at the level of awareness, we are highly reliable in regard to discriminating between self and non-
self. Pathologies and oddly arranged experiments may reveal ‘who’ problems, but in normal
ecological behaviour it is generally clear whose intention/action it is. As we know from philo-
sophers like Wittgenstein, Shoemaker, and Evans, the self-identiﬁcation question – ‘Someone
is intentionally picking up this apple, is it me?’ – just doesn’t come up. 
In effect, it is important to realize that there is no necessary isomorphism between the
phenomenological level and the neuronal level. So if the neuronal processes can be deﬁned as
168
ACTION AND AGENCY

involving a step-wise process, this does not mean that a step-wise process needs to show up in
phenomenology.4
Similar things can be said concerning the role of higher-order cognition or reflective
introspection of the sort proposed by Graham and Stephens (1994; Stephens and Graham 2000)
in explaining the sense of agency. If actions are speciﬁed from the very start and at the ﬁrst-
order level of experience as belonging to particular agents, i.e. if in everyday experience we do
not act and then consider whether it was our action or someone else’s, this suggests that the
first-order, pre-reflective, non-conceptual experience of agency is primitive relative to meta-
cognitive self-ascriptions of actions that involve conceptual and linguistic resources. This is part
of what it means to say that our way of being in the world is characterized primarily in terms of
action. To be human is already to be action-situated in the world in a way that defines the
organized usefulness of the things we ﬁnd around us, and then lets us think about them.
NOTES
1
Normality is also a question of conventionality. As Husserl points out, there exist indeterminate general
demands made by custom and tradition: ‘One’ judges thus, ‘one’ holds the fork in such and such a
way, etc. (1952/1989, p. 269). As Sartre would later observe, ‘To live in a world haunted by my
fellowmen is not only to be able to encounter the Other at every turn of the road; it is also to ﬁnd
myself engaged in a world in which instrumental-complexes can have a meaning which my free project
has not ﬁrst given to them. It means also that in the midst of this world already provided with meaning,
I meet with a meaning which is mine and which I have not given to myself, which I discover that I
“possess already”’ (1956, pp. 509–510).
2
Anscombe (1957) argues that in order for something to be a reason for action one must be able to
see how one’s current action is going to bring it about (‘bringing about heaven on earth’ is not a real
answer to why I pick up the fork or vacuum the carpet). In order to accept that ‘because I want to be
happy’ could be an answer to the question of why I walk towards the door, we should be able to see
some means-end relation between the current activity and the distal goal; my desire for the latter is
what makes the former appropriate. 
3
We use the term ‘radical top-down’ to distinguish the sort of account that involves reﬂectively conscious
cognitive processes (as we ﬁnd here in Graham and Stephens) from what are sometimes called ‘top-
down’ processes in neuroscience. In neuroscience ‘top-down’ does not imply conscious processes.
For example, Tsakiris (2005) speaks about non-conscious body-schematic (neural) representations
as being top-down processes.
4
On the question about isomorphism between sub-personal and personal levels, see Gallagher (1997),
Hurley (2005), and Varela (1996).
FURTHER READING
Alain Berthoz & Jean-Luc Petit, Phénoménologie et physiologie de l’action. Paris: Odile Jacob, 2006.
Marc Jeannerod, The Cognitive Neuroscience of Action. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 1997. 
ACTION AND AGENCY
169

Susan Pockett, William P. Banks & Shaun Gallagher (eds.), Does Consciousness Cause Behavior?
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006. 
Paul Ricoeur, Freedom and Nature: The Voluntary and the Involuntary. Trans. E. V. Kohák. Evanston:
Northwestern University Press, 1966.
Johannes Roessler & Naomi Eilan, Agency and Self-awareness. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003.
170
ACTION AND AGENCY

How we know others
How do we get to know and understand others? Is social cognition perceptual or inferential in
nature? Is our understanding of others in principle like our understanding of trees, rocks, and
clouds, or does it differ in fundamental ways from our understanding of inanimate objects? Do
we understand others in analogy to ourselves, that is, does self-understanding have primacy
over the understanding of others, or is the understanding of self and other equally primordial,
basically employing the same cognitive mechanisms? 
According to a prevalent but mistaken view, whatever valuable insights phenomenology might
possibly offer to an understanding of the mind, an account of social cognition is not part of its
repertoire. As Dennett argues, for instance, traditional phenomenology is committed to a form
of methodological solipsism; rather than investigating the mental life of others, the classical
phenomenologist is concerned only with his or her own mental life, and thus engaged in a process
of autophenomenologizing (1987, pp. 153–154). As we shall see in the following, however, no
one familiar with the phenomenological tradition can endorse the claim that phenomenology has
failed to analyse the minds of others. But let us take a look at the standard options in the
contemporary debate, before turning to what phenomenology has to offer.
THEORY OF MIND DEBATE
In recent years, much of the discussion of the nature of social cognition has taken place within
the framework of the so-called theory of mind debate. The expression ‘theory of mind’ is generally
used as shorthand for our ability to attribute mental states to self and others and to interpret,
predict, and explain behaviour in terms of mental states such as intentions, beliefs, and desires
(cf. Premack and Woodruff 1978, p. 515). Although it was originally assumed that it was the
possession and use of a theory that provided the individual with the capacity to attribute mental
9

states, the contemporary debate is split on the issue, and is generally considered to be a dispute
between two views. On one side, we ﬁnd the theory theory of mind and on the other the simulation
theory of mind.
Theory theory (TT) is so called because it claims that our understanding of others relies on
adopting a theoretical stance; it requires the appeal to a particular theory, namely, folk psychology,
which offers us the commonsense explanation of why people do what they do. Simulation theory
(ST), in contrast, is the grandchild of the argument from analogy (see, for example, Gordon and
Cruz 2003). It claims that our understanding of the other is based on self-simulating their beliefs,
desires, or emotions. I put myself in their place and ask what I would be thinking or feeling, and
then I project the results onto them. On this view, we do not need theory or folk psychology since
we have our own mind to use as a model of what the other’s mind must be like.
This neat division is an oversimplification, however. Not only because of the existence of
several hybrid theories that combine TT and ST, but also because neither of the main positions
are theoretical monoliths. Theory-theorists are basically split on the issue of whether the theory
in question is innate and modularized (Carruthers, Baron-Cohen) or whether it is acquired in the
same manner as ordinary scientiﬁc theories (Gopnik, Wellman). As for the simulationists, some
claim that the simulation in question involves the exercise of conscious imagination and
deliberative inference (Goldman), some insist that the simulation, although explicit, is non-
inferential in nature (Gordon), and ﬁnally there are those who argue that the simulation rather
than being explicit and conscious is implicit and sub-personal (Gallese). 
Generally speaking, however, TT holds that the understanding of minded beings (be it of
oneself or others) is theoretical, inferential, and quasi-scientiﬁc in nature. It views the attribution
of mental states as a matter of inference to best explanation and prediction of behavioural data
and argues that mental states are unobservable and theoretically postulated entities. It
consequently denies that we have any direct experience of such states. Many philosophers
(phenomenologists included) would claim that we need concepts in order to extract and
comprehend the informational richness of what is already given, already present to us (like the
connoisseur who is able to discern and differentiate aromas and ﬂavours in the wine to which
others are not sensitive). Many would also endorse the idea that our observations are inﬂuenced
and enriched by former experiences. When TT claims that the attribution of mental states is
theoretically mediated, however, it has something more radical in mind. The idea is basically
that the employment of theory allows us to transcend what is given in experience:
One of the most important powers of the human mind is to conceive of and think about
itself and other minds. Because the mental states of others (and indeed of ourselves) are
completely hidden from the senses, they can only ever be inferred.
(Leslie 1987, p. 139)
Normal humans everywhere not only ‘paint’ their world with color, they also ‘paint’ beliefs,
intentions, feelings, hopes, desires, and pretenses onto agents in their social world. They
do this despite the fact that no human has ever seen a thought, a belief, or an intention.
(Tooby and Cosmides, in Baron-Cohen 1995, p. xvii)
172
HOW WE KNOW OTHERS

It should be noticed that TT defends a double thesis. It not only claims that our understanding
of others is inferential in nature, it also argues that our own self-experience is theoretically
mediated. After all, the basic idea is that any reference to mental states involves a theoretical
stance, and thus involves the application of a theory of mind.
HOW WE KNOW OTHERS
173
False-belief tests
Claims about the developmental route of theory of mind are often based on false-belief
experiments. A simple version of the test involves a child ﬁnding out that a crayon box
actually contains candles. Another person (or a puppet) enters the room and the child is
asked what this other person (or puppet) might think is in the crayon box. The three year
old, on average, thinks the other person will say there are candles in the box; the four year
old, on average, will recognize that the other person (or puppet) will have a false belief,
namely that because it is a crayon box, the box will have crayons in it. Why this interest
in children’s ability to succeed on false-belief tasks? In order to ascribe false beliefs to
others (and to itself), the child is assumed to be able to understand that our beliefs might
differ from, and thus be distinct from, real-world events and situations. The child’s
understanding that a person has a false belief consequently provides compelling evidence
that the child is able to appreciate the distinction between world and mind, between reality
and our beliefs about reality. In short, in order for the child to ascribe false beliefs to self
or other, the child must have beliefs about beliefs. It must be in possession of a theory of
mind.
Other false-belief tests involve narratives or small plays. For example, in Baron-Cohen
et al. (1985), three groups of children were tested: 20 autistic children (mean chrono-
logical age (CA) 11 years/11 months; mean verbal mental age (MA) of 5/5), 14 Down’s
syndrome children (mean CA of 10/11; mean MA 2/11), and 27 normal children (CA and
MA 4/5). The children are seated opposite the experimenter and on the desk in front of
them are two dolls, Sally and Anne. Sally has a basket; Anne has a box. Sally hides a
marble in her basket and leaves the room to go for a walk. When she is away Anne takes
the marble out of Sally’s basket and puts it in her own box. When Sally returns, the child
is asked the belief question: ‘Where will Sally look for her marble?’ (see Figure 9.1). The
correct answer, of course, is ‘in Sally’s basket’; the incorrect response is ‘in Anne’s box’.
If the child gives the correct answer, it is assumed that they have developed a theory of
mind sufﬁcient to recognize that Sally has a false belief, and a belief that differs from their
own. When children four years and older are confronted with this question they will
typically say that she will look inside her basket, since that is where she (falsely) believes
it to be hidden. Younger children, however, will often point to the box, indicating that they
think that Sally will look for the marble where it really is. They apparently fail to under-
stand that other persons’ beliefs could be false (Frith and Happé 1999, pp. 3–4). In this
continued

Whereas TT argues that our understanding of others chieﬂy engages detached intellectual
processes, moving by inference from one belief to the other, ST argues that our understanding
of others exploits our own motivational and emotional resources. Thus, in contrast to the theory-
theorists, the simulationists would deny that what lies at the root of our mentalizing (mind-reading)
abilities is a sort of theory. In their view, we possess no such theory, or at least none complete
enough to underpin all our competence with psychological notions. Thus far, the different versions
of the simulation theory agree. However, when it comes to a more positive account of what the
simulationist alternative amounts to, the opinions differ. We’ll focus on Goldman’s version of
explicit simulation, since it is the one that most unequivocally relies on and refers to a routine
that merits the name ‘simulation’. We will later return to the question of whether our under-
standing of others could be based on implicit simulations.
According to Goldman, our understanding of the minds of others is grounded in our introspective
access to our own mind; our capacity for self-ascription precedes the capacity for other-ascription.
174
HOW WE KNOW OTHERS
experiment all of the children were
able to answer factual and location
questions about the marble, but only
20 per cent of the autistic children
were able to answer the belief
question in contrast to 86 per cent of
the Down’s syndrome and 85 per cent
of the normal children. The conclusion
drawn was that autistic children have
not fully developed theories of mind
(for some critical remarks, cf. Hobson
1993; Zahavi and Parnas 2003). 
FIGURE 9.1 False-belief scenario. Source: Frith
and Happé (1999).

More speciﬁcally, Goldman argues that my understanding of others is rooted in my ability to project
myself imaginatively into their situation. I literally use my imagination to put myself in the target’s
‘mental shoes’. If, for instance, I witness an immigrant being harassed by a desk clerk, I would be
able to grasp the immigrant’s mental state and predict his subsequent behaviour by means of the
following procedure. By means of an explicit simulation, I would imaginatively put myself in his
situation, I would imagine how I would feel and react under similar circumstances, and on the basis
of analogy I would then attribute or project similar states to the person I am simulating (cf. Goldman
2000). Here is Goldman’s step-wise description of this process:
First, the attributor creates in herself pretend states intended to match those of the target.
In other words, the attributor attempts to put herself in the target’s ‘mental shoes’. The
second step is to feed these initial pretend states [e.g. beliefs] into some mechanism of
the attributor’s own psychology . . . and allow that mechanism to operate on the pretend
states so as to generate one or more new states [e.g. decisions]. Third, the attributor
assigns the output state to the target. . . .
(Goldman 2005, pp. 80–81)
One might think that there would be problems with the very ﬁrst step: ‘the attributor creates in
herself pretend states intended to match those of the target’. This suggests that the simulator
already has some idea of what’s going on with the other person. But where does that knowledge
come from and why isn’t that already the very thing we are trying to explain? Hybrid theorists who
combine TT and ST suggest that folk psychology provides, not a sense of what is going on with
the other person, but some general rules about how people think and behave in certain situations,
and that this is what the simulationist can use to generate the pretend mental states needed for
the simulation process (e.g. Currie and Ravenscroft 2002). In contrast, Goldman appeals to sub-
personal mirror resonance processes (discussed below), although he then faces the problem of
how to translate these processes into a conceptual grasp of propositional attitudes. 
Both sides in the theory of mind debate are faced with difﬁculties. One can, for instance,
question some of the empirical claims and implications associated with TT. If a theory of mind
is required for the experience of minded beings, then any creature that lacks such a theory will
also lack both self-experience and other-experience. According to the standard view, however,
children gain possession of a theory of mind only when they are around four years old. Thus, a
direct implication of TT seems to be that young children will lack any understanding of self and
others during the ﬁrst three to four years of life. But is that really true? When pressed on the issue,
some theory-theorists refer to various mechanisms that might be regarded as precursors to a
theory of mind (cf. Baron-Cohen 1995) and will in fact concede that children do understand
(experience) psychological states such as emotions, perceptions, and desires in both self and
others prior to the possession of a proper theory of mind. They then argue that what these children
lack is an understanding of representational mental states (cf. Wellman et al. 2001, pp. 656,
677). However, since the term ‘representational mental state’ is quite ambiguous, this admission
doesn’t do much to clarify the situation. At times, the term is used inclusively to cover all
intentional states, including perceptions; at other times, it is used much more restrictively to
cover only proper beliefs (thoughts). This vacillation makes TT into something of a moving target.
It also threatens to leave it with the uncomfortable choice between only two options. It can either
HOW WE KNOW OTHERS
175

defend a very strong, some would say extreme, claim, according to which the child has no ﬁrst-
person access to any of its own mental episodes and no experience of other minded creatures
prior to the acquisition of a theory of mind. Alternatively, it can defend a much weaker, some would
say trivial, claim by deﬁning representational mental states in such narrow and conceptually
complex terms that it is no wonder that it takes a relatively high level of cognitive sophistication
to be able to understand and attribute them to self and other. To rephrase the criticism in slightly
different terms: one can define a mental state as something purely interior and private, as
something that is not visible in meaningful actions and expressive behaviour. Given such a
concept of a mental state, there are good reasons to believe that children will only be able to
master the concept and ascribe it to others and self at a relatively late stage. However, the obvious
and crucial question is why one would want to operate with such a narrow understanding of the
mind in the ﬁrst place.
When it comes to ST, one might initially question whether there is any experiential evidence
in support of the claim that our understanding of others relies on conscious simulation routines.
Consider that on most versions of explicit ST, the claim is that simulation is not only explicit but
pervasive. That is, we use it all the time, or at least it is the default way of understanding others.
Goldman thinks this is a moderate claim:
The strongest form of ST would say that all cases of (third-person) mentalization employ
simulation. A moderate version would say, for example, that simulation is the default
method of mentalization . . . I am attracted to the moderate version. . . . Simulation is the
primitive, root form of interpersonal mentalization.
(2002, pp. 7–8)
Third-person mentalization signifies simply that one person is trying to understand another
person, rather than trying to understand herself (which would be ﬁrst-person). But if simulation
is both explicit and pervasive, then one should have some awareness of the different steps that
one goes through as one consciously simulates the other’s mental state. Is there any pheno-
menological evidence for this? A simple phenomenological objection to explicit ST is that when
I interact with or come to understand another person, there is no experiential evidence that I use
such conscious (imaginative, introspective) simulation routines. That is, when we consult our own
common experience of how we understand others, we don’t ﬁnd such processes. Of course, this
is not to say that we never use simulations, but that in itself is telling. It may be the case that
confronted with some strange or unaccountable behaviour I do try to understand the other person
by running a simulation routine (or by appealing to theory). This is clearly the rare case, however.
Moreover, I can easily become aware that I am in fact taking this approach, and it is all the more
apparent when I do this, simply because it tends to be the exception. But this tells against the
idea that I employ simulation in the usual everyday circumstance. Most of our encounters are
not third-person puzzles solved by ﬁrst-person procedures. They are second-person interactions
in which I easily have a sense of what is going on with the other person based on our common
pragmatic or socially contextualized interactions, with no cognitive simulation required.
Wittgenstein once raised precisely the right question in this regard: ‘Do you look within yourself,
in order to recognize the fury in his face?’ (Wittgenstein 1980, § 927). 
176
HOW WE KNOW OTHERS

Furthermore, one might ask whether it is really legitimate to cast our experience of others in
terms of a ﬁrst-person imaginative exercise. When we project ourselves imaginatively into the
perspective of the other, when we put ourselves in his or her shoes, will we then really attain an
understanding of the other or will we merely be reiterating ourselves? As Gilbert Ryle once
remarked, the logic of simulation isn’t correct because the idea of imputing to a variety of others
what is true of my simulated action ignores the diversity of their actions. ‘[T]he observed
appearances and actions of people differ very markedly, so the imputation to them of inner
processes closely matching [one’s own or] one another would be actually contrary to the evidence’
(1949, pp. 53–54). If I project the results of my own simulation on to the other, I understand only
myself in that other situation, but I don’t necessarily understand the other. The question, then,
is whether a process of simulation will ever allow for a true understanding of the other, or merely
let me attain an understanding of myself in a different situation (see below for further discussion). 
PROBLEMS WITH IMPLICIT SIMULATION
Some of these same questions can be raised about the implicit version of ST. ST has gained more
ground in recent years by appealing to good neuroscientiﬁc evidence involving sub-personal
activation of mirror neurons, shared representations, or more generally, resonance systems. If
simulation is sub-personal, and not something of which we would be aware, then phenomenology
is not in a position to raise objections, since phenomenology doesn’t give us access to the sub-
personal domain. In this regard, however, it is important to note that the implicit version of ST is
actually an argument against the explicit version of ST. That is, if our understanding of others is
in fact mediated by an implicit and automatic simulation process, then we have little need for
the more explicit version. Indeed, to the extent that an implicit ST would explain the pheno-
menological scarcity of explicit simulation, it would support the simple phenomenological
argument against explicit simulation. Along this line, Gallese states: ‘Whenever we face situations
in which exposure to others’ behavior requires a response by us, be it active or simply attentive,
we seldom engage ourselves in an explicit, deliberate interpretive act. Our understanding of a
situation most of the time is immediate, automatic, and almost reﬂex like’ (2005, p. 102).
Let’s take a closer look at the recent neuroscience that seemingly supports the idea of implicit
simulation. The basic ﬁnding in this regard is that one’s motor system reverberates or resonates in
one’s encounters with others. My motor system is activated when I perceive another person
performing an intentional action, for example. Mirror neurons in the pre-motor cortex and in Broca’s
area of the human brain are activated both when I engage in speciﬁc instrumental actions, and when
I observe someone else engage in those actions (Rizzolatti et al. 1996, 2000). Also, speciﬁc
overlapping neural areas (shared representations), in parts of the frontal and parietal cortexes, are
activated under the following conditions: (1) when I engage in an intentional action; (2) when I
observe some other person engage in that action; (3) when I imagine myself or another person
engage in that action; and (4) when I prepare to imitate another person’s action (Figure 9.2) (see,
for example, Grèzes and Decety 2001). 
These sub-personal mechanisms are said to constitute a simulation of the other’s intentions
(Gallese 2001; Gallese and Goldman 1998). Gallese captures it clearly in his claim that 
HOW WE KNOW OTHERS
177

Whenever we are looking at someone performing an action, beside the activation of
various visual areas, there is a concurrent activation of the motor circuits that are recruited
when we ourselves perform that action. . . . Our motor system becomes active as if we
were executing the very same action that we are observing. . . . Action observation implies
action simulation . . . our motor system starts to covertly simulate the actions of the
observed agent.
(2001, pp. 37–38)
This involves sub-personal processes generated by ‘automatic, implicit, and nonreflexive
simulation mechanisms . . .’ (Gallese 2005, p. 117). The processes themselves are very real, and
there is plenty of neuroscientiﬁc evidence to support this. But is it appropriate to characterize
these processes as simulations?2
As we saw, one possible objection to ST is that since it employs a model that is ﬁrst-person,
or at least conﬁned to my own system (a simulation in my own mind or motor system), nothing
justiﬁes inferring anything about what must be going on in the other person. Defenders of the
implicit version of ST have an answer to this. Mirror neurons (and shared representations) are
neutral – neither first- nor third-person – they are activated both for my own action and for
observation of the other’s action: activation of the system simulates the intentional action but
not the agent (de Vignemont 2004; Gallese 2005; Hurley 2005; Jeannerod and Pacherie 2004).
In this case, the sub-personal simulation process, like its explicit cousin, involves a multi-step
process. First, we perceive a certain behaviour; this is followed immediately by activation of
shared representations – in neutral mode; and this is followed by a determination of agency (i.e.
a speciﬁcation of who did the action – me or the other person) (Jeannerod and Pacherie 2004).3
The neuroscientiﬁc data, however, is open to an alternative and more parsimonious inter-
pretation. One could easily claim that the neural resonance processes of which we have been
speaking, in fact are part of the processes that underlie intersubjective perception rather than
simulation. That is, these processes have to do with a direct perception of the other person’s
intentions, rather than a distinct mental process of simulating their intentions. This claim requires
178
HOW WE KNOW OTHERS
Observation
Imagination
Preparing to
imitate
Action
FIGURE 9.2 Shared representations1

that we conceive of perception as a temporal phenomenon, and as enactive, and thus as involving
motor processes. First, mirror neurons fire 30–100 ms after appropriate visual stimulation
(Gallese, private correspondence). What is, even in neurological terms, a short amount of time
between activation of the visual cortex and activation of the pre-motor cortex, raises the question
of where precisely to draw the line between the act of perception and something that would
count as a simulation. Even if it is possible to draw a line between activation of the visual cortex
and activation of the pre-motor cortex, this does not mean that this line distinguishes between
perception and simulation as a step-wise process.
Let’s be careful and clear about this. Gallese and the implicit simulationists are not 
claiming that the step-wise neuronal processes (sensory activation of visual cortex followed by
mirror system activation) generate a step-wise conscious process of perception plus simulation.
Gallese contends that the simulation stays implicit; that the mirror system activation itself can
be read, functionally, as a simulation process. Nonetheless, we can raise two issues in this
regard. 
The ﬁrst issue is this: if perception is an enactive process (e.g. Hurley 1998; Noë 2004) –
sensorimotor, and not just sensory reception (see Chapter 5) – then it may be more appropriate
to think of the resonance processes as part of the structure of the perceptual process when
perception is of the action of others. Mirror activation, on this interpretation, is not the initiation
of simulation; it’s part of a direct intersubjective perception of what the other is doing. At the
phenomenological level, when I see the other’s action or gesture, I see (I directly perceive) the
meaning in the action or gesture. I see the joy or I see the anger, or I see the intention in the face
or in the posture or in the gesture or action of the other. I see it. I don’t have to simulate it. And I
immediately see that it is their action, gesture, emotion, or intention, and it is extremely rare that
I would be in a position to confuse it with my own. 
Of course, the simulationist can accept the phenomenology (‘Yes indeed, that is what seems
to happen’) and still hold to the interpretation that the speciﬁc sub-personal processes involve
simulation. But what precisely justifies this interpretation? Can the simulationist offer any
convincing evidence that the activation of resonance processes is in fact a simulation?
This brings us to the second issue, which counts as an argument against the implicit version
of ST. What theorists of implicit simulation call ‘simulation’ is not simulation in any genuine sense
of the word. Consider, ﬁrst, two deﬁnitions of ‘simulation’ offered by the Oxford English Dictionary,
which we will refer to as the ‘pretence deﬁnition’ and the ‘instrumental deﬁnition’. 
(1) The pretence deﬁnition: Simulation is an imitation, in the sense of something not real –
counterfeit; to simulate means to feign, to pretend. 
(2) The instrumental deﬁnition: Simulation in the sense of a simulator: a model (a thing) that we
can use or do things with so we can understand the real thing. 
We can ﬁnd both senses of the term used to deﬁne simulation in the literature of ST. Consider
the following characterizations (italics added). 
Instrumental def: Simulation means ‘using one’s own evaluation and reasoning
mechanisms as a model for theirs . . .’ (Dokic and Proust 2002, p. viii). 
HOW WE KNOW OTHERS
179

Instrumental def + pretence def: ‘According to ST, a simulator who runs a simulation of
a target would use the resources of her own decision making mechanism, in an ‘off-line’
mode, and then the mechanism would be fed with the mental states she would have if
she was in the target’s situation’ (Bernier 2002, p. 34).
Pretence def: Simulation involves ‘pretend states’ where, ‘by pretend state I mean some
sort of surrogate state, which is deliberately adopted for the sake of the attributor’s task.
. . . In simulating practical reasoning, the attributor feeds pretend desires and beliefs into
her own practical reasoning system’ (Goldman 2002, p. 7).
Pretence def: ‘our motor system becomes active as if we were executing that very same
action that we are observing’ (Gallese 2001, p. 37). 
Pretence def: the neurons that respond when I see your intentional action, respond ‘as if
I were carrying out the behavior . . .’ (Gordon 2005, p. 96). 
The concept of simulation, as used in ST, then, is deﬁned as meeting these two conditions: it is
a process that I control in an instrumental way (in the explicit version it is ‘deliberately adopted’),
and it involves pretence (I put myself ‘as if’ in the other person’s shoes). For sub-personal
processes, however, both of these characterizations fail. 
(1) If simulation is characterized as a process that I (or my brain) instrumentally use(s) or
control(s), if this is what simulation is, then it seems clear that what is happening in the implicit
processes of motor resonance is not simulation. We, at the personal level, do not do anything
with the activated brain areas – in fact, we have no instrumental access to neuronal activation,
and we can’t use it as a model. Nor does it make sense to say that at the sub-personal level the
brain itself is using a model or methodology, or comparing one experience with another, or
creating pretend states, or that one set of neurons makes use of another set of neurons as a
model. In precisely the intersubjective circumstances that we are considering, these neuronal
systems do not take the initiative; they do not activate themselves, but are activated by the other
person’s action. The perception of the other person’s action automatically activates in our brain
the same areas that are activated when we engage in similar action. The other person has an
effect on us. The other elicits this activation. This is not a simulation, but a perceptual elicitation.
It is not we (or our brains) who are doing it, but the other who does this to us.
Furthermore, (2) in sub-personal processes there is no pretence, and this is the case whether
we consider neuronal processes as vehicles (mechanisms) or in terms of the content that they
might represent. As vehicles, neurons either fire or don’t fire. They don’t pretend to fire. 
As far as we know, of course, no one is making this kind of silly claim. More to the point, however, 
what these neurons represent or register cannot be pretence in the way required by ST. 
They do not ﬁre ‘as if’ I were you. As we saw, proponents of implicit ST claim that the mirror 
system is neutral with respect to the agent; there is no ﬁrst- or third-person speciﬁcation involved. 
In that case, it is not possible for them to register my intentions as pretending to be your
intentions.
It is therefore not clear why we should think of the activation of resonance systems as a
simulation process of the sort required by ST. This is not to deny that there are resonance
180
HOW WE KNOW OTHERS

processes at work in our perception of the other person. Moreover, the nature of the resonance
processes involved in such encounters makes our perception of others (persons and some
animals) different from our perception of objects and instruments. But it doesn’t make social
cognition the result of an implicit simulation. 
EMPATHY AND THE ARGUMENT FROM ANALOGY
The phenomenological tradition contains rich but also quite diverse and even occasionally
competing accounts of intersubjectivity. In the following, we cannot cover all the different versions,
but will focus on those that are of most immediate relevance for issues in the contemporary
debate.
Let us take our point of departure in the classical attempt to come to grips with the problem
of other minds known as the argument from analogy. The argument runs as follows: the only mind
I have direct access to is my own. My access to the mind of another is always mediated by his
bodily behaviour. But how can the perception of another person’s body provide me with infor-
mation about his mind? In my own case, I can observe that I have experiences when my body is
causally inﬂuenced, and that these experiences frequently bring about certain actions. I observe
that other bodies are inﬂuenced and act in similar manners, and I therefore infer by analogy that
the behaviour of foreign bodies is associated with experiences similar to those I have myself. In
my own case, being scalded by hot water is associated with the feeling of intense pain; this
experience then gives rise to a quite distinct behaviour: screaming. When I observe other bodies
being scalded by hot water and screaming, I infer that it is likely that they are also feeling pain.
Thus, the argument from analogy can be interpreted as an inference to best explanation. An
inference bringing us from observed public behaviour to a hidden mental cause. Although this
inference does not provide me with indubitable knowledge about others and although it does not
allow me to actually experience other minds, at least it gives me more reason to believe in their
existence, than in denying it.
What is the relationship between this classical argument and the contemporary theory of
mind debate? More speciﬁcally, how does the argument from analogy relate to the simulation
theory and to the theory-theory, respectively? The argument straddles the difference between
the two alternatives. It has afﬁnities with (one version of) the simulation theory in so far as it argues
that we have an immediate and direct access to the content of our own minds, and in so far as
it holds that this self-acquaintance serves as our point of departure when it comes to an
understanding of others, that is, in so far as it insists that we come to know others in analogy
with ourselves. On the other hand, by arguing that our understanding of others is an inference
to best explanation, an inference bringing us from observed public behaviour to a hidden mental
cause, the argument from analogy also shares fundamental claims with the theory-theory of
mind.
The phenomenologist, Max Scheler, helps to throw cold water on the argument from analogy.
As he points out, the argument presupposes that which it is meant to explain. If I am to see a
similarity between, say, my laughing or screaming and the laughing or screaming of somebody
else, I need to understand their bodily gestures and behaviour as expressive phenomena, as
HOW WE KNOW OTHERS
181

manifestations of joy or pain, and not simply as physical movements. If such an understanding
is required for the argument of analogy to proceed, however, the argument presupposes what it
is supposed to establish. In other words, we employ analogical lines of reasoning only when we
are already convinced that we are observing minded creatures but are simply unsure precisely
how we are to interpret the expressive phenomena in question (Scheler 1954, p. 240; cf.
Gurwitsch 1979, pp. 14, 18). 
Scheler also questions two of the crucial presuppositions that are made by the argument from
analogy. First, the argument assumes that my point of departure is my own consciousness. This
is what is at ﬁrst given to me in a quite direct and unmediated fashion, and it is this purely mental
self-experience that is then taken to make possible the recognition of others. One is at home in
oneself and one then has to project into the other, who one does not know, what one already ﬁnds
in oneself. Second, the argument also assumes that we never have direct access to another
person’s mind. We can never experience her thoughts or feelings. We can only infer that they must
exist based on what we perceive, namely her bodily and behavioural appearances. Although
both of these assumptions might seem perfectly obvious, Scheler rejects both. As he puts it, the
argument from analogy underestimates the difficulties involved in self-experience and over-
estimates the difﬁculties involved in the experience of others (Scheler 1954, p. 251). We should
not fail to acknowledge the embodied and embedded nature of self-experience and we should
not ignore what can be directly perceived about others. That is, Scheler is pointing to the
importance of embodiment on both sides of this relation: he denies that our initial self-
acquaintance is of a purely mental nature and that it takes place in isolation from others, and
he also denies that our basic acquaintance with others is inferential in nature. We can perceive
the joy, sadness, puzzlement, eagerness of others, or that they have a question or a concern, etc.,
in their movements, gestures, facial expressions and actions, and without necessarily going
beyond that in order to infer something about their mind. 
For we certainly believe ourselves to be directly acquainted with another person’s joy in
his laughter, with his sorrow and pain in his tears, with his shame in his blushing, with his
entreaty in his outstretched hands, with his love in his look of affection, with his rage in
the gnashing of his teeth, with his threats in the clenching of his ﬁst, and with the tenor
of his thoughts in the sound of his words. If anyone tells me that this is not ‘perception’,
for it cannot be so, in view of the fact that a perception is simply a ‘complex of physical
sensations’, and that there is certainly no sensation of another person’s mind nor any
stimulus from such a source, I would beg him to turn aside from such questionable
theories and address himself to the phenomenological facts.
(Scheler 1954, p. 260)
It is no coincidence that we use psychological terms to describe behaviour; indeed, we would
be hard pressed to describe it in terms of bare movements. Affective and emotional states are
not simply qualities of subjective experience; rather, they are given in expressive phenomena,
i.e. they are expressed in bodily gestures and actions, and they thereby become visible to others.
There is something highly problematic at the phenomenological level of description about
claiming that intersubjective understanding is a multi-stage process in which the ﬁrst stage is
182
HOW WE KNOW OTHERS

the perception of meaningless behaviour and the ﬁnal one an intellectually based attribution of
psychological meaning. In the majority of cases, it is quite difﬁcult (and artiﬁcial) to divide a
phenomenon neatly into a psychological aspect and a behavioural aspect – think merely of a
smile, a handshake, an embrace, a leisurely stroll. In the face-to-face encounter we are confronted
neither with a mere body, nor with a hidden psyche, but with a uniﬁed whole. Scheler speaks of
an ‘expressive unity’ (Ausdruckseinheit). It is only subsequently, through a process of abstraction,
that this unity can be divided and our interest then proceed ‘inwards’ or ‘outwards’ (Scheler
1954, p. 261). 
Phenomenological views, then, involve non-mentalizing, embodied, perceptual approaches to
questions of understanding others and the problem of intersubjectivity. We begin from the
recognition that the body of the other presents itself as radically different from any other physical
entity, and accordingly that our perception of the other’s bodily presence is unlike our perception
of physical things. The other is given in its bodily presence as a lived body, a body that is actively
engaged in the world. As Sartre pointed out, it would be a decisive mistake to think that my
ordinary encounter with the body of another is an encounter with the kind of body described by
physiology. The body of another is always given to me in a situation or meaningful context, which
is co-determined by the action and expression of that very body (1956, p. 345). 
Some phenomenologists suggest that this involves a distinctive mode of consciousness which
they call empathy (see Scheler 1954; Stein 1989). Empathy is deﬁned as a form of intentionality
in which one is directed towards the other’s lived experiences.4 Any intentional act that discloses
or presents the other’s subjectivity from the second-person perspective counts as empathy.
Although empathy, so understood, is based on perception (of the other’s bodily presence) and
can involve inference in difﬁcult or problematic situations (where one has to work out how another
person feels about something), it is not reducible to some additive combination of perception
and inference. The phenomenological conception of empathy thus stands opposed to any theory
that claims our primary mode of understanding others is by perceiving their bodily behaviour and
then inferring or hypothesizing that their behaviour is caused by experiences or inner mental
states similar to those that apparently cause similar behaviour in us. Rather, in empathy, we
experience the other directly as a person, as an intentional being whose bodily gestures and
actions are expressive of his or her experiences or states of mind (for further discussion, see
Thompson 2001, 2005, 2007; Zahavi 2001a).
MENTALISM AND THE CONCEPTUAL PROBLEM OF OTHER MINDS
Despite their differences, TT and ST both deny that it is possible to directly experience other
minded creatures; this is supposedly why we need to rely on and employ either theoretical
inferences or internal simulations. Both accounts consequently share the view that the minds
of others are hidden, and they consider one of the main challenges facing a theory of social
cognition to be the question of how and why we start ascribing such hidden mental entities or
processes to certain publicly observable bodies. As we have seen, phenomenologists would
question the very way this question is framed. They would argue that the appeal to either theory
or simulation is unwarranted since it is motivated by an overly impoverished conception of what
HOW WE KNOW OTHERS
183

is given, of what is experientially available. It is occasionally assumed that a phenomenological
account of intersubjectivity is by and large opposed to TT, whereas the relation between
phenomenology and ST is much more conciliatory. This is only partially correct. In fact, by
emphasizing the embodied nature of self-experience, several of the phenomenologists 
have called attention to a problem that in retrospect must seem particularly troublesome for
Goldman’s simulationist account. Whereas theory-theorists such as Gopnik have traditionally
emphasized the parallelism between the ascription of mental states to self and other (Gopnik
1993), Goldman has stressed the asymmetry. But if we start out by accepting the conceptual
separation of the mental from the behavioural, and if my own self-experience is of a purely mental
nature, whereas my experience of others is purely behavioural in nature, we need to understand
why I should even so much as think that there are other minded creatures. As Davidson has 
put it: 
If the mental states of others are known only through their behavioral and other outward
manifestation, while this is not true of our own mental states, why should we think our
own mental states are anything like those of others?
(2001, p. 207; cf. Merleau-Ponty 1962, p. 348)
If we adopt what McCulloch (2003, p. 94) has recently called a behaviour-rejecting mentalism,
i.e. if we deny that embodiment and bodily behaviour have any essential role to play in experience
and cognition, if we deny that embodiment and environmental embedding are essential to having
a mind, we will have a hard time escaping what is known as the conceptual problem of other
minds. If my self-experience is, in the primary instance, of a purely mental nature, i.e. if my body
does not ﬁgure essentially in my self-ascription of (some) psychological states, while my ascription
of mental states to others are based solely on their bodily behaviour, what, then, should guarantee
the ascription of the same type of states to self and to others? How would we ever come to be in
possession of a truly general concept of mind that is equally applicable to different subjects (cf.
Avramides 2001, pp. 135, 224)?
Merleau-Ponty’s solution was to insist on the embodied character of self-experience. Were self-
experience of a purely mental nature, were it only present in the form of an immediate and unique
inwardness, I would not only lack the means of ever recognizing other bodies as embodied
subjects, I would also lack the ability to recognize myself in the mirror, and more generally, I
would be unable to grasp a certain intersubjectively describable body as myself:
If the sole experience of the subject is the one which I gain by coinciding with it, if the mind,
by deﬁnition, eludes ‘the outside spectator’ and can be recognized only from within, my
cogito is necessarily unique, and cannot be ‘shared in’ by another. Perhaps we can say
that it is ‘transferable’ to others. But then how could such a transfer ever be brought
about? What spectacle can ever validly induce me to posit outside myself that mode of
existence the whole signiﬁcance of which demands that it be grasped from within? Unless
[. . .] I have an exterior others have no interior. The plurality of consciousness is impossible
if I have an absolute consciousness of myself.
(Merleau-Ponty 1962, p. 373)
184
HOW WE KNOW OTHERS

The other can be evident to me because I am not transparent for myself, and because
my subjectivity draws its body in its wake.
(ibid., p. 352).
Since intersubjectivity is, in fact, possible, there must exist a bridge between my self-
acquaintance and my acquaintance with others; my experience of my own subjectivity must
contain an anticipation of the other (ibid., pp. 353, 448). If I am to recognize other bodies as
embodied foreign subjects, I have to be in possession of something that will allow me to do so.
When I experience myself, and when I experience others, there is in fact a common denominator.
In both cases, I am dealing with embodiment and one of the features of my embodied subjectivity
is that it, per deﬁnition, entails acting and living in the world. When I go for a walk, write a letter,
or play ball, to use Strawson’s classic examples (Strawson 1959, p. 111), I am experiencing
myself, but in a way that anticipates the manner in which I would experience another person and
in which another person would experience me. Indeed, when I engage in bodily self-exploration,
when I touch or observe my own body, I encounter aspects of my own being that can also be seen
or touched by others. 
The proper way to respond to the sceptical challenge is consequently by abandoning the
radical divide between the subject’s mind and body. This is where the notions of expression and
action become crucial. It could be argued, of course, that any account of the mind has to take
subjectivity and the ﬁrst-person perspective seriously, and that a focus on expression and action
will consequently lose sight of what is essential to the mind. However, this worry is misguided.
There is nothing reductive in the reference to expression and action, since subjectivity ﬁgures
centrally in both concepts. 
The idea is not to reduce consciousness as such to intentional behaviour. But we should
recognize that the expressive relation between mental phenomena and behaviour is stronger than
that of a mere contingent causal connection, though weaker than that of identity. Bodily behaviour
(which should be distinguished from embodiment) is neither necessary nor sufﬁcient for a whole
range of mental phenomena, so one can occur without the other – which is why lying, deception,
and suppression is possible – but this is not to say that this is generally the case or that it could
conceivably always be the case. As a rule, we do not come to know one independently of the other.
As Wittgenstein says, ‘One can say “He is hiding his feelings.” But that means that it is not a priori
they are always hidden’ (1992, p. 35e). In fact, as Rudd (2003, p. 114) has recently argued,
intersubjective understanding is possible precisely because some of our mental states ﬁnd a
natural expression in bodily behaviour, and because the language we learn for our mental states
is a language that we learn to apply to others even as we learn to apply it to ourselves. 
Expression is more than simply a bridge that closes the gap between inner mental states and
external bodily behaviour. In seeing the actions and expressive movements of other persons, one
already sees their meaning. No inference to a hidden set of mental states is necessary. Expressive
behaviour is saturated with the meaning of the mind; it reveals the mind to us. Certainly, it differs
from the mind’s direct manifestation available from the ﬁrst-person perspective. We should respect
and maintain the asymmetry between the ﬁrst-person and the second- (and third-)person access
to psychological states, but this is not a difference between an immediate certainty on the one
side, and an insecure inference on the other. We should recognize that each type of access has
HOW WE KNOW OTHERS
185

its own strengths and weaknesses. The second- (or third-)person access only ‘falls short’ of the
ﬁrst-person access if it is assumed that the latter is privileged, and that it is the internal aspiration
of the former to approximate the latter as closely as possible (Moran, R. 2001, p. 157).
The idea that behaviour, considered in itself, is neither expressive nor signiﬁcant, is unaccept-
able. The idea that behaviour is merely the outwardly observable effect of mental states is also
unacceptable. If we say that behaviour is expressive, this does not mean that it expresses or
externalizes something that is internal or hidden away. Such views do not merely fail to recognize
the true nature of behaviour, they also present us with a misleading perspective on the mind,
suggesting that the mind is a purely internal happening located and hidden in the head, thereby
giving rise to the problem of other minds (cf. McDowell 1998, p. 393). We should avoid con-
struing the mind as something visible to only one person and invisible to everyone else. The mind
is not something exclusively inner, something cut off from the body and the surrounding world
as if psychological phenomena would remain exactly the same, even without gestures, bodily
expressions, etc. As Overgaard (2005) points out, psychological phenomena stretch their arms
in many directions – they play many publicly observable roles – and to cut off all of these public
arms would leave us with a severely distorted picture of the mental.
When somebody blushes because he is ashamed, the blush reveals and manifests the shame,
it doesn’t conceal it. When somebody screams in pain, while the dentist drills in his tooth, it
makes little sense to say that this is merely behaviour, and that the real pain is still concealed
and inner. As Bennett and Hacker observe, we can speak of indirect evidence or of knowing
indirectly only where it also makes sense to speak of a more direct evidence, but there is no more
direct way of knowing that somebody is in pain than seeing him writhe in pain, or knowing that
somebody sees something than by him showing what he sees, or knowing what he thinks than
from his sincere confession. By contrast, noticing a bottle of pain-killers next to his bedside
together with an empty glass of water and concluding that he is in pain is an example of knowing
indirectly or by way of inference (2003, pp. 89, 93). 
This is not behaviourism. The idea is not to identify mental states with behaviour, or reduce
them to behaviour, nor does it rule out that some experiential states are covert; but not all
experiences can lack a natural expression if intersubjectivity is to get off the ground.5 To suggest
that the indirect means of verifying claims about black holes or subatomic particles can ‘give us
a model for verifying hypotheses in the area of the study of human and animal subjectivity’ (Searle
1999b, p. 2074) seems deeply confused. 
One reason why the problem of other minds seems so persistent is that we have conﬂicting
intuitions about the accessibility of the mental life of others. On the one hand, there is something
right about the claim that the feelings and thoughts of others are manifest in their expressions
and gestures. On the other hand, there also seems to be something right in the idea that the
mental life of another is in some respect inaccessible. There are situations, where we have no
reason to doubt that the other is angry, in pain, or bored. There are other situations where we have
no clue as to their precise state of mind. Despite this, it seems wrong to claim that the mental life
of others is essentially inaccessible, just as it seems wrong to claim that everything is open to view.
The challenge is to reconcile both intuitions, rather than letting one of them go (Overgaard 2005).
Phenomenology argues that it makes no sense to speak of an ‘other’ unless the other is in
some way given and accessible. That I have an actual experience of the other, and do not have
186
HOW WE KNOW OTHERS

to be satisﬁed with a mere inference or imaginative simulation, does not imply, however, that I
can experience the other in the same way as she herself does, nor that the other’s consciousness
is accessible to me in the same way as my own is. The second- (and third-)person access to
another person differs from the ﬁrst-person access to my own experience, but this difference is
not an imperfection or a shortcoming. Rather, the difference is constitutional. It is what makes
my experience of the other, rather than a self-experience. As Husserl points out, if I had the same
access to the consciousness of the other as I have to my own, the other would have ceased being
an other, and instead have become a part of myself (1950/1999, p. 139). We experience the
behaviour of others as expressive of experiences that transcend the behaviour that expresses
them. Thus, the givenness of the other is of a most peculiar kind. As Lévinas would put it, the
absence of the other is exactly his presence as other (1979, p. 89). The otherness of the other
is exactly manifest in the elusiveness of his or her ﬁrst-personal dimension. To demand more, to
claim that I would only have a real experience of the other if I experienced her feelings or thoughts
in the same way as she herself does, is nonsensical. It would imply that I would only experience
an other if I experienced her in the same way that I experience myself, i.e. it would lead to an
abolition of the difference between self and other, to a negation of the alterity of the other, of that
which makes the other other. 
A satisfying account of social cognition must consequently accomplish something of a
balancing act. On the one hand, it won’t do to overstate the difference between self-experience
and the experience of others, since this will confront us with the conceptual problem of other
minds. On the other hand, it won’t do to downplay the difference between self-experience and
the experience of others either, since this would fail to do justice to the otherness of the other.
INTERACTION AND NARRATIVE
Primary intersubjectivity
How can we explain the abilities that we have for our direct perception of the intentions and
meanings of others which Scheler and other phenomenologists describe? Developmental science
tells us that long before the child reaches the age of four, the supposed age for acquiring a theory
of mind, the capacities for human interaction and intersubjective understanding have already
been accomplished in certain embodied practices – practices that are emotional, sensorimotor,
perceptual, and nonconceptual. These embodied practices constitute our primary access for
understanding others, and they continue to do so even after we attain our more sophisticated
abilities in this regard (Gallagher 2001; Zahavi 2004b). 
In most intersubjective situations we have a direct understanding of another person’s
intentions because their intentions are explicitly expressed in their embodied actions and their
expressive behaviours. This understanding does not require us to postulate or infer a belief or a
desire hidden away in the other person’s mind. What some theorists might abstractly call a
person’s belief or desire is expressed directly in her actions and behaviours. 
A primary, perceptual sense of others is already manifest in the behaviour of the newborn. 
In neonate imitation, which depends not only on a contrast, in some sense, between self and
HOW WE KNOW OTHERS
187

non-self, and a proprioceptive sense of one’s own body, but also on a responsiveness to the fact
that the other is of the same sort as oneself (Bermúdez 1995; Gallagher 1996; Gallagher and
Meltzoff 1996), infants are able to distinguish between inanimate objects and people. The fact
that they imitate only human faces (see Legerstee 1991; Johnson 2000; Johnson et al. 1998)
suggests that infants are able to parse the surrounding environment into those entities that
perform human actions (people) and those ‘things’ that do not (Meltzoff and Brooks 2001). An
intermodal tie between a proprioceptive sense of one’s body and the face that one sees is already
functioning at birth. For the infant, the other person’s body presents opportunities for action and
expressive behaviour – opportunities that it can pursue through imitation. From early infancy
humans (and perhaps some animals) have capabilities for an interaction with others that fall
under the heading of what the developmental psychologist Colwyn Trevarthen (1979) calls
‘primary intersubjectivity’. These are precisely the capacities that underlie what Scheler describes
as the ability to directly perceive the intentions and meanings of others.
The early capabilities that contribute to primary intersubjectivity constitute an immediate
mode of interaction that does not depend on what theory of mind calls inferential ‘mentalizing’
or ‘mind-reading’. Infants, notably without the intervention of theory or simulation, are able to see
bodily movement as goal-directed intentional movement, and to perceive other persons as agents.
This does not require advanced cognitive abilities; rather, it is a perceptual capacity that is ‘fast,
automatic, irresistible and highly stimulus-driven’ (Scholl and Tremoulet 2000, p. 299). Baldwin
and colleagues, for example, have shown that infants at 10–11 months are able to parse some
kinds of continuous action according to intentional boundaries (Baldwin and Baird 2001; Baldwin
et al. 2001). The infant follows the other person’s eyes, and perceives various movements of the
head, the mouth, the hands, and more general body movements as meaningful, goal-directed
movements. Such perceptions give the infant, by the end of the ﬁrst year of life, a non-mentalizing
understanding of the intentions and dispositions of other persons (Allison et al. 2000; Baldwin
1993; Johnson 2000; Johnson et al. 1998).
Primary intersubjectivity also includes affective coordination between the gestures and
expressions of the infant and those of caregivers with whom they interact. Infants ‘vocalize and
gesture in a way that seems “tuned” [affectively and temporally] to the vocalizations and gestures
of the other person’ (Gopnik and Meltzoff 1997, p. 131). Infants at 5–7 months detect cor-
respondences between visual and auditory information that specify the expression of emotions
(Walker 1982). The perception of emotion in the movement of others, however, does not involve
taking a theoretical stance or creating a simulation of some inner state. It is a perceptual
experience of an embodied comportment (Bertenthal et al. 1984; Moore et al. 1997). This kind
of perception-based understanding, therefore, is not a form of mind-reading. In seeing the actions
and expressive movements of the other person one already sees their meaning; no inference to
a hidden set of mental states (beliefs, desires, etc.) is necessary.
The capabilities involved in primary intersubjectivity suggest that before we are in a position
to wonder what the other person believes or desires, we already have specific perceptual
understandings of what they feel, whether they are attending to us or not, whether their intentions
are friendly or not, and so forth. There is, in primary intersubjectivity, a common bodily
intentionality that is shared across the perceiving subject and the perceived other. As Gopnik and
Meltzoff indicate, ‘we innately map the visually perceived motions of others onto our own
188
HOW WE KNOW OTHERS

kinesthetic sensations’ (1997, p. 129), and the evidence from recent research on mirror neurons
and resonance systems in social neuroscience supports this.6 Thus, before we are in a position
to theorize, simulate, explain, or predict mental states in others, we are already in a position to
interact with and to understand others in terms of their expressions, gestures, intentions, and
emotions, and how they act toward ourselves and others. Furthermore, primary intersubjectivity
is not primary simply in developmental terms. Rather, it remains primary throughout the life span,
across all face-to-face intersubjective experiences, and it underpins those developmentally later,
and occasional, practices that may involve explaining or predicting mental states in others. 
Secondary intersubjectivity
In spite of the access that primary intersubjectivity gives us to others, this is certainly not sufﬁcient
to explain the full range of intersubjective understanding. If human faces are especially salient,
even for the youngest infants, or if we continue to be capable of perceptually grasping the meaning
of the others’ expressions and intentional movements, such face-to-face interaction does not
exhaust the possibilities of intersubjective understanding. 
Expressions, intonations, gestures, and movements, along with the bodies that manifest them,
do not ﬂoat freely in the air; we ﬁnd them in the world, and infants soon start to notice how others
interact with the world. When infants begin to tie actions to pragmatic contexts, they enter into
what Trevarthen calls ‘secondary intersubjectivity’. Around the age of one year, infants go beyond
the person-to-person immediacy of primary intersubjectivity, and enter into contexts of shared
attention – shared situations – in which they learn what things mean and what they are for (see
Trevarthen and Hubley 1978). Behaviour representative of joint attention begins to develop
around 9–14 months (Phillips et al. 1992). The child alternates between monitoring the gaze of
the other and what the other is gazing at, checking to verify that they are continuing to look at
the same thing. Indeed, the child also learns to point around this same time. Eighteen-month-
old children comprehend what another person intends to do with an instrument in a speciﬁc
context. They are able to re-enact to completion the goal-directed behaviour that someone else
fails to complete. Thus, the child, on seeing an adult who tries to manipulate a toy and who
appears frustrated about being unable to do so, quite readily picks up the toy and shows the adult
how to do it (Meltzoff 1995; Meltzoff and Brooks 2001). The child can understand that the other
person wants food or intends to open the door; that the other can see him (the child) or is looking
at the door. This is not taking an intentional stance, i.e. treating the other as if they had desires
or beliefs hidden away in their minds; rather, the intentionality is perceived in the contextualized
actions of others. Others are not given (and never were given) primarily as objects that we
encounter cognitively, or as entities in need of explanation. We perceive them as agents whose
actions are framed in their practical activities. It follows that there is not one uniform way in
which we relate to others, but that our relations are mediated through the various pragmatic
circumstances of our encounters. Indeed, we are caught up in such pragmatic circumstances,
and are already existing in reference to others, from the very beginning (consider, for example,
the infant’s dependency on others for nourishment), even if it takes some time to sort out which
agents provide sustenance, and which ones are engaged in other kinds of activities.
HOW WE KNOW OTHERS
189

As we noted, children do not simply observe others; they are not passive observers. Rather,
they interact with others, and in doing so they develop further capabilities in the contexts of those
interactions. Our understanding of the actions of others is guided by the most relevant pragmatic
(intentional, goal-oriented) level, ignoring possible sub-personal or lower-level descriptions, and
also ignoring mentalizing interpretations. Rather than making an inference to what the other
person is intending by starting with bodily movements, and moving thence to the level of mental
events (desires and beliefs), we see actions as meaningful in the context of the physical and
intersubjective environment. If, in the vicinity of a loose board, I see you reach for a hammer and
nail, I know what your intentions are as much from the hammer, nail, and loose board as from
anything that I observe about your bodily expression or postulate in your mind. We interpret the
actions of others in terms of their goals and intentions set in contextualized situations, rather
than abstractly in terms of either their muscular performance or their beliefs.7 The environment,
the situation, or the pragmatic context is never perceived neutrally (non-semantically), either in
regard to our own possible actions, or in regard to the actions and possibilities of others. As
Gibson’s theory of affordances suggests, we see things in relation to their possible uses, and
therefore never as disembodied observers. Likewise, our perception of the other person, as
another agent, is never of an entity existing outside of a situation, but rather of an agent in a
pragmatic context that throws light on the intentions (or possible intentions) of that agent. 
Let us at this stage briefly return to our earlier discussion of empathy. The use of the 
concept is not uncontroversial. In fact, even in phenomenological circles, the notion has fallen
into a certain disrepute. As Heidegger argues, if one seeks to understand intersubjectivity on 
the basis of empathy one will remain committed to a serious misconception of the nature of the
self: 
If this word [empathy] is at all to retain a signiﬁcation, then only because of the assumption
that the ‘I’ is at ﬁrst in its ego-sphere and must then subsequently enter the sphere of
another. The ‘I’ does not ﬁrst break out [. . .] since it already is outside, nor does it break
into the other, since it already encounters the other outside.
(2001, p. 145)
According to this understanding of the concept, the notion of empathy is linked to the problem
of how one (isolated) subject can encounter and understand another (isolated) subject. Even if
the empathic approach does not commit the same mistakes as the argument from analogy it still
misconstrues the nature of intersubjectivity, since it takes it to be ﬁrst and foremost a thematic
encounter between individuals, where one is trying to grasp the inner emotions or experiences
of the other (this connotation is particularly obvious in the German word for empathy: Einfühlung).
However, as Heidegger also points out, the very attempt thematically to grasp the experiences
of others is the exception rather than the rule. Under normal circumstances, we understand each
other well enough through our shared engagement in the common world. 
A similar criticism can be be found in Aron Gurwitsch. Gurwitsch readily acknowledges the
importance of expressive phenomena, but he criticizes Scheler for having been too one-sided in
his approach, and then argues that the realm of expressive phenomena is neither the only, nor
the primary, dimension to be considered if we wish to understand what it is that enables us to
190
HOW WE KNOW OTHERS

encounter other human beings as humans (Gurwitsch 1979, p. 33). In his view, we do not
primarily, and ordinarily, encounter others as thematic objects of cognition. Rather, we encounter
them in the world in which our daily life occurs, or to be more precise, we encounter others in
worldly situations, and our way of being together and understanding each other is co-determined
in its meaning by the situation at hand (ibid., pp. 35–36, 95, 106). 
To exemplify, Gurwitsch analyses a situation, reminiscent of an example given by Wittgenstein,
where two workers are cobbling a street. In this work situation, one worker lays the stones while
the other knocks them into place. Each worker is related to the other in his activity and comport-
ment. When one worker understands the other, the understanding in question does not involve
grasping some hidden mental occurrences. There is no problem of other minds. There is no prob-
lem of how one isolated ego gets access to another isolated ego. Rather, both workers understand
each other in virtue of the roles they play in the common situation (ibid., pp. 104, 108, 112). 
It is precisely within such common, and mainly pragmatic, situations that expressive
phenomena occur. When working or conversing with my partner, she might shake her head or
wrinkle her brow. But these facial expressions and bodily gestures are not unambiguous. They
do not reveal psychological states simply or uniformly. Each person has different countenances
and facial habits. But this is rarely a problem, since we do not encounter expressions in isolation.
They always occur in a given context, and our understanding of the context, of what comes before
and after, helps us understand the expression. As Gurwitsch points out, the ‘same’ shaking of
the head can take on different meanings in different situations. What an expressive phenomenon
is and what it signiﬁes in a particular case becomes comprehensible to me in the whole of the
present situation (ibid., p. 114; cf. Sartre 1956, p. 347). 
Heidegger and Gurwitsch both emphasize the social and cultural embeddedness of
intersubjective understanding. However, one can accept this emphasis and still consider the
notion of empathy to be useful. One should simply acknowledge that our typical understanding
of others is contextual and realize that empathy, properly understood, is not a question of feelingly
projecting oneself into the other, but rather an ability to experience behaviour as expressive of
mind, i.e. an ability to access the life of the mind of others in their expressive behaviour and
meaningful action. In fact, in contrast to mentalistic theory-of-mind approaches that deﬁne the
problem as trying to access the other person’s mind, phenomenological approaches suggest
that a more productive focus is on the other person’s world. As Merleau-Ponty puts is: ‘In so far
as I have sensory functions . . . I am already in communication with others. . . . No sooner has
my gaze fallen upon a living body in process of acting than the objects surrounding it immediately
take on a fresh layer of signiﬁcance; they are no longer simply what I myself could make of them,
they are what this other pattern of behaviour is about to make of them’ (1962, p. 353). In effect,
to understand other persons I do not primarily have to get into their minds; rather, I have to pay
attention to the world that I already share with them.
Narrative competency
How do we get the more complex and nuanced understanding of why people do what they do?
Certainly we start to realize that when confronted with a loose board, one person may pick up a
HOW WE KNOW OTHERS
191

hammer and nail and go to work, while another person may simply talk about the looseness of
the board, and a third may ignore it altogether. We start to understand that one person may know
something that another person doesn’t, or that others may think something very different from
us. To understand others in these situations and to engage in such practices we need something
more than our basic perceptions, emotions, and embodied interactions.
Tomasello has recently proposed that our social cognition takes three forms. We can
understand others (1) as animate beings, (2) as intentional agents, and (3) as mental agents. In
his view, the ontogenetic relevance of this tripartition is straightforward. Whereas infants are
able to distinguish animate beings from non-animate beings already from birth onwards, they are
only able to detect intentionality, in the sense of goal-directed behaviour, from around 9–12
months of age (as evidenced in phenomena such as joint attention, gaze following, joint
engagement, imitative learning, etc.), and they only become aware of others as mental agents
with beliefs that might differ from their own at around 4–5 years of age. Why does the last step
take so much longer? The answer provided by Tomasello is two-fold. On the one hand, he calls
attention to the different role of expressive behaviour. Whereas the animacy of others is directly
expressed in their behaviour, intentionality is also expressed in actions, but is at the same time
somewhat divorced from them, since on occasion it may remain unexpressed or be expressed
in different ways. Finally, when it comes to thoughts and beliefs these might lack natural
behavioural expressions altogether (Tomasello 1999, p. 179), which is what makes them so
much more difﬁcult to grasp. On the other hand, Tomasello argues that the more advanced form
of social cognition emerges as late as it does because it depends on prolonged real-life social
interaction (ibid., p. 198). More speciﬁcally, he argues that language-use may play a crucial role
in children’s coming to view other people as mental agents (ibid., p. 176). In order to understand
that other persons have beliefs about the world that differ from their own, children need to engage
them in discourses in which these different perspectives are clearly apparent, be it in dis-
agreements, misunderstandings, requests for clariﬁcation, or reﬂective dialogues (ibid., pp. 176,
182). Although it seems potentially misleading to designate the difference between an
understanding of the goal-directed actions of others and an understanding of their false or
divergent beliefs as a difference between an understanding of others as intentional agents and
as mental agents – it might suggest both that there is nothing mindful about goal-directed actions
and no intentionality to thoughts and beliefs – Tomasello is certainly right in pointing to the fact
that our understanding of others gradually becomes more sophisticated, and that there are
dimensions of the mind that are not as readily accessible as others. Moreover, he is also right in
pointing to the cultural and social dimension of this developmental process. Rather than being
the result of an automatic maturation of certain innate cognitive modules, it seems plausible to
view these more sophisticated forms of social cognition as abilities that develop in tandem with
increasingly complex forms of social interaction.
Theory-of-mind approaches, both TT and ST, or any hybrid version that combines them, miss
some basic and important capacities for social cognition. Yet, the acknowledgement of capa-
bilities for understanding others that define primary and secondary intersubjectivity – the
embodied, sensorimotor (emotion informed) capabilities that enable us to perceive the intentions
of others, and the perceptual and action capabilities that enable us to understand others in the
pragmatically contextualized situations of everyday life – is still not sufﬁcient to address what
192
HOW WE KNOW OTHERS

are clearly new developments around the ages of two, three and four years. The ‘elephant in the
room’ around the age of two years is, of course, language. But if language development itself is
something that depends on the capabilities of primary and secondary intersubjectivity, language
also carries these capabilities forward and puts them into service in much more sophisticated
social contexts. Explanation and prediction of action from a third-person stance is far more
infrequent and far less reliable than our normal intersubjective means of coming to understand
others through dialogue and conversation and shared narratives (Hutto 2004). If someone is
acting in a puzzling way, by far the easiest and most reliable way to gain further information is
not to engage in detached theorizing or internal simulation, it is to employ conversational skills
and ask the person for an explanation. 
Importantly, the capacity for understanding narrative, which starts to develop around age two,
provides a more nuanced way of understanding others. The pervasive presence of narrative in
our daily lives, and the development of narrative competency, provides a more parsimonious
alternative to theory or simulation approaches, and a better way to account for the more nuanced
understandings (and mis-understandings) we have of others. Competency with different kinds
of narratives enables us to understand others in a variety of ways. For example, folk-psychological
narratives (Bruner 1986) may provide the means to facilitate our understanding of intentional
actions in what we have suggested are the rare cases when, as observers, we are confronted with
a puzzling case. This is what Hutto suggests by his narrative practice hypothesis:
The Narrative Practice Hypothesis (NPH) claims that children normally achieve [folk
psychological] understanding by engaging in story-telling practices, with the support of
others. The stories about those who act for reasons – i.e. folk psychological narratives –
are the foci of this practice. Stories of this special kind provide the crucial training set
needed for understanding reasons.
(Hutto 2007, p. 53)
A complementary idea is that other kinds of narrative competencies enable a less mediated
interpretation of the other’s actions and intentions, that is, without the need for a folk psychology
of mental states. Normally, coming to understand another’s reasons is not a matter of
comprehending their discrete ‘mental states’ but rather their attitudes and responses as whole
situated persons. I encounter the other person, not abstracted from their circumstances, but in
the middle of something that has a beginning and that is going somewhere. I see them in the
framework of a story in which either I have a part to play or I don’t. The narrative is not primarily
about what is ‘going on inside their heads’; it’s about what is going on in our shared world and
about how they understand and respond to it. In this sense, our commonsense understanding
of others does not consist of folk psychological theory, but of the skilful practical reasoning that
depends on a developed narrative competency.
But, one might ask, aren’t narratives simply types of theories, and doesn’t this heavy reliance
on narratives entail an endorsement of some kind of theory of mind? As we see it, there are two
crucial differences between narratives that frame our social interaction and the kind of theories
to which TT appeals. First, the latter involve a reference to unobservable entities. According to
TT, mental states are theoretically postulated entities comparable to the black holes of
HOW WE KNOW OTHERS
193

astrophysics, and many theory-theorists of an eliminativist persuasion would even argue that
black holes are considerably more real than mental states such as hopes, memories, intentions,
and emotions. In contrast, narratives are grounded in observable events that take place in the
world. Second, this implies, as Bruner (1986) suggests, that narrative is a particular mode of
thinking that relates to the concrete and particular; it takes the concrete context to be of primary
importance in the determination of meaning. In contrast, theories in the proper sense of the
term are concerned with the abstract and general, and in this sense they abstract away from the
particular context.8
In the case of someone’s puzzling action, a narrative can facilitate understanding by ﬁlling in a
‘rationale’ when this is not immediately obvious. This doesn’t mean that our understanding of others
requires an occurrent or explicit narrative story telling: but it does require the ability to see and
frame the other person in a detailed pragmatic or social context, and to understand that context in
a narrative way. As Alasdair McIntyre (1981) suggested, for an observer, or for a participant, an
action has intelligibility when it can ﬁnd a place in a narrative (see Gallagher and Hutto 2007).
Narratively framing my understanding of others may happen explicitly or implicitly. An implicit
use of narrative simply means that while I interpret another person’s actions, I do so without
realizing that my interpretation involves a narrative framework. Even when an explicit knowledge
of a person’s story helps me to make sense out of what they are doing, there may be much more
going on. I understand any particular story in terms of other narratives about relevant social
practices, contexts, and characters. Such narratives may also shape my evaluative judgements
about the other person’s actions. 
Sartre’s example of being caught peeping through a keyhole is apropos. If I catch you as you
are down on your knees peeping through a keyhole at some people in the next room, I may
immediately assume your behaviour to be an offensive invasion of privacy. You are a ‘peeping
Tom’ and ought to be exposed. But my understanding of your behaviour is not based on having
a theory about peeping Toms, or about inferences about what you might believe or desire. After
all, I caught you ‘in the act’, ‘red handed’, and my evaluation of your behaviour is fully informed
by the various narratives that go along with peeping Toms. You know the same narratives and
for that very reason you can immediately feel shame and the weight of my judgement. 
This central role for narratives points in two directions. First, larger narratives that further
contextualize the situation, either in terms of different cultural norms or the peculiarities of a
person’s history or values, may be needed for a fuller understanding. Such narratives are available
as, and help to constitute, the shared normative practices that inform our cultural and
commonsense understandings (cf. Brandom 1994). Together, armed with these narrative
understandings, we go on to invent important institutions, create laws, and engage in complex
social practices. 
Second, in acquiring the narratives that we share with others, we shape our own self-
understandings. Since we develop in social contexts and normally acquire the capacity for
understanding in those contexts, the development of self-narrative obviously involves others.
Katherine Nelson (2003) points out that narrative abilities start to emerge in two year olds, ‘with
respect to the child’s own experience, which is forecast and rehearsed with him or her by parents’.
Self-narrative requires building on our experiences of and with others and their narratives. Thus,
at the beginning of this process we ﬁnd that ‘children of 2–4 years often “appropriate” someone
194
HOW WE KNOW OTHERS

else’s story as their own’ (ibid., p. 31). There is, then, another side to the story of how we
understand others through narratives; we also understand ourselves through narratives. As we’ll
see in the next chapter, this idea lends support to a growing interdisciplinary consensus among
developmental psychologists, neuroscientists, and philosophers (cf. Bruner, Dennett, Damasio,
McIntyre, Ricoeur, Schechtman) about the importance of a socially embedded narrative self. 
NOTES
1
Thanks to Peer Bundgaard for the diagrammatic suggestion.
2
Gallese is not alone in his interpretation of these resonance processes as simulation. Jeannerod and
Pacherie (2004, p. 113) ‘argue in favor of a simulation hypothesis that claims that actions, whether
overt or covert, are centrally simulated by the neural network, and that this simulation provides the
basis for action recognition and attribution’. A growing number of neuroscientists endorse this view.
Marco Iacoboni states: ‘When you see me perform an action – such as picking up a baseball – you
automatically simulate the action in your own brain’ (cited in Blakeslee 2006). Giacomo Rizzolatti
writes: ‘Mirror neurons allow us to grasp the minds of others not through conceptual reasoning but
through direct simulation. By feeling, not by thinking’ (in Blakeslee 2006). And Ramachandran and
Oberman claim that mirror neurons ‘not only send motor commands but also enable both monkeys
and humans to determine the intentions of other individuals by mentally simulating their actions’
(2006, p. 65; also see Oberman and Ramachandran 2007).
3
See our discussion of ‘naked intentions’ in the previous chapter.
4
This use of the term consequently differs from Stueber’s recent discussion, where he explicitly deﬁnes
empathy as a form of ‘inner or mental imitation’ (2006, p. 28).
5
Some empirical research suggests that the expression of a number of basic emotions, such as anger,
happiness, disgust, contempt, sadness, fear, and surprise, are cross-cultural and universal, though
there are, of course, culturally speciﬁc rules about how to manage expressions in public (Ekman 2003,
pp. 4, 10, 58). The suggestion that basic emotional expressions are innate is further corroborated by
the fact that even congenitally blind children normally exhibit the relevant facial expressions.
6
In citing Gopnik and Meltzoff’s claim about the necessity for innate mappings we are not thereby
endorsing their theory-theoretic construal of what this involves. Indeed, much of the evidence
developed by Meltzoff and cited by Gopnik and Meltzoff supports the idea of a strong intersubjective
perceptual capacity in the infant.
7
Our understanding of the performance of mimes who work without props depends on their excellent
ability to express intentions in their movements, but also on our familiarity with contexts. The mime’s
talent for expressive movements is clearly demonstrated in contrast to what we often experience in
the game of charades or pantomime when we haven’t a clue about what the player is trying to
represent.
8
This is not to deny that theories have their own historical contexts, in terms of how they get developed,
and in terms of their employment by theorists. Theory, however, tends to ignore just such contexts.
More importantly, however, because of their general nature, theories ignore the context of the person
we are trying to understand – call it the context of application. To the degree that theory remains
general and dependent on pre-determined rules or predictions, it downplays the importance of the
HOW WE KNOW OTHERS
195

particular aspects of the situation under consideration. If theorists-of-mind do worry about the context
of application, the only way that they are able to take it into consideration is by appealing to narrative
aspects of the situation.
FURTHER READING
Anita Avramides, Other Minds. London: Routledge, 2001.
Aron Gurwitsch, Human Encounters in the Social World. Trans. F. Kersten. Pittsburgh: Duquesne University
Press, 1979.
Edmund Husserl, Cartesian Meditations: An Introduction to Phenomenology. Trans. D. Cairns. The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoff, 1999.
Daniel D. Hutto & Matthew Ratcliffe (eds.), Folk Psychology Re-assessed. Dordrecht: Springer Publishers,
2007.
Søren Overgaard, Wittgenstein and Other Minds: Rethinking Subjectivity and Intersubjectivity with
Wittgenstein, Levinas, and Husserl. New York and London: Routledge, 2007.
Matthew Ratcliffe, Rethinking Commonsense Psychology. London: Palgrave-Macmillan, 2007.
Jean-Paul Sartre, The Emotions: Outline of a Theory. Trans. B. Frechtman. New York: Philosophical Library,
1948.
Max Scheler, The Nature of Sympathy. Trans. P. Heath. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1954.
Anthony Steinbock, Home and Beyond. Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1995.
Michael Theunissen, The Other. Trans. C. Macann. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1986.
Evan Thompson (ed.), Between Ourselves: Second-Person Issues in the Study of Consciousness. Exeter:
Imprint Academic, 2001.
Dan Zahavi, Husserl and Transcendental Intersubjectivity. Athens: Ohio University Press, 2001.
196
HOW WE KNOW OTHERS

Self and person
The phenomenological and ontological status and nature of the self are controversial issues
that are currently debated in a variety of different ﬁelds, including philosophy of mind, social
theory, cultural studies, psychiatry, developmental psychology, and cognitive neuroscience.
Among the topics discussed are questions like the following: What is a self? Does it exist for real,
or is it a mere social construct or perhaps a neurologically-induced illusion? If something like a
self exists, what role does it play in our conscious life, and when and how does it emerge in the
development of the infant? 
The scientiﬁc community is rather split on the issue concerning the scientiﬁc and philosophical
legitimacy of the notion of self. There is currently no consensus about whether the self has an
experiential reality or whether it is nothing but a theoretical ﬁction. Some claim that the sense of
self is an integral part of consciousness (cf. Damasio 1999) and that this is something which the
ongoing search for the neural correlates of consciousness must necessarily take into account.
Others argue that it is neither necessary nor rational to assume the existence of a self, since it is
a theoretical entity that fulﬁls no indispensable explanatory function (cf. Metzinger 2003). Currently,
both sides have ardent defenders. Where should one start, if one wants to make headway? 
A ﬁrst step is to recognize that there is no widespread philosophical consensus about what
exactly it means to be a self. The concept is characterized in a variety of ways throughout the
literature. The disparity of conceptions can be glimpsed by considering an incomplete inventory
of terms that have come to proliferate in philosophical and psychological accounts: 
•
Material self, social self, spiritual self (James 1890/1950).
•
Ecological self, interpersonal self, extended self, private self, conceptual self (Neisser 1988).
•
Autobiographical self, cognitive self, contextualized self, core self, dialogical self, embodied
self, empirical self, ﬁctional self, minimal self, neural self (see, for example, Damasio 1999;
Strawson 1999).
10

This disparity, which is both problematic and productive, is directly related to the variety of
methodological approaches taken within philosophy and in related interdisciplinary studies of
the self. They include introspection, phenomenological analysis, linguistic analysis, the use 
of thought experiments, empirical research in cognitive and brain sciences, and studies of
exceptional and pathological behaviour. One problem to be posed in this light is whether different
characterizations of self signify diverse aspects of a unitary concept of selfhood, or whether 
they pick out different and unrelated concepts. This problem of ‘inter-theoretical coherency’ 
is addressed below. Regardless of how one answers this problem, however, the variety of
approaches and definitions found in studies of the self productively reinforces the idea that
human cognition involves complex and varied aspects that are not easily reducible to one set of
principles.
NEUROSCEPTICISM AND THE NO-SELF DOCTRINE
The legitimacy of the notion of self has been questioned throughout the history of philosophy. In
one tradition, the claim has been that the positing of a conscious self or subject is descriptively
unwarranted. If we describe the content of our consciousness accurately, if we actually pay
attention to that which is given, we do not ﬁnd any self. This is the standard interpretation of
Hume’s reﬂections on the self. It follows that, rather than having experiential reality, the self must
be classiﬁed as a linguistic construct or as a product of reﬂection. This is also – perhaps somewhat
surprisingly – a view one can ﬁnd in phenomenology. In the ﬁrst edition of Logical Investigations,
Husserl defends what is known as a non-egological theory of consciousness. On this view there
is no pure identical ego-pole that is shared by all experiences or that conditions their unity.
Experiences are not states or properties of anybody, but mental events that occur without a
subject. Whereas we can distinguish between a red sports car and the experience of a red sports
car, we are unable to locate a third element, a pure ego that is directed at the sports car through
the experience. 
Sartre later adopted a similar view. It has occasionally been argued that mental life would
dissipate into the chaos of unstructured and separate sensations if it were not supported by the
unifying, synthesizing, and individuating function of a central and atemporal ego. However, as
Sartre pointed out in one of his early essays, The Transcendence of the Ego, this reasoning
misjudges the nature of the stream of consciousness; it does not need an exterior principle of
individuation, since it is per se individuated. Nor is consciousness in need of any transcendent
principle of uniﬁcation, since it is, as such, a ﬂowing unity. As we saw in Chapter 4, it is exactly
as temporal that consciousness uniﬁes itself. Thus, a correct account of time-consciousness will
show that the contribution of an ego is unnecessary; the ego consequently loses its raison d’être
(Sartre 1957, p. 40). 
Furthermore, Sartre claimed that a correct phenomenological investigation of lived
consciousness will simply not ﬁnd an ego, whether understood as an inhabitant in or possessor
of consciousness. One occasionally says of a person who is absorbed in something that he has
‘forgotten’ himself. This way of speaking contains a truth. When I am absorbed in reading a story,
I have a consciousness of the narrative and a pre-reﬂective self-awareness of the reading but,
198
SELF AND PERSON

according to Sartre, I do not have any awareness of an ego. As long as we are absorbed in the
experience, living it, no ego will appear. The ego emerges only when we adopt a distancing and
objectifying attitude to the experience in question, that is, when we reﬂect upon it. As Sartre put
it, the ego appearing in reﬂection is the object and not the subject of reﬂection. When I engage
in a reﬂective exploration of this object, I will be examining it as if it were the ego of another
person. In other words, I will assume the perspective of the other on myself (ibid., p. 87). It is in
this sense that the ego is transcendent and it is exactly for this reason that Sartre, in an attempt
to bypass the problem of solipsism, denied that my ego is something about which I enjoy a special
certitude: ‘My I, in effect, is no more certain for consciousness than the I of other men. It is only
more intimate’ (ibid., p. 104).
This phenomenologically motivated self-scepticism has recently been matched by a rather
different kind of scepticism. According to a view that is gaining popularity among some
neuroscientists and philosophers, what is crucial is not whether or not the self is a given in
experience. Whether something is real is neither a question of its appearance, nor a question of
whether it is experienced as real, rather it is a question of whether it fits into our scientific
worldview. According to this criterion, the concept of the self has been weighed and has been
found wanting. 
One prominent exponent of this neuroscepticism is Thomas Metzinger, who in Being No One
offers us a representationalist and functionalist analysis of what a consciously experienced ﬁrst-
person perspective is. The conclusion he reaches is quite unequivocal: ‘no such things as selves
exist in the world: Nobody ever was or had a self’ (2003, p. 1). For all scientiﬁc and philosophical
purposes, the notion of a self can safely be eliminated. It is neither necessary nor rational to
assume the existence of a self, since it is a theoretical entity that fulfils no indispensable
explanatory function. In reality, the self is not an actually existing object, and it is certainly not
an unchangeable substance, rather it is what Metzinger calls a representational construct.
Biological organisms exist, but an organism is not a self. Some organisms possess self-models,
but such self-models are not selves; they are merely complex brain states (ibid., p. 563). All that
really exist are certain types of information-processing systems that are engaged in operations
of self-modeling, and we should not commit the mistake of confusing a model with reality (ibid.,
pp. 370, 385, 390). Or to be more precise, the self-representing system is caught up in a naïve-
realistic self-misunderstanding (ibid., pp. 332, 436–437, 564). Properly speaking, there is no one
who confuses herself with anything, since there is no one who could be taken in by the illusion
of a conscious self (ibid., p. 634).
It is obviously possible to speak of the self or ego the way Husserl, Sartre, and Metzinger do.
One problem with their sceptical reservations, however, is that they all presuppose rather speciﬁc
concepts of self, which they then proceed to criticize. Yet is it at all clear what, precisely, a 
self is? 
VARIOUS NOTIONS OF SELF
What we intend to do in the following is to contrast a rather classical understanding of the self
(the self as a pure identity-pole), which, to a large extent, is targeted by the non-egological criticism,
SELF AND PERSON
199

with two alternate and more contemporary ways of conceiving of the self (the self as a narrative
construction, and the self as an experiential dimension).
The self as a pure identity-pole
This traditional view insists on distinguishing between the identical self on the one hand and the
manifold of changing experiences on the other. In a sequential order I can taste a single malt
whisky, smell a bunch of violets, admire a painting by Picasso, and recollect a visit to Venice. We
are here faced with a number of different experiences, but they also have something in common;
they all have the same subject, they are all lived through by one and the same self, namely myself.
Whereas experiences arise and perish in the stream of consciousness, the self remains as one
and the same through time. More speciﬁcally, the self is taken to be a distinct principle of identity
that stands apart from and above the stream of changing experiences and which, for that very
reason, is able to structure it and give it unity and coherence.
The notion of self at work here is obviously a very formal and abstract one. It is always the case
that experience is lived through by a certain subject; it is always an experience for a certain
subject. The self is, consequently, understood as the pure subject, or ego-pole, to which any
episode of experiencing necessarily refers back. It is the subject of experience rather than the
object of experience. Instead of being something which can, itself, be given as an object for
experience, it is a necessary condition of possibility for (coherent) experience. We can infer that
it must exist, but it is not, itself, something that can be experienced. It is an elusive principle, a
presupposition, rather than a datum or something that appears in the stream of experience. If
it did make a phenomenal appearance, it would be an appearance for someone, i.e. it would be
an object, and therefore no longer a self (cf. Natorp 1912, pp. 8, 40). As Kant already pointed
out in his Critique of Pure Reason, ‘It is . . . evident that I cannot know as an object that which I
must presuppose to know any object’ (1956/1999, p. A402). 
The self as a narrative construction
A quite different way of conceiving the self takes its point of departure in the fact that self-
comprehension and self-knowledge, rather than being something that is given once and for all,
is something that has to be appropriated and can be attained with varying degrees of success.
As long as life goes on, there is no ﬁnal self-understanding. The same, however, can also be said
for what it means to be a self. The self is not a thing, it is not something ﬁxed and unchangeable
but rather, something evolving. It is an achievement rather than a given. It is something that is
realized through one’s projects and actions and it therefore cannot be understood independently
of one’s own self-interpretation. In short, one is not a self in the same way one is a living organism.
One does not have a self in the same way that one has a heart or a nose (Taylor 1989, p. 34). 
According to this view, which has become increasingly popular lately, the self is constructed
in and through narrative self-interpretations. When confronted with the question ‘Who am I?’ we
will tell a certain story and emphasize aspects that we deem to be of special signiﬁcance, to be
200
SELF AND PERSON

that which constitutes the leitmotif in our life, that which deﬁnes who we are, that which we
present to others for recognition and approval (Ricoeur 1988, p. 246). This narrative, however,
is not merely a way of gaining insight into the nature of an already existing self, since there is no
such thing as a pre-existing self, one that just awaits being portrayed in words. To believe in such
a pre-linguistic given is quite literally to have been misled by stories.
The narrative account is quite explicit in emphasizing the temporal dimension of selfhood
(see also Chapter 4). Human time is the time of our life stories; a narrated time structured and
articulated by the symbolic mediations of narratives (ibid., p. 244). Events and experiences that
occur at different times are united by being incorporated into a single narrative. Whether or not
a particular action, experience, or characteristic counts as mine is a question of whether or not
it is included in my self-narrative. As MacIntyre puts it, the unity of the self ‘resides in the unity
of a narrative which links birth to life to death as narrative beginning to middle to end’ (ibid., 
p. 205). 
The narrative account also stresses the social dimension of selfhood (cf. Chapter 9). Narration
is a social process that starts in early childhood and continues for the rest of our life. I come to
know who I am and what I want to do with my life by participating in a linguistic community.
Others are called upon to hear and to accept the narrative accounts we give of our actions and
experiences. Furthermore, as Bruner points out, our self-making stories are not made up from
scratch; they pattern themselves on conventional genres. When talking about myself, my selfhood
becomes part of the public domain, and its shape and nature is guided by cultural models of what
selfhood should and shouldn’t be (Bruner 2002, p. 65). To come to know oneself as a person
with a particular life history and particular character traits is, consequently, both more
complicated than knowing one’s immediate beliefs and desires and less private than it might
initially seem (Jopling 2000, p. 137). When I interpret myself in terms of a life story, I might be
both the narrator and the main character, but I am not the sole author. The beginning of my own
story has always already been made for me by others and the way the story unfolds is only in part
determined by my own choices and decisions. In fact, the story of any individual life is not only
interwoven with the stories of others (parents, siblings, friends, etc.), it is also embedded in a larger
historical and communal meaning-giving structure (MacIntyre 1985, p. 221). Whether I come to
understand myself as the inheritor and continuer of various traditions, or not, my story is caught
up in such traditions.
Who we are depends upon the story we (and others) tell about ourselves. The story can be more
or less coherent, and the same holds true for our self-identity. The narrative self is, consequently,
an open-ended construction which is under constant revision. It is pinned on culturally relative
narrative hooks and organized around a set of aims, ideals, and aspirations (Flanagan 1992, p.
206). It is a construction of identity that starts in early childhood and continues for the rest of
our life, always involving a complex social interaction. Who one is depends on the values, ideals,
and goals one has, and on one’s actions; it is a question of what has signiﬁcance and meaning
for one, and this, of course, is conditioned by the community of which one is part. Thus, as has
often been claimed, one cannot be a self on one’s own, but only together with others, as part of
a linguistic community. This narrative connection to others goes two ways; not only does it shape
our own self, but, as we indicated in the previous chapter, it also provides a framework for
understanding others.
SELF AND PERSON
201

It is worthwhile noticing that the narrative account can on a certain reading turn into a version
of the no-self doctrine. In effect, one might consider the extended narrative self as simply a
ﬁction, albeit a useful one because it lends a practical sense of continuity to life, but a ﬁction
nonetheless. Dennett (1988, 1991) offers an example of this view, which he sees as consistent
with recent developments in our understanding of how the brain functions. The consensus from
contemporary neuroscience is that neurological processing is for the most part distributed across
various brain regions. There is consequently no real uniﬁed neurological centre of experience,
nor is there any real identity across time that we could label the self. Humans, however, do have
language. And with language we begin to make our experiences relatively coherent and integrated
over extended time periods. We use words to tell stories, and according to Dennett it is with these
stories that we create what we call selves. We extend our biological boundaries to encompass a
life of meaningful experience. Two things are to be noted from Dennett’s account. First, we cannot
prevent ourselves from ‘inventing’ our selves. We are hardwired to become language users, and
once we are caught up in the web of language and begin spinning our own stories, we are not
totally in control of the product. As Dennett puts it, ‘Our tales are spun, but for the most part we
don’t spin them; they spin us’ (1991, p. 418). Second, an important product of this spinning is
the narrative self. The narrative self, however, is nothing substantially real. Rather, according to
Dennett, it is an empty abstraction. Speciﬁcally, Dennett deﬁnes a self as an abstract ‘center of
narrative gravity’, and likens it to the theoretical ﬁction of the centre of gravity of any physical
object. In the case of narrative gravity, however, an individual self consists of the abstract and
movable point where the various stories (of ﬁction or biography) that the individual tells about
himself, or are told about him, meet up.
The self as an experiential dimension
In The Feeling of What Happens, Damasio claims that a sense of self is an indispensable part
of the conscious mind. As he writes: ‘If “self-consciousness” is taken to mean “consciousness
with a sense of self,” then all human consciousness is necessarily covered by the term – there
is just no other kind of consciousness’ (1999, p. 19). When I think thoughts, read a text, perceive
a melody, a red sports car, or a steaming cup of hot chocolate, I automatically and implicitly
sense that I, rather than anyone else, am doing it. I sense that the objects I now perceive are being
apprehended from my perspective and that the thoughts formed in my mind are mine and not
anyone else’s. Thus, as Damasio puts it, there is a constant, but quiet and subtle, presence of
self in my conscious life (ibid., pp. 7, 10, 127). 
Consciousness is not a monolith, however, and Damasio ﬁnds it reasonable to distinguish a
simple, foundational kind of consciousness, which he calls core consciousness, from a more
complex kind, which he calls extended consciousness. Core consciousness has a single level of
organization and remains stable across the lifetime of the organism. It is not exclusively human
(non-human animals may have a core consciousness) and does not depend upon conventional
memory, reasoning, or language. In contrast, extended consciousness has several levels of
organization. It evolves across the lifetime of the organism and depends upon both conventional
and working memory. It can be found in a basic form in some non-humans, but only attains its
202
SELF AND PERSON

highest peak in language-using humans. According to Damasio, these two kinds of consciousness
correspond to two kinds of self. He calls the sense of self that emerges in core consciousness
the core self and refers to the more elaborate sense of self provided by extended consciousness
as the autobiographical self (1999, pp. 16–17, 127). From a developmental perspective, there
are little more than simple states of core self in the beginning, but as experience accrues, memory
grows and the autobiographical self can be deployed (ibid., p. 175). 
From a purely descriptive point of view, however, there is nothing new in the analyses offered
by Damasio. We are dealing with a reformulation of ideas already found in classical pheno-
menology. To put it differently, the most explicit defence and analysis of what might be called the
experiential dimension of selfhood is precisely to be found in classical phenomenology. Thus, it
is important to realize that both Husserl and Sartre subsequently distanced themselves from the
non-egological position they had originally defended. Or to be more precise, the notion of self they
came to embrace was not the concept they had earlier rejected; rather, they came to realize that
there is more than one legitimate notion of self.
Sartre argues that consciousness is at bottom characterized by a fundamental self-appearance
or self-referentiality which he terms ipseity (selfhood, from the Latin ipse) (1956, p. 103). When
Sartre speaks of a self, he is referring to something very basic, something characterizing
(phenomenal) consciousness as such. It is something that characterizes my very mode of
existence, and although I can fail to articulate it, it is not something I can fail to be. As Sartre also
puts it, ‘pre-reﬂective consciousness is self-consciousness. It is this same notion of self which
must be studied, for it deﬁnes the very being of consciousness’ (ibid., 76).
Merleau-Ponty occasionally speaks of the subject as realizing its ipseity in its embodied being-
in-the-world (1962, p. 408). However, he also refers to Husserl’s investigations of inner time-
consciousness and writes that the original temporal flow must count as the archetypical
relationship of self to self and that it traces out an interiority or ipseity (ibid., p. 426). A few lines
later, Merleau-Ponty adds that consciousness is always affected by itself and that the word
‘consciousness’ has no meaning independently of this fundamental self-givenness (1962, 
p. 426).
As Husserl points out, consciousness exists as a stream, and it appears to itself as a stream.
But how the stream of consciousness is capable of being conscious of itself, how it is possible
and comprehensible that the very being of the stream is a form of self-consciousness, is the
enduring question (2001b, pp. 44, 46). Indeed, Husserl’s investigation of temporality is very
much motivated by his interest in the question of how consciousness manifests itself to itself.
His analysis of the structure of inner time-consciousness (protention-primal impression-retention)
is precisely to be understood as an analysis of the (micro)structure of the pre-reflective self-
appearance and ipseity of our experiences (Husserl 1966a/1991; Zahavi 1999, 2003b). What
we ﬁnd in Husserl is ultimately a sustained investigation of the relationship between selfhood,
self-experience, and temporality. 
Michel Henry repeatedly characterizes selfhood in terms of an interior self-affection (e.g. Henry
1973, p. 682). Insofar as subjectivity reveals itself to itself, it is a self (Henry 2003, p. 52). Or as
he puts it in his early work Philosophy and Phenomenology of the Body : ‘The interiority of the
immediate presence to itself constitutes the essence of ipseity’ (Henry 1975, p. 38). It is because
SELF AND PERSON
203

consciousness is as such characterized by a primitive, tacit, self-consciousness, that it is
appropriate to ascribe a fundamental type of ipseity to the experiential phenomena. More
precisely, Henry links a basic notion of selfhood to the ﬁrst-personal givenness of experiential
life.
The crucial idea propounded by all of these phenomenologists is that an understanding of what
it means to be a self calls for an examination of the structure of experience, and vice versa. Thus,
the self is not something that stands opposed to the stream of consciousness, it is not an ineffable
transcendental precondition, nor is it a mere social construct that evolves through time; it is
taken to be an integral part of the structure of our conscious life. More precisely, the claim is that
the (minimal or core) self possesses experiential reality, and is in fact identiﬁed with the ﬁrst-
personal appearance of the experiential phenomena. At its most primitive, self-experience is
simply a question of being pre-reﬂectively aware of one’s own consciousness. As we have indicated
in previous chapters, this is what makes experience subjective. Although there are different types
of experiences (smelling hay, seeing a sunset, touching an ice cube, etc.), and although there are
different types of experiential givenness (perceptual, imaginative, and recollective, etc.), there
are common features as well. One such common feature is the quality of mineness. With the
possible exception of certain pathological states (but see below), experiences that I live through
in the ﬁrst-person perspective are my experiences. When I think about Paris, smell crushed mint
leaves, listen to Prokoﬁev’s Romeo and Juliet or move my left arm, all these various experiences
seem to share a certain feature; they are all felt as mine; they carry a subtle presence of self.
Phenomenal consciousness consequently entails a primitive form of self-referentiality or for-me-
ness. Whether a certain experience is experienced as mine or not does not depend on something
apart from the experience itself. If the experience is given in a ﬁrst-personal mode of presentation
for me, it is experienced as my experience, otherwise not. In short, the self is conceived as the
invariant dimension of ﬁrst-personal givenness in the multitude of changing experiences.
Incidentally, this view makes it clear that self-experience is not to be understood as an
experience of an isolated, worldless self; nor is the self located and hidden in the head. To have
a self-experience is not to interrupt the experiential interaction with the world in order to turn one’s
gaze inwards; on the contrary, self-experience is always the self-experience of a world-immersed
embodied agent. The self is present to itself precisely and indeed only when it is engaged in the
world. It would consequently be a decisive mistake to interpret the phenomenological notion of
a core, or minimal, self as a Cartesian-style mental residuum, that is, as some kind of self-
enclosed and self-sufﬁcient interiority. The phenomenological notion of self is fully compatible
with a strong emphasis on the fundamental intentionality, or being-in-the-world, of consciousness. 
This third notion of self is a minimalist notion, and it is obvious that there are far more complex
forms of selves to consider. With this said, however, the experiential notion remains fundamental
in the sense that nothing that lacks this dimension deserves to be called a self. Some have
argued that no organism can survive or act without being able to distinguish between self and
nonself (cf. Dennett 1991, pp. 174, 414), even if on a non-conscious level. According to the
phenomenological conception of the minimal self, however, selfhood requires more than merely
a non-conscious differentiation between oneself and the environment. In fact, the crucial idea
is that some minimal form of self-experience is essential for selfhood. 
204
SELF AND PERSON

SOCIALITY AND PERSONALITY
What is the relation between the narrative self – a self linked to sociality, memory, and language
– and the experiential self – a self linked to the basic structures of experience and action? The
two different notions of self are not necessarily at odds. They can be seen as complementary
notions. But in this case, it is important to clarify their exact relation. Is the experiential core self
a (logical and temporal) precondition for the extended narrative self? Is the extended self a higher-
order construction, perhaps even a (useful) ﬁction? Or is the core self, on the contrary, a sub-
sequent abstraction; is it simply a stripped-down version of what must count as the genuine and
original self? 
The experiential self, although constantly accommodating changing experiences, has a
structure (deﬁned by temporality and embodiment) that remains stable across the lifetime of the
organism. In contrast, the narrative self evolves across the lifetime of the organism. From a
developmental perspective, there are little more than simple states of core self in the beginning,
but as experience accrues, memory grows and the autobiographical/narrative self develops.
On the phenomenological view, the experiential core self is not a product of our narrative
practices. It is an integral part of the structure of phenomenal consciousness and must be
regarded as a pre-linguistic presupposition for any narrative practices. We should recognize the
existence of a primitive, pre-conceptual self(-experience) from early in ontogenesis. Furthermore,
experiences and actions must already be given as mine if I am to worry about how they hang
together or make up a coherent life story. Only a being with a first-person perspective could
consider her own aims, ideals, and aspirations as her own and tell a story about them. When
speaking of a ﬁrst-person perspective, one should consequently distinguish between having
such a perspective and being able to articulate it linguistically. Whereas the latter obviously
presupposes mastery of the ﬁrst-person pronoun, the former is simply a question of the ﬁrst-
personal, subjective manifestation of one’s own experiential life. 
One option is to distinguish between an experiential self and a narrative self (as above, and
as a number of philosophers have done). Another option is to opt for a deeper terminological
differentiation. When dealing with the experiential self, one might retain the term ‘self’ since we
are dealing precisely with a primitive form of self-experience or self-referentiality. By contrast, it
may be helpful to speak not of the self, but of the person as a narrative construction. After all,
what is being addressed by a narrative account is the nature of my personal character or
personality; a personality that evolves through time and is shaped by the values I endorse, my
moral and intellectual convictions and decisions, and my actions. The etymology of the term
‘person’ speaks strongly in favour of this view. The Latin persona refers to masks worn by actors
and is related to the expression dramatis personae, which designates the characters in a play
or a story.1
The fact that narrative personhood presupposes experiential selfhood (but not vice versa)
does not diminish the signiﬁcance of the former, especially when it comes to questions of personal
identity. Due to the ﬁrst-person and embodied nature of experience, our experiential life might
be inherently individuated. As such, a description of my experiential self will not differ signiﬁcantly
from a description of your experiential self, except, of course, insofar as the ﬁrst is a description
SELF AND PERSON
205

of me, the second a description of you. By contrast, a more tangible and differentiating kind of
individuality manifests itself in my personal history, in my moral and intellectual convictions and
decisions, in all of those things found in my self-narrative and in others’ narratives about me. It
is through my actions that I deﬁne who I am, thereby distinguishing myself from others; actions
have a character-shaping effect.2 I remain the same as long as I adhere to my convictions; when
they change, I change (Hart 1992, pp. 52–54). Ideals and convictions are identity deﬁning; acting
against one’s ideals or convictions can mean the disintegration (in the sense of a dis-integrity)
of one’s wholeness as a person (cf. Moland 2004). 
Persons do not exist in a social vacuum. To exist as a person is to exist socialized into a
communal horizon, where one’s bearing on oneself is appropriated from other people. As Husserl
writes, 
The origin of personality lies in empathy and in the social acts which are rooted in the latter.
To acquire a personality it is not enough that the subject becomes aware of itself as the
center of its acts: personality is rather constituted only when the subject establishes
social relations with others.
(1973a, p. 175)
I become a person through my life with others in our communal world. Usually, the self under
consideration is already personalized or at least in the process of developing into a full-blown
person. In this respect, although a narrow focus on the experiential core self might be said to
involve a certain amount of abstraction, there is no reason to question its reality, it is not a mere
abstraction. Normally, our self-understanding is interwoven with and understood in the light of
a self-narrative, but there is self-experience in the minimal sense deﬁned above even when one’s
capacity to weave a narrative of oneself has not yet developed or has been diminished or lost
through a neurological disease or psychiatric disorder. This is borne out by empirical science.
A DEVELOPMENTAL STORY
All healthy infants have an innate rooting response. When the corner of the infant’s mouth is
touched, the infant turns her head and opens her mouth toward the stimulation. By recording
the frequency of rooting in response to either external tactile stimulation or tactile self-stimulation
it was discovered that newborns (24 hours old) showed rooting responses almost three times
more frequently in response to external stimuli. Philippe Rochat concludes from this that even
newborns can pick up the intermodal invariants that specify self-versus nonself-stimulation, and,
thereby, have the ability to develop an early sense of self (2001, pp. 40–41). Infants are in
possession of proprioceptive information from birth and as Rochat argues, proprioception is ‘the
modality of the self par excellence’ (ibid., p. 35; see also, Gallagher 2005; Gallagher and Meltzoff
1996). Thus, long before they are able to pass any mirror self-recognition tasks, not to speak of
any false-belief tasks, infants have a sense of their own bodies as organized and environmentally
embedded entities and, hence, an early perceptually-based sense of themselves. Following in
the footsteps of Gibson and Neisser, Rochat calls this early sense of self the infant’s ecological
206
SELF AND PERSON

self (ibid., pp. 30–31, 41). For Rochat, the ecological self is clearly a bodily self and he argues
that the infant’s self-experience is initially a question of the infant’s experience of its own
embodied self. It is through their early explorations of their own bodies that infants specify
themselves as differentiated agents in the environment, eventually developing a more explicit
awareness of themselves. More precisely, infants have an inborn inclination to investigate their
own bodies. This inclination forms the cradle of self-perception and constitutes the developmental
origin of self-knowledge (ibid., pp. 29, 39, 74).
Proprioceptive awareness, as we indicated in Chapter 7, provides an immediate experiential
access to my pre-reﬂective, embodied self, even when I, as an agent, am not reﬂectively seeking
myself, but am engaged in pragmatically and socially contextualized action. Although much of
the detail about bodily position and movement vis-à-vis the environment, detail which is absolutely
essential for motor control and physical action, is not conscious, whatever is conscious does not
present itself as detailed information about various parts of my body. Rather, it manifests itself
as an integrated or global sense of where I am spatially in relation to the immediate environment,
and what, in any particular situation, I am capable of doing. Proprioceptive awareness, in the
broad sense, includes what Gibson calls visual proprioception – the sense of self-movement
that I get from vision. Such ecologically situated experience provides a pre-reﬂective sense of the
self as a spatial presence and a set of embodied capabilities. When my attention or conscious
activity is directed toward the environment or toward some project, the content of proprioceptive
awareness, in this Gibsonian sense, tells me, for example, whether I am moving or staying still,
whether I am sitting or standing, whether I am reaching or grasping or pointing, whether I am
speaking or maintaining silence.
The Gibsonian notion of an ecological self thus involves the idea that the information I receive
about the world includes, implicitly, information about my own self (speciﬁcally about egocentric
perspective and spatial embodiment). My perception of the world is at the same time shot through
with information about my own embodied position in that world. In this sense, all perception
involves a co-experience of self and environment – information about the relation between
perceiver and perceived (Gibson 1986, p. 126). Gibson’s theory has found conﬁrmation in a
number of empirical studies, for instance in the so-called ‘moving room experiment’ (Lee and
Aronson 1974). The subject (Lee and Aronson conducted the experiment with toddlers) is standing
on a solid ﬂoor, but is surrounded by walls hanging from the ceiling. If the walls are then moved
towards or away from the subject, the subject will sway or fall. For example, the optical flow
created by moving the facing wall towards the subject gives him the impression that he is himself
falling forward. The muscular readjustments undertaken to compensate for this apparent sway
cause him to fall back (Neisser 1988, pp. 37–38). 
A further example can be found in developmental psychology. An infant as young as a few
weeks can discriminate between objects that are within its reach and objects that are just outside
its reach. The infant is far less inclined to reach out for an object that is just outside its reach. Of
course, for the infant to be able to make this distinction is for the infant to be aware of the position
of the object in relation to itself. This is not to say, however, that infants are already, at this 
stage, in possession of an explicit representation of self, rather, they are able to perceive 
a distinctive kind of affordance involving self-specifying information. Thus, even very young 
infants pick up the information that speciﬁes the ecological self. They respond to optical ﬂow,
SELF AND PERSON
207

discriminate between themselves and other objects, and easily distinguish their own actions
and their immediate consequences from events of other kinds. They experience themselves,
they experience where they are, how they are moving, what they are doing, and whether a given
action is their own or not. These achievements appear already in the ﬁrst weeks and months 
of life, and testify to the existence of a primitive but basic form of self-experience (Neisser 
1993, p. 4).
PATHOLOGIES OF THE SELF
In Making Stories, Jerome Bruner – an ardent defender of a narrative approach to the self –
admits that certain features of selfhood are innate and that we need to recognize the existence
of a primitive, pre-conceptual self. At the same time, however, he maintains that dysnarrativia
(which we, for instance, encounter in Korsakoff’s syndrome or Alzheimer’s disease) is deadly for
selfhood and that there would be nothing like selfhood if we lacked narrative capacities (Bruner
2002, pp. 86, 119). Bruner is quite right in assuming that a reference to pathology can be
illuminating, but the question is whether his own observations are really to the point. Alzheimer’s
disease is a progressive, degenerative brain disorder that results in profound memory loss,
changes in behaviour, thinking, and reasoning as well as a signiﬁcant decline in overall functioning
(Snyder 2000, p. 44). The person suffering from Alzheimer’s will consequently have a wide range
of cognitive impairments; the comprehension and expression of speech (and narratives) will only
be one of the areas affected. So even, and to put it in an odd but pointed way, if no self remains
in the advanced stages of Alzheimer’s, one cannot without further ado conclude that dysnarrativia
was the cause of death. (If one were on the lookout for a disorder that specifically targeted
narrative capacities, global aphasia might be a better choice – but then again, who would want
to claim that those struck by global aphasia cease being selves?) Furthermore, there is a big if.
It is by no means obvious that Alzheimer’s disease brings about a destruction of the ﬁrst-person
perspective, a complete annihilation of the dimension of mineness and that any experience that
remains is merely an anonymous and unowned experiential episode, so that the ‘subject’ no
longer feels pain or discomfort as his or her own. In fact, it is hardly insigniﬁcant that experienced
clinicians report that no one person with Alzheimer’s disease is exactly like another (ibid., p. 72).
But if this is true, and if Alzheimer’s disease does in fact constitute a severe case of dysnarrativia,
we should draw the exact opposite conclusion from Bruner. We would be forced to concede that
there must be more to being a self than what is addressed by the narrative account. This is in
fact the conclusion drawn by Damasio, who explicitly argues that neuropathology provides
empirical evidence in support of the distinction between core self and autobiographical self.
Neuropathology reveals that impairments of extended consciousness allow core consciousness
to remain intact, whereas impairments that begin at the level of core consciousness cause
extended consciousness to collapse as well (Damasio 1999, pp. 115–119).
Other questions abound. Are the senses of agency and ownership for actions and experiences
the result of a self-ascriptive meta-cognitive operation employing conceptual and linguistic
resources, or are actions and experiences implicitly and pre-linguistically sensed as one’s own?
Does explicit and conceptual self-reference rest on an implicit sense of self? If senses of agency
208
SELF AND PERSON

and ownership are part of the experiential self, are disruptions of these senses, e.g. in
schizophrenia, Anarchic Hand Syndrome, Alien Hand Syndrome, or Unilateral Neglect, for
example, fatal for the experiential self?3 These are questions currently debated in philosophy,
psychology, and cognitive neuroscience. There is, however, a growing awareness of the fact that
these issues concerning self-reference cannot be settled by empirical means alone and that
there is an acute need for a philosophical clariﬁcation of the different notions and experiences
of self. Not only can the cognitive neuroscience of the self beneﬁt from a clariﬁcation of the
notions of self and of the possibility of an implicit self-representation, but the philosophical
investigation can certainly also profit from an engagement with neuro-psychological and 
-pathological ﬁndings. 
Still, within both the philosophical and cognitive neuroscientiﬁc discussions one ﬁnds divisions
on such issues. For example, on one side, the distinction between the sense of ownership and
the sense of agency (defined in Gallagher 2000a, and discussed above in Chapter 8) is a
distinction made on the level of ﬁrst-order experience associated with the experiential or minimal
self. Engaged in some action I implicitly feel the action to be mine and I have a sense of generating
it and controlling it – I don’t have to reﬂectively attribute it or evaluate it in regard to the coherency
of my intentions. In regard to the sense of agency, it certainly feels different if I walk across the
room on my own volition than if I am pushed across the room. If I am pushed or if I am undergoing
involuntary spasms, I will experience ownership of the movement – I, rather than somebody else,
am the one moving – but I will lack a sense of agency; I will lack an experience of being the agent
or initiator of the movement. On the other side, some philosophers and scientists claim that
ownership or agency is a matter of explicitly deciding to whom the mental event or process should
be ascribed – is this my action (or thought) or not (Jeannerod and Pacherie 2004; Stephens and
Graham 2000)? Scientists who support the ﬁrst, implicit view argue that the second, explicit
view is too demanding and tends to reduce the sense of the self in action to a post hoc
construction. Instead, they claim that the acting self has an implicit sense of self-agency, which
is simultaneous with acting (Haggard and Clark 2003; Tsakiris and Haggard 2005). In their
respective arguments, the opposing sides draw on various investigations of neuro- and
psychopathological disorders (Jeannerod 1999; Rossetti and Rode 2002). 
Let us look at a more dramatic case of disturbed self-experience, namely schizophrenia.
Although the most recent versions of the psychiatric diagnostic systems (DSM-IV and ICD-10) do
not include a reference to the self, varieties of self-disorders have always ﬁgured, at least implicitly,
as an important component in the clinical picture of schizophrenia. As early as 1913, the concept
of ‘Ichstörungen’ (disturbances of the self) was introduced by Jaspers. One year later Berze
proposed that a basic transformation of self-consciousness was at the root of schizophrenia. But
the most detailed analyses of schizophrenic self-disorders are to be found in phenomenologically-
oriented psychiatry (Minkowski 1927; Conrad 1959; Laing 1960; Blankenburg 1971; Tatossian
1979; Sass 2000; Parnas 2003; Parnas et al. 2005). As Minkowski wrote: ‘The madness . . . does
not originate in the disorders of judgment, perception or will, but in a disturbance of the innermost
structure of the self’ (1997, p. 114).
Parnas has argued that all of these complaints point to a diminished ipseity, where the sense
of self no longer automatically saturates the experience (Parnas 2003; Parnas et al. 2002). We
are faced with an experiential disturbance on a pre-reﬂective level that is far more basic than the
SELF AND PERSON
209

kind of feelings of inferiority, insecurity, and unstable identity that we ﬁnd in personality disorders
outside the schizophrenic spectrum (Parnas et al. 2005).
Some patients are able to articulate these subtle disturbances better than others. One of
Parnas’ patients reported that the feeling that his experiences were his own always came with a
split-second delay; another that it was as if his self was somehow displaced a few centimetres
backwards. A third explained that he felt an indescribable inner change that prevented him from
leading a normal life. He was troubled by a very distressing feeling of not being really present or
even fully alive. This experience of distance or detachment was accompanied by a tendency to
observe or monitor his inner life. He summarized his afﬂiction by saying that his ﬁrst-personal
life was lost and replaced by a third-person perspective (Parnas 2003, p. 223).
More generally speaking, Parnas and Sass have argued that these self-disorders may even
be ascribed a generating, pathogenic role. They antecede, underlie, and shape the emergence
of later psychotic pathology and may thus unify what, from a purely descriptive psychiatric
standpoint, may seem to be unrelated or even antithetical syndromes and symptoms (Sass and
Parnas 2006). 
It is not difﬁcult to ﬁnd ﬁrst-person statements about schizophrenic symptoms of thought
insertions or delusions of control, which (if taken in isolation and at face value) seem to offer
ample evidence in support of the claim that some experiential states completely lack the quality
of mineness or the sense of ownership. However, subjects who experience thought insertions or
delusions of control clearly recognize that they are the subjects in whom the alien episodes
occur. The patients are not confused about where the alien movements or thoughts occur – the
sites of such movements or thoughts are their own bodies and minds. Some sense of ownership
is still retained, and that is the basis for their complaint (cf. Gallagher 2000b, p. 230; Stephens
and Graham 2000, pp. 8, 126). Even if the inserted thoughts or alien movements are felt as
intrusive and strange, they cannot lack the quality of mineness completely, since the afﬂicted
subject is quite aware that it is he himself rather than somebody else who is experiencing these
alien thoughts and movements. When schizophrenics assert that their thoughts or movements
are not their own, they do not mean that they themselves are not having the thoughts, or that it
is not their own body that is being moved, but rather that someone else is inserting the thoughts
or controlling the movements and that they themselves are not responsible for generating them.
Thus, rather than involving a complete lack of a sense of ownership, passivity phenomena like
thought insertions primarily involve a lack of a sense of self-agency and a mis-attribution of
agency to someone or something else. 
This seems to indicate that some sense of ownership survives even in schizophrenic delusions.
It has been suggested, however, that schizophrenic experiences such as thought insertion and
delusions of control represent a failure of what philosophers call ‘immunity to error through
misidentification’ (Campbell 1999; also, more recently, Jeannerod and Pacherie 2004). The
immunity principle is based on what Wittgenstein (1958) called the use of the ﬁrst-person pronoun
‘as subject’. He suggested that if a person says that she has a certain experience, it would be
nonsensical to ask ‘are you sure that it is you who are having the experience?’ If you claim to have
a toothache, it makes no sense to ask, ‘Are you sure that it is you who have the toothache?’ This
is nonsensical, not because it concerns an issue pertaining to grammatical structure, but because
it concerns the proximity of experience, the surety of one’s own experience, or more precisely, a
210
SELF AND PERSON

pre-reﬂective awareness of one’s own ipseity, an awareness that Shoemaker (1968) calls ‘non-
observational’. Shoemaker also makes it clear that immunity to error through misidentiﬁcation
applies to forms of self-reference in which there is no need for identiﬁcation, and thus no chance
of misidentiﬁcation. In other words, we are immune to error in this regard, not because we are
so good, or so infallible at judging who we are, but because this kind of self-awareness doesn’t
involve a judgement at all. We are not in a position to get it wrong, or to get it right; we are simply,
in general or by default, always correct on this score. According to this view, the immunity principle
would seem to apply equally to both the sense of ownership and the sense of agency. My use of
the ﬁrst-person pronoun to signify agency or ownership does not require me to verify that I meet
certain criteria in order to judge, on the basis of observation, that I am the one who is acting.
In contrast to uses of the ﬁrst-person pronoun as subject, however, uses of the ﬁrst-person
pronoun as object can be open to sensible questions about identiﬁcation. Such a claim would
be based on criteria that observationally (perceptually) I would have to match up with my own
appearance. Consider the following rather gruesome example, which clearly involves
misidentiﬁcation. In response to a statement such as ‘I am bleeding,’ one may sensibly ask, ‘Are
you sure that it is you who are bleeding.’ Imagine for example that you have had the misfortune
of being involved in a trafﬁc accident. When you come to, you see a bleeding leg and mistakenly
identify it as your own, and declare ‘I am bleeding.’ Once you move your leg, however, you discover
that the leg you see bleeding belongs to one of the other occupants of the car. 
John Campbell has suggested that we can find violations of the immunity principle in
schizophrenic symptoms. He writes, citing the work of Christopher Frith:
What is so striking about the phenomenon of thought insertion as described by
schizophrenic patients is that it seems to involve an error of identiﬁcation. . . . A patient
who supposes that someone else has inserted thoughts into his mind is right about which
thoughts they are, but wrong about whose thoughts they are. So thought insertion seems
to be a counterexample to the thesis that present-tense introspectively based reports of
psychological states cannot involve errors of identiﬁcation. Frith himself puts the point
succinctly.
(Campbell 1999, pp. 609–610)
Campbell then quotes Frith (1992, p. 80):
Thought insertion, in particular, is a phenomenon that is difﬁcult to understand. Patients
say that thoughts that are not their own are coming into their head. This experience implies
that we have some way of recognising our own thoughts. It is as if each thought has a label
on it saying ‘mine’. If this labelling process goes wrong, then the thought would be
perceived as alien.
We can clarify this by considering Shoemaker’s observation that ‘whereas the statement “My arm
is moving” is subject to error through misidentiﬁcation, the statement “I am waving my arm” is
not’ (1984, p. 8). Shoemaker’s claim clearly requires some qualiﬁcation. Whether one or the
other statement is or is not immune to error through misidentiﬁcation depends on the experiential
SELF AND PERSON
211

basis for the statement. It is certainly true that if the statement ‘My arm is moving’ is made solely
on the basis of visual perception then there is a possibility of misidentiﬁcation. By using mirrors
or videotape to manipulate visual perception, a deafferented or ‘proprioblind’ subject – for
example, one who lacks proprioceptive awareness of his arm – may be easily tricked into thinking
that his arm is moving. But that same subject, in such circumstances of deafferentation, could
equally be led to say ‘I am waving my arm’, and be quite wrong about who it is who is waving an
arm. In contrast, the statement ‘My arm is moving’, even if meant to express an involuntary
movement (i.e. without agency), is immune to error through misidentiﬁcation if the basis for the
statement is proprioceptive experience. This is the case even if one is experimentally fooled into
thinking that one’s arm is moving in a way that it is not (as done, for example, in experiments that
use muscle vibration techniques), or even if there is no arm (as in the case of a phantom arm).
In such cases I may be wrong about what my arm is doing, or even that it is an arm that is doing
it, but I could not be wrong about the fact that it is I who experience it.4 What the statement ‘My
arm is moving’ means in such cases is ‘I feel my arm is moving’, and one cannot sensibly ask,
‘Are you sure that it is you who feel your arm moving?’ Immunity to error is not about moving one’s
body parts, it’s about one’s experience.
When the schizophrenic reports that certain thoughts are not his thoughts, that someone
else is generating these thoughts, he is also indicating that these thoughts are being manifested,
not ‘over there’ in someone else’s head, but within his own stream of consciousness, a stream
of consciousness for which he claims ownership. In other words, his complaint with regard to
inserted thoughts is not that he is suddenly telepathic, but that someone else has invaded his
own mind. The sense of ownership might be disturbed and frail, but it is not absent. For that
reason the schizophrenic should provide a positive answer to what he might rightly regard as a
nonsensical question: are you sure that you are the one who is experiencing these thoughts? After
all, this is precisely his complaint. He is experiencing thoughts that seem to be generated by
others. His phenomenology is this: he has a sense of ownership for the stream of consciousness
which is impossible to misidentify (because it is in no need of identiﬁcation), but into which are
inserted thoughts for which he has no sense of agency. His judgement that it is he who is being
subjected to these thoughts is immune to error through misidentiﬁcation, even if he is completely
wrong about who is causing his thoughts. 
The application of the immunity principle does not depend on there being intact for action both
a sense of ownership and a sense of agency. In cases of involuntary movement, or in cases of
involuntary pain, where I lack a sense of agency, there is still a sense of ownership, so I cannot
deny that I experience my arm moving, or that it is my tooth that is aching. In such cases immunity
to error through misidentiﬁcation which is linked to the sense of ownership remains intact.5 In
some cases, the sense of ownership for one’s body does in fact go missing or become confused.
For example, in cases of Alien Hand Syndrome, or in unilateral neglect, where stroke patients
totally ignore the left side of their bodies, subjects will claim that their left arm is not theirs, and
that it belongs to someone else. Clearly they have misidentiﬁed themselves. In this case, however,
the misidentiﬁcation does not violate the immunity principle since the misidentiﬁcation is made
in regard to the body ‘as object’.6 That is, the arm is no longer part of the patient’s lived body,
and they treat it as an object with which they do not identify. 
212
SELF AND PERSON

CONCLUSION
Whether the self is real or fictional, one thing or many, it is clearly something that needs
explanation, for at least two reasons. First, there is an undeniable sense of self that accompanies
experience and action. If this phenomenology points to something real, then a full explanation
of cognition would require some account of the self. As for those who claim that the self has a
ﬁctional status, they still need to explain why the ﬁction arises, and for whom. In either case, one
is led back to the phenomenology, and to neuropsychologial accounts involving the mechanisms
responsible for the implicit (ecological and proprioceptive) structures of perception and action,
for autobiographical memory, and for the generation of narratives. 
As Galen Strawson has recently argued, if we wish to answer the metaphysical question
concerning whether or not the self is real, we will ﬁrst need to know what a self is supposed to
be. In order to establish this, our best chance will be to look at self-experience, since self-
experience is what gives rise to the question in the ﬁrst place by giving us a vivid sense that there
is something like a self. Thus, as Strawson readily concedes, the metaphysical investigation of
the self is subordinate to the phenomenological investigation. The latter places constraints on
the former. Nothing can count as a self unless it possesses those properties attributed to the
self by some genuine form of self-experience (2000, p. 40). Of course, this move could be
countered by the neurosceptics who might argue that it would be a fallacy to conclude to the literal
properties of the self from the content and structure of phenomenal self-experience. For the
sceptics, our self-experience, our primitive, pre-reﬂective feeling of conscious selfhood, is never
truthful in that it does not correspond to any single entity inside or outside of the self-representing
system (cf. Metzinger 2003, p. 565). But it remains rather unclear why the reality of the self
should depend upon whether it faithfully mirrors either sub-personal mechanisms or external
(mind independent) entities. If we were to wholeheartedly endorse such a restrictive metaphysical
principle, we would declare most of the world we live in and know and care about, illusory. For
someone to declare everything peculiar to human life fictitious simply because it cannot be
grasped by a certain mode of scientiﬁc comprehension, not only reveals one’s prior commitment
to a naïve scientism, according to which (natural) science is the sole arbiter of what there is, one
also self-defeatingly (no pun intended) runs the risk of undermining the very scientiﬁc realism
that one champions. After all, science is itself a human enterprise. So why not rather insist that
the self is real if it has experiential reality and that the validity of our account of the self is to be
measured by its ability to be faithful to experience, by its ability to capture and articulate (invariant)
experiential structures (Zahavi 2003d, 2005a, 2005b)? 
Interdisciplinary approaches that focus on a single aspect or dimension of the complex
problems of self are more likely to mitigate problems of inter-theoretical coherency. Neuro-
scientists, psychologists, psychiatrists, and roboticists, as much as philosophers, have an interest
in developing a model of the self (cf. Gallagher and Shear 1999; Kircher and David 2003; Zahavi
2000). The neuropsychology of dissociative disorders and the neuroscience of the split-brain, for
example, as well as the cognitive linguistics of narrative structure and a hermeneutically inclined
phenomenology may throw light on how narrative generates a seemingly uniﬁed self in normal
humans. A variety of approaches, including phenomenology, the neuroscience of motor action,
SELF AND PERSON
213

animal studies, and developmental psychology, are needed to understand aspects of self-experi-
ence, self-recognition, agency, and social interaction, and how such things contribute to the
generation of self-identity. In the end, if good explanations of these various aspects of experience
are developed, a cognitive science that incorporates the insights of phenomenology has the
potential to recast the central philosophical questions about the self.
NOTES
1
This is neither to suggest that persons are after all mere ﬁctions or that they are masks that somehow
conceal the primitive core self. The point is simply that there is an etymological link between narratives
and the original concept of persons.
2
Our actions shape our character, but the inﬂuence goes the other way as well, of course (see Gallagher
2007; Gallagher and Marcel 1999). The actions we perform and the choices we make are partially
explained by our character. In fact, as Anscombe has argued, the activity of giving reasons for actions
comes to a stop with ‘because that’s the kind of person I am (she is)’ (1957).
3
Marchetti and Della Sala (1998) have made an important distinction between ‘Alien Hand Syndrome’
and ‘Anarchic Hand Syndrome’. Anarchic hand involves a disruption in the sense of agency, but the
subject still acknowledges that it is his own hand performing the seemingly goal-directed movement.
In the case of Alien Hand Syndrome, by contrast, the sense of ownership is disrupted as well and the
subject denies that the hand is actually his (see Gallagher and Væver 2004).
4
Proprioception (sense of limb position) and nocioception (pain sensation) cannot be wrong about
whose body it is (they deliver information only about the subject’s own body), although proprioception
can be wrong about what posture the body is in, and nocioception can be wrong about where the
cause of the pain is located (Gallagher 2003b; also Jeannerod and Pacherie 2004).
5
It is not clear why Jeannerod and Pacherie (2004) equate the sense of ownership with ‘the self as
object’. And this equation seems important in their claim about immunity to error through
misidentiﬁcation: ‘In a nutshell then, the bad news for philosophers is that self-identiﬁcation is after
all a problem. In the domain of action and intention at least, there is no such thing as immunity to error
through misidentiﬁcation, whether for the self as object (sense of ownership) or for the self as agent
(sense of agency)’ (p. 141). It’s also not clear why this would be bad news for philosophers rather than
for ordinary people who normally depend on this kind of immunity, even if they don’t know it.
6
This also applies to the sense of ownership that we may have for a rubber hand in certain experimental
situations, most famously in Botvinick and Cohen (1998; also see Tsakiris and Haggard 2005). In this
case, too, the attribution of ownership is ‘as object’ and based on vision, and not ‘as subject’. 
FURTHER READING
Shaun Gallagher & Jonathan Shear (eds), Models of the Self. Exeter: Imprint Academic, 1999.
Tilo Kircher & Anthony David (eds), The Self in Neuroscience and Psychiatry. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2003.
Paul Ricoeur, Oneself as Another. Trans. K. Blamey. Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1994.
214
SELF AND PERSON

Philippe Rochat (ed.), The Self in Early Infancy. New York: Elsevier, 1995.
Jean-Paul Sartre, The Transcendence of the Ego. Trans. F. Williams & R. Kirkpatrick. New York: Noonday
Press, 1957.
Dan Zahavi (ed.), Exploring the Self. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 2000.
Dan Zahavi, Subjectivity and Selfhood. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005.
SELF AND PERSON
215


Conclusion
In a recent introduction to cognitive science, Friedenberg and Silverman devote ten lines (out of
529 pages) to phenomenology. They write that phenomenology refers to subjective experience
rather than objective description, and that phenomenological description differs from intro-
spection in that it focuses on the immediate and subjective perception of an external stimulus
and does not require training or an intensive examination of one’s internal state (Friedenberg and
Silverman 2006, p. 77). As should be clear from the preceding chapters, this is not only a very
misleading description of what phenomenology amounts to and what it has to offer the study of
the mind, it also reﬂects a rather strange prioritization, or lack of one. In fact, in our view – but
this should hardly come as a surprise at this stage – any contemporary introduction to the
cognitive sciences should include a substantial discussion of phenomenology. This is so, not only
because phenomenology has made quite substantial contributions to the study of the mind, but
also because contemporary discussions in the cognitive sciences are becoming increasingly
aware of the rich possibilities offered by phenomenological approaches to certain central issues,
and any timely introduction to this area of research ought to reﬂect this.
The problem, of course, is that although a small number of prominent ﬁgures in philosophy
of mind and the cognitive sciences have recently started to take philosophical phenomenology
seriously, the vast majority of researchers are not using the term in its technical sense when
they talk of phenomenology, but are still identifying phenomenology with some kind of
introspectionism. As we have tried to make clear, however, phenomenology is not just another
name for a kind of psychological self-observation; rather, it is the name of a philosophical
approach that can offer much more to contemporary consciousness research and cognitive
sciences than a simple compilation of introspective data. Phenomenology refers to the tradition
of philosophy that originated in Europe and includes the work of Husserl, Heidegger, Merleau-
Ponty, Sartre, and other more recent thinkers. By ignoring this tradition and the resources therein,
contemporary cognitive research risks missing out on important insights that, in the best of
11

circumstances, will end up being rediscovered decades or centuries later (cf. Zahavi 2004d). 
Phenomenology involves a rich set of approaches with many different practitioners, and it
would have been impossible to do justice to all issues in an introduction of this size. We have
consequently been forced to be selective. We have focused on topics that are of particular
importance for contemporary discussions in philosophy of mind and cognitive science – topics
such as consciousness and self-consciousness, intentionality, the temporal nature of experience,
perception, embodiment, action, and our understanding of self and others – topics that can and
should be investigated, prior to deciding the larger metaphysical issues that often dominate
philosophical discussions. This list is not exhaustive; there are many other areas where
phenomenology has made contributions with direct relevance for ongoing discussions in the
cognitive sciences; we could mention the debate about mental imagery, the analysis of the
cognitive value of emotions, and the criticism of AI as examples of some of the issues we haven’t
been able to cover. But hopefully our presentation will stimulate the reader to pursue further
readings.
One of the frequent claims made by defenders and detractors alike is that the distinguishing
feature of a phenomenological approach to the mind is its sustained focus on the ﬁrst-person
perspective. As we have also tried to show, however, this is an overly narrow definition.
Phenomenological analyses of the nitty-gritty details of action, embodiment, intersubjectivity, and
so on, provide more than simply a description of ﬁrst-person experience. In numerous investi-
gations of how the subjectivity of others manifests itself in gestures, expressions, and bodily
behaviour, phenomenologists have also provided detailed analyses from the second-person
perspective, thereby providing a more sophisticated and nuanced understanding of how to
heterophenomenologize than one ﬁnds among avowed heterophenomenologists. Contrary to
the claim made by Dennett, classical phenomenology already stresses the interdependency of
auto- and heterophenomenology (Zahavi 2007). Accordingly, it would be a serious mistake to limit
subjectivity to that which might only be accessible from a ﬁrst-person perspective. To quote from
the preface to Merleau-Ponty’s Phenomenology of Perception:
Hitherto the Cogito depreciated the perception of others, teaching me as it did that the I
is accessible only to itself, since it deﬁnes me as the thought which I have of myself, and
which clearly I am alone in having, at least in this ultimate sense. For the ‘other’ to be more
than an empty word, it is necessary that my existence should never be reduced to my bare
awareness of existing, but that it should take in also the awareness that one may have
of it; and thus include my incarnation in some nature and the possibility, at least, of a
historical situation.
(1962, pp. xii–xiii)
Concerning many of the issues that we have considered we think that phenomenology offers
alternatives to views that are standard in philosophy of mind and the cognitive sciences. It seems
appropriate to conclude with a brief and pointed review.
•
Methodology: phenomenology is distinct from both introspection and heterophenomenology;
it offers philosophically informed methodological tools that can disclose signiﬁcant – but
218
CONCLUSION

frequently overlooked – dimensions of experience; it can help to define good empirical
questions and contribute to the design of behavioural and brain-imaging experiments; and
it can frame interpretations of empirical data in ways that are scientiﬁcally rigorous without
being reductionistic.
•
Consciousness and self-consciousness: phenomenology offers a clear alternative to higher-
order theories of consciousness, and contributes to an account of experience which has
wide ramiﬁcations for empirical science (including developmental psychology, ethology, and
psychiatry) and for our understanding of cases ranging from common and everyday ones,
like driving a car, to the more exotic aspects of non-conscious perception and blindsight.
•
The temporality of experience: phenomenology offers a detailed analysis of one of the most
important, but also one of the most neglected aspects of consciousness, cognition, and
action – the intrinsic temporal nature of experience that is the phenomenological
complement to the dynamical nature that underpins our brain–body–environment system. 
•
Perception: in contrast to various representationalist models of perception, phenomenology
defends a non-Cartesian view that emphasizes the embodied, enactive, and contextual
nature of perception. 
•
Intentionality: phenomenology offers a developed non-reductionist account of the
intentionality of experience that stresses the co-emergence of mind and world and suggests
an alternative to the standard choice between internalism and externalism. 
•
Embodied cognition: perhaps more than any other approach, phenomenology has con-
sistently championed an embodied and situated view of cognition. Although insisting on the
phenomenological distinction between the lived body and the objective body, phenomenology
also shows that biology, even beyond neuroscience, is important for understanding our
mental life. 
•
Action and agency: phenomenologically sensitive distinctions between kinds of movement,
and between the sense of agency and the sense of ownership, can provide important tools
for a more adequate account of action and for the understanding of certain pathologies
where the sense of agency is lacking. Such distinctions can also inform various neuroimaging
experiments.
•
Intersubjectivity and social cognition: phenomenology offers a non-mentalizing alternative
to theory-of-mind explanations, complements evidence from developmental psychology, and
suggests a reinterpretation of the neuroscience of resonance systems. 
•
Self and person: phenomenology offers clarifying analyses about self-experience and
different concepts of the self that can inform the recent and growing interest in these
questions in cognitive neuroscience. Specifically, phenomenology shows that the self is
signiﬁcantly involved in all aspects of experience, including intentionality, phenomenality,
temporality, embodiment, action, and our interaction with others. 
Thus, in the preceding chapters, we have emphasized how counterproductive it would be to
ignore the insights of the phenomenological tradition, but this should obviously not be
misinterpreted as simply the expression of a backward-looking nostalgia. Our suggestion is
obviously not that the right way to proceed when it comes to attaining a more satisfying account
of the mind is by turning our backs on recent conceptual clariﬁcations and empirical discoveries
CONCLUSION
219

in order to return to classical phenomenology. We do think that the cognitive sciences can proﬁt
from considering the detailed analyses and conceptual clariﬁcations provided by phenomenology,
but the relation between phenomenology and cognitive science is not a one-way enterprise. It is
not merely a question of applying ready-made phenomenological distinctions and concepts, as
if there were no reciprocity, no feedback, and as if such applications would not lead to
modifications of the original ideas. Rather, our guiding idea has been the notion of mutual
enlightenment. 
The last sub-chapter of Merleau-Ponty’s The Structure of Behavior carries the heading ‘Is there
not a truth in naturalism?’ It contains a criticism of Kantian transcendental philosophy, and on
the very ﬁnal page of the book, Merleau-Ponty calls for a redeﬁnition of transcendental philosophy
that makes it pay heed to the real world (1963, p. 224). Thus, rather than making us choose
between either an external scientiﬁc explanation or an internal phenomenological reﬂection, a
choice which according to Merleau-Ponty would rip asunder the living relation between
consciousness and nature, he asks us to reconsider the very opposition, and to search for a
dimension that is beyond both objectivism and subjectivism. What is interesting and important,
however, is that Merleau-Ponty doesn’t conceive of the relation between phenomenology and
positive science as a question of how to apply already established phenomenological insights
on empirical issues. It isn’t simply a question of how phenomenology might constrain positive
science. On the contrary, Merleau-Ponty’s idea is that phenomenology itself can be changed and
modiﬁed through its dialogue with the empirical disciplines. In fact, it needs this confrontation
if it is to develop in the right way. Importantly, Merleau-Ponty holds this view without thereby
reducing phenomenology to merely yet another positive science, without thereby dismissing its
truly philosophical nature. 
The phenomenological motto: ‘To the things themselves’ (Zu den Sachen selbst) calls for us
to let our experience guide our theories. We should pay attention to the way in which we experience
reality. Cognitive scientists might not pay much attention to the formal structure of phenomenality,
but as empirical researchers they do in fact pay quite a lot of attention to concrete empirical
phenomena. Frequently the knowledge and information they possess concerning these
phenomena are more detailed than what any philosopher might be in possession of. Although
phenomenological philosophy might ultimately have different concerns than science, and
although philosophical and scientific questions might ultimately differ radically, the pheno-
menological investigation of cognition and consciousness cannot allow itself to simply ignore
empirical research. Phenomenological investigations of time-consciousness, body-awareness,
intersubjectivity, intentionality, etc. can not only proﬁt directly from insights obtained through
empirical studies of psychopathological or neuropathological disorders, studies of infantile social
interaction, perception, memory, and emotion, etc., they can also profit indirectly from the
problem-oriented approach found in these empirical sciences. The very attempt to engage in
dialogue with cognitive science forces phenomenology to become more problem-oriented and
may thereby counteract what still remains one of its greatest weaknesses: its preoccupation
with exegesis. We are obviously not denying that there is still very much to learn from such authors
as Husserl, Heidegger, Sartre, Merleau-Ponty, Lévinas, etc., but phenomenologists should not
ignore opportunities to engage in critical dialogue, not only with empirical science, but also with
220
CONCLUSION

other philosophical traditions. It is exactly by confronting, discussing, and criticizing alternative
approaches that phenomenology can demonstrate its vitality and contemporary relevance. 
In his Consciousness Explained, Dennett provides a rather amusing description of the
difﬁculties of interdisciplinary cooperation: 
I have grown accustomed to the disrespect expressed by some of the participants for
their colleagues in the other disciplines. ‘Why[. . .]’ ask the people in Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
‘do you waste your time conferring with those neuroscientists? They wave their hands
about “information processing” and worry about where it happens, and which neuro-
transmitters are involved, and all those boring facts, but they haven’t a clue about the
computational requirements of higher cognitive functions.’ ‘Why,’ ask the neuroscientists,
‘do you waste your time on the fantasies of Artiﬁcial Intelligence? They just invent whatever
machinery they want, and say unpardonably ignorant things about the brain.’ The cognitive
psychologists, meanwhile, are accused of concocting models with neither biological
plausibility nor proven computational powers; the anthropologists wouldn’t know a model
if they saw one, and the philosophers, as we all know, just take in each other’s laundry,
warning about confusions they themselves have created, in an arena bereft of both data
and empirically testable theories. With so many idiots working on the problem, no wonder
consciousness is still a mystery.
(1991, p. 255)
As Dennett then goes on to argue, however, there really is no alternative to this collaboration. And
here we would agree. Empirical data can serve to challenge and validate theoretical analyses.
Conversely, conceptual analysis can provide directions and tools for the empirical scientists and
might also help in the design and development of experimental paradigms. If real progress is to
be made in the study of the mind, it requires a collaborative effort that draws on all the available
resources and that integrates a variety of theoretical and empirical disciplines and methods.
Having said this, let us add two caveats. The ﬁrst is that although empirical data are important,
we obviously shouldn’t overlook that they are open to interpretation. Their interpretation will
usually depend upon the framework within which one is operating. Thus, the theoretical impact
of an empirical case is not necessarily something that can be easily determined. Although it
might be argued that phenomenology should pay attention to empirical ﬁndings, this doesn’t
entail that it should accept the (metaphysical and epistemological) interpretation that science
gives of these ﬁndings.
Secondly, although we think it is important to encourage the exchange between pheno-
menology and empirical science, the possibility of a fruitful cooperation between the two should
not make us overlook their difference. There is no incoherence in claiming that phenomenology
should be as informed by the best available scientiﬁc knowledge, while at the same time insisting
that the ultimate transcendental philosophical concerns of phenomenology differ from those of
positive science.
Let us conclude, then, by wholeheartedly endorsing the renewed focus on subjectivity. An
investigation of the ﬁrst-person perspective is of paramount importance not only for philosophy
of mind, but also for a number of related disciplines including social philosophy, psychiatry,
CONCLUSION
221

developmental psychology, and cognitive neuroscience. Ultimately, what we need is an account
of the ﬁrst-person perspective that (among other things) addresses its signiﬁcance (the role it
plays) and systematic import, describes its structure, delineates the methodology that we should
employ when investigating it, and ﬁnally clariﬁes its ontological or metaphysical status. However,
as we have tried to argue, it would be highly unfortunate if the long overdue recognition of the
importance of the ﬁrst-person perspective took the form of a return to a Lockean-style account
of consciousness. What do we mean by a Lockean-style account? In this context, we are mainly
thinking of a pre-Kantian and pre-Wittgensteinian view on consciousness; that is, one that ignores
transcendental considerations, thereby viewing consciousness merely as yet another object in
the world, and one that deﬁnes subjectivity as something inner and private, thereby disregarding
the extent to which it is visible to others in our meaningful behaviour, the extent to which our
subjectivity is inﬂuenced, shaped, and formed by our interaction and engagement with others,
and by our shared forms of life.
222
CONCLUSION

References
We have quoted from English translations where available. If no translations were available we have
provided our own translations. In the case of quotations from Husserl and Heidegger, the following
convention has been used. In those cases where the English translation includes the German page number
in the margin, only the German page number is provided, and the years following the author’s name refer
to the publication date of the German original and the English translation, respectively. For example,
Husserl 1966a/1991, p. 124, refers to page 124 in Husserl’s Zur Phänomenologie des inneren Zeit-
bewußtseins (published in German in 1966 and in English translation in 1991).
Allison, T., Puce, Q. and McCarthy, G. (2000). Social perception from visual cues: role of the STS region.
Trends in Cognitive Science 4/7, 267–278.
Anscombe, G.E.M. (1957). Intention. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
Armstrong, D.M. (1968). A Materialist Theory of the Mind. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Armstrong, D. (1981). The Nature of Mind, and other Essays. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Asemissen, H.U. (1958/59). Egologische reﬂexion. Kant-Studien 50, 262–272.
Augustine (1955). Confessions. Philadelphia, PA: Westminster Press.
Avramides, A. (2001). Other Minds. London: Routledge.
Bach-Y-Rita, P., Collins, C.C., Saunders, F. and Scadden, L. (1969). Vision substitution by tactile image
projection. Nature 221, 963–964.
Bach-y-Rita, P., Tyler, M.E. and Kaczmarek, K.A. (2003). Seeing with the brain. International Journal of
Human-computer Interaction 15/2, 285–295.
Baker, L.R. (2000). Persons and Bodies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Baldwin, D.A. (1993). Infants’ ability to consult the speaker for clues to word reference. Journal of Child
Language 20, 395–418.
Baldwin, D.A. and Baird, J.A. (2001) Discerning intentions in dynamic human action. Trends in Cognitive
Science 5/4, 171–178.
Baldwin, D.A., Baird, J.A., Saylor, M.M. and Clark, M.A. (2001). Infants parse dynamic action. Child
Development 72/3, 708–117.

Bartlett, F. (1932). Remembering: A Study in Experimental and Social Psychology. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Baron-Cohen, S. (1995). Mindblindness. An Essay on Autism and Theory of Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A. and Frith, U. (1985). Does the autistic child have a ‘theory of mind’? Cognition
21, 37–46.
Bennett, M.R. and Hacker, P.M.S. (2003). Philosophical Foundations of Neuroscience. Oxford: Blackwell.
Bermúdez, J.L. (1995). Transcendental arguments and psychology: the example of O’Shaughnessy on
intentional action. Metaphilosophy 26, 379–401.
Bermúdez, J.L. (1998). The Paradox of Self-Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bernier, P. (2002). From simulation to theory. In J. Dokic and J. Proust (eds), Simulation and Knowledge
of Action (pp. 33–48). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Bertenthal, B.I., Profﬁtt, D.R. and Cutting, J.E. (1984). Infant sensitivity to ﬁgural coherence in biomechanical
motions. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 37, 213–230.
Bisiach, E. (1988). Language without thought. In L. Weiskrantz (ed.), Thought Without Language (pp.
464–484). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bisiach, E. and Luzzatti, C. (1978). Unilateral neglect of representational space. Cortex 14, 129–133.
Blakemore, S.J., Wolpert, D.M. and Frith, C.D. (2002). Abnormalities in the awareness of action. Trends in
Cognitive Science 6/6, 237–242.
Blakeslee, S. (2006). Cells that read minds. New York Times, 10 January 2006, at: http://www.nytimes.
com/2006/01/10/science/10mirr.html.
Blanke, O., Landis, T., Spinelli, L. and Seeck, M. (2004). Out-of-body experience and autoscopy of
neurological origin. Brain 127/2, 243–258.
Blankenburg, W. (1971). Der Verlust der natürlichen Selbstverständlichkeit. Ein Beitrag zur Psycho-
pathologie symptomarmer Schizophrenien. Stuttgart: Enke.
Block, N. (1997). On a confusion about a function of consciousness. In N. Block, O. Flanagan and G.
Güzeldere (eds), The Nature of Consciousness (pp. 375–415). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Blumental, A.L. (2001). A Wundt primer: The operating characteristics of consciousness. In R. W. Rieber
and D. K. Robinson (eds), Wilhelm Wundt in History: The making of a scientiﬁc psychology (pp. 121–144).
New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers.
Botvinick, M. and Cohen, J. (1998). Rubber hands feel touch that eyes see. Nature 391, 756.
Braddon-Mitchell, D. and Jackson, F. (2006). Philosophy of Mind and Cognition: An Introduction, 2nd
edition. Oxford: Blackwell
Brandom, R. (1994). Making It Explicit: Reasoning, Representing, and Discursive Commitment. Cambridge,
MA, Harvard University Press.
Brentano, F. (1973). Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint. Trans. A. C. Rancurello, D. B. Terrell and L.
L. McAlister. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Brook, A. (1994). Kant and the Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brooks, R.A. (1990). Elephants don’t play chess. Robotics and Autonomous Systems 6, 3–15.
Brooks, R.A. (2002). Flesh and Machines: How Robots Will Change Us. New York: Pantheon Books.
Bruner, J. (1986). Actual Minds, Possible Worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bruner, J. (2002). Making Stories: Law, Literature, Life. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Buytendijk, F.J.J. (1974). Prolegomena to an Anthropological Physiology. Trans. A. I. Orr et al. Pittsburgh,
PA: Duquesne University Press.
Cabanis, P. (1802). Rapports du physique et du moral de l’homme. Paris: Crapart, Caille et Ravier.
Cabestan, Ph. (1996). La constitution du corps selon l’ordre de ses apparitions. EPOKHE 6, 279–298.
224
REFERENCES

Campbell, J. (1999). Schizophrenia, the space of reasons and thinking as a motor process. The Monist
82/4, 609–625.
Campos, J.J., Bertenthal, B.I. and Kermoian, R. (1992). Early experience and emotional development: the
emergence of wariness of heights. Psychological Science 3, 61–64.
Carr, D. (1999). The Paradox of Subjectivity: The Self in the Transcendental Tradition. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Carruthers, P. (1996). Language, Thoughts and Consciousness. An Essay in Philosophical Psychology.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Carruthers, P. (1998). Natural theories of consciousness. European Journal of Philosophy 6/2, 203–222.
Carruthers, P. (2005). Consciousness: Essays from a Higher-order Perspective. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Cassam, Q. (1997). Self and World. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Chalmers, D. (1995). Facing up to the problem of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies 2/3,
200–219.
Chalmers, D.J. (1996). The Conscious Mind. In Search of a Fundamental Theory. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Chalmers, D.J. (1997). Moving forward on the problem of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies
4/1, 3–46.
Chalmers, D.J. (ed.) (2002). Philosophy of Mind: Classical and Contemporary Readings. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Chaminade, T. and Decety, J. (2002). Leader or follower? Involvement of the inferior parietal lobule in
agency. Neuroreport 13/1528, 1975–1978.
Chiel, H.J. and Beer, R.D. (1997). The brain has a body: adaptive behavior emerges from interactions of
nervous system, body and environment. Trends in Neurosciences 20, 553–557.
Chisholm, R.M. (1967). Brentano on descriptive psychology and the intentional. In E. N. Lee and M.
Mandelbaum (eds), Phenomenology and Existentialism (pp. 1–23). Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins Press.
Clark, A. (1997). Being There: Putting Brain, Body, and World Together Again. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cole, J. (1995). Pride and a Daily Marathon. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cole, J., Sacks, O. and Waterman, I. (2000). On the immunity principle: a view from a robot. Trends in
Cognitive Science 4/5, 167.
Conrad, K. (1959). Die beginnende Schizophrenie: Versuch einer Gestaltanalyse des Wahns. Stuttgart:
Thieme Verlag.
Costall, A. (2004). From Darwin to Watson (and cognitivism) and back again: the principle of
animal–environment mutuality. Behavior and Philosophy, at: http://www.ﬁndarticles.com/p/articles/
mi_qa3814/is_200401/ai_n9383857.
Costall, A. (2006). Introspectionism and the mythical origins of modern scientiﬁc psychology. Consciousness
and Cognition 15, 634–654.
Crane, T. (2001). Elements of Mind: An introduction to the Philosophy of Mind. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Crick, F. (1995). The Astonishing Hypothesis. London: Touchstone.
Currie, G. and Ravenscroft, I. (2002). Recreative Minds. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dainton, B. (2000). Stream of Consciousness: Unity and Continuity in Conscious Experience. London:
Routledge.
Dainton, B. (2003). Time in experience: reply to Gallagher. PSYCHE 9/12, at: http://psyche.cs.monash.
edu.au/symposia/dainton/gallagher-r.pdf.
Damasio, A.R. (1994). Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain. New York: Grosset/
Putnam.
REFERENCES
225

Damasio, A.R. (1999). The Feeling of What Happens. San Diego, CA: Harcourt.
Davidson, D. (2001). Subjective, Intersubjective, Objective. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
de Vignemont, F. (2004). The co-consciousness hypothesis. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences
3/1, 97–114.
Dennett, D.C. (1979). On the absence of phenomenology. In D. Gustafson and B. Tapscott (eds), Body, Mind,
and Method (pp. 93–113). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Dennett, D.C. (1981). Where am I? In D. R. Hofstadter and D. C. Dennett, The Mind’s I: Fantasies and
Reﬂections on Mind and Soul (pp. 217–229). New York: Basic Books.
Dennett, D.C. (1982). How to study human consciousness empirically, or, nothing comes to mind. Synthese
53, 159–180.
Dennett, D.C. (1987). The Intentional Stance. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dennett, D.C. (1988) Why everyone is a novelist. Times Literary Supplement, 16–22 September, pp. 1016,
1028–1029.
Dennett, D.C. (1991). Consciousness Explained. Boston, MA: Little, Brown and Co.
Dennett, D.C. (1993a). Caveat emptor. Consciousness and Cognition 2, 48–57.
Dennett, D.C. (1993b). Living on the edge. Inquiry 36, 135–159.
Dennett, D.C. (2000). Re-introducing The Concept of Mind. In G. Ryle, The Concept of Mind, new edition.
London: Penguin.
Dennett, D.C. (2001). The Fantasy of First-Person Science. Nicod Lectures. Private circulation, at:
http://ase.tufts.edu/cogstud/papers/chalmersdeb3dft.htm.
Dennett, D.C. (2003). Who’s on ﬁrst? Heterophenomenology explained. Journal of Consciousness Studies
10/9–10, 19–30.
Dennett, D.C. (2007). Heterophenomenology reconsidered. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences
6/1–2, 247–270.
Dewey, J. (1896). The reﬂex arc concept in psychology. Psychological Review 3, 357–370.
Dilthey, W. (1992). Der Aufbau der geschichtlichen Welt in den Geisteswissenschaften. Gesammelte
Schriften 7. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Dokic, J. (2003). The sense of ownership: an analogy between sensation and action. In J. Roessler and N.
Eilan (eds), Agency and Self-Awareness: Issues in Philosophy and Psychology (pp. 321–344). Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Dokic, J. and Proust, J. (2002). Introduction. In J. Dokic and J. Proust (eds), Simulation and Knowledge of
Action (pp. vii–xxi). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Dretske, F. (1995). Naturalizing the Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dreyfus, H. (1967). Why computers must have bodies in order to be intelligent. Review of Metaphysics 21/1,
13–32.
Dreyfus, H. (1972). What Computers Can’t Do. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dreyfus, H.L. (1991). Being-in-the-World. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dreyfus, H. (1992). What Computers Still Can’t Do. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Drummond, J.J. (1990). Husserlian Intentionality and Non-Foundational Realism. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Drummond, J.J. (1992). An abstract consideration: de-ontologizing the noema. In J. J. Drummond and L.
Embree (eds), The Phenomenology of the Noema (pp. 89–109). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Drummond, J.J. (2003). The structure of intentionality. In D. Welton (ed.), The New Husserl: A Critical Reader
(pp. 65–92). Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press.
Ekman, P. (2003). Emotions Revealed: Understanding Faces and Feelings. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.
Engel, A.K, Fries. P. and Singer, W. (2001). Dynamic predictions: oscillations and synchrony in top-down
processing. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 10, 704–716.
226
REFERENCES

Evans, G. (1982). The Varieties of Reference. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Farrer, C. and Frith, C.D. (2002). Experiencing oneself vs. another person as being the cause of an action:
the neural correlates of the experience of agency. NeuroImage 15, 596–603.
Farrer, C., Franck, N., Georgieff, N., Frith, C.D., Decety, J. and Jeannerod, M. (2003). Modulating the
experience of agency: a positron emission tomography study. NeuroImage 18, 324–333.
Flanagan, O. (1992). Consciousness Reconsidered. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fodor, J. (1987). Psychosemantics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Frankfurt, H. (1988). The Importance of What We Care About: Philosophical Essays. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Friedenberg, J. and Silverman, G. (2006). Cognitive Science: An Introduction to the Study of Mind. London:
Sage.
Friedman, W. (1990). About Time: Inventing the Fourth Dimension. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Frith, C.D. (1992). The Cognitive Neuropsychology of Schizophrenia. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Frith, U. and F. Happé (1999). Theory of mind and self-consciousness: what is it like to be autistic? Mind
& Language 14, 1–22.
Frith, C.D., Blakemore, S. and Wolpert, D.M. (2000). Explaining the symptoms of schizophrenia:
abnormalities in the awareness of action. Brain Research Review, 31/2–3, 357–363.
Gallagher, S. (1979). Suggestions towards a revision of Husserl’s phenomenology of time-consciousness.
Man and World 12, 445–464.
Gallagher, S. (1986). Lived body and environment. Research in Phenomenology 16, 139–170. Reprinted
in D. Moran and L. Embree (eds), Phenomenology: Critical Concepts in Philosophy Vol II. London:
Routledge, 2004.
Gallagher, S. (1996). The moral signiﬁcance of primitive self-consciousness. Ethics 107/1, 129–140.
Gallagher, S. (1997). Mutual enlightenment: recent phenomenology in cognitive science. Journal of
Consciousness Studies 4/3, 195–214.
Gallagher, S. (1998). The Inordinance of Time. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Gallagher, S. (2000a). Philosophical conceptions of the self: implications for cognitive science. Trends in
Cognitive Science 4/1, 14–21.
Gallagher, S. (2000b). Self-reference and schizophrenia: a cognitive model of immunity to error through
misidentification. In D. Zahavi (ed.), Exploring the Self: Philosophical and Psychopathological
Perspectives on Self-Experience (pp. 203–239). Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Gallagher, S. (2001). The practice of mind: theory, simulation, or interaction? Journal of Consciousness
Studies 8/5–7, 83–107.
Gallagher, S. (2003a). Phenomenology and experimental design. Journal of Consciousness Studies
10/9–10, 85–99
Gallagher, S. (2003b). Bodily self-awareness and object-perception. Theoria et Historia Scientiarum:
International Journal for Interdisciplinary Studies 7/1, 53–68.
Gallagher, S. (2003c). Sync-ing in the stream of experience: time-consciousness in Broad, Husserl, and
Dainton. PSYCHE 9/10, at: http://psyche.cs.monash.edu.au/v9/psyche-9-10-gallagher.html.
Gallagher, S. (2005). How the Body Shapes the Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gallagher, S. (2006). The intrinsic spatial frame of reference. In H. Dreyfus and M. Wrathall (eds), The
Blackwell Companion to Phenomenology and Existentialism (pp. 346–355). Oxford: Blackwell.
Gallagher, S. (2007). Simulation trouble. Social Neuroscience 2/3–4, 353–365.
Gallagher, S. and Cole, J. (1995). Body schema and body image in a deafferented subject. Journal of Mind
and Behavior 16, 369–390.
REFERENCES
227

Gallagher, S. and Hutto, D. (2007). Understanding others through primary interaction and narrative practice.
In J. Zlatev, T. Racine, C. Sinha and E. Itkonen (eds), The Shared Mind: Perspectives on Intersubjectivity.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Gallagher, S. and Marcel, A.J. (1999). The self in contextualized action. Journal of Consciousness Studies
6/4, 4–30.
Gallagher, S. and Meltzoff, A. (1996). The earliest sense of self and others: Merleau-Ponty and recent
developmental studies. Philosophical Psychology 9, 213–236.
Gallagher, S. and Shear, J. (eds) (1999). Models of the Self. Exeter: Imprint Academic.
Gallagher, S. and Varela, F. (2003). Redrawing the map and resetting the time: phenomenology and the
cognitive sciences. Canadian Journal of Philosophy. Supplementary Volume 29, 93–132.
Gallagher, S. and Væver, M. (2004). Disorders of embodiment. In J. Radden (ed.), The Philosophy of
Psychiatry: A Companion (pp. 118–132). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gallese, V.L. (2001). The ‘shared manifold’ hypothesis: from mirror neurons to empathy. Journal of
Consciousness Studies 8, 33–50.
Gallese, V.L. (2005). ‘Being like me’: self-other identity, mirror neurons and empathy. In S. Hurley and N.
Chater (eds), Perspectives on Imitation I (pp. 101–118). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gallese, V.L. and Goldman, A. (1998). Mirror neurons and the simulation theory of mind-reading. Trends
in Cognitive Science 2, 493–501.
Gellhorn, E. (1943). Autonomic Regulations: Their Significance for Physiology, Psychology, and
Neuropsychiatry. New York: Interscience Publications.
Georgieff, N. and Jeannerod, M. (1998). Beyond consciousness of external events: a ‘Who’ system for
consciousness of action and self-consciousness. Consciousness and Cognition 7, 465–477.
Gibbs, R.W. (2006). Embodiment and Cognitive Science. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gibson, J.J. (1986). The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Goldman, A. (1970). A Theory of Human Action. New York: Prentice Hall.
Goldman, A.I. (2000). Folk psychology and mental concepts. Protosociology 14, 4–25.
Goldman, A.I. (2002). Simulation theory and mental concepts. In J. Dokic and J. Proust (eds), Simulation
and Knowledge of Action (pp. 1–19). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Goldman, A. (2005). Imitation, mind reading, and simulation. In S. Hurley and N. Chater (eds), Perspectives
on Imitation II (pp. 79–94). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gonzalez, J.C. and Bach-y-Rita, P. (2003). Perceptual adaptive recalibration: tactile sensory substitution
in blind subjects. Behavior and Philosophy.
Gopnik, A. (1993). How we know our minds: the illusion of first-person knowledge of intentionality.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 16, 1–14.
Gopnik, A. and Meltzoff, A. (1997). Words, Thoughts, and Theories. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gordon, R.M. (2005). Intentional agents like myself. In S. Hurley and N. Chater (eds), Perspectives on
Imitation I (pp. 95–106). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gordon, R. and Cruz, J. (2003). Simulation theory. In Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science. London: Nature
Publishing.
Graham, G. and Stephens, G.L. (1994). Mind and mine. In G. Graham and G. L. Stephens (eds), Philosophical
Psychopathology (pp. 91–109). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gregory, R.L. (1997). Mirrors in Mind. Oxford/New York: W. H. Freeman.
Grèzes, J. and Decety, J. (2001). Functional anatomy of execution, mental simulation, and verb generation
of actions: a meta-analysis. Human Brain Mapping 12, 1–19.
Gurwitsch, A. (1966). Studies in Phenomenology and Psychology. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University
Press.
228
REFERENCES

Gurwitsch, A. (1979). Human Encounters in the Social World. Trans. F. Kersten. Pittsburgh, PA: Duquesne
University Press.
Haggard, P. and Clark, S. (2003). Intentional action: conscious experience and neural prediction. Conscious
Cognition 12/4, 695–707.
Hamm, A.O., Weike, A.I., Schupp, H.T., Treig, T., Dressel, A. and Kessler, C. (2003). Affective blindsight: intact
fear conditioning to a visual cue in a cortically blind patient. Brain 126/2, 267–275.
Hart, J.G. (1992). The Person and the Common Life. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Haugeland, J. (1998). Having Thought: Essays in the Metaphysics of Mind, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Head, H. (1920). Studies in Neurology, Volume 2. London: Oxford University Press.
Heidegger, M. (1964). The origin of the work of art. In A. Hofstadter and R. Kuhns (eds), Philosophies of
Art and Beauty (pp. 649–701). Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Heidegger, M. (1976). Logik: Der Frage nach der Wahrheit, Walter Biemel (ed.). Gesamtausgabe Band 21.
Frankfurt am Main: Vittorio Klostermann.
Heidegger, M. (1975). Die Grundprobleme der Phänomenologie. Gesamtausgabe Band 24. Frankfurt am
Main: Vittorio Klostermann; The Basic Problems of Phenomenology. Trans. A. Hofstadter. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1982.
Heidegger, M. (1978). Metaphysische Anfangsgründe der Logik im Ausgang von Leibniz. Gesamtausgabe
26. Frankfurt am Main: Vittorio Klostermann.
Heidegger, M. (1979). Prolegomena zur Geschichte des Zeitbegriffs. Gesamtausgabe Band 20. Frankfurt
am Main: Vittorio Klostermann.
Heidegger, M. (1986). Sein und Zeit. Tübingen: Max Niemeyer. Being and Time. Trans. J. Stambaugh.
Albany: SUNY, 1996.
Heidegger, M. (1993). Grundprobleme der Phänomenologie (1919/1920). Gesamtausgabe Band 58.
Frankfurt am Main: Vittorio Klostermann.
Heidegger, M. (1994). Phänomenologische Interpretationen zu Aristoteles. Einführung in die
phänomenologische Forschung. Gesamtausgabe Band 61. Frankfurt am Main: Vittorio Klostermann.
Heidegger, M. (2001). Einleitung in die Philosophie. Gesamtausgabe Band 27. Frankfurt am Main. Vittorio
Klostermann.
Heil, J. (2004). Philosophy of Mind: A Contemporary Introduction. London: Routledge.
Henry, M. (1973). The Essence of Manifestation. Trans. G. Etzkorn. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Henry, M. (1975). Philosophy and Phenomenology of the Body. Trans. G. Etzkorn. The Hague: Martinus
Nijhoff.
Henry, M. (2003). De la subjectivité. Paris: PUF.
Hobson, R.P. (1993). Autism and the Development of Mind. Hove: Psychology Press.
Hobson, R.P. (2002). The Cradle of Thought. London: Macmillan.
Hodgson, S. (1870). The Theory of Practice. London: Longmans, Green, Reader & Dyer.
Hodgson, D. (1996). The easy problems ain’t so easy. Journal of Consciousness Studies 3/1, 69–75.
Hurley, S. (1998). Consciousness in Action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hurley, S. (2005). The shared circuits hypothesis: a uniﬁed functional architecture for control, imitation,
and simulation. In S. Hurley and N. Chater (eds), Perspectives on Imitation: From Neuroscience to Social
Science, Volume 1 (pp. 177–194). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Husserl, E. (1950). Cartesianische Meditationen und Pariser Vorträge, Husserliana I. The Hague: Martinus
Nijhoff; The Paris Lectures. Trans. P. Koestenbaum. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1964 (pp. 3–39);
Cartesian Meditations: An Introduction to Phenomenology. Trans. D. Cairns. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff,
1999 (pp. 43–183).
REFERENCES
229

Husserl, E. (1952). Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie. Zweites
Buch. Phänomenologische Untersuchungen zur Konstitution, Husserliana IV. Den Haag: Martinus
Nijhoff; Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy. Second
Book. Studies in the Phenomenology of Constitution, transl. R. Rojcewicz and A. Schuwer. Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1989.
Husserl, E. (1959). Erste Philosophie II (1923–24), Husserliana VIII. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Husserl, E. (1962). Phänomenologische Psychologie, Husserliana IX. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff;
Phenomenological Psychology: Lectures, Summer Semester, 1925. Trans. J. Scanlon. The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoff, 1977 (pp. 3–234); Psychological and Transcendental Phenomenology and the
Confrontation with Heidegger (1927–1931). Trans. T. Sheehan and R. E. Palmer. Dordrecht: Kluwer
Academic Publishers, 1997 (pp. 237–349, 517–526).
Husserl, E. (1966a). Zur Phänomenologie des inneren Zeitbewußtseins (1893–1917), Husserliana X. The
Hague: Martinus Nijhoff; On the Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Internal Time (1893–1917).
Trans. J. Brough. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1991.
Husserl, E. (1966b). Analysen zur passiven Synthesis, Husserliana XI. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Husserl, E. (1970). The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology. An Introduction
to Phenomenology. Trans. D. Carr. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Husserl, E. (1971). Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie. Drittes
Buch: Die Phänomenologie und die Fundamente der Wissenschaften, Husserliana V. The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoff; Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy.
Third Book. Phenomenology and the Foundations of the Sciences, transl. T. E. Klein and W. E. Pohl. The
Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1980.
Husserl, E. (1973a). Zur Phänomenologie der Intersubjektivität II, Husserliana XIV. The Hague: Martinus
Nijhoff.
Husserl, E. (1973b). Zur Phänomenologie der Intersubjektivität III, Husserliana XV. The Hague: Martinus
Nijhoff.
Husserl, E. (1973c). Ding und Raum. Vorlesungen 1907, Husserliana XVI. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff;
Thing and Space: Lectures of 1907. Trans. R. Rojcewicz. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1997.
Husserl, E. (1976). Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie I,
Husserliana III/1–2. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff; Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a
Phenomenological Philosophy. First Book. General Introduction to a Pure Phenomenology. Trans. F.
Kersten. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1982.
Husserl, E. (1979). Aufsätze und Rezensionen (1890–1910). Husserliana XXII. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Husserl, E. (1984). Einleitung in die Logik und Erkenntnistheorie, Husserliana XXIV. The Hague: Martinus
Nijhoff.
Husserl, E. (1987). Aufsätze und Vorträge (1911–1921). Husserliana XXV. Dordrecht: Martinus Nijhoff.
Husserl, E. (2001a). Logical Investigations I–II. Trans. J. N. Findlay. London: Routledge.
Husserl, E. (2001b). Die Bernauer Manuskripte über das Zeitbewusstsein (1917–18), Husserliana XXXIII.
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Husserl, E. (2002). Zur phänomenologischen Reduktion. Texte aus dem Nachlass (1926–1935),
Husserliana XXXIV. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Husserl, E. (2003). Transzendentaler Idealismus. Texte aus dem Nachlass (1908–1921). Husserliana
XXXVI. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Hutto, D.D. (2004). The limits of spectatorial folk psychology. Mind and Language 19/5, 548–573.
Hutto, D.D. (2007). The narrative practice hypothesis: origins and applications of folk psychology. In D. Hutto
(ed.), Narrative and Understanding Persons (pp. 43–68). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
230
REFERENCES

Huxley, T.H. (1874). On the hypothesis that animals are automata, and its history. Fortnightly Review, 16,
555–580.
Jack, A.I. and Roepstorff, A. (2002). Introspection and cognitive brain mapping: from stimulus–response
to script–report. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 6/8, 333–339.
James, W. (1950). The Principles of Psychology I–II. New York: Dover.
Jeannerod, M. (1997). The Cognitive Neuroscience of Action. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
Jeannerod, M. (1999). To act or not to act: perspectives on the representation of actions. Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology 52A/1, 1–29.
Jeannerod, M. and Pacherie, E. (2004). Agency, simulation, and self-identiﬁcation. Mind and Language
19/2, 113–146.
Johnson, M. (1987). The Body in the Mind: The Bodily Basis of Meaning, Imagination, and Reason. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Johnson, S.C. (2000). The recognition of mentalistic agents in infancy. Trends in Cognitive Science 4,
22–28.
Johnson, S. et al. (1998). Whose gaze will infants follow? The elicitation of gaze-following in 12-month-old
infants. Developmental Science 1, 233–238.
Jopling, D.A. (2000). Self-Knowledge and the Self. London: Routledge.
Journal of Consciousness Studies (1997). Editorial, 4/5–6, 385–388.
Kant, I. (1956). Kritik der reinen Vernunft. Hamburg: Felix Meiner; Critique of Pure Reason. Trans. P. Guyer
and A. W. Wood. Cambridge. Cambridge University Press, 1999.
Kant, I. (1992). Concerning the ultimate ground of the differentiation of directions in space. In D. Walford
and R. Meerbote (eds), The Cambridge Edition of the Works of Immanuel Kant. Theoretical Philosophy,
1755–1770 (pp. 365–372). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Keller, P. (1999). Husserl and Heidegger on Human Experience. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kim, J. (2005). Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge, MA: Westview Press.
Kircher, T. and David, A. (eds) (2003). The Self in Neuroscience and Psychiatry. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Kriegel, U. (2003). Consciousness as intransitive self-consciousness: two views and an argument. Canadian
Journal of Philosophy 33/1, 103–132.
Kriegel, U. (2004). Consciousness and self-consciousness. Monist 87/2, 185–209.
La Mettrie, J.O., de. (1745). Histoire naturelle de l’ame. La Haye: Jean Neaulme.
Laing, R.D. (1960/1990). The Divided Self. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Lakoff, G. and Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we Live By. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G. and Nuñez, R.E. (2001). Where Mathematics Comes From: How the Embodied Mind Brings
Mathematics into Being. New York: Basic Books.
Leder, D. (1990). The Absent Body. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lee, D.N. and Aronson, E. (1974). Visual proprioceptive control of standing in human infants. Perception
& Psychophysics 15, 529–532.
Legerstee, M. (1991). The role of person and object in eliciting early imitation. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology 51, 423–433.
Legrand, D. (2006). The bodily self. The sensori-motor roots of pre-reflexive self-consciousness.
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 5, 89–118.
Leslie, A.M. (1987). Children’s understanding of the mental world. In R. L. Gregory (ed.), The Oxford
Companion to the Mind (pp. 139–142). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lévinas, E. (1979). Le temps et l’autre. Paris: Fata Morgana
Lewis, M. (2003). The development of self-consciousness. In J. Roessler and N. Eilan (eds), Agency and
Self-Awareness (pp. 275–295). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
REFERENCES
231

Locke, J. (1975). An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lotze, R.H. (1887). Metaphysic in Three Books: Ontology, Cosmology, and Psychology. Trans. B. Bosanquet,
2nd edition. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Lutz, A. (2002). Toward a neurophenomenology as an account of generative passages: a ﬁrst empirical
case study. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 1, 133–167.
Lutz, A. and Thompson, E. (2003). Neurophenomenology: integrating subjective experience and brain
dynamics in the neuroscience of consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies 10, 31–52.
Lutz, A., Lachaux, J.-P., Martinerie, J. and Varela, F.J. (2002). Guiding the study of brain dynamics using
ﬁrst-person data: synchrony patterns correlate with on-going conscious states during a simple visual
task. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science USA 99, 1586–1591.
Lycan, W.G. (1987). Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lycan, W.G. (1997). Consciousness as internal monitoring. In N. Block, O. Flanagan and G. Güzeldere
(eds), The Nature of Consciousness (pp. 754–771). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lyons, W. (1986). The Disappearance of Introspection. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
McClamrock, R. (1995). Existential Cognition: Computational Minds in the World. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
McCulloch, G. (2003). The Life of the Mind: An Essay on Phenomenological Externalism. London: Routledge.
McDowell, J. (1992). Putnam on mind and meaning. Philosophical Topics 20/1, 35–48.
McDowell, J. (1998). Meaning, Knowledge, and Reality. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
McGinn, C. (1991). The Problem of Consciousness. Oxford: Blackwell.
MacIntyre, A. (1985). After Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory. London: Duckworth.
McIntyre, R. (1999). Naturalizing phenomenology? Dretske on Qualia. In J. Petitot, F. J. Varlea, B. Pachoud,
and J.-M. Roy (eds), Naturalizing Phenomenology (pp. 429–439). Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press.
McTaggart, J.M.E. (1908). The Unreality of Time. Mind 17 (New Series, no. 68), 457–474.
Majid, A., Bowerman, M., Kita, S., Haun, D.B.M. and Levinson, S.C. (2004). Can language restructure
cognition? The case for space. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 8/3, 108–114.
Marbach, E. (1993). Mental Representation and Consciousness: Towards a Phenomenological Theory of
Representation and Reference. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishing.
Marcel, A.J. (1983). Conscious and unconscious perception: an approach to the relations between
phenomenal experience and perceptual processes. Cognitive Psychology 15, 238–300.
Marcel, A.J. (1993). Slippage in the unity of consciousness. In G. R. Bock and J. Marsh (eds), Experimental
and Theoretical Studies of Consciousness (Ciba Foundation Symposium 174) (pp. 168–180). New
York: Wiley.
Marcel, A.J. (1998). Blindsight and shape perception: deﬁcits of visual consciousness or of visual function?
Brain 121, 1565–1588.
Marcel, A.J. (2003). The sense of agency: awareness and ownership of action. In J. Roessler and N. Eilan
(eds), Agency and Awarness (pp. 48–93). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Marcel, A.J. and Bisiach, E. (eds) (1988). Consciousness in Contemporary Science. Oxford: Oxford Science.
Marchetti, C. and Della Sala, S. (1998). Disentangling the alien and anarchic hand. Cognitive
Neuropsychiatry 3/3, 191–207.
Marion, J.-L. (1998). Etant donné : essai d’une phénoménologie de la donation, 2nd edition. Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France.
Maund, B. (1995). Colours: Their Nature and Representation. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Mead, G.H. (1962). Mind, Self and Society. From the standpoint of a Social Behaviorist. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
232
REFERENCES

Meltzoff, A.N. (1995). Understanding the intentions of others: re-enactment of intended acts by 18-month-
old children. Developmental Psychology 31, 838–850.
Meltzoff, A.N. and Brooks, R. (2001). ‘Like me’ as a building block for understanding other minds: bodily
acts, attention, and intention. In B. F. Malle et al. (eds), Intentions and Intentionality: Foundations of
Social Cognition (pp. 171–191). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962). Phenomenology of Perception. Trans. C. Smith. London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1963). The Structure of Behavior. Trans. A. L. Fisher. Pittsburgh, PA: Duquesne University
Press.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1964). Signs. Trans. R. C. McCleary. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1968). The Visible and the Invisible. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (2003). Nature: Course Notes from the Collège de France. Evanston, IL: Northwestern
University Press.
Metzinger, T. (2003). Being No One. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Millikan, R. (2004). Varieties of Meaning: The 2002 Jean Nicod Lectures. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Minkowski, E. (1927). La schizophrénie. Psychopathologie des schizoïdes et des schizophrènes. Paris: Payot.
Minkowski, E. (1997). Au-delà du rationalisme morbide. Paris: Éditions l’Harmattan.
Mohanty, J.N. (1972). The Concept of Intentionality. St. Louis, MO: Warren H. Green.
Moland, L.L. (2004). Ideals, ethics, and personhood. In H. Ikäheimo, J. Kotkavirta, A. Laitinen and P. Lyyra
(eds), Personhood (pp. 178–184). Jyväskylä: University of Jyväskylä Press.
Moore, D.G., Hobson, R.P. and Lee, A. (1997). Components of person perception: an investigation with
autistic, non-autistic retarded and typically developing children and adolescents. British Journal of
Developmental Psychology 15, 401–423.
Moore, G.E. (1903). The refutation of idealism. Mind 12, 433–453.
Moran, D. (2001). Analytic philosophy and phenomenology. In S. Crowell, L. Embree and S. J. Julian (eds),
The Reach of Reﬂection: Issues for Phenomenology’s Second Century (pp. 409–433). West Harford,
CT: Electron Press.
Moran, R. (2001). Authority and Estrangement: An essay on self-knowledge. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press
Myin, E. and O’Regan, J.K. (2002). Perceptual consciousness, access to modality and skill theories. Journal
of Consciousness Studies 9/1, 27–45.
Nagel, T. (1974). What is it like to be a bat? Philosophical Review 83, 435–450.
Natorp, P. (1912). Allgemeine Psychologie. Tübingen: J.C.B. Mohr.
Nelson K. (2003). Narrative and the emergence of a consciousness of self. In G. D. Fireman, T. E. J. McVay
and O. Flanagan (eds), Narrative and Consciousness (pp. 17–36). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Neisser, U. (1988). Five kinds of self-knowledge. Philosophical Psychology 1/1, 35–59.
Neisser, U. (1993). The self perceived. In U. Neisser (ed.), The Perceived Self: Ecological and Interpersonal
Sources of Self-Knowledge (pp. 3–21). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Noë, A. (2004). Action in Perception. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Noë, A. (2007). The critique of pure phenomenology. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 6/1–2,
231–245.
Oberman, L.M. and Ramachandran, V.S. (2007). The simulating social mind: the role of the mirror neuron
system and simulation in the social and communicative deficits of autism spectrum disorders.
Psychological Bulletin 133/2, 310–327.
Overgaard, S. (2005). Rethinking other minds: Wittgenstein and Lévinas on expression. Inquiry 48/3,
249–274.
REFERENCES
233

O’Shaughnessy, B. (1980). The Will: A Dual Aspect Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
O’Shaughnessy, B. (1985). Seeing the light. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 85, 193–218.
O’Shaughnessy, B. (1995). Proprioception and the body image. In J. Bermúdez, A. J. Marcel and N. Eilan
(eds), The Body and the Self (pp. 175–203). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Paillard, J. (2000). The neurobiological roots of rational thinking. In H. Cruse et al. (eds), Prerational
Intelligence: Adaptive Behavior and Intelligent Systems Without Symbols and Logic, Volume I (pp.
343–355). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Parnas, J. (2003). Self and schizophrenia: a phenomenological perspective. In T. Kircher and A. David
(eds), The Self in Neuroscience and Psychiatry (pp. 217–241). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Parnas, J. and Zahavi, D. (2002). The role of phenomenology in psychiatric diagnosis and classiﬁcation. In
M. Maj, W. Gaebel, J. J. López-Ibor and N. Sartorius (eds), Psychiatric Diagnosis and Classiﬁcation (pp.
137–162). New York: Wiley.
Parnas, J., Bovet, P. and Zahavi, D. (2002). Schizophrenic autism, clinical phenomenology and pathogenetic
implications. World Psychiatry 1/3, 131–136.
Parnas, J., Møller, P., Kircher, T., Thalbitzer, J., Jansson, L., Handest, P. and Zahavi, D. (2005). EASE:
Examination of Anomalous Self-Experience. Psychopathology 38, 236–258.
Petitot, J., Varela, F., Pachoud, B. and Roy, J.-M. (eds) (1999). Naturalizing Phenomenology: Issues in
Contemporary Phenomenology and Cognitive Science. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Phillips, W., Baron-Cohen, S. and Rutter, M. (1992). The role of eye-contact in the detection of goals:
evidence from normal toddlers, and children with autism or mental handicap. Development and
Psychopathology 4, 375–383.
Plato (1985). Phaedo. In E. Hamilton and H. Cairns (eds), Plato: The Collected Dialogues. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Pöppel, E. (1988). Mindworks: Time and Conscious Experience. Boston, MA: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Premack, D. and Woodruff, G. (1978). Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind? Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 4, 515–526.
Price, D.D. and Aydede, M. (2005). The experimental use of introspection in the scientiﬁc study of pain and
its integration with third-person methodologies: the experiential-phenomenological approach. In M.
Aydede (ed.), Pain: New Essays on its Nature and the Methodology of its Study (pp. 243–273).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Putnam, H. (1977). Meaning and reference. In S. P. Schwartz (ed.), Naming, Necessity and Natural Kinds
(pp. 119–132). Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Ramachandran, V.S. and Oberman, L.M. (2006). Broken mirrors. Scientiﬁc American 295/55, 63–69.
Ramachandran, V.S. and Blakeslee, S. (1998). Phantoms in the Brain: Probing the Mysteries of the Human
Mind. New York: William Morrow.
Ricoeur, P. (1966). Freedom and Nature: The Voluntary and the Involuntary. Evanston, IL: Northwestern
University Press.
Ricoeur, P. (1988). Time and Narrative III. Trans. K. Blamey and D. Pellauer. Chicago: Chicago University
Press.
Rizzolatti, G., Fadiga, L., Matelli, M., Bettinardi, V., Paulesu, E., Perani, D. and Fazio, G. (1996). Localization
of grasp representations in humans by PET: 1. Observation compared with imagination. Experimental
Brain Research 111, 246–252.
Rizzolatti, G., Fogassi, L. and Gallese V. (2000). Cortical mechanisms subserving object grasping and
action recognition: a new view on the cortical motor functions. In M. S. Gazzaniga (ed.), The New Cognitive
Neurosciences (pp. 539–552). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Robinson, H. (1994). Perception. London: Routledge.
234
REFERENCES

Rochat, P. (2001). The Infant’s World. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Rodemeyer, L. (2006). Intersubjective Temporality. It’s About Time. Dordrecht: Springer.
Rosenthal, D.M. (1986). Two concepts of consciousness. Philosophical Studies 94/3, 329–359.
Rosenthal, D.M. (1993a). Thinking that one thinks. In M. Davies and G. W. Humphreys (eds), Consciousness:
Psychological and Philosophical Essays (pp. 197–223). Oxford: Blackwell.
Rosenthal, D.M. (1993b). Higher-order thoughts and the appendage theory of consciousness. Philosophical
Psychology 6, 155–166.
Rosenthal, D.M. (1993c). State consciousness and transitive consciousness. Consciousness and Cognition
2/4, 355–363.
Rosenthal, D.M. (1997). A theory of consciousness. In N. Block, O. Flanagan and G. Güzeldere (eds), The
Nature of Consciousness (pp. 729–753). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rossetti, Y. and Rode, G. (2002). Reducing spatial neglect by visual and other sensory manipulations: non-
cognitive (physiological) routes to the rehabilitation of a cognitive disorder. In H. O. Karnath, A. D. Milner
and G. Vallar (eds), The Cognitive and Neural Bases of Spatial Neglect (pp. 375–396). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Rowlands, M. (2003). Externalism: Putting Mind and World Back Together Again. Montreal and Kingston:
McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Rowlands, M. (2006). Body Language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Roy, J.-M., Petitot, J., Pachoud, B. and Varela, F.J. (1999). Beyond the gap: an introduction to naturalizing
phenomenology. In J. Petitot, F. J. Varlea, B. Pachoud and J.-M. Roy (eds), Naturalizing Phenomenology
(pp. 1–83). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Rudd, A. (1998). What it’s like and what’s really wrong with physicalism: a Wittgensteinian perspective.
Journal of Consciousness Studies 5/4, 454–463.
Rudd, A. (2003). Expressing the World: Skepticism, Wittgenstein, and Heidegger. Chicago: Open Court.
Ryckman, T. (2005). The Reign of Relativity: Philosophy in Physics 1915–1925. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Ryle, G. (1949). The Concept of Mind. New York: Barnes and Noble.
Sartre, J.-P. (1956). Being and Nothingness. Trans. H. E. Barnes. New York: Philosophical Library.
Sartre, J.-P. (1957). The Transcendence of the Ego. Trans. F. Williams and R. Kirkpatrick. New York: Noonday
Press.
Sartre, J.-P. (1967). Consciousness of self and knowledge of self. In N. Lawrence and D. O’Connor (eds),
Readings in Existential Phenomenology (pp. 113–142). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Sass, L. (2000). Schizophrenia, self-experience, and the so-called ‘negative symptoms’. In D. Zahavi (ed.),
Exploring the Self (pp. 149–182). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Sass, L. and Parnas, J. (2006). Explaining schizophrenia: the relevance of phenomenology. In M. Chung,
W. Fulford, G. Graham (eds), Reconceiving Schizophrenia (pp. 63–96). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schacter, D.L. (1996). Searching for Memory: The Brain, the Mind, and the Past. New York: Basic Books.
Schacter, D.L., Reiman, E., Curran, T., Sheng Yun, L., Bandy, D., McDermott, K.B. and Roediger, H.L. (1996).
Neuroanatomical correlates of veridical and illusory recognition memory: evidence from positron
emission tomography. Neuron 17, 1–20.
Scheler, M. (1954). The Nature of Sympathy. Trans. P. Heath. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Schenk, T. and Zihl, J. (1997). Visual motion perception after brain damage: I. Deﬁcits in global motion
perception. Neuropsychologia 35, 1289–1297.
Scholl, B.J. and Tremoulet, P.D. (2000). Perceptual causality and animacy. Trends in Cognitive Sciences
4/8, 299–309.
Schooler, J.W. and Schreiber, C.A. (2004). Experience, meta-consciousness, and the paradox of
introspection. Journal of Consciousness Studies 11/7–8, 17–39.
REFERENCES
235

Searle, J.R. (1983). Intentionality: An Essay in the Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Searle, J.R. (1992). The Rediscovery of the Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Searle, J.R. (1998). Mind, Language and Society. New York: Basic Books.
Searle, J.R. (1999a). Neither phenomenological description nor rational reconstruction: reply to Dreyfus,
30 January, at: http://istsocrates.berkeley.edu/~jsearle/reply_to_dreyfus_1_30_99.rtf.
Searle, J.R. (1999b). The future of philosophy. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London
B354, 2069–2080.
Seigel, J. (2005). The Idea of the Self: Thought and Experience in Western Europe Since the Seventeenth
Century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sellars, W. (1963). Science, Perception and Reality. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Sheets-Johnstone, M. (1990). The Roots of Thinking. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
Sheets-Johnstone, M. (1999). The Primacy of Movement. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Shoemaker, S. (1968). Self-reference and self-awareness. Journal of Philosophy LXV, 556–579.
Shoemaker, S. (1984). Personal identity: a materialist’s account. In S. Shoemaker and R. Swinburne,
Personal Identity. Oxford: Blackwell.
Siewert, C.P. (1998). The Signiﬁcance of Consciousness. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Siewert, C. (2006). Consciousness and intentionality. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2007
edition), E. N. Zalta (ed.), at: http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2007/entries/consciousness-
intentionality.
Simons, D.J. Chabris, C.F. (1999). Gorillas in our midst. Perception 28, 1059–1074.
Smith, D.W. (1989). The Circle of Acquaintance. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Smith, D.W. (2003). Phenomenology. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2003 edition), E. N.
Zalta (ed.), at: http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/phenomenology.
Smith, D.W. and McIntyre, R. (1982). Husserl and Intentionality. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Snyder, L. (2000). Speaking our Minds: Personal Reﬂections from Individuals with Alzheimer’s. New York:
W.H. Freeman.
Stein, E. (1989). On the Problem of Empathy, 3rd revised edition. Trans. by W. Stein. Washington: ICS
Publishers.
Stephens, G.L. and Graham, G. (2000). When Self-Consciousness Breaks: Alien Voices and Inserted
Thoughts. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Straus, E. (1966). Philosophical Psychology. New York: Basic Books.
Strawson, P.F. (1959), Individuals. London: Methuen.
Strawson, G. (1994). Mental Reality. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Strawson, G. (1999). The self and the SESMET. In S. Gallagher and J. Shear (eds), Models of the Self (pp.
483–518). Thorverton: Imprint Academic.
Strawson, G. (2000). The phenomenology and ontology of the self. In D. Zahavi (ed.), Exploring the Self (pp.
39–54). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Stueber, K.R. (2006). Rediscovering Empathy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Stroud, B. (2000). The Quest for Reality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tatossian, A. (1979/1997). La phénoménologie des psychoses. Paris: L’art du comprendre.
Taylor, C. (1989). Sources of the Self. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Thompson, E. (2001). Empathy and consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies 8/5–7, 1–32.
Thompson, E. (2005). Empathy and human experience. In J. D. Proctor (ed.), Science, Religion, and the
Human Experience (pp. 261–285). New York: Oxford University Press.
Thompson, E. (2007). Mind in Life: Biology, Phenomenology, and the Sciences of Mind. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
236
REFERENCES

Thompson, E. and Varela, F. (2001). Radical embodiment: neural dynamics and consciousness. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences 5/10, 418–425.
Thompson, E., Lutz, A. and Cosmelli, D. (2005). Neurophenomenology: an introduction for neuro-
philosophers. In A. Brook and K. Akins (eds), Cognition and the Brain: The Philosophy and Neuroscience
Movement (pp. 40–97). New York and Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The Cultural Origins of Human Cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Tooby, J. and Cosmides, L. (1995). Foreword. In S. Baron-Cohen, Mindblindness: An Essay on Autism and
Theory of Mind (pp. xi–xviii). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Toussaint, B. (1976). Comments on C. H. Seibert’s paper: on the body phenomenon in Being and Time.
Proceedings of the Heidegger Circle (175–178). DePaul University, private circulation.
Trevarthen, C. (1979). Communication and cooperation in early infancy: a description of primary
intersubjectivity. In M. Bullowa (ed.), Before Speech. The Beginning of Interpersonal Communication (pp.
321–347). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Trevarthen, C. and Hubley, P. (1978). Secondary intersubjectivity: conﬁdence, conﬁding and acts of meaning
in the ﬁrst year. In A. Lock (ed.), Action, Gesture and Symbol: The Emergence of Language(pp. 183–229).
London: Academic Press.
Tsakiris, M. (2005). On agency and body-ownership. Paper presented at Expérience Subjective Pré Réﬂexive
and Action (ESPRA) Conference, CREA, Paris. December.
Tsakiris, M. and Haggard, P. (2005). The rubber hand illusion revisited: visuotactile integration and self-
attribution. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 31/1, 80–91.
Tye, M. (1995). Ten Problems of Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Van Gelder, T.J. (1999). Wooden iron? Husserlian phenomenology meets cognitive science. In J. Petitot,
F. J. Varela, J.-M. Roy and B. Pachoud (eds), Naturalizing Phenomenology: Issues in Contemporary
Phenomenology and Cognitive Science (pp. 245–265). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Van Gulick, R. (1997). Understanding the phenomenal mind: are we all just armadillos? In N. Block, O.
Flanagan and G. Güzeldere (eds), The Nature of Consciousness (pp. 559–566). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Van Gulick, R. (2000). Inward and upward: reﬂection, introspection, and self-awareness. Philosophical
Topics 28/2, 275–305.
Van Gulick, R. (2006). Mirror mirror – is that all? In U. Kriegel and K. Williford (eds), Self-Representational
Approaches to Consciousness (pp. 11–39). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Varela, F. (1995). Resonant cell assemblies: a new approach to cognitive functioning and neuronal
synchrony. Biological Research 28, 81–95.
Varela, F. (1996). Neurophenomenology: a methodological remedy to the hard problem. Journal of
Consciousness Studies 3, 330–350.
Varela, F.J. (1999). The specious present: a neurophenomenology of time consciousness. In J. Petitot, F.
J. Varela, J.-M. Roy and B. Pachoud (eds), Naturalizing Phenomenology: Issues in Contemporary
Phenomenology and Cognitive Science. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Varela, F. and Depraz, N. (2000). At the source of time: Valance and the constitutional dynamics of affect.
Arobase: Journal des lettres et sciences humaines 4/1–2, 143–166.
Varela, F., Lachaux, J.P., Rodriguez, E. and Martinerie, J. (2001). The brainweb: phase-synchronization and
long-range integration. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 2, 229–239.
Varela, F.J., Thompson, E. and Rosch, E. (1991). The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and Human
Experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Varela, F., Toro, A., John, E. R. and Schwartz, E. (1981). Perceptual framing and cortical alpha rhythms.
Neuropsychologia 19, 675–686.
REFERENCES
237

Velmans, M. (2000). Understanding Consciousness. London: Routledge.
Waldenfels, B. (2000). Das leibliche Selbst. Vorlesungen zur Phänomenologie des Leibes. Frankfurt am
Main: Suhrkamp.
Walker, A.S. (1982). Intermodal perception of expressive behaviors by human infants. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology 33, 514–535.
Watson, J. (1913). Psychology as the behaviorist views it. Psychological Review 20, 158–177.
Wellman, H.M., Cross, D. and Watson, J. (2001). Meta-analysis of theory-of-mind development: the truth
about false belief. Child Development 72, 655–684.
Welton, D. (2000). The Other Husserl: The Horizons of Transcendental Phenomenology. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press.
Weiskrantz, L. (1986). Blindsight. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Weiskrantz, L. (1997). Consciousness Lost and Found. A Neuropsychological Exploration. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Weiskrantz, L., Warrington, E.K., Sanders, M.D. and Marshall, J. (1974). Visual capacity in the hemianopic
ﬁeld following a restricted occipital ablation. Brain 97, 709–728.
Wheeler, M. (2005). Reconstructing the Cognitive World. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wider, K. (1997). The Bodily Nature of Consciousness. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Williams, B. (2005). Descartes: The Project of Pure Enquiry. London: Routledge.
Wittgenstein, L. (1958). Philosophical Investigations, 3rd edition. Trans G. E. M. Anscombe. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Wittgenstein, L. (1980). Remarks on the Philosophy of Psychology II. Oxford: Blackwell.
Wittgenstein, L. (1992). Last Writings on the Philosophy of Psychology; Volume II. Oxford: Blackwell.
Wolpert, D.M. and Flanagan, J.R. (2001). Motor prediction. Current Biology 11/18, 729–732.
Wundt, W. (1900). Völkerpsychologie. Eine Untersuchung der Entwicklungsgesetze von Sprache, Mythus
und Sitte. Leipzig: Kröner.
Yarbus, A. (1967). Eye Movements and Vision. New York: Plenum Press.
Yoshimi, J. (2007). Mathematizing phenomenology. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 6/3,
271–291.
Zahavi, D. (1992). Intentionalität und Konstitution. Eine Einführung in Husserls Logische Untersuchungen.
Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press.
Zahavi, D. (1994). Husserl’s phenomenology of the body. Études Phénoménologiques 19, 63–84.
Zahavi, D. (1997). Horizontal intentionality and transcendental intersubjectivity. Tijdschrift voor Filosoﬁe
59/2, 304–321.
Zahavi, D. (1999). Self-Awareness and Alterity: A Phenomenological Investigation. Evanston, IL:
Northwestern University Press.
Zahavi, D. (ed.) (2000). Exploring the Self: Philosophical and Psychopathological Perspectives on Self-
Experience. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Zahavi, D. (2001a). Beyond empathy: phenomenological approaches to intersubjectivity. Journal of
Consciousness Studies 8/5–7, 151–167.
Zahavi, D. (2001b). Husserl and Transcendental Intersubjectivity. Athens: Ohio University Press.
Zahavi, D. (2002). First-person thoughts and embodied self-awareness: some reﬂections on the relation
between recent analytical philosophy and phenomenology. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences
1, 7–26.
Zahavi, D. (2003a). Husserl’s Phenomenology. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Zahavi, D. (2003b). Inner time-consciousness and pre-reﬂective self-awareness. In D. Welton (ed.), The New
Husserl: A Critical Reader (pp. 157–180). Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
238
REFERENCES

Zahavi, D. (2003c). Husserl’s intersubjective transformation of transcendental philosophy. In D. Welton
(ed.), The New Husserl: A Critical Reader (pp. 233–254). Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Zahavi, D. (2003d). How to investigate subjectivity: Heidegger and Natorp on reflection. Continental
Philosophy Review 36/2, 155–176.
Zahavi, D. (2003e). Phenomenology and metaphysics. In D. Zahavi, S. Heinämaa and H. Ruin (eds),
Metaphysics, Facticity, Interpretation (pp. 3–22). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Zahavi, D. (2004a). Husserl’s noema and the internalism-externalism debate. Inquiry 47/1, 42–66.
Zahavi, D. (2004b). The embodied self-awareness of the infant: a challenge to the theory-theory of mind?
In D. Zahavi, T. Grünbaum and J. Parnas (eds), The Structure and Development of Self-Consciousness:
Interdisciplinary Perspectives (pp. 35–63). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Zahavi, D. (2004c). Back to Brentano? Journal of Consciousness Studies 11, 66–87.
Zahavi, D. (ed.) (2004d). Hidden Resources: Classical Perspectives on Subjectivity. Special double issue
of Journal of Consciousness Studies 11/10–11.
Zahavi, D. (2004e). Phenomenology and the project of naturalization. Phenomenology and the Cognitive
Sciences 3/4, 331–347.
Zahavi, D. (2005a). Subjectivity and Selfhood: Investigating the First-Person Perspective. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Zahavi, D. (2005b). Being someone. Psyche 11/5, 1–20.
Zahavi, D. (2006). Merleau-Ponty on Husserl: a reappraisal. In T. Toadvine (ed.), Merleau-Ponty – Critical
Assessments of Leading Philosophers, Volume I (pp. 421–445). London: Routledge.
Zahavi, D. (2007). Killing the strawman: Dennett and phenomenology. Phenomenology and the Cognitive
Sciences 6/1–2, 21–43.
Zahavi, D. (ed.) (2008a). Internalism and Externalism in Phenomenological Perspective. Special issue of
Synthese, in press.
Zahavi, D. (2008b). The phenomenological tradition. In D. Moran (ed.), Routledge Companion to Twentieth-
Century Philosophy. London: Routledge. In press.
Zahavi, D. and Parnas, J. (2003). Conceptual problems in infantile autism research: why cognitive science
needs phenomenology. Journal of Consciousness Studies 10/9, 53–71.
Zahavi, D. and Stjernfelt, F. (eds) (2002). One Hundred Years of Phenomenology: Husserl’s Logical
Investigations Revisited. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Zajac, F.E. (1993). Muscle coordination of movement: a perspective. Journal of Biomechanics 26, Suppl.
1, 109–124.
Zeki, S. (2002). Neural concept formation and art: Dante, Michelangelo, Wagner. Journal of Consciousness
Studies 9/3, 53–76
Zihl, J., von Cramon, D. and Mai, N. (1983). Selective disturbance of movement vision after bilateral brain
damage. Brain 106, 313–340.
REFERENCES
239

absence: 35, 52, 67, 84, 94, 128, 130, 165, 187
action: 8, 11, 12, 39; and agency 153–169; and
consciousness 61, 66; and embodiment
130–3, 137–138, 140–149; and
intersubjectivity 176–180, 183, 185,
187–190, 191–5; and perception 96,
99–100, 103; and self 201, 205, 207–209,
212–214, 218–219; and time 72, 81, 86
affectivity: 82, 87, 100, 117, 182, 188
affordances: 100, 103, 132, 138, 147, 190, 207
agency, sense of: 11, 39–40, 219; and agency
158, 160–166, 169; and self 209, 211–212,
214
Alien Hand Syndrome: 209, 212, 214
allocentric space: 141–142, 144
Anarchic Hand Syndrome: 160, 166, 209, 214
Anscombe, G.E.M: 169, 214, 
anticipation: 8, 97, 155, 161, 185; and time 75,
77–78, 82, 86–87
Aphasia: 208
Armstrong, David: 45, 52, 65–66 
artiﬁcial intelligence: 1, 4, 221
attention: 3, 15–16, 23, 25, 38, 42, 71, 81,
86–87, 119, 145, 146–148, 159–160, 165,
166, 183, 189, 191, 198, 207, 220–221 ;
and consciousness 46–47, 54–55, 61–63,
66, 67; and perception 97–98, 100, 103, 105
Baron-Cohen, Simon: 172–173, 175 
Bermúdez, José Louis: 143, 150, 188
Blindsight: 57–60, 65, 128, 219
body image: 145–146
body schema: 145–147, 164–165, 169
brain-in-a-vat: 5, 130–131
Brentano, Franz: 2, 53, 109; and intentionality
109–110, 113
Brooks, Rodney: 133, 134, 136, 139, 188, 189
Bruner, Jerome: 193–194, 201, 208
Buytendijk, Frederik: 117, 147
Campbell, John: 210–211
Cartesianism: 5, 11, 204, 219; and embodiment
134–136, 149; and intentionality 109,
122–123
Chalmers, David: 6, 54, 107–108
Clark, Andy: 5, 134, 209 
communication: 21, 101, 191
Condillac, Étienne Bonnot de: 94, 103
consciousness: 2–7, 9, 11–12, 212, 217–222;
and agency 155, 157–161, 165, 168; and
embodiment 136, 145, 147–148, 150; and
intentionality 107–111, 113–114, 116,
118–122, 124–125, 127–128; and
intersubjectivity 181–182, 183–187; and
method 13–21, 23–29, 31, 33, 41–43; and
Index

perception 91, 96–97, 101, 103–104, and
self 197–200, 202–205, 208–209, 212; and
self-consciousness 45–68; and time 72–80,
82–87; see stream of consciousness; pre-
reﬂective self-consciousness
constitution (phenomenological sense): 23–24,
29
context: 7, 8, 12, 114, 138, 149, 207, 195, 197,
219; and agency 153–155, 158, 164; and
intersubjectivity 176, 183, 189–195; and
perception 95–96, 100, 103; and time
76–77, 81–82
Damasio, Antonio: 5, 32, 93, 164, 195, 197,
202–203, 208
Deafferentation: 11, 212
Decety, Jean: 40, 162–164, 166, 177
Dennett, Daniel: 4, 5, 12, 14, 20, 97, 110,
129–130, 161, 171, 195, 202, 204, 218,
221; and heterophenomenology 17–18, 30,
41–42
Descartes, Rene: 29, 134–137
Dreyfus, Hubert: 3, 4, 26, 122
dualism: 5, 6, 10, 56, 109, 123, 135, 148
dynamical systems: 32–34, 36, 38; and time
80–82
efference: 162ff.
egocentric space/frame of reference: 27, 48,
141–144, 207
eliminativism: 6, 118, 194
embeddedness: 7, 49, 66, 78, 86, 90, 201, 206;
and embodiment 133, 238, 142; and
intentionality 117, 119, 123; and
intersubjectivity 182, 191, 194
embodied cognition: 5, 131, 134, 219
embodiment: 5, 11, 26, 33, 66, 80, 129–150,
165, 218–219; and intersubjectivity
182–183, 184–185; and self 205, 207 
emotion: 15, 58, 95, 115, 137, 146, 149, 154,
and intersubjectivity 172, 174–175, 179,
182, 187–188, 190–193, 195, 218, 220
enactive perception: 11, 98, 125, 131, 133,
178–179, 219
environment: 7, 8, 14, 66, 70, 82, 154, 156,
163, 184, 188, 189, 204, 206, 207, 219; and
embodiment 132–133, 137–139, 145; and
intentionality 107, 111, 117, 122, 123; and
perception 85, 99–100, 105
epoche: 23–28, 33–34
expression (expressive movement): 91, 116,
120, 138, 148, 154, 162, 218; and
intersubjectivity 182–183, 185–187,
188–192, 195
externalism: 11, 121–125, 128, 219
eyestrain: 117, 138
face recognition: 16, 28
false belief experiments: 49, 173–174, 206 
Farrer, Cloe: 40, 162, 164, 165–166
ﬁrst-person: 7, 10, 84, 89, 136, 218, 221–222;
methodology 13–20, 25–26, 30, 32, 34–36,
40–42; consciousness 47–48, 54–55; and
intentionality 109–111, 119; and
intersubjectivity 176, 178, 185–187; and self
204–205, 208, 210–211
Flanagan, Owen: 4, 51, 127–128, 162, 201
Frege, Gottlob: 2
Frith, Christopher: 40, 162, 164–166, 174, 211
functionalism: 4–6, 10, 130
Gallese, V.: 168, 172, 177–180, 195
gestalt: 8–9, 53, 78, 95–96, 104, 149
gesture: 179, 181–183, 186, 188–191, 218,
Gibson, J.J.: 98, 100, 132, 190, 206–207
Goldman, Alvin: 51, 172, 174–176, 178–180,
185
Graham, George: 160–162, 166, 169, 209–210
Gurwitsch, Aron: 21, 43, 182, 190, 191
Heidegger, Martin: 1, 6, 20–21, 22, 24, 41–42,
153, 217; and embodiment 150; and
externalism 122, 124–125; and historicity 86;
and intentionality 117; and intersubjectivity
190, 191; and reﬂection 63; and perception
94, 100, 104; and practical action 154; and
pre-reﬂective self-consciousness 46–47, 53
heterophenomenology: 17–18, 30, 38, 42, 218
Hobson, Peter: 148, 174
horizon: 8, 132, 142, 206; and perception 97,
99, 101–102; and time 78, 85–86
Husserl, Edmund: 1–2, 5–6, 9, 15, 19ff., 89,
104, 127–128, 162, 169, 187, 198, 199,
203, 206, 217, 220; and embodiment 134ff.
INDEX
241

147; and externalism 122–124; and
intentionality 113ff., 121; and historicity 86;
and mineness 50; and perception 90ff.,
96–99, 102; and pre-reﬂective self-
consciousness 46–47, 53–54; and reﬂection
64–65; and time-consciousness 75ff.
idealism: 20, 42, 89, 112, 125, 127, 154
imitation: 179, 188, 195
immunity to error through misidentiﬁcation:
210–212, 214
inserted thought: 210–212
intentionality: 2, 7, 9, 10, 11, 20, 25, 41,
107–128, 140, 145, 218–220; and agency
155–159, and intersubjectivity 183,
188–190, 191–192; and perception 91–92,
94, 96–97, 99, 101–102; and retention 77,
79, 80; and self 204; and self-consciousness
46, 56, 66–67 
interaction: 66, 99, 117, 148–149, 187–188,
189–190, 192–193, 201, 204, 214,
219–220
intermodality: 95, 131, 139, 188, 206
internalism: 11, 121–128, 130, 219
intersubjectivity: 26, 40, 148–149, 171–195,
218–220; and perception 101–102; see
social cognition
introspection: 3, 4, 10, 13, 14, 15, 23, 26, 42,
107, 124, 198, 217–218; and sense of
agency 169; and consciousness 53, 55, 57;
and phenomenology 19–21
intuition: 21, 78–79, 90, 124, 136
ipseity: 203–204, 209–210
James, William: 2, 11, 14, 15, 137; and self 197;
and time 73, 76, 78, 84, 87
Jeannerod, Marc: 61, 167–168, 178, 195,
209–210, 214
joint attention: 103, 189, 192
kinaesthesis: 207
language: 48, 85, 91, 110, 133, 138, 148, 185,
193, 202–203, 205; and method 12, 30–32,
34
Levinas, Emmanuel: 20, 187, 220
lifeworld: 79, 153
lived body: 11, 183, 212, 219; and embodiment
134–138, 140–142, 145, 148, 150
Locke, John: 3, 7, 92, 93, 222
Lutz, Antoine: 33–35, 37–38, 42
Marbach, Eduard: 30–32
Marcel, Anthony: 4, 16, 58, 67, 162, 214
meaning: 7; and agency 153–154, 169; and
embodiment 138, 149; and consciousness
63, 67; and intentionality 107–108,
114–116, 119–121, 123–124, 126–127;
and intersubjectivity 179, 182, 185, 188,
190, 193; and method 16, 20, 22, 24–25,
30, 41; and perception 91, 95, 97–99; and
self 201, 203; and time 69–70, 86
Meltzoff, Andrew: 188–189, 195, 206
memory: 27, 28, 30–32, 42, 91, 160; and self-
consciousness 66, 70; and time 70–72, 75,
77–81, 83–85, 87
mentalistic views: 23, 192 
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice: 1, 5, 6, 18, 21, 23, 38,
42, 118, 144–146, 156, 165, 217–218,
220; and egocentric space 141–144; and
embodiment 134–137, 139–140, 149; and
externalism 122; and intersubjectivity
184–185, 191; and perception 89, 91,
94–95, 99, 101–103, 125; and reﬂection
63–65; and self 203; and time 72
metaphysics: 6, 10, 53, 94, 135, 136, 213, 218,
221–222; and intentionality 107, 121,
125–127; and method 21–22, 30, 40–41
method: 2–5, 9–11, 13–43, 218, 221, 222; and
intersubjectivity 176, 180; and
phenomenology 19–28; and self 198; and
self-consciousness 62–64
Metzinger, Thomas: 2, 20–21, 41; and self 197,
199, 213 
Minkowski, Eugene: 141, 209
mirror neurons: 167, 177–179, 189, 195
motor control: 40, 60–61, 133, 146–147, 157,
162–166, 207
movement: 12, 39, 66, 98–99, 104, 125, 188,
219; and agency 155–157, 159–167; and
embodiment 132, 138, 145–147; and
perception 70, 75, 77, 82–83, 85, 87, and
self 207, 209, 212, 214; and time 70, 75, 77,
82–83, 85, 87
242
INDEX

Nagel, Thomas: 9, 49
narrative: 12, 49, 80, 86, 161; and
intersubjectivity 173, 187, 191–195; and self
198, 200–202, 206, 208, 213–214 
natural attitude: 22, 25, 28
naturalism: 4, 22, 29, 42, 56, 220
Neglect, Unilateral: 11, 140, 209, 212
Neisser, Urich: 197, 206–208
neural correlates: 38, 40, 162–163, 197
neurophenomenology: 13, 33–35, 38–39,
41–42 
non-conscious functioning: 52, 54–56, 58,
60–61, 65, 145, 156, 165, 169, 204, 219;
and intentionality 108, 120–121, 128
non-observational self-awareness: 54–55, 61,
80, 143
non-perspectival awareness: 142, 144
objective body: 12, 136–137, 141, 219
ownership, sense of: 80, 210
Pacherie, Elizabeth: 168, 195, 214
parietal cortex : 164–165, 177
Parnas, Josef: 141, 174, 209–210
passivity: 100, 210
perception: 6–11, 89–105, 167–168, 217–220;
and consciousness 52, 55, 58, 60–61, 65;
and embodiment 137, 139, 141–144,
146–150; and intentionality 111–112,
114–115, 122–124, 131–132;
intersubjectivity 178–183, 187–190; and
method 25, 27, 31, 33; and self 207, 209,
212–213; and time 70, 72–79, 86
Petitot, Jean: 30, 32–33
phantom limb: 11, 130, 212
phenomenon: 21–22, 80, 83, 109–110
phenomenological reduction 21, 24–28, 33, 
38
posture: 98, 132–133, 138, 143–146, 179, 
214
pre-reﬂective self-consciousness: 46–47, 49–51,
54–56, 60–62, 64, 66–67, 80
presence: 76, 78, 84, 90, 91; forcible 100
primary intersubjectivity: 187–189
proprioception: 143–144, 147, 150, 206, 214 
protention: 76–82, 84–85, 87, 203
psychologism: 2, 12, 20, 121
Ramachandran, V.S.: 140, 195
rationality: 63, 89, 133, 158
realism: 41, 121–126, 213
reduction, scientiﬁc: 9, 104, 108–110, 118, 219;
see also phenomenological reduction
representation: 8, 11, 15, 20, 31; and agency
164–169; and consciousness 52–53, 57; and
embodiment 131, 133; and intentionality
111–114, 118–119, 126–127; and
intersubjectivity 175–178; and perception
90–94, 98–99, 104–105; and self 199, 207,
209, 219; and time 74–75, 79
retention: 76–81, 83–85, 87, 203
Ricoeur, Paul: 54, 86, 149, 195, 201
Rizzolatti, Giacomo: 195
robotics: 11, 103, 213; and embodiment 130,
133–134, 136, 139–141
Roy, Jean-Michel: 30, 32–33, 42
Russell, Bertrand: 2
Ryle, Gilbert: 4, 5, 12, 177
Sartre, Jean-Paul: 1, 6, 20, 107, 169, 217, 220;
and embodiment 134–137, 143, 145, 149;
and externalism 122; and intentionality
117–118; and intersubjectivity 183, 191,
194; and perception 102–103; and pre-
reﬂective self-consciousness 46–47, 53–54;
and reﬂection 61–64; and self 198–199, 203
Sass, Louis: 209–210
Scheler, Max: 181–183, 187, 188, 190
schizophrenia: 12, 160, 166, 209
scientism: 30, 41–42, 89, 213
Searle, John: 2, 4, 49, 110, 130–131, 159, 186;
and ﬁrst-person 47, 110; and intentionality
116, 120; and internalism 130–131
secondary intersubjectivity: 189, 192
second-person perspective: 176, 183, 218
self-consciousness: 45–68, 79–80, 202–204,
209, 218–219 
self-reference: 55, 57, 68, 208–209, 211
shared representations: 167–168, 177–178
Shoemaker, Sidney: 55, 57, 168, 211
simulation theory: 12, 172, 174, 181
situated cognition: 8, 11, 23, 86, 103, 132, 137,
141, 149, 169, 193, 207, 219
social cognition: 148, 171, 180, 183, 187–188,
191–192, 219; see intersubjectivity
INDEX
243

solipsism: 102, 173, 199
somatosensory cortex: 131, 164
space: 11, 23, 137, 141–144, 148–150, 156,
164
Stephens, Lynn: 160–162, 166, 169, 209–210 
Straus, Erwin: 132, 156
Strawson, Galen: 110, 116, 120–121, 185, 197,
213 
stream of consciousness: 42, 55, 63, 66, 198,
200, 203, 204, 212; and time 72, 75, 80,
83–84, 87
subpersonal processes: 93, 105, 138, 175, 177
theory of mind: 12, 48–49, 171–175, 181, 188,
191–193, 219
theory-theory: 12, 172, 181
third-person perspective: 7, 61, 90, 136, 210;
and intersubjectivity 176, 178, 180, 192; 
and method 13–14, 16–20, 32, 40
Thompson, Evan: 5, 134; and intersubjectivity
183; and method 19, 33, 38; and time
81–82, 87
thought-insertion: 210–212
time: 3, 69–87, 164, 201–205
time-consciousness: 33, 56, 72, 75–6, 79–80,
84, 198, 203, 220
transcendental philosophy: 23–24, 26, 28–29,
38, 40–42, 135, 204, 220–222 
transparency, experiential: 54, 67, 117, 143
truth: 41, 113, 213
Varela, Francisco: 5, 125, 134, 169; and method
30, 32–34, 38, 41; and time 80–82, 87
vision: 58–59, 70, 93, 97, 99, 132, 139, 143,
147, 207, 214
Watson, John: 3, 14
Wittgenstein, Ludwig: 168, 176, 185, 191, 210
244
INDEX

