
February 1998 
ISBN 0-262-53154-2 
264 pp. 
$24.00/£15.95 (PAPER) 
ADD TO CART 
Other Editions 
Cloth (1996) 
Series 
Bradford Books 
Related Links 
More about this book 
P 
< BACK 
The Cerebral Code 
Thinking a Thought in the Mosaics of the Mind 
William H. Calvin 
Prologue 
Act I 
The Representation Problem and the Copying Solution 
Cloning in Cerebral Cortex 
A Compressed Code Emerges 
Managing the Cerebral Commons 
Resonating with Your Chaotic Memories 
Partitioning the Playfield 
Intermission Notes 
Act II 
The Brownian Notion 
Convergence Zones with a Hint of Sex 
Chimes on the Quarter Hour 
10 The Making of Metaphor 
11 Thinking a Thought in the Mosaics of the Mind 
Afterthoughts 
Glossary and Brief Tutorials 
Recommended Reading 
Notes 
The Author 
About the Artists 
Index 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 

Prologue 
There may be nothing new under the sun, tut 
permutation of the old within complex systems 
can do wonders. 
STEPHEN JAY GOULD, 1977 
T
HIS IS A BOOK about thought, memory, creativity, conscious-
ness, narrative, talking to oneself, and even dreaming. In 
a book that parallels this one, How Brains Think, I explored 
those subjects in a general way but here I treat them as some of the 
predicted outcomes of a detailed darwinian theory for how our 
cerebral cortex represents mental images — and occasionally 
recombines them, to create something new and different. 
This book proposes how darwinian processes could operate in 
the brain to shape up mental images. Starting with shuffled 
memories no better than the jumble of our nighttime dreams, a 
mental image can evolve into something of quality, such as a 
sentence to speak aloud. Jung said that dreaming goes on contin-
uously but you can't see it when you are awake, just as you can't 
see the stars in the daylight because the sky is too bright. Mine is 
a theory for what goes on, hidden from view by the glare of 
waking mental operations, that produces our peculiarly human 
type of consciousness with its versatile intelligence. As Piaget 
emphasized, intelligence is what we use when we don't know 
what to do, when we have to grope rather than using a standard 
response. In this book, I tackle a mechanism for doing this 
exploration and improvement offline, how we think before we act 
and how we practice the art of good guessing. 

2 
Surprisingly, the subtitle's mosaics of the mind is not just a liter-
ary metaphor. It is a description of mechanism at what appears to 
be an appropriate level of explanation for many mental 
phenomena — that of hexagonal mosaics of electrical activity, 
competing for territory in the association cortex of the brain. This 
two-dimensional mosaic is predicted to grow and dissolve, much 
as the sugar crystals do in the bottom of a supersaturated glass of 
iced tea. Looking down on the cortical surface, with the right kind 
of imaging, ought to reveal a constantly changing patchwork quilt. 
A closer look at each patch ought to reveal a hexagonal pattern 
that repeats every 0.5 mm. The pattern within each hexagon of 
this mosaic may be the representation of an item of our vocab-
ulary: objects and actions such as the cat that sat on the mat, tunes 
such as Beethoven's dit-dit-dit-dah, images such as the profile of 
your grandmother, a high-order concept such as a Turing Machine 
— even something for which you have no word, such as the face 
of someone whose name you haven't learned. If I am right, the 
spatiotemporal firing pattern within that hexagon is your cerebral 
code for a word or mental image. 
THE OTHER PHRASE IN THE BOOK'S TITLE that is sure to be mistaken 
for literary license is, of course, the cerebral code. The word "code" 
is often only a short way of saying "unlocking the secrets of and 
newspaper headline writers love such short words. Neurobiolog-
ists also speak loosely about codes, as when we talk of "frequency 
codes" and "place codes," when we really mean only a simple 
mapping. 
Real codes are phrase-based translation tables, such as those 
of bank wires and diplomatic telegrams. A code is a translation 
table whereby short abstract phrases are elaborated into the "real 
thing." If s similar to looking up ambivalence in a dictionary and 
getting an explanatory sentence back. In the genetic code, the 
RNA nucleotide sequence CUU is translated into leucine, the 
triplet GGA into glycine, and so on. The cerebral code, strictly 
speaking, would be what we use to convert thought into action, a 
translation table between the short-form cerebral pattern and its 
muscular implementation. 

3 
Informally, code is also used for the short-form pattern itself, 
for instance, a nucleotide chain such as GCACUUCUUGCACUU. 
In this book, cerebral code refers to the spatiotemporal firing pattern 
of neocortical neurons that is essential to represent a concept, 
word, or image, even a metaphor. One of my theoretical results 
is that a unique code could be contained within a unit hexagon 
about 0.5 mm across (though it is often redundantly repeated in 
many neighboring hexagons). 
It was once thought that the genetic code was universal, that 
all organisms from bacteria to people used the same translation 
table. Now it turns out that mitochondria use a somewhat differ-
ent translation table. Although the cerebral code is a true code, it 
surely isn't going to be universal; I doubt that the spatiotemporal 
firing pattern I use for dog (transposed to a musical scale, it would 
be a short melody, perhaps with some chords) is the same one that 
you use. Each person's cerebral codes are probably an accident of 
development and childhood experience. 
If we find some 
commonality, for example, that most people's brains innately use 
a particular subset of codes for animate objects (say, C minor 
chords) and another subset (like the D major chords) for inanimate 
objects, I will be pleasantly surprised. 
An important consequence of my cerebral code candidate, fall-
ing out of the way in which cortical pattern-copying mechanisms 
seem capable of generating new categories, is that ascending 
levels of abstraction become possible — even analogies can 
compete, to help you answer those multiple-choice questions such 
as "A is to B as C is to D,EF." With a darwinian 
process operating in cerebral cortex, you can imagine 
using stratified stability to generate those strata of 
concepts that are inexpressible except by roundabout, 
inadequate means — as when we know things of 
which we cannot speak. Thaf s the topic of the book's 
penultimate chapter, "The Making of Metaphor." 
AS A NEUROPHYSIOLOGY with long experience doing 
single neuron recordings in locales ranging from sea 
slug ganglia in vitro to human cerebral cortex in situ, I undertook 
this theoretical venture about a decade ago. I didn't set out to 

A 
explain representations, or even the nature of working memory. 
Like most people in neurobiology, I considered such questions too 
big to be approached directly. One had to work on their found-
ations instead. 
Back then, I had a much more modest goal: to seek brain 
analogies to the darwinian mechanisms that create higher-order 
complex systems in nature, something that could handle Kenneth 
Craik's 1943 notion of simulating a possible course of action before 
actually acting. We know, after all, that the darwinian ratchet can 
create advanced capabilities in stages, that if s an algorithmic 
process that gradually creates quality — and gets around the 
usual presumption that fancy things require an even fancier 
designer. We even know a lot of the ins-and-outs of the process, 
such as how evolution speeds up in island settings and why it 
slows down in continental ones. 
However attractive a top-down cognitive design process might 
be, we know that a bottom-up darwinian process can achieve 
sophisticated results, given enough time. Perhaps the brain has 
invented something even fancier than darwinism, but we first 
ought (so I reasoned) to try the darwinian algorithm out for size, 
as a foundation — and then look for shortcuts. In 1987,1 wrote a 
commentary in Nature, "The brain as a Darwin Machine/' propos-
ing a term for any full-fledged darwinian process, in analogy to 
the Turing Machine. 
Indeed, since William James first discussed the matter in the 
1870s during Charles Darwin's lifetime, darwinian processes have 
been thought to be a possible basis for mental processes, a way to 
shape up a grammatically correct sentence or a more efficient plan 
for visiting the essential aisles of the grocery store. They're a way 
to explore the Piagetian maze, where you don't initially know 
what to do; standard neural decision trees for overlearned items 
may suffice for answering questions, but something creative is 
often needed when deciding what to do next — as when you pose 
a question. 
When first discovered by Darwin and Wallace and used to 
explain the shaping up of new species over many millennia, the 
darwinian ratchet was naturally thought to operate slowly. Then 
it was discovered that a darwinian shaping up of antibodies also 

5 
occurs, during the days-to-weeks time course of the immune 
response to a novel antigen. You end up with a new type of 
antibody that is a hundred times more effective than the ones 
available at the time of infection — and is, of course, far more 
numerous as well. What would it take, one asks, for the brain to 
mimic this creative mechanism using still faster neural mechan-
isms to run essentially the same process? 
Might some 
milliseconds-to-minutes darwinian ratchet form the foundation, 
atop which our sophisticated mental life is built? 
As Wittgenstein once observed, you gain insights mostly 
through new arrangements of things you already know, not by 
acquiring new data. This is certainly true at the level of biological 
variation: despite the constant talk of "mutations," if s really the 
random shuffle of grandparent chromosomes during meiosis as 
sperm and ova are made, and the subsequent sexual recombinat-
ion during fertilization, that generates the substantial new 
variations, such as all the differences between siblings. Novel 
mental images have also been thought to arise from recombinat-
ions during brain activity. In our waking hours, most of these 
surely remain at subconscious levels—but many are probably the 
same sorts of juxtapositions that we experience in dreams every 
night. As the neurophysiologist J. Allan Hobson has noted: 
Persons, places, and time change suddenly, without notice. 
There may be abrupt jumps, cuts, and interpolations. There may 
be fusions: impossible combinations of people, places, times, 
and activity abound. 
Most such juxtapositions and chimeras are nonsense. But during 
our waking hours, they might be better shaped up in a darwinian 
manner. Only the more realistic ones might normally reach 
consciousness. 
THE MECHANISTIC REQUIREMENTS for this kind of darwinian process 
are now better known than they were in the 1870s; they go well 
beyond the selective-survival summary of darwinism that so often 
trivializes the issue. Charles Darwin, alas, named his theory 
natural selection, thus leading many of his followers to focus on 

6 
only one of what are really a half-dozen essential aspects of the 
darwinian process. Thus far, most "darwinian" discussions of the 
brain's ontogeny, when examined, turn out to involve only several 
of the darwinian essentials — and not the whole creative loop that 
I discuss in later chapters. 
I attempted to apply these six darwinian attributes to our 
mental processes in The Cerebral Symphony and in "Islands in the 
mind/7 published in Seminars in the Neurosciences in 1991, but at 
that time I hadn't yet found a specific neural mechanism that 
could turn the crank. Later in 1991,1 realized that two recent 
developments in neuroscience — emergent synchrony and 
standard-length intracortical axons — provided the essential 
elements needed for a darwinian process to operate in the super-
ficial layers of our cerebral cortex. This neocortical Darwin 
Machine opens up a broad neurophysiological-level consideration 
of cortical operation. With it, you can address a range of cognitive 
issues, from recognition memory to higher intellectual function 
including language and plan-ahead mechanisms — even figuring 
out what goes with the leftovers in the refrigerator. 
DESPITE THE HERITAGE from William James and Kenneth Craik, 
despite the recent interdisciplinary enthusiasm for fresh 
darwinian and complex adaptive systems approaches to long-
standing problems, any such darwinian crank is going to seem 
new to those scientists who have little detailed knowledge of 
darwinian principles beyond the crude "survival of the fittest" 
caricature. 
For one thing, you have to think about the statistical nature of 
the forest, as well as the characteristic properties of each type of 
tree. Population thinking is not an easily acquired habit but I 
hope that the first chapter will briefly illustrate how to use it to 
make a list of six essential features of the darwinian process — 
plus a few more features that serve as catalysts, to turn the ratchet 
faster. Next comes a dose of the local neural circuits of cerebral 
cortex, as that is where the triangular arrays of synchronized 
neurons are predicted, that will be needed for both the coding and 
creative complexity aspects. This is also where I introduce the 
hexagon as the smallest unit of the Hebbian cell-assembly and 

7 
estimate its size as about 100 minicolumns involving 10,000 
neurons (ifs essentially the 0.5 mm macrocolumn of association 
cortex, about the same size as the ocular dominance columns of 
primary visual cortex but perhaps not anchored as permanently). 
This is where compressing the code is discussed and that puts us 
in a position to appreciate how long-term memory might work, 
both for encoding and retrieval. 
About halfway through the book, we'll be finished with the 
circuitry of a neocortical Darwin Machine and ready to consider, 
in Act II, some of its surprising products: categories, cross-
modality matching, sequences, analogies, and metaphors. Ifs just 
like the familiar distinction we make between the principles of 
evolution and the products of evolution. The products, in this 
case, are some of the most interesting ways that humans differ 
from our ape cousins: going beyond mere category formation to 
shape up further levels of complexity such as metaphor, narrative, 
and even agendas. I think that planning ahead, language, and 
musical abilities also fall out of this same set of neocortical 
mechanisms, as I've discussed (along with their "free lunch" 
aspects, thanks to common neural mechanisms) in my earlier 
books. 
SOME READERS MAY HAVE NOTICED BY NOW that this book is not like 
my previous ones. They were primarily for general readers and 
only secondarily for fellow scientists, but that order is reversed 
here. To help compensate, I've provided a glossary starting at 
page 203 (even the neuroscientists will need it for the brief 
tutorials in chaos theory and evolutionary biology). Consult it 
early and often. 
And I had the general reader firmly in mind as I did the book 
design (ifs all my fault, even the page layout). The illustrations 
range from the serious to the sketchy. In Three Places in New 
England, the composer Charles Ives had a characteristic way of 
playing a popular tune such as "Yankee Doodle" and then 
dissolving it into his own melody; even a quote of only four notes 
can be sufficient to release a flood of associations in the listener 
(something that I tackle mechanistically in Act II, when warming 
up for metaphor mechanisms). As a matter of writer's technique, 

8 
I have tried to use captionless thumbnail illustrations as the 
briefest of scene-setting digressions, to mimic Ives. I have again 
enlisted the underground architect, Malcolm Wells, to help me out 
— you won't have any trouble telling which illustrations are 
Mac's! Furthermore, a painting by the neurobiologist Mark Meyer 
adorns the cover. For some of my own illustrations, alas, I have 
had to cope with conveying spatiotemporal patterning in a spatial-
only medium (further constrained by being grayscale-only and 
tree-based!). Although I've relied heavily on musical analogies, 
the material fairly begs for animations. 
I have resisted the temptation to utilize computer simulations, 
mostly for reasons of clarity (in my own head — and perhaps also 
the reader's). Simulations, if they are to be more than mere 
animations of an idea, have hard-to-appreciate critical assumpt-
ions. At this stage, simulations are simply not needed — one can 
comprehend the more obvious consequences of a neocortical 
Darwin Machine without them, both the modular circuits and the 
territorial competitions. Plane geometry fortunately suffices, 
essentially that discovered by the ancient Greeks as they contem-
plated the hexagonal tile mosaics on the bathhouse floor. 

Act I 
Everyone knows that in 1859 Darwin demonstrated the occurrence of 
evolution with such overwhelming documentation tnat it was soon almost 
universally accepted. What not everyone knows, however, is tnat on tnat 
occasion Darwin introduced a number of otner scientific and philosophical 
concepts tkat nave been of far-reaching importance ever since. These 
concepts, population thinking and selection, owing to their total originality, 
had to overcome enormous resistance. One might think that among the 
many hundreds of philosophers who had developed ideas about change, 
beginning with the Ionians, Plato and Aristotle, the scholastics, the 
philosophers of the Enlightenment, Descartes, Locke, Hume, Leibniz, Kant, 
and the numerous philosophers of the first half of the nineteenth century, 
that there would have been at least one or two to have seen the enormous 
heuristic power of that combination of variation and selection. But the 
answer is no. To a modern, who sees the manifestations of variation and 
selection wherever he looks, this seems quite unbelievable, but it is a historical 
fact. 
E R N S T MAYR, 
1994 
Looking back into the history of biology, it appears that wherever a 
phenomenon resembles learning, an instructive theory was first proposed to 
account for the underlying mechanisms. In every case, this was later replaced 
by a selective theory. Thus the species were thought to have developed by 
learning or by adaptation of individuals to the environment, until Darwin 
showed this to have been a selective process. Resistance of bacteria to 
antibacterial agents was thought to be acquired by adaptation, until Luria and 
Delbriick showed the mechanism to be a selective one. Adaptive enzymes were 
shown by Monod and his school to be inducible enzymes arising through the 
selection of preexisting genes. Finally, antibody formation that was thought 
to be based on instruction by the antigen is now found to result from the 
selection of already existing patterns. It thus remains to be asked if learning 
by the central nervous system might not also be a selective process, i.e., 
perhaps learning is not learning either. 
NIELS K J E R N E , 
1967 

1 
T k e Representation Rroblem 
and tke Copying Solution 
Even in the small world of Drain science [in the 
1860s], two camps were beginning to form. One held 
that psychological functions such as language or 
memory could never he traced to a particular region of 
the hrain. if one had to accept, reluctantly, that the 
hrain did produce the mind, it did so as a whole and 
not as a collection of parts with special functions. The 
other camp held that, on the contrary, the hrain did 
have specialized parts and those parts generated 
separate mind functions. The rift hetween the two 
camps was not merely indicative of the infancy of hrain 
research; the argument endured for another century 
and, to a certain extent, is still with us today. 
A N T O N I O R. DAMASIO, 1995 
O
NE CELL, ONE MEMORY may not be the way things work, 
but it seems to be the first way that people think about 
the problem of locating memories in cells. Even if you 
aren't familiar with how computers store data, the take-home 
message of most introductions to the brain is that there are 
pigeonhole memories — highly specialized interneurons, the 
firing of which might constitute an item's memory evocation. On 
the perceptual side of neurophysiology, we call it the 
grandmother's face cell (a neuron that may fire only once a year, at 
Christmas dinner). On the movement side, if a single interneuron 
(thaf s an "insider neuron," neither sensory neuron nor motor 

12 
neuron) effectively triggers a particular response, it gets called a 
command neuron. In the simplest of arrangements, both would be 
the same neuron. 
Indeed, the Mauthner cells that trigger the escape reflex of the 
fish are exactly such neurons. If the fish is attacked from one side, 
the appropriate Mauthner cell fires and a massive tail flip results, 
carrying the fish away from the nibbles of its predator. 
Fortunately these cells already had a proper name, so we were 
spared the nibble-detector tail-flip cell 
But we know better than to generalize these special cases to 
the whole brain — it can't be one cell, one concept. Yet the 
reasoning that follows isn't as easily recalled as those pigeonhole 
memory examples that inadvertently become the take-home 
message from most introductions to the subject. A singular 
neuron for each concept is rendered implausible in most 
vertebrates by the neurophysiological evidence that has accum-
ulated since 1928, when the first recordings from sensory nerves 
revealed a broad range of sensitivity. There were multiple types, 
with the sensitivity range of one type overlapping that of other 
types. This overlap, without pure specialties, had been suspected 
for a long time, at least by the physiologically inclined. Thomas 
The three cone types 
\ / X \ LI 
1 
AOOnm 
light wavelength 
h. Lh 
A™ J 
This combination is: "Blue" 
"Green" 
"YeHov/1 
Ted" 
Young formulated his trichromatic theory of colors in 1801; after 
Hermann von Helmholtz extended the theory in 1865, it was 
pretty obvious that each special color must be a particular pattern 
of response that was achievable in various ways, not a singular 
entity. More recently, taste has turned out the same way: bitter 

13 
is just a pattern of strong and weak responses in four types of taste 
buds, not the action of a particular type. 
This isn't to say that a particular interneuron might not come 
to specialize in some unique combination — but it's so hard to 
find narrow specialists, insensitive to all else, that we talk of the 
expectation of finding one as the "Grandmother's face cell 
fallacy" The "command neuron" usually comes with scare 
quotes, too, as the Mauthner cell arrangement isn't a common one. 
While we seek out the specialized neurons in the hopes of finding 
a tractable experimental model, we usually recognize that 
committees are likely the irreducible basis of representations — 
certainly the more abstract ones we call schemas. 
Because the unit of memory is likely to be closely related to 
sensory and motor schemas, pigeonhole schemes such as one-cell-
one-memory had to be questioned. After Karl Lashley got 
through with his rat cortical lesions and found no crucial 
neocortical sites for maze memory traces, we had to suspect that 
a particular "memory trace" was a widespread patterning of some 
sort, one with considerable redundancy. You're left trying to 
imagine how a unit of memory could be spatially distributed in a 
redundant manner, overlapping with other memories. 
One technological analogy is the hologram, but the brain 
seems unlikely to utilize phase information in the same way. A 
simpler and more familiar example of an ensemble representation 
is the pattern of lights on a message board. Individually, each light 
signifies nothing. Only in combination with other lights is there 
a meaning. More modern examples are the pixels of a computer 
screen or dot-matrix printer. Back in the 1940s, the physiological 
psychologist Donald Hebb postulated such an ensemble (which he 
called a cell-assembly) as the unit of perception — and therefore 
memory. I'll discuss the interesting history of the cell-assembly in 
the Intermission Notes but for now, just think of one committee-one 
concept, and that any one cell can serve on multiple committees. 
Note that it is not merely the lights which are lit that contain 
the concept's characteristic pattern: it is just as important that 
other lights are off, those that might "fog" the desired pattern 
were they turned on. Fortunately, most neurons of association 
cortex fire so infrequently that we often take the shortcut of 

14 
talking only about "activating cells"; in other parts of the nervous 
system (especially the retina), there are background levels of 
activity that can be decreased as well as increased (just as gray 
backgrounds allow the textbook illustrator to use both black and 
white type) in an analog manner. But, as we shall see, neocortex 
also has some "digital" aspects. 
A minor generalization to Hebb's cell-assembly would be 
moveable patterns, as when a message board scrolls: the pattern's 
the thing, irrespective of which cells are used to implement it. I 
cannot think of any cerebral examples equivalent to the moving 
patterns of Conway's Game of Life, such as flashers and gliders, 
but it is well to keep the free-floating patterns of automata in 
mind. 
The important augmentation of the message board analogy is 
a pattern of twinkling lights: the possibility that the relevant 
memory pattern is a spatiotemporal one, not merely a spatial one. 
In looking for spatiotemporal patterns and trying to discern 
components, we are going to have the same problems as the child 
looking at a large Christmas tree, trying to see the independently 
flashing strings of lights that have been interwoven. 
IN THE LONG RUN, however, a memory pattern cannot be a 
spatiotemporal one: long-term memories survive all sorts of 
temporary shutdowns in the brain's electricity, such as coma; they 
persist despite all sorts of fogging, such as those occurring with 
concussions and seizures. Hebb's dual trace memory said that 
there had to be major representational differences between long-
term memory and the more current "working memories," which 
can be a distinctive pattern of neuron firings. As Hebb put it: 
If some way can be found of supposing that a reverberatory 
[memory] trace might cooperate with the structural change, and 
carry the memory until the growth change is made, we should be able 

15 
to recognize the theoretical value of the trace which is an activity 
only, without having to ascribe all memory to it. 
We are familiar with this archival-versus-current, passive-
versus-active distinction from phonograph records, where a 
spatial-only pattern holds the information in cold storage and a 
spatiotemporal pattern is recreated on occasion, a pattern almost 
identical to that which originally produced the spatial pattern. A 
sheet of music or a roll for a player piano also allows a spatial-
only pattern to be converted to a spatiotemporal one. I will 
typically use musical performance as my spatiotemporal pattern 
analogy and sheet music as my analogy to a spatial-only 
underpinning. 
At first glimpse, there appear to be some spatial-only sensat-
ions, say, those produced by my wristwatch on my skin (if s not 
really static because I have the usual physiological tremor, and a 
radial pulse, to interact with its weight). But most of our sensat-
ions are more obviously spatiotemporal, as when we finger the 
corner of the page in preparation for turning it. Even if the input 
appears static, as when we stare at the center of a checkerboard, 
some jitter is often introduced, as by the small micronystagmus of 
the eyeball (as I discuss further in the middle of my Intermission 
Notes, the nervous system gets a spatiotemporal pattern from the 
photoreceptors sweeping back and forth under the image). 
Whether timeless like a drawing of a comb or changing with time 
as when feeling a comb running through your hair, the active 
"working" representation is likely to be spatiotemporal, some-
thing like the light sequence in a pinball machine or those winking 
light strings on the Christmas tree. 
Certainly, all of our movements involve spatiotemporal 
patterns of muscle activation. Even in a static-seeming posture, 
physiological tremor moves things. In general, the implement-
ation is a spatiotemporal pattern involving many motor neuron 
pools. Sometimes, as in the case of the fish's tail flip, the 
command for this starts at one point in time and space, but usually 
even the initiation of the movement schema is spatiotemporal, 
smeared out in both time and space. 

16 
The sensation need not funnel down to a point and then 
expand outwards to recruit the appropriate response sequence; 
rather, the spatiotemporal pattern of the sensation could create the 
appropriate spatiotemporal pattern for the response without ever 
having a locus. Spread out in both time and space, such ephemeral 
(and perhaps relocatable) ensembles are difficult to summarize in 
flow charts or metaphors. Think, perhaps, of two voices, one of 
which (the sensory code) starts the song, is answered by the other 
voice (movement code); the voices are then intertwined for awhile 
(and the movement eventually gets underway), and then the 
second voice finishes the song. 
To my mind, the representation problem is which spatio-
temporal pattern represents a mental object: surely recalling a 
memory is not a matter of recreating the firing patterns of every 
cell in the brain, so that they all mimic the activity at the time of 
input. Some subset must suffice. How big is it? Is it a synchron-
ized ensemble like a chord, as some cortical theories would have 
it? Or is it more like a single note melody? Or with some chords 
mixed in? Does it repeat over and over, or does one repetition 
suffice for a while? 
THOSE QUESTIONS WERE IN THE AIR, for the most part, even back in 
my undergraduate days of the late 1950s, when I first met Hebb 
after reading his then-decade-old book, 
It is inaccurate — worse, it The Organization of Behavior. Hebb, 
is mislea Jing — to call amazingly, guessed a solution in 1945, 
psyckology tke study of even before the first single neuron 
Lekavior: It is tke study of recordings from mammalian cerebral 
tke underlying processes, cortex (glass microelectrodes weren't 
just as ckemistry is tke invented until 1950). Although our data 
study of tke atom ratker have grown magnificently in recent 
tkan pH values, spectro- decades, we haven't improved much on 
scopes, and test tukes. 
Hebb's statement of the problem, or on 
D. O. HEBB, 1980 his educated guess about where the 
solution is likely to be found. 
Multiple microelectrode techniques now allow the sampling 
of several dozen neurons in a neighborhood spanning a few 
square millimeters. In motor cortex, even a randomly sampled 

17 
ensemble can predict which movement, from a standard 
repertoire, that a trained monkey is about to make. For monkeys 
forced to wait before acting on a behavioral choice, sustained cell 
firing during the long hold is mostly up in premotor and 
prefrontal areas. In premotor and prefrontal cortex, some of the 
spatiotemporal patterns sampled by multiple microelectrodes are 
surprisingly precise and task-specific. With the fuzzier imaging 
techniques, we have recently seen some examples of where work-
ing memory patterns might be located: for humans trying to 
remember telephone numbers long enough to dial them, it's the 
classical Broca and Wernicke language areas that light up in 
imaging techniques. 
Because recall is so much more difficult than mere recognition 
(you can recognize an old phone number, even when you can't 
voluntarily recall it), we may need to distinguish between 
different representations for the same thing. The cryptographers 
make a similar distinction between a document and a hashed 
summary of that document (something like a checksum but 
capable of detecting even transposed letters). Such a 100-byte 
"message digest" is capable of recognizing a unique, multipage 
document ("I've seen that one before") but doesn't contain enough 
information to actually reconstruct it. So, too, we may have to 
distinguish between simple Hebbian cell-assemblies — ones that 
suffice for recognition — and the more detailed ones needed for 
abstracts and for complete recall. 
Hebb's formulation imposes an important constraint on any 
possible explanation for the cerebral representation: if s got to 
explain both spatial-only and spatiotemporal patterns, their inter-
conversions, their redundancy and spatial extent, their imperfect 
nature (and characteristic errors therefrom), and the links of assoc-
iative memory (including how distortions of old memories are 
caused by new links). No present technology provides an analogy 
to help us think about the problem. 
THE ROLE OF SIMILAR CONSTRAINTS on theorizing can be seen in 
how Kepler's three "laws" about planetary orbits posed the 
gravity problem that Newton went on to solve. Only a half 
century ago, molecular genetics had a similar all-important 

18 
constraint that set the stage for a solution. Biologists knew that, 
whatever the genetic material was, it had to fit inside the cell, be 
chemically stable — and, most significantly, it had to be capable 
of making very good copies of itself during cell "division." That 
posed the problem in a solvable way, as it turned out. 
Most people thought that the gene would turn out to be a 
protein, its three-dimensional nooks and crannies serving as a 
template for another such giant molecule. The reason Crick and 
Watson's DNA helical-zipper model caused such excitement in 
1953 was because it fit with the copying constraint. It wasn't until 
a few years later that it became obvious how a triplet of a 4-letter 
DNA code was translated into strings from the 20-letter amino 
acid alphabet, and so created enzymes and other proteins. 
Looking for molecular copying ability led to the solution of the 
puzzle of how genes were decoded. Might looking for a neural 
copying mechanism provide an analogous way of approaching the 
cerebral code puzzle? 
MEMES ARE THOSE THINGS that are copied from mind to mind. 
Richard Dawkins formulated this concept in 1976 in his book, The 
Selfish Gene. Cell division may copy genes, but minds mimic 
everything from words to dances. The cultural analog to the gene 
is the meme (as in mime or mimic); if s the unit of copying. An 
advertising jingle is a meme. The spread of a rumor is cloning a 
pattern from one mind to another, the metastasis of a 
representation. 
Might, however, such cloning be seen inside one brain and not 
just between brains? Might seeing what was cloned lead us to the 
representation, the cerebral code? 
Copying of an ensemble 
pattern hasn't been observed yet, but there are reasons to expect 
it in any brain — at least, in any brain large enough to have a 
long-distance communications problem. 
If the pattern's the thing, how is it transmitted from the left 
side of the brain to the right side? Or from front to back? We 
can't send it like a mail parcel, so consider the problems of 
telecopying, of making a distant copy of a local pattern. Is there 
a NeuroFax Principle at work? 

19 
When tracing techniques were crude, at a millimeter level of 
resolution, it seemed as if there were point-to-point mappings, an 
orderly topography for the major sensory pathways such that 
neighbors remained next to one another. One could imagine that 
those long corticocortical axon 
bundles were like fiber optic bun-
dles that convey an image by 
thousands of little light pipes. 
But with finer resolution, topo-
graphic mappings turn out to be 
only 
approximately 
point-to-
point; instead, an axon breaks up 
into clumps of endings. For the 
corticocortical axon terminations 
of the "interoffice mail," this fan-
out 
spans 
macrocolumnar 
dimensions and sometimes many 
millimeters. Exact point-to-point 
mapping doesn't occur. 
So, at first glimpse, it appears that corticocortical bundles are 
considerably worse than those incoherent fiber optic bundles that 
are factory rejects — unless, of course, something else is going on. 
Perhaps it doesn't matter that the local spatiotemporal pattern is 
severely distorted at the far end; if codes are arbitrary, why should 
it matter that there are different codes for Apple in different parts 
of the brain? Just as there are two equally valid roots to a quad-
ratic equation, just as isotopes have identical chemical properties 
despite different weights, so degenerate codes are quite common. 
For example, there are six different DNA triplets that all result in 
leucine being tacked on to a growing peptide. 
The main drawback to a degenerate cortical code is that most 
corticocortical projections are reciprocal: six out of seven interareal 
pathways have a matching back projection. It might undo the 
distortion of the forward projection, in the manner of inverse 
transforms, but thaf s demanding a lot of careful tuning and 
regular recalibration. And it isn't simply a matter of each local 
region having two local codes for Apple, one for sending, the other 
Memes are not strung out along 
linear chromosomes, ana it is 
not clear that they occupy and 
compete for discrete "loci", or 
tnat tney nave identifiable 
"alleles" . . . . The copying 
process is probably much less 
precise than in the case of 
genes. . . . Memes may partially 
blend with each other in a way 
that genes do not. 
RICHARD DAWKINS, 1982 

20 
for receiving. Each region has multiple projection targets and thus 
many possible feedback codes that mean Apple. 
There might, of course, be some sort of error-correction code 
that allows a single characteristic spatiotemporal pattern for Apple. 
It would have to remove any distortions caused by the spatial 
wanderings, plus those associated with temporal dispersions of 
corticocortical transmission. 
It would need, furthermore, to 
operate in both the forward and return paths. I originally 
dismissed this possibility, assuming that an error-correcting 
mechanism was too fancy for cerebral circuitry. But, as will 
become apparent by the end of the following chapter, such error 
correction is easier than it sounds, thanks to that fanout of the 
corticocortical axon's terminals contributing to standardization of 
a spatiotemporal pattern. 
COPYING FOR A FAUX FAX is going to be needed for cerebral cortex, 
even if simpler nervous systems, without a long-distance problem, 
can operate without copying. Copying might also be handy for 
promoting redundancy. But there is a third reason why copying 
might have proved useful in a fancy brain: darwinism. 
Perhaps it is only a matter of our impoverished knowledge of 
complex systems, but creativity seems to be a shaping-up process. 
During the evolution of new species and during the immune 
response's production of better and better antibodies, successive 
generations are shaped up, not especially the individual. Yes, the 
individual is plastic and it learns, but this modification during life 
is not typically incorporated into the genes that are passed on 
(learning and experience only change the chances of passing on the 
genes with which one was born — the propensity for learning 
such things, rather than the things themselves). Yes, culture itself 
passes along imitations, but memes are easily distorted and easily 
lost, compared to genuine genes. 
Reproduction involves the copying of patterns, sometimes 
with small chance variations. Creativity may not always be a 
matter of copying errors and recombination, but it is reasonable 
to expect that the brain is going to make some use of this 
elementary darwinian mechanism for editing out the nonsense 

21 
and emphasizing variations on the better-fitting ones in a next 
generation. 
NATURAL SELECTION ALONE isn't sufficient for evolution, and 
neither is copying alone — not even copying with selection will 
suffice. I can identify six essential aspects of the creative darwin-
ian process that bootstraps quality. 
1. There must be a reasonably complex pattern involved. 
2. The pattern must be copied somehow (indeed, that which 
is copied may serve to define the pattern). 
3. Variant patterns must sometimes be produced by chance. 
4. The pattern and its variant must compete with one another 
for occupation of a limited work space. For example, 
bluegrass and crab grass compete for back yards. 
5. The competition is biased by a multifaceted environment, 
for example, how often the grass is watered, cut, fertilized, 
and frozen, giving one pattern more of the lawn than 
another. That's natural selection. 
6. There is a skewed survival to reproductive maturity 
(environmental selection is mostly juvenile mortality) or a 
skewed distribution of those adults who successfully mate 
(sexual selection), so new variants always preferentially 
occur around the more successful of the current patterns. 
With only a few of the six essentials, one gets the more wide-
spread "selective survival" process (which popular usage tends to 
call darwinian). You may get some changes (evolution, but only 
in the weakest sense of the word) but things soon settle, running 
out of steam without the full process to turn the darwinian ratchet. 
Indeed, many things called darwinian turn out to have no 
copying process at all, such as the selective survival of some 
synaptic connections in the brain during pre- and postnatal 
development of a single individual. Selective survival, moreover, 
doesn't even require biology. For example, a shingle beach is one 
where the waves have carried away the smaller rocks and sand, 
much as a carving reflects the selective removal of some material 
to create a pattern. The copying-mutation-selection loop utilized 

22 
by the small-molecule chemists as they try to demonstrate the 
power of RNA-based evolution captures most of darwinism, as do 
"genetic" algorithms of computer science. 
Not all of the essentials have to be at the same level of organiz-
ation. Pattern, copying, and variation involve the genes, but 
selection is based on the bodies (the phenotypes that carry the 
genes) and their environment; inheritance, however, is back at the 
genotype level. In RNA-based evolution, the two levels are 
combined into one (the RNA serves as a catalyst in a way that 
affects its survival — but it is also what is copied). 
BECAUSE NEURAL VERSIONS OF THE SIX ESSENTIALS are going to play 
such a large role in the rest of this book, let me comment on the 
better-known versions for a moment. 
The gene is a string of DNA base-pairs that, in turn, instructs 
the rest of the cell about how to make a protein, perhaps an 
enzyme that regulates the rate of tissue growth. We'll be looking 
back from neural implementations, such as movement comm-
ands, and trying to see what patterns could have served as the 
cerebral code to get them going. Larger genetic patterns, such as 
whole chromosomes, are seldom copied exactly. So, too, we will 
have to delve below the larger movements to see what the smaller 
units might be. 
While the biological variations seem random, unguided 
variation isn't really required for a darwinian process to operate. 
We tend to emphasize randomness for several reasons. First, 
randomness is the default assumption against which we test 
claims of guidance. And second, the process will work fine 
without guidance, without any foreknowledge of a desired result. 
That said, it might work faster, and in some restricted sense better, 
with some hints that bias the general direction of the variants; this 
need not involve anything as fancy as artificial selection. We will 
see neural versions of random copying errors and recombination, 
including (in the last chapter) some discussion about how a slow 
darwinian process might guide a faster one by biasing the general 
direction in which its variations are done. 
Competition between variants depends on some limitation in 
resources (space in association cortex, in my upcoming examples) 

23 
or carrying capacity. During a wide-open population explosion, 
competition is minor because the space hasn't filled up yet. 
For competition to be interesting, it must be based on a 
complex, multifaceted environment. Rather than the environment 
of grass, we'll be dealing with biases from sensation, feedback 
from our own movements, and even our moods. 
Most 
interestingly, there are both current versions of these 
environmental factors and memories of past ones. 
Many of the offspring have variations that are "worse" than 
the successful parent pattern but a minority may possess a variant 
that is an even better fit to the particular multifaceted 
environment. This tendency to base most new variations on the 
more successful of the old ones is what Darwin called the 
principle of inheritance, his great insight and the founding 
principle of what became population biology. 
It means that the darwinian process, as a whole loop, isn't 
truly random. Rather, it involves repeated exploratory steps 
where small chance variations are done on well-tested-by-the-
environment versions. If s an enormously conservative process, 
because variations propagate from the base of the most successful 
adults — not the base of the population as born. Without this 
proviso, the process doesn't accumulate wisdom about what 
worked in the past. The neural version also needs exactly the 
same characteristic, where slight variations are done from an 
advanced position, not from the original center of the population. 
AT LEAST FIVE OTHER FACTORS are known to be important to the 
evolution of species. The creative darwinian process will run 
without them, but they affect the stability of its outcome, or the 
rate of evolution, and will be important for my model of cognitive 
functions. Just like the catalysts and enzymes that speed chemical 
reactions without being consumed, they may make improbable 
outcomes into commonplace ones. 
7. Stability may occur, as in getting stuck in a rut (a local 
peak or basin in the adaptational landscape). Variants 
occur but they backslide easily. Only particularly large 
variations can ever escape from a rut, but they are few, and 

24 
even more likely to produce nonsense (phenotypes that fail 
to develop properly, and so die young). 
8. Systematic recombination generates many more variants 
than do copying errors and the far-rarer cosmic-ray 
mutations. Recombination usually occurs once during 
meiosis (the grandparent chromosomes are shuffled as 
haploid sperm and ova are made) and again at fertilization 
(as the haploid parent genomes are combined into diploid 
once again, at fertilization). Sex, in the sense of gamete 
dimorphism (going to the extremes of expensive ova and 
cheap sperm), was invented several billion years ago and 
greatly accelerated species evolution over the rate promot-
ed by errors, bacterial conjugation, and retroviruses. 
9. Fluctuating environments (seasons, climate changes, 
diseases) change the name of the game, shaping up more 
complex patterns capable of doing well in several environ-
ments. For such jack-of-all-trades selection to occur, the 
environment must change much faster than efficiency 
adaptations can track it, or 'lean mean machine" special-
ists will dominate the expensive generalists. 
10. Parcellation, as when rising sea level converts the hilltops 
of one large island into an archipelago of small islands, 
typically speeds evolution. This is, in part, because more 
individuals then live on the margins of the habitat where 
selection pressure is greater. Also, there is no large central 
population to buffer change. When rising sea level con-
verted part of the coastline of France into the island of 
Jersey, the red deer trapped there in the last interglaciation 
underwent a considerable dwarfing within only a few 
thousand years. 
11. Local extinctions, as when an island population becomes 
too small to sustain itself, speed evolution because they 
create empty niches. When subsequent pioneers rediscov-
er the unused resources, their descendants go through a 
series of generations where there is enough food — even 
for the more extreme variations that arise, the ones that 
would ordinarily lose out in the competition with the more 
optimally endowed, such as the survivors of a resident 

25 
population. When the environment again changes, some 
of those more extreme variants may be able to cope better 
with the third environment than the narrower range of 
variants that would reach reproductive age under the 
regime of a long-occupied niche. 
Sexual selection also has the reputation of speeding evolution, and 
there are "catalysts" acting at several removes, as in Darwin's 
example of what introducing cats to an English village would do 
to enhance the bee-dependent flowers, via reducing the rodent 
populations that disrupt bee hives. 
An example of how these catalysts work together is island 
biogeography, as in the differentiation of Darwin's finches unbuff-
ered by large continental gene pools. Archipelagos allow for many 
parallel evolutionary experiments. Episodes that recombine the 
islands (as when sea level falls during an ice age) create winner-
take-most tournaments. Most evolutionary change may occur in 
such isolation, in remote valleys or offshore islands, with major 
continental populations serving as slowly changing reservoirs that 
provide pioneers to the chancy periphery. 
ALTHOUGH THE CREATIVE DARWINIAN PROCESS will run without 
these catalysts, using darwinian creativity in a behavioral setting 
requires some optimization for speed, so that quality is achieved 
within the time span of thought and action. Accelerating factors 
are the problem in what the French call avoir Vesprit de I'escalier — 
finally thinking of a witty reply, but only after leaving the party. 
I will not be surprised if some accelerating factors are almost 
essential in mental danvinism, simply because of the time 
windows created by fleeting opportunities. 
The wheels of a machine 
to play rapidly 
must not fit with the utmost exactness 
else the attrition diminishes the Impetus. 
SIR WALTER SCOTT, discussing Lord Byron's mind 

* 
% 
*h *l 
%. *k 
% o, 
'9/ 
% \ 
H 

Cloning in Ceretral Cortex 
All scribes, however careful, are bound to make a few errors, 
and some are not above a little willful "improvement." If they 
all copied from a single master original, meaning would not be 
greatly perverted. But let copies be made from other copies, 
wbicb in their turn were made from other copies, and errors 
will start to become cumulative and serious. We tend to regard 
erratic copying as a bad thing, and in tbe case of human 
documents it is bard to think of examples wbere errors can be 
described as improvements. I suppose tbe scbolars of tbe 
Septuagint could at least be said to bave started something big 
wben tbey mistranslated tbe Hebrew word for "young woman" 
into tbe Greek word for "virgin," coming up witb tbe prophecy: 
"Behold a virgin sball conceive and bear a son. . . . " Anyway, 
as we sball see, erratic copying in biological replicators can in a 
real sense give rise to improvement, and it was essential for tbe 
progressive evolution of life that some errors were made. 
RICHARD DAWKINS, The Selfish Gene, 1976 
T
HIS is THE HARDEST CHAPTER in the whole book. In it, I have 
to delve into the neuroanatomy and neurophysiology of 
cortical neurons, importing lessons from such seemingly 
unrelated subjects as synchronously flashing fireflies. By the end 
of this chapter, I will have shown how copying could arise in 
neocortex. By the end of the sixth chapter, the cortical equivalents 
of all the darwinian essentials and all the accelerating factors will 

28 
have been examined. But it gets easier, not harder, starting with 
the fourth chapter. 
Neurophysiologists distinguish between cell properties and 
circuit properties, much as biologists distinguish between 
genotype and phenotype. Some phenomena are clearly due to the 
circuit rather than the cells involved, to the wiring rather than the 
components — a new property "emerges" from the particular 
combination. You won't find it in any one neuron. The classical 
example of an emergent property involves lateral inhibition and 
it is the reason that Keffer Hartline got a Nobel Prize in 1967. 
Thanks to local activity contributing to a ring of depression in 
surrounding neurons, lateral inhibition sharpens up fuzzy bound-
aries. Compound eyes, the many narrow-angle photoreceptors of 
which provide an extreme case of fuzzy optics, have a series of 
inhibitory interconnections that are capable of recreating a light-
dark boundary in the environment, restoring much of what was 
lost. 
But lateral inhibition also has a tendency to produce features 
where none exist, illusions such as the Mach bands that you see if 
looking through a narrow slit between your fingers. Georg von 
Bekesy, whose studies of such sideways interactions in the cochlea 
were the subject of his 1961 Nobel Prize, also produced illusions 
from skin surfaces, to illustrate the generality of the lateral 
inhibition principles. Antagonistic surrounds ("Mexican hats") 
are common in all the first half-dozen 
stages of the analysis of a visual image, 
though 
they 
become 
somewhat 
elongated and asymmetric ("Australian 
bush hats") in primary visual cortex. 
Because of the many axon collaterals 
that branch laterally in neocortex, 
lateral inhibition extends several millimeters. 
Both the sharpening of fuzzy boundaries and the illusions are 
emergent properties of a laterally inhibiting neural network. 
What might be the emergent consequences of lateral excitation? 
THERE IS GOOD REASON to worry about recurrent excitation. It is 
potentially regenerative, in the same sense as a string of fire 

29 
3.0 mm 
PyrwmUM neuron mama eond many 
fPOGWVWtt GOmtCTtV VTWGnOB WtOIWty 
to neighboring areas of cortex, the 
hash for both lateral Inhibition and 
crackers. It is also the most prominent wiring principle of mam-
malian neocortex. 
A few words about cerebral cortex, the icing on the brain's 
cake:. in this cake, it's the frosting that has the appearance of 
layering! Six layers are usually identified on the basis of cell size 

30 
or axon packing density, though we sometimes subdivide it 
further (in primary visual cortex, one talks about layers 4a, 4b, 
4ca, and 4cP). At other times, we lump layers together: when I 
mention the "superficial layers/' I'm combining layers 1,2, and 3. 
fcJ> 
Part of the monkey superficial pyramidal 
neuron reconstructed by McGuIre et al 
(J. Comp. Neurol. 1991), showing axon 
terminals to Immediate neighbors (thin 
axons amidst dendritic tree) as well as 
branches to cells a microcolumn away. 
Furthermore, there are three functional groupings that have 
become apparent: on the analogy to the mail boxes stacked on 
many a desk, layer 4 could be said to be the IN box of neocortex, 
because most of the inputs from the thalamus terminate there. 
The deep layers could be called the OUT box, as pyramidal 
neurons of layers 5 and 6 send axons outside the cortex, back to 
thalamus or down to the spinal cord, and so forth. The neurons 
of the superficial layers seem to constitute the INTERNAL mailbox 
of the neocortex, specializing in the interoffice memos. 
Interactions among the superficial pyramidal neurons are what 
this book is mostly about, as these neurons seem capable of 
implementing a darwinian copying competition, one that can 
shape up quality from humble beginnings. 

31 
The axons of the superficial pyramidal cells are prominent in 
the corpus callosum and other long corticocortical paths, but also 
in the intrinsic horizontal connections: those axon branches that 
never leave the superficial layers because they run sideways. 
They preferentially terminate on other superficial pyramidal neu-
rons — and in a patterned manner, too. Some axon branches go 
to near neighbors, but the ones that go further ignore a whole 
series of intermediate neurons before communicating with those 
about 0.5 mm distant. 
Those sparsely populated gaps are something like the Sherlock 
Holmes story about the dog that didn't bark in the night. It took 
a long time before anyone noticed this fact. In 1975 came the first 
hint of these gap patterns. In 1982, when Jennifer Lund and 
Kathleen Rockland first studied the gaps in the superficial layers' 
intrinsic horizontal connections, it was in the visual cortex of the 
tree shrew. Though the gap distance varies, we now know that it 
is a common arrangement for many areas of neocortex, and for 
many animal species. Thanks to the detailed reconstructions of 
several HRP-injected superficial pyramidal neurons by Barbara 
McGuire and her colleagues, we also know that these synaptic 
connections are likely to be excitatory, probably using glutamate 
as their neurotransmitter, and that their predominant targets are 
other superficial pyramidal neurons. 
Their axons have dozens of branches, going sideways in many 
radial directions, fanning out eventually into thousands of axon 
terminals. Although no single superficial pyramidal neuron has 
enough terminals to fill in a doughnut, we might expect a small 
minicolumn group of such neurons to produce a ring of excitation, 
as well as the central spot of excitation from the branches to 
immediate neighbors. 
Point-to-area is the more common 
arrangement for axon projections, such as those of the pyramidal 
neurons of the deep layers. Recurrent inhibition is also seen, but 
only the recurrent excitation of the superficial layers of neocortex 
has this Sherlock-Holmes feature of prominent silent gaps. 
Optical imaging techniques that look down on the brain's 
surface are now capable of resolving a spread of activity in cortex. 
Stimulation of a restricted area of retina, of a type that classically 
would be expected to concentrate cortical activity in only one area 

32 
4 # 
I of the exposed cortical surface, is now seen to 
j contribute to multiple hot spots of activity at 
macrocolumnar separations, much as predicted. 
The neocortical versions of long-term potentiat-
ion (LTP) are also concentrated in the superficial 
I layers. 
We know that N-methyl-D-aspartate 
j (NMDA) types of postsynaptic receptors, which 
I have the unusual characteristic of augmenting their 
strength when inputs arrive in clusters (such as 
quasi-synchronously from different sources), are especially 
common in the superficial layers. 
All of this raises the possibility of self-reexciting loops, not un-
like the reverberating circuits postulated for the spinal cord by 
Rafael Lorente de N6 in 1938, in the very first volume of the 
Journal of Neurophysiology. If the synaptic strengths are high 
enough, and the paths long enough to escape the refractory 
periods that would otherwise limit re-excitation, closed loops of 
activity ought to be possible, impulses chasing their tails. Moshe 
Abeles, whose Jerusalem lab often observes more than a dozen 
cortical neurons at a time, has seen some precise impulse timing 
of one neuron, relative to 
another, 
in 
premotor 
and 
prefrontal 
cortex 
neuron 
ensembles. 
It is unknown 
whether or not these firing 
patterns represent reverberation, 
in Lorente's original sense of 
recirculating loops. These long, 
precisely-timed firing patterns 
are important for the notion of 
spatiotemporal patterns that I 
will later develop. 
branching axon activating cortical loops 
«ftM-Lonnt»<l«No 
EMERGENT SYNCHRONY is well known as a commonplace conseq-
uence of recurrent excitation, one that ought to be seen with even 
weak connection strengths and short paths. In 1665, the Dutch 
physicist Christiaan Huygens noticed that two pendulum clocks 
hanging from a common support were synchronized. When he 

33 
disturbed the synchrony, it returned within a half hour. 
Harmonic oscillators are slower to entrain than nonlinear 
relaxation oscillators, which can take just a few cycles. 
The most famous example of entrairunent is probably menstr-
ual cycles in women's dormitories. More dramatic in appearance 
is a whole tree filled with little lights, flashing in unison. No, I 
don't mean a Christmas tree wired up, under the control of a 
single flasher — there's a natural, wireless example based on 
hundreds of independent oscillators. 
The little lights are 
hundreds of fireflies, and they have no leader to set the pace. 
Imagine a tree thirty-five to forty feet high, apparently with a 
firefly on every leaf, and all the fireflies flashing in perfect 
unison at a rate of about three times in two seconds, the tree 
being in complete darkness between flashes. Imagine a tenth of 
a mile of river front with an unbroken line of mangrove trees 
with fireflies on every leaf flashing in synchronization, the 
insects on the trees at the ends of the line acting in perfect unison 
with those between. Then, if one's imagination is sufficiently 
vivid, he may form some conception of this amazing spectacle. 
It doesn't require any elaborate notions of mimicry to account for 
the firefly entrainment; even small tendencies to advance to the 
next flash when stimulated with light will suffice to create a "rush 
hour." Furthermore, you usually do not see waves propagating 
through such a population, except perhaps when the flashing is 
just beginning or ending. Even in cortical simulations with prop-
agation delays, near-synchrony is seen, in much the way (anomal-
ous dispersion) that some velocities can exceed the speed of light. 
Weak mutual re-excitation (a few percent of threshold) is quite 
sufficient to entrain; one need not postulate strong connection 
strengths in the manner needed for Lorente's recirculating chains. 
So long as the neurons (or fireflies) already have enough input to 
fire repeatedly, there will be an entrainment tendency if they 
mutually re-excite one another. And that is exactly what super-
ficial pyramidal neurons, 0.5 mm apart, seem so likely to do. The 
triple combination — mutual re-excitation, silent gaps that focus 
it, and the resulting entrainment tendencies — is what gives the 

34 
superficial layers of neocortex the potential of being a Darwin 
Machine. 
LOOKING DOWN FROM ON HIGH at the superficial layers of 
neocortex, in what the neuroanatomists call "tangential slices/' is 
like looking down on a forest from a balloon. Any one neuron is 
seen in a top-down perspective, orthogonal to that seen from the 
side in the usual surface-to-depth slice. Like the branches of any 
one tree, any one neuron has a dendritic tree, but also an axon 
tree, much as the foresf s tree has branching roots below ground. 
The axon of a single superficial pyramidal neuron will be seen 
to spread in many directions. Though sensory neurons and motor 
neurons may vary, the average interneuron sends out as many 
synapses as it receives, usually between 2,000 and 10,000. Not 
enough radial plots have yet been done to know how symmetric 
the horizontal spread is, but it seems clear that the axon branches 
travel in many directions from the cell. 
GIVEN 
standard 
length 
excitatory 
axons, 
entrained 
...recurrent excitation between 
some cell pairs produces 
entrained firing patterns. 
An entrained pair tends 
to recruit additional cells 
that are equidistant. 
spot" 
...and so create a 
TRIANGULAR ARRAY. 
The distance from the cell body to the center of the axon term-
inal cluster, studied mostly in the side views, is not the same in all 
cortical areas. That "0.5 mm" mentioned earlier is really as small 
as 0.4 mm (in primary visual cortex of monkeys) or as large as 0.85 
mm (in sensorimotor cortex). It scales with the width of the basal 
dendritic tree. I'll use 0.5 mm as my standard example of this 
local metric; it corresponds to a basal dendritic tree of about 0.25 

35 
mm spread, which is also about the spread of one cluster of axon 
terminals and the extent of one silent gap. 
If two superficial pyramidal neurons, about 0.5 mm apart, are 
interested in the same features because of similar inputs and 
thresholds, their spike trains ought to start exhibiting occasional 
spike synchrony. It need not be all the spikes from each neuron 
for the following analysis to be relevant; only some of their spikes 
need synchronize via the recurrent excitation. 
There should also be some minor tendency for two such cells, 
already firing repeatedly, to recruit another cell 0.5 mm away that 
is almost active. 
If that third superficial pyramidal neuron 
becomes active, we should see three often-synchronized neurons 
forming an equilateral triangle. But that is not the end of it: there 
is a second site receiving synchronous input from the 
parent pair (this is exactly like that elementary 
exercise in plane geometry where a compass is used 
to bisect a line or drop a perpendicular). So a fourth 
neuron might join the chorus. 
And because the third and fourth cells provide new annuli of 
excitation, either can combine with one of the first pair to bring a 
fifth point into synchrony. What we have, it is apparent, is a 
mechanism for forming up a triangular array of some size, nodes 
of synchronized activity 0.5 mm 
from corresponding cells of this 
chorus. It could work either by 
synchronizing preexisting activity 
or by recruiting otherwise sub-
threshold neurons at the nodes. 
Once a potential node is surround-
ed by a few synchronous nodes 
exciting it, there ought to be a hot 
spot, an unusually effective con-
vergence of simultaneous inputs. 
This triangular array annexat-
ion tendency is not unlimited. (Regions with insufficiently excited 
neurons, as I discuss in the latter part of chapter 6, provide barriers 
to any further empire-building.) And the triangular array is 
surely ephemeral, here now and gone in seconds. When it is shut 

36 
down by enough inhibition (or reduction of excitation), it will be 
as if a blackboard had been erased. 
Traces will linger, however, in much the way that blackboards 
retain ghostly images of former patterns. The synaptic strengths 
should remain changed for a while; indeed, the synchrony-
sensitive long-term potentiation of the superficial neocortical 
layers suggests that synaptic strength can remain augmented for 
many minutes. This will make it easier to recreate the active form 
of the triangular array — perhaps not all of its spatial extent, but 
part of it. 
THE LATTICE CONNEcnviTY seen in the anatomy, it should be said, 
does not fall into neat triangular arrays, measured by distance in 
the tangential plane of section. Though the neuroanatomists 
speak of "polka-dot" patterns and 'lattices" for the axon terminal 
clusters in the superficial layers, the spacing of the clusters is only 
roughly triangular. Of course, adjusting conduction velocity or 
synaptic delay during a tune-up period could make a triangular 
array, when replotted as "driving time" rather than distance. 
But not even an equal conduction time, for converging 
simultaneously on a potential recruit, is actually required for the 
present theory. Though exact synchrony has been convenient for 
introducing the principles, all that triangular arrays require in the 
long run is a prenatal tune-up period that results in a good-
enough self-organization, so that most of the six surrounding 

37 
nodes produce axon clusters that mutually overlap in a manner 
that aids entrainment. It may not matter to this self-organizing 
principle what an external observer would find "regular." I'll 
stick to triangular array terminology for the theory, but don't 
expect to find exact triangles in either the anatomy or physiology, 
only good-enough approximations. 
FROM A PAIR OF LIKE-MINDED CELLS, we see the possibility of a large 
chorus, all singing in synchrony. Furthermore, it's a chorus that 
can recruit additional members out on its edges. Like a choir 
standing on risers, these singers tend to space themselves so that 
each is standing in between two singers on the row below. The 
choir isn't as perfect a triangular array as the fruit displays at your 
corner grocery, but it's a good enough approximation to the 
familiar packing principle. 
So far, this choir only chants in unison. It's monomaniacal, 
perhaps only interested in one feature of the stimulus. It's surely 
not the true Hebbian cell-assembly The choir corresponding to a 
concept representation would surely sing in parts, just as sopranos 
carry one melody and the altos another, each group having 
different interests. We will need polyphony for harmonious 
categories, not just chants. 

38 

A Compressed. Code Emerges 
Tkese self-re-exciting systems [cell-assemblies] could 
not consist of one circuit of two or three neurons. but 
must have a number of circuits. . . . I could assume 
that when a number of neurons in the cortex are 
excited hy a given sensory input they tend to hecome 
interconnected, some of them at least forming a 
multicircuit closed system. . . . The idea then [1945] 
was that a percept consists of assemblies excited 
sensorily, a concept of assemblies excited centrally, hy 
other assemblies. 
D. O. HEBB, 1980 
P
OLYPHONIC MUSIC elaborated on chants by combining a 
number of independent but harmonizing melodies. The 
task of this chapter is considerably easier: we only have to 
combine notes, each from a different triangular array, into a 
simple melody (polyphony, as chapter 7 will show, is a useful 
analogy to whafs going on in category representations). While 
this chapter starts with some issues regarding the cortical 
landscape from which the choir sings, it soon progresses to an 
abstraction much like written music. 
Happily, by the end of this chapter, we will see the choir 
coalesce into sections, each of which sings the complete song. 
Unlike the placements favored by choirmasters, the sopranos are 
not grouped together; if s more like each section has one soprano, 
one alto, one bass, and so forth, each singing a different part. Each 

40 
section is surrounded by neighbors, sections that are similarly 
diverse. You might think that this would make it difficult for a 
choirmaster — if one exists — to conduct, but remember that 
string quartets get along nicely without a conductor, and what I 
will describe here is a chorus of string quartets. 
In cortex, it looks as if one string-quartet section occupies a 
space that is hexagonal in shape and about 0.5 mm across. It 
could constitute the most elementary version of Hebb's cell-
assembly, one that could represent a word, a face, or a 
pronunciation. Cloning indeed clues us in, suggesting what the 
relevant code might be — that characteristic pattern needed for 
the first darwinian essential. To get there, however, we first need 
to consider a few more aspects of the geometry and its relevant 
neurophysiology. 
THE "HOT SPOT" COULD BE SIZEABLE, because of the width of those 
0.25 mm clusters of terminals. But the history of neurophysiology 
suggests that, functionally speaking, the hot spot might be far 
smaller, perhaps as small as a minicolumn (0.03 mm diameter, and 
a small percent of the area). Before returning to the spatial extent 
of a triangular array, let us consider the size of its nodes (I'll use 
node as a punctate theoretical term, with hot spot referring to 
physiologists measure, and axon terminal clusters referring to 
what anatomists see). 
Anatomical connectivity (the fanout of the axon terminals, the 
width of dendritic trees) is usually far more widespread than 
physiological responsiveness (such as receptive field centers). 
Indeed, at a few removes, every neuron in the brain can potent-
ially connect to every other neuron — but such extensive 
funneling rarely happens. Antagonistic surrounds serve to 
concentrate things. In the retina, for example, wide areas of the 
photoreceptor mosaic would seem to have paths to a second-order 
cell, but a bipolar cell usually has a far smaller receptive field 
center, thanks to flanking inhibition (or it has an inhibited center 
with flanking excitation, the other type of antagonistic center-
surround arrangement commonly seen) except during dark 
adaptation. 

41 
In addition to antagonistic arrangements, some axon terminals 
seem to have very weak synaptic strengths; indeed, we sometimes 
talk of "silent synapses." Anatomically, they're there; physio-
logically, they're undetectable most of the time. An example of 
this second type of physiological focusing is the projection from 
a thalamic neuron, one specializing in just one finger tip, to the 
hand map in cerebral cortex. Its axon terminal branches seem to 
span much of the hand's map, but, when you look at the cortical 
neurons they're feeding, you find that they typically have small 
receptive fields, little larger than those of thalamic neurons. 
Another indicator of size: visual cortex cells at millimeter separat-
ions with similar orientation preference are interconnected, 
suggesting the possibility of hot spots that are as small as those 
0.03 mm minicolumns. 
The superficial pyramidal neurons are not the only cells 
contacted by the intrinsic axon collaterals; about 20 percent of the 
axon terminals are onto smooth stellate neurons (that themselves 
produce GABAergic inhibition), presumably contributing to forms 
of flanking inhibition that reduce the size of the hot spot. 
THERE SHOULD BE A MARKED 
STABILITY of the triangular arrays 
formed by the hot spots, even 
under various perturbations. Let 
us suppose that a triangular array 
is firing in a repeated cycle. And 
that one point in the midst of a tri-
angular array tries to fire out of 
sync, later than its neighbors. 
It has, however, six neighbors 
that are all sending it synchronous 
inputs at the standard time in the cycle, thus tending to correct it 
(actually, it may have a dozen because the axons tend to have 
several terminal clusters 0.5 mm apart). The same argument 
applies if the idiosyncratic neuron attempts to omit a impulse. 
Similarly, early firings tend to be corrected the next time around 
if the neuron has any tendency to produce longer-than-average 
interimpulse intervals following an earlier-than-average impulse. 

42 
Spatially, there is the aforementioned tendency to focus synch-
ronous excitation on the center of the hot spot. What both tenden-
cies mean is that, like a crystal forming, we might expect to see 
some standardization. One might almost think of it as error 
correction. 
Another force for standardization may be the minicolumn of 
association cortex (represented as a raised bump in many of my 
"tangential slice" illustrations), those hundred cells organized 
around a dendritic bundle. The well-studied orientation columns 
of primary visual cortex seem to prefer similar stimuli, and the 
superficial pyramidal neurons have many close-in axon collaterals 
before the silent gap that often excite near neighbors. These 
suggest that a number of the minicolumn's 39 superficial pyra-
midal neurons may be synchronously activated. Because of this, 
I have not found it useful to distinguish between the individual 
superficial pyramidal neuron and all the superficial pyramidal 
neurons within a given minicolumn. The six neighbors could be 
as many as 39x6=234 superficial pyramidal neurons, speaking 
together to exact conformity. 
One may thus think of the "cells" and "nodes" as really work-
alike minicolumns. This tendency to act as a group could 
eliminate the "holes" in the lattice that might otherwise result 
from the incomplete "polka-dot" annuli of an individual superfic-
ial pyramidal neuron, and give rise to the point-to-annulus prop-
erty that I infer. 
DOES A HOT SPOT FORM at precisely the location suggested by the 
node of a triangular array? It need not, of course, if other wiring 
principles override the triangular tendency; for example, making 
connections with other orientation columns of the same 
orientation angle might obscure triangular tendencies in primary 
visual cortex. But this is a theory for association cortex, not for the 
most specialized of cortical areas. Clustered recurrent excitatory 
terminals have indeed been found in many neocortical areas of 
many animal species. 
Any one superficial pyramidal neuron's annulus isn't perfect, 
of course, because its terminal clusters do not provide full 
coverage. But when six minicolumn's worth of them overlap at 

43 
the same node (even more, actually, because of the tendency of the 
axon to continue across another silent gap to produce another 
cluster), there will be one point that will have more input than 
others, and this ought to help define the node more narrowly. 
Furthermore, the cells implementing surround inhibition in the 
superficial layers of neocortex, the large stellate cells, have axons 
that reach far enough (except in rats) — so six inhibitory point-to-
area circles also help define a node via subtraction. 
As we shall see in the next chapter, some synaptic augment-
ation mechanisms, such as those at the NMDA synapses, are 
available for rewarding such convergence. The NMDA synapses 
have a remarkably imprecise notion of synchrony, so aug-
mentation per se might not be sensitive to the equal conduction 
distances that define the triangle. Exact synchrony of synaptic 
potentials depends on identical conduction times, all else being 
equal. Yet ordinary spatial summation — one bump standing on 
the shoulder of another postsynaptic potential — can define 
synchrony with considerable precision if the threshold for impulse 
production can be exceeded only by the optimal overlap, peak 
atop peak. Higher thresholds will shrink the size of hot spots and, 
if the conduction speeds are equal, center them equidistant from 
their inputs. 
LET US NOW CONSIDER THE ENSEMBLE PROBLEM in the context of this 
tendency to recruit a triangular chorus. We don't have just one 
triangular array, but multiple ones that interdigitate. 
When looking at a banana, various types of feature detectors 
ought to be interested; let us say that the parents of one triangular 
array (A) are fans of the yellow color of the banana. Other 
superficial pyramidal neurons will likely be interested in one or 
another of the tangents to the banana's profile, and so one might 
get another triangular array (B) forming up to specialize in 
horizonal line representation. This second horizontal array need 
not be synchronized with the yellow array (as a common form of 
the binding theory assumes) for present purposes. 
Furthermore, the horizontal-tangenf s array might start several 
millimeters away from where the yellow array starts. One can 
easily imagine a half-dozen separate features, each with its own 

AA 
triangular array, each starting from a different part of the cortical 
work space. Provided that each array starts up on the same slant 
(this assumption will become more reasonable once we discuss 
evoking memories via resonances), the various triangular arrays 
will be parallel to one another. 
A 
> J S 
A 
^ 
! 
A: 
*4 i > ^ > A ! 
A' 
y 
\ 
y 
\ 
B 
i 
• B . 
' 
^ B 
^ B 
y 
S 
Is THE HEBBIAN CELL-ASSEMBLY the whole collection of triangular 
arrays, each stretching over many millimeters, looking like those 
multiple strings of Christmas tree lights, out of sync with one 
another but flashing together within strings? 
No, because that ensemble isn't the minimal cell-assembly that 
could contain the minimal information needed to reconstruct it. 
There is obviously lots of redundancy in such a repetitive set of 
triangular arrays. Let us imagine using an unusually capable 
microscope and increasing the magnification as we gaze down on 
the cortical surface. Fewer and fewer nodes of each triangular 
array will be included as we increase the mag, just as zooming in 
on a flashing Qiristmas tree will encompass fewer and fewer 
lights in sync. 
Eventually we will zoom a bit too far, so that one of the triang-
ular arrays (say, yellow) will no longer have a representative in our 
field of view. We might notice this because there are no longer 

45 
The cells activated by an object 
were intentionally made to lay on 
an ellipse of about 03 mm width 
any synchronous spots. So we zoom back out a little and one 
member of the yellow chorus pops back into sight. It's now about 
0.5 mm across our field of view. We decrease the mag a little 
further and now we're seeing several sets of synchronized spots. 
So is the minimal 
Hebbian 
cell-assembly 
contained within a 0.5 
mm circle? 
No, it is 
actually a hexagon, one 
that is 0.5 mm between 
parallel sides. We can 
suppose that we have, 
lining an edge of such a 
hexagon, one representat-
ive from each of N triang-
ular arrays. 
Move the 
Nth array (say, the yellow 
specialists) out a little 
and other yellow point 
will 
creep 
into 
the 
opposite side of our 
original hexagon. If s just 
like screen wrap on your 
computer monitor, where 
a line "ends around." 
While the Hebbian cell-
assembly may not look 
like a hexagon, its spatial 
extent may not be any 
larger than a hexagon, 
thanks to The Wrap. 
WHAT'S THE RELATIONSHIP between hexagonal mosaics and the 
triangular arrays? There are some potential confusions, particul-
arly because of the similarity in dimensions, each being about 0.5 
mm (as are macrocolumns, which are areas with similar sources 
of distant inputs). The hexagon is a committee comprised of one 
member from each of a number of different triangular arrays. 
in cortex, so as to be larger than the 
0. 5 mm axon gap. (3ut since each 
point on the ellipse creates its own 
triangular array (only one is shown), 
they "end-around" and demonstrate 
that a 05 mm hexagon is the "unit 
area" of non-redundant points. 

46 
Because a hexagon is the largest nonredundant collection of 
points from a set of triangular arrays, the hexagon is a shorthand 
term that we must treat with care, lest we become overly concrete. 
For example, that the largest nonrepeating area is a 
hexagon does not tell us that it is a fixed hexagon. 
Our hexagonal-shaped viewing mask can be moved 
" about (though not rotated) and still fulfill the 
requirement of containing only one element of each 
triangular array. If you try this exercise with your 
wallpaper, remember that checkerboards are the 
++**&* 
other common regular mosaic; we're unlikely to 
y&f"* T-9 encounter square mosaics here because there is no 
apparent copying mechanism for them. 
We might still see hexagons embedded in the anatomy if 
something in the underlying cortical circuitry tended to make 
some areas interact as groups. The immovable color blobs might 
serve as fixed anchors, as might the macrocolumns (ocular domin-
ance columns also span about 0.5 mm). Perhaps the ABCD points 
tend to form an emergent rhythm that comes to be contained in 
the local connectivity. It, then, would have a territorial identity 
that would make some mask placements more meaningful than 
others — an anchored hexagon. 
The Wrap has an interesting consequence for the issue of 
whaf s the unit pattern (still a problem in biology; see Helena 
Cronin's answer in the glossary under "gene"): even if the feature 
detectors that were originally active were scattered over a few 
millimeters, we now have a more 
compact representation. We have 
compacted the presynchronization, 
premosaic Hebbian cell-assembly into 
a small standard space, presumably 
making it easier to restart the 
characteristic spatiotemporal firing 
pattern from a local cortical circuit; 
indeed, any of a number of similar 
hexagons could proceed to clone a 
whole population of the resur-
rected spatiotemporal pattern. 

47 
Of course, we have a tendency to concentrate on only those 
cells that are firing in response to the banana. If you also consider 
what cells must remain silent to avoid fogging the characteristic 
pattern, the cerebral code for Banana occupies the full hexagon. In 
the musical analogy that opened this chapter, this hexagon 
corresponds to the string quartet. Its members, too, have to know 
when to keep quiet so as not to ruin the harmony. 
Another way to look at the unit-pattern problem is to ask what 
is the minimum cell-assembly needed to reignite this spatio-
temporal pattern. That's the minimal assembly of cells which can 
hexagonal mosaic, 
1 the individual "tiles" 
t pattern stretching out 
laterally across a cortical work space, 
but at least a "starter" fraction of it. 
Because it takes two cells 0.5 mm apart 
to start generating a triangular array, 
the rninimal Hebbian cell-assembly is 
two adjacent hexagons worth of the 
characteristic spatiotemporal pattern. 
Even if sensory input isn't providing a 
subliminal fringe of almost-active inputs 
for triangular node recruitment to boost, 
the NMDA augmentation can still 
recruit a new node; it just takes longer 
than if sensory input was already 
pushing the nodal neurons into the 
subthreshold region. In chapter 5,1 will 
elaborate on the reconstitution of spatiotemporal firing patterns 
from spatial-only connectivity patterns and 
revisit this point. 
For now, observe that our original 
collection of feature detectors, possibly scat-
tered over some distance in cortex, has 
become rather like those hexagonal mosaics 
forming the floors of the Grecian steam 
Two triangular arraye may, 
if maintained long enough, 
alter synaptic strengths, 
creating attractors 
(here simulated with two 
magnets attracting a 
pendulum) within a 
hexagon's circuitry that will 
sustain the firing pattern. 

48 
C 
\1 
If tne four triangular arrays A BCD are sufficient to code for Banana, tnen we 
nave a clone or Banana when another complete set of ABCD points is 
successfully recruited. Hexagonal mosaics are secondary to sets or triangular 
arrays. 
baths 2,500 years ago. Looking down on the cortex with fine 
enough resolution won't necessarily reveal the boundaries of even 
anchored hexagons — not any more than you can detect the 
boundaries of the unit pattern of wallpaper in the midst of the 
mosaic it forms. But looking down on the cortical surface ought 
to reveal a triangular array via its synchrony, and then another 
such triangular array offset somewhat in time. Perhaps we would 
see one triangular array, and then the others, recruit additional 
territory. It would be as if additional hexagonal tiles were being 
added to the unfinished floor. Later we might see the finished 
portion of the tiling retreat, fading out as if erased, or perhaps 
replaced by a competing string-quartet pattern, advancing from 
the other direction. 
The recurrent excitation of the superficial layers of neocortex 
seems an excellent setup for cloning spatiotemporal patterns. Like 
the patches of bluegrass and crabgrass in my backyard, they could 
even compete for territory, though at the expense of losing their 
clonelike uniformity near the cerebral frontiers. 

49 
The purpose of art is to lay hare the questions 
which have heen hidden hy the answers. 
JAMES BALDWIN 

50 
DATA ANALYSIS needs 
a template at both the 
correct orientation and 
the correct size of the 
local triangular array. 
Rotate through 
60 degrees 
around a hot spot. 
Try various sizes 
(easier with 
optical recording 
and poet-
proceeelnqi) 
^Template could be: 
-- electrocortlcography 
" * strip or grid electrode 
* - microelectrode sites 
- optical mask 
PREDICTED tuning curves 
for various template sizes, 
assuming triangular array 
is maintained during the test. 
Sv; 
max 
angle 
SOME EXPERIMENTAL STRATEGIES 
FOR DETECTING TRIANGULAR ARRAYS 

4 
Managing the Cerebral Commons 
[Jorge Luis Borges] talked of a country that prided 
itself on its cartographical institute and the excellence 
of its maps. As tne years went by, this institute would 
draw maps of greater and greater accuracy until at last 
tne institute achieved tne ultimate, tne full-scale map. 
And, Borges says, if you wander through the desert 
today, you can see places where portions of the map are 
still pegged to the region they represent! 
MICHAEL A. ARBIB, 
1985 
T
HE MAP IS NOT THE TERRITORY, as various people said earlier 
in the century, but Arbib goes on to emphasize that our job 
as brain theorists is not to replace a 'life richly lived by the 
running of some computer program/' We've got to extract some-
thing simpler, a maplike guide to the underlying complexity, 
despite the seeming functional incomprehensibility of those cells 
in the hidden layers in connectionist networks. We need brain 
abstractions — such as common processes, used again and again 
— in order to appreciate the fine details. 
Among the abstractions that have recently been helpful are 
those six essentials of a darwinian process: a characteristic pattern 
that is copied, occasional variants that compete for a work space, 
with success biased by a multifaceted environment, and with the 
more successful producing most of the next round of slight 
variants (Darwin's inheritance principle). In the last chapter, we 
saw how copying mechanisms also helped identify a characteristic 

52 
pattern. The predicted mosaics of electrical activity are just one 
ephemeral state of the cerebral cortex, but they may provide a 
guide to what else it does. If we can learn to think about the 
dynamically reforming patchwork quilt of cloning territories as 
simply as we think about maps, perhaps we can find a way 
around the hidden-layer incomprehensibility. 
This chapter (far easier than the last two) will address the 
variant patterns and the work space itself, and later chapters will 
consider cloning competitions in more detail. In between is some 
chaos, in the best sense of the word, that underlies the memorized 
environment. But first we are going to need some metaphors to 
guide us in exploring a jack-of-all-trades work space. We need a 
lot of multifunctional potential (potentially powerful, but it makes 
it difficult to name things) rather than a lot of fixed compartments. 
WE HUMANS HAVE A LOT OF CEREBRAL CORTEX, enough to cover four 
sheets of typing paper; thaf s the potential size of our patchwork 
quilt of competing hexagonal patterns. A chimpanzee's cerebral 
cortex is equally thick but there's only enough, when all is 
flattened out, to cover one sheet of paper. 
Monkeys have about a postcard worth, and rats 
are down in postage stamp territory. So far, after 
a century of neuroscience, there's nothing to 
suggest that a square millimeter worth of human 
cortex is much different than the same area in a 
monkey's brain. 
But, though everyone assumes that bigger is likely better, 
we've had trouble saying in what way that four times as much 
cortex has been better. There are increases everywhere in the 
forebrain structures during the evolution from apes to humans. 
Yes, there are some human abilities such as language, music, 
planning ahead, accurate throwing, and toolmaking that might 
require some additional cortical space beyond that available in the 
apes, but they haven't been "tacked on" as a bulge here and a 
bump there, in the way a house is often enlarged over the years. 
It seems to be easier to increase all of cortex than just to 
selectively enlarge one piece. This wouldn't have surprised 
Charles Darwin, who emphasized specialized adaptations but also 

53 
acknowledged that the underlying variations often involved quite 
general aspects of growth and form, inextricably linking some 
functions. Many of the new or improved-beyond-the-apes human 
skills seem to share cortical space with one another, allowing for 
conversions of function (as I discuss in How Brains Think, 
conversion and coexistence of functions in the same structure is 
yet another original insight of Darwin's). And such multi-
functionality has some interesting implications for the evolution 
of new functionality. 
You wouldn't think that a new function could spring forth 
fully formed, as Minerva leaped forth from the head of Jupiter — 
but it can, thanks to sharing space with an older function. Such 
bundling of functions constitutes something of a "free lunch." The 
new function might profit from some additional improvements for 
efficiency, but its invention per se is not likely to be understood by 
concentrating on such slow adaptations. 
NEW FUNCTIONS USUALLY GET A BIG HEAD START, making part-time 
use of an organ that, in the past, has been under natural selection 
for some other, and often quite different, function. Feathers for 
thermal insulation serving to improve wing aerodynamics is a 
standard example. Just as the 1940s computers for missile 
guidance gave a big boost to computers for word processing a few 
decades later, so brains are particularly capable of conversions of 
function, improvements in one function stage-setting the 
emergence of other, seemingly unrelated functions in the off-
hours for the original function. The functions might then continue 
to share the same space, or the space might subdivide into 
specialists in the two functions. 
Because of co-habitation of functions, the labels we use can 
create some serious blinders. 
For example, large areas of 
"language cortex" may be involved with both hand and face 
movement sequencing — and with analyzing the sequence of 
sounds you hear. Language cortex isn't exclusively concerned 
with language. Sensory and motor, hand and face, illustrate the 
multifunctional reality that brain theories need to cover. 
Certainly, just reading the popular press accounts about 
advances in neuroscience, you'd think that cortex was very spec-

54 
ialized, with pigeonholes everywhere: areas for inanimate objects, 
others for tool concepts, and so on. This recalls Cicero's advice 
about how to remember new names, which stressed imagining 
each new person in a different location, such as a room within a 
large mansion (offering similar advice thirteen centuries later, 
Thomas Aquinas suggested niches in a cathedral). But, however 
convenient it may be initially to think of the brain as a tabula rasa, 
with empty pigeonholes at birth waiting to be filled up with a 
lifetime of memories and acquired skills, few neuroscientists think 
that it really works that way. Nevertheless, we happily analyze 
whatever specialties we can find — and, by the functional names 
we give the area, often blind ourselves to considering additional 
coexisting functions. 
In the experiments of generations of 
neurophysiologists, individual cortical 
neurons have often responded to several 
sensory modalities. 
Neuroanatomists 
know that everything is connected to 
everything (if not directly, then within 
only several removes). Where they exist, 
specializations are surely not exclusive, 
probably in much the same sense that an underutilized 
neurosurgeon could on occasion help out by doing routine life-
insurance physicals in a general medical practice. 
SO THE SPECIAUZED-ROOM ANALOGIES won't do, in the long run, 
however useful they may be for analyzing early stages of percept-
ion. I'm going to introduce multifunctionality via some fanciful 
allusions to the various fields and alcoves within a large public 
park. Grassy parks such as London's Hampstead Heath are nice, 
but I have been intrigued with the grassless parks in some cities 
of Europe, where fine brown gravel walkways cover everything 
that isn't fenced off. 
The park fences are probably due to another tragedy of the 
commons, I thought, a consequence of the increasing population 
density inside cities. With more people over the centuries but 
even less parkland, the open space becomes overused. And then 
come the fences. 

55 
Public spaces such as communal pasture lands have some 
drawbacks that fencing may avoid, such as overgrazing (where 
the consequences accrue to the owner of the fenced area, rather 
than being spread out over everyone who shares the commons). 
That might, I thought, be one advantage of the departmentalizat-
ion of the cortex, all those Brodmann Areas. Multifunctional areas 
of cerebral cortex may, of course, have all the problems associated 
with a commons — and the tragedies thereof. 
Indeed, I observed from a park bench in the center of Paris, 
some of the graveled areas are flattened so evenly that — well, 
you don't suppose that the workers have been preparing the 
surface for the next obvious step? 
IN MY PARK BENCH REVERIE, the surface was smoothed for exactly 
that reason. The park officials explain that these aren't permanent 
tiles that the schoolchildren are laving and repositioning — 
they're merely temporary pavers. (Under the influence of the 
Greek and Roman bathhouse floors, I originally called them tiles 

56 
— but my architect-illustrator gently informed me that tiles 
implied mortar, that perhaps I had intended to speak of the 
precast concrete pavers used by homeowners for degrassing the 
patio?) 
The schoolchildren who play in the park will first create a 
hexagonal mold, its bottom carved into a mascot design. Then 
they'll pour and lay as many of them as they can, design side up. 
Some areas will have a standard cat design, and then you might 
walk across some gravel again until encountering another honey-
combed area, each paver having the dog design favored by an-
other group of paver-layers. Since they're all hexagonal in shape, 
they're easy for the children to lay without exercising any judg-
ment, a nice algorithmic process. A robot could do it. 
Perhaps, I thought, we could 
even dispense with the paver-
layers and imagine a pair of 
pavers as sometimes cloning a 
third with the same characteristic 
decoration, inserting it into any 
adjacent unpaved space. 
What, you wonder, will happen when the army of cat pavers 
comes face to face (well, edge to edge) with the dog ones? Will 
dog pavers replace cat pavers and start taking over the cat 
territory? Is the size of the dog territory important for some 
reason? Now, if these were the hexagonal mosaics predicted for 
cerebral cortex, someone would surely suggest that they have to 
all fire in synchrony, binding them together so that they will be 
noticed by an observer on high. I'd prefer to suggest (just wait for 
chapter 8) that there's a critical number needed before they're 
likely to communicate effectively with the motor centers of the 
brain. 
Indeed (aren't reveries fun?), leaving aside the cartesian 
theater fallacy for the moment, what might you see from an aerial 
photo of this park? Probably lots of alcoves (thanks to those 
barriers known as foliage) opening off the central spaces, though 
the extent of the alcoves will be obscured by the overhanging tree 
branches, as will some of the paths between them (thafs one 

57 
advantage of a map over an aerial photo — and shows why an 
abstract schema can improve on a "rich mental image"). 
Up close, of course, 
there are many things 
going on simultan-
eously in this park: 
wandering around it 
might reveal country 
dancing in one alcove, 
children listening to a 
storyteller in another 
alcove, occasionally an 
alcove 
with 
some 
specialized 
facilities 
such as chess tables or 
a few charcoal grills. 
Though not suitable 
for the dancers, such 
specialized 
facilities 
could still be used by 
the storyteller. Various paver designs might get started in one 
alcove or another, with themes reflecting the activities in progress, 
and then clone their way outward into more general-purpose 
open spaces, the ones where soccer games alternate with rock 
concerts and frisbee tag. 
I'VE LONG THOUGHT THAT COPYING COMPETITIONS, rather like the 
paving of that park, must be the way in which my premotor cortex 
goes about deciding between various alternative actions as I make 
up my mind. Thumb-up, a precision grip, and pointing might be 
the contending possibilities. A hexagonal movement schema is, 
in principle, no different than a sensory one. To an observing 
neurophysiologist, both would likely be as incomprehensible in 
appearance as a bar code on a grocery shelf. 
Perhaps there is some minimum plurality needed to get the 
action underway. Perhaps it takes a certain amount of coherent 
cortical output, enough hexagons worth of movement schemas 

58 
Deciding to act might 
be a matter of cloning 
movement commands. 
Movement might not 
be initiated until one 
dominates. 
A competition for 
cortical territory might 
occur as overlapping 
patterns are converted 
into one or the other, 
depending in part on 
fading resonances from 
earlier occupations. 
singing in sync as a chorus, in order to persuade the subcortical 
centers to get their act together. 
I expect that for well-learned "cortical reflexes/' as when I 
quickly wave at a friend driving past, the decision making is much 
simpler. But when there is time for indecision, and where there 
are various possible actions contending, a copying competition is 
a nice mechanism for gating thought into action, one solution to 
the problem of how billions of neurons can make up their collect-
ive mind. Perhaps if s a matter of whose song can recruit the 
largest chorus, and not a manner of annexing all the competing 
territories — rather as in hegemony, where one nation may 
dominate the political agendas of a region without actual 
territorial conquest. 
WE HAVE ALREADY IDENTIFIED the first two darwinian essentials, 
and now we have a candidate for a work space. If s just an 
analogy so far, but soon it will be fleshed out as like a dynamically 
changing patchwork quilt of differing hexagonal territories. What 
about variations on the cloned pattern, ways of making a new 
individual, one that might clone a new patch and compete with its 
parent pattern? 

59 
There is clearly the possibility of the aforementioned "error 
correction" preventing any variations on an established pattern, 
once a given hexagon is surrounded by like-minded ones for 
crystallization tendencies to assert themselves. But on the edges 
of a paver area, bordering an unorganized area, a hexagon may 
only have three or four neighbors. Furthermore, some geometric 
arrangements of barriers allow only two neighbors to an 
unorganized hexagon. It is on such frontiers that we should first 
look for variant patterns, not within the "continents." 
Most simply, a hexagonal variant could be caused by the 
failure of one or more of the triangular arrays to clone new nodes. 
The spatiotemporal melody within the hexagon would be missing 
a note, in the manner of a piano with a dead key. This "loss of 
detail" might mean the dropout of one attribute, such as color, 
but not necessarily. When we say yellow or horizontal, we are only 
emphasizing the most easily investigated attribute of our "feature 
detector" (itself a convenient fiction). Many interneurons are 
multisensory and so a given triangular array need not represent 
a modality that is orthogonal to all other attributes. 
A second type of 
The 3-note "Bach" hexagons meet the 4-note 
"Beethovens" 
variant would be when 
new triangular arrays 
join the collection. The 
most likely way for this 
to happen is when two 
different 
hexagonal 
mosaic patterns collide 
and a "no-man's-land" 
forms where the two 
s p a t i o t e m p o r a l 
patterns superimpose 
(or 
perhaps 
they 
partially inhibit one 
another, in the clash of 
incompatible 
spatio-
temporal 
melodies). 
There are two aspects 
of such a no-mans-
such that an 
undecided region 
may receive 
equal doses of 
both melodies. 

60 
land: variant patterns and whether the border moves as one tiling 
replaces another (to be treated in the next chapter, after we 
examine resonances). 
AN EVOLUTIONARY work space is not usually a continent but rather 
a much smaller region, such as an island or isolated valley or 
hilltop. Patchy distribution of essential resources can create sub-
populations, if migration across the resourceless gaps is infreq-
uent. I'll develop the idea further in Act II, but a work space 
implies more than a blackboard; if s also a region where a sub-
population can go extinct, and thereby create an empty niche. 
So, too, the relevant cortical work space for cloning compet-
itions is unlikely to be the whole neocortex. The change in the 
metric associated with the gaps (and the basal dendritic spreads) 
between adjacent cortical areas may ensure that cloning remains 
within one Brodmann Area (though the U-fibers of the better-
known corticocortical connections might still manage to produce 
clones, as I will show in chapter 8). Patchy excitatory drive may 
create even smaller work spaces, as might waves of inhibition. 
Much more can (and will) be said about the generation of 
variants and the size of work spaces, but it will be useful to first 
consider some cortical possibilities for that fifth essential, the 
multifaceted environment, now that we have identified the 
pattern, how it copies, how it might vary, and the limited territory 
in which it might compete. 

61 
Tke difference ketween tke amoeka and Einstein is tkat, 
altkougk kotk make use of tke metkod of trial and error or 
ekmination, tke amoeka dislikes erring wkile Einstein is 
intrigued ky it: ke consciously searckes for kis errors in tke 
kope of learning ky tkeir discovery and elimination. 
KARL POPPER, 1979 
Intelligent variations require an explanation for kow tkese 
variations or kypotkeses came to ke wise-in-advance. Tkat most 
kypotkeses are wise, I kave no doukt. As suck, tkey reflect 
akeady ackieved knowledge or, at very least, wise restrictions on 
tke searck space. Suck wisdom does not, kowever, explain 
furtker advances in knowledge. Tkat kypotkeses, even if not 
wise, are far from random, I agree. But wise or stupid, 
restraints on tke searck space do not explain novel solutions. 
D O N A L D T.CAMPBELL, 
1990 

62 
A Brief Guide to the Illustrations 
Reality (four or more sets of triangular arrays) is 
usually too complicated to illustrate, so hexagons 
are substituted in most illustrations. 
A complete active set of triangular arrays 
for Banana, sustained by a basin of attraction 
in the underlying connectivity, is represented 
by an icon on a raised hexagon. 
A complete active set, merely sustained by 
recruitment copying from neighboring hexagons, 
is represented by the flat hexagons with an icon. 
basin of attraction In the underlying connectivity, 
without an active set manifesting it, 
is represented by the unfilled icon and hexagon. 
If the connectivity changes are fading with time 
(synaptic depression or reduced facilitation), 
it is represented by a more ghostly icon. 
As above, but with reminders that 
there i6 a spatlotemporal pattern 
underlying the hexagon. 

5 
ResoTiaiting with i W r 
Chaotic Memories 
[Does memory consist] of the traces of things registered 
in the mind? What can he the traces of words, of 
actual ohjects, what further could he the enormous 
space adequate to the representation of such a mass of 
material? 
CICERO 
Some people do not hecome thinkers simply hecause their 
memories are too good. 
FRIEDRICH WILHELM NIETZSCHE 
We have to change truth a little in order to rememher it. 
GEORGE SANTAYANA 
E
NVIRONMENT IS THAT FIFTH ESSENTIAL for a full-fledged 
darwinian process. Environments aren't just one thing, 
though we often speak of them as having one key feature 
that dominates all others; for example, as if it were simple 
efficiency at cracking open difficult seeds that makes the 
difference between the less successful and the more successful 
finches in the Galapagos, at least during a drought. But typical 
environments are multif aceted — mental environments ought to 
be particularly variegated — and they fluctuate widely over a 
lifetime. 
From the standpoint of a darwinian process operating in neo-
cortex, the environment ought to include such things as physio-
logical state, sensory inputs from the outside environment, and 

64 
memories of earlier ones from an inner environment. In each 
cortical area, physiological state ought to include the relative 
ratios of those four major neuromodulators (acetylcholine, 
serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine) arriving from 
subcortical sites, plus all the peptide neuromodulators. Also, 
preparedness for action (those holds on movements that might be 
arriving from prefrontal cortex, those agendas being monitored 
from orbital frontal) creates behavioral "sets." Thalamus is 
particularly influential at "activating the EEG" in small regions of 
neocortex, surely an aspect of selective attention that forms part 
of the environment for a darwinian process. All of these factors 
will impinge on the ability of a cortical area to sustain a 
spatiotemporal pattern, to clone new territory, and to resurrect a 
spatiotemporal pattern that has fallen silent. 
A major part of our environment, however, is a memorized 
one, and the psychology of memory suggests that it is far more 
unreliable than is usually thought. Sensory inputs are, by the time 
they reach the areas of cortex involved with working memory, 
filtered by perceptual processes. Furthermore, the sensations are 
averaged over some time past. We don't see the jittery visual field 
that our eye movements suggest we ought to be seeing; instead we 
see a stable model of that visual world, complete with some of the 
mistakes we call illusions and hallucinations. 
A memory recall, to a psychologist or neurophysiologist, is an 
even more artificial construction because it isn't anchored by 
current sensory input. Recalls are created on the fly, sometimes 
differently on successive occasions, and are potentially tainted by 
injections from one's imagination. At times, reality becomes 
suspect because the validity of your memories are called into 
question. Studies of eyewitnesses to staged mishaps have long 
suggested that even those eyewitnesses who initially recall the 
cars, people, and sequence of events correctly can, after a few 
weeks, get them scrambled up — and not realize it. 
THE MEMORIZED ENVIRONMENT is surely the biggest problem we 
face as we try to make sense of the setting for a darwinian 
shaping-up process. All the other contributors are potentially 
active patterns of cell firings or their immediate aftermath. 

65 
Environments memorized some time ago surely involve passive 
spatial-only patterns. 
If a hexagon's activity is the relevant spatiotemporal pattern, 
what is the corresponding spatial-only pattern that can recreate it? 
It is presumably the synaptic connectivity within the hexagon (in 
actuality, within a minimum of two adjacent hexagons but, most 
of the time, likely spanning dozens). 
In any one hexagon of cortex, we can distinguish between 
internally generated spatiotemporal patterns and imposed ones 
(such as those that are due to recruitment from neighboring 
hexagons). Ifs the same distinction as in learning a new dance 
step, where traditional locomotion spatiotemporal patterns get in 
the way of copying the instructions from the caller. Ifs not an 
either-or situation: each hexagon's connectivity can either aid or 
hinder an imposed melody via resonance phenomena. 
Resonance is what makes Puget Sound (misnamed; ifs really 
a long bay) have a multistory tidal range, while the nearby Pacific 
Ocean seacoast has only about one-third the range — merely up 
to the first floor windows, as it were. The time that it takes 
seawater to slosh back and forth in the bay is similar to the tidal 
period, and so the amplitude builds up, much like gently pushing 
a child on a swing at the pendulum's characteristic rate. 
Another classic example is the washboarded road, whose 
bumps and ruts interact with the spatiotemporal bouncing pattern 
of the moving vehicle. There may be some 
speed at which the vehicle's tires and 
springs resonate with the bumps. Increase 
or decrease your speed by 30 percent and 
you will probably escape the jarring ride — 
unless, of course, too many other drivers 
have tried the same trick and thus created a 
secondary set of bumps for your new speed. 
The bumps are created, after all, by bouncing vehicles. Connectiv-
ities are the bumps and ruts of the brain; indeed, they are created 
in part by carving — removing pre-existing connections — and in 
part by building up other connections. 
There isn't a one-to-one mapping between spatial-only and 
spatiotemporal patterns within the nervous system in the manner 

66 
of a phonograph recording or sheet music. A given long-term 
connectivity surely supports many distinct spatiotemporal 
patterns. In the spinal cord, for example, a given connectivity 
supports a half-dozen gaits of locomotion, each a distinct spatio-
temporal pattern involving many muscles and the relative times 
of their activation. It is presumably the initial conditions that 
determine which pattern is elicited from the connectivity. 
One aspect of initial conditions is that ghostly blackboard, the 
fading facilitation of synapses that was caused by earlier activity 
in the hexagon. Another aspect is the pitter-patter of inputs from 
thalamus and elsewhere; inputs that are not strong enough to 
initiate impulses can nonetheless bias the hexagon's resonances. 
There are also those neuromodulators impinging diffusely on neo-
cortex from subcortical areas; likely the relative activity in these 
systems enhances or masks characteristic resonances. Somewhat 
more specific inputs from amygdala or thalamus may "shift 
attention" in a similar way. 
CHAOTIC ATTRACTORS ARE A MORE GENERAL WAY of thinking about 
resonance. There's a fuller discussion of chaos in the Glossary, but 
the simplest attractors are the point attractors, such as the rest state 
at the bottom of the pendulum's damped swing. The clocklike 
limit-cycle attractors are familiar from 
the relaxation oscillators that flush 
and refill reservoirs; there's one that 
causes the neuron to fire rhythmically 
on occasion. Bursting cells may have 
a quasiperiodic attractor but, in Walter 
Freeman's words, 
"if a system 
flutters like a butterfly, it may have a 
chaotic attractor." 
Chaotic behavior (in the math-
ematical sense of the word) looks 
random. The aperiodic appearance of the waking EEG is one 
example; physiological tremor is another. Chaos is a pattern 
difficult to predict because it isn't recursive. But chaos, like 
mixing with a kitchen egg beater, isn't noise; it is still produced 
detenninistically by the underlying mechanisms. 

67 
In deep sleep, the EEG's chaotic behavior is replaced by limit-
cycle rhythmicity; in Parkinsonism, the normal chaotic attractor of 
physiological tremor is said to be replaced by fixed-point attract-
ors (rigidity) and limit-cycle attractors (rhythmic tremor). If there 
are two attractors mixed up, the system may loop around one 
attractor and then switch to the other — and in a manner far more 
complicated than the familiar example of the compound 
pendulum. The transition between attractors is effectively a phase 
transition analogous to solid-liquid-gas transitions. 
Figure-ground illusions provide an example of how 
an unchanging stimulus pattern may give rise to 
several (sometimes alternating) perceptions, even if 
you fixate on a single point. 
If we are comatose or under deep anesthesia, point attractors 
dominate and we experience rest or rigidity. The hierarchy of 
mental functions builds up from this lowest level, where very little 
is working, to the level of deep sleep characterized by slow waves, 
which are also characteristic of the late //clonic,/ part of seizures. 
Above that is a level of functioning such as stupor and dementia, 
where things aren't working very well but at least aren't stuck in 
the limit cycle of oscillations. As we switch 
from walking to jogging to running, we change 
in and out of the various attractors. When the 
Necker cube switches back and forth between 
top-down and bottom-up perspectives, if s 
presumably because we're switching in and 
out of lobes of an attractor. 
OUR MORE INTELLIGENT MENTAL STATES are sometimes said to flirt 
around the "edge of chaos." This term is from complexity theory, 
which envisages an adaptive system that ranges between a rigid 
order and a more flexible disorder, controlling the degree of 
permitted disorder. We may range from satisfaction at getting 
something right (convergent thinking) to blue-sky divergent 
thinking; in those more creative moments, some of our cortical 
systems may be poised near the edge of chaos. So, just to abstract 
the term even further from its everyday connotations, chaos is 
controlled disorder! 
H 

68 
"Capture" is another aspect of resonance/attractors that will 
be useful here: a spatiotemporal pattern that comes close to an 
attractor's pattern will be altered to conform with that of the 
attractor. When you feel captured by that washboarded road, if s 
because you really are being 
shoehorned into an attractor. This 
convergence is another way of 
saying that attractors have a basin of 
attraction, a wide set of starting 
conditions that all eventually lead 
into the same attractor cycle. 
Thus we have convergence to a 
quasi-reproducible pattern — and 
that enables a form of sensory 
generalization (as I'll discuss in Act 
II, the classic example of generaliz-
ation is getting a monkey to treat a 
large triangle the same as a small 
inverted triangle). Categorical per-
ception is but one example of 
cognitive phenomena that could be 
effected by capture, as when we 
listen to a graded range of speech 
sounds progressing from /ba/ to 
/pa/. 
We hear them not as a 
changing series but as a monoton-
ous 
repetition 
of 
/ba/ 
that, 
suddenly, 
switches 
to 
/pa/ 
repeating over and over (newborns 
don't have this problem, lacking 
capture categories). The reason that 
many native Japanese speakers 
confuse the English / l / and /r/ sounds (as when rice comes out 
as lice) is an in-between Japanese phoneme whose well-learned-in-
infancy category captures both English phonemes. That means 
that the Japanese speaker cannot hear his mistake in English 
pronunciation ("But I did pronounce it exactly the way that you 
said!"). 
When we listen to a person 
speaking or read a page or 
print, muck of what we think 
we see or hear is supplied 
from our memory. We over-
look misprints, imagining 
the right letters, though we 
see the wrong ones; and how 
little we actually hear, when 
we listen to speech, we realize 
when we go to a foreign 
theatre; for there what 
troubles us is not so much 
that we cannot understand 
what the actors say as that 
we cannot hear their words. 
The fact is that we hear quite 
as little under similar 
conditions at home, only our 
mind, being fuller of English 
verbal associations, supplies 
the requisite material for 
comprehension upon a much 
slighter auditory hint. 
WILLIAM JAMES, 1899 

69 
According to dynamics the stimulus places the cortex in one of 
its basins of attraction, and the form of the output is 
determined hy the attractor. The rinding that perceptual 
patterns are created hy the sensory cortices implies that the 
cortical dynamics is nonlinear and chaotic, hecause neither 
linear operations nor point and limit cycle attractors can create 
novel patterns. Having played its role in setting the initial 
conditions, the sense-dependent activity is washed away, and 
the perceptual message that is sent on into the forehrain is the 
construction, not the residue of a filter or a computational 
algorithm. A requirement for this process of "laundering" is 
for spatial coherence, which arises from cooperativity over the 
cortical populations. This process of replacement of sensory 
inputs hy endogenous constructions in perception constitutes 
the hasis of epistemological solipsism in hrains. 
WALTER J. FREEMAN, 
1995 
AFTER ALL THIS BACKGROUND on memory, and the loose analogies 
to chaos and complexity, we can now consider how an unorgan-
ized cortical territory is influenced by resonances when a spatio-
temporal pattern arrives by lateral cloning. If the cloning pattern 
resonates with the connectivity, annexation will be easier than if 
it doesn't. Indeed, perhaps the new region will adopt the rhythm 
so enthusiastically that the pattern will locally persist, even if the 
lateral copying that ignited it were to be discontinued. 
On the other hand, were the cortex sufficiently excitable that 
all patterns reliably cloned laterally, resonances would not matter. 
The local maintenance of the rhythm, however, would then be 
totally dependent on lateral copying. It would be easily erased, in 
comparison to resonating regions that kept going when a supply 
route was temporarily interrupted. The copying-only case is like 
a group of novice dancers learning a new spatiotemporal pattern 
by following instructions from a caller (as in square dance); when 
the caller stops, so do they. But eventually, as the dancers develop 
their own internal resonances, they can generate the patterns on 
their own, sans caller. 
Locally, graded effects might be important for getting the 
rhythm started, much as piano keys can be struck softly or 

70 
vigorously. Once into lateral cloning mode, however, the notes 
might be as stereotyped as those plucked notes on a harpsichord, 
more digital than analog — with copying from copies, you 
probably need a digital code, as shades of grays eventually go to 
all-or-nothing extremes (much as photocopying the previous 
photocopy of a photograph will progress to an image with a 
solarized black-and-white appearance). So our cerebral code is 
likely to be binary, even though calling it up from scratch may 
have important analog aspects. 
Note that we now have a serious reason for treating the 
hexagon as more than just a convenient group name for a collect-
ion of N points from N triangular arrays. Yes, extension of 
territory initially involves each triangular array recruiting a new 
node in the no-mans-land — but resonances mean that some 
sequences fit into a locally favored melody, and some don't. The 
favored melody is a property of the hexagon's connectivity, as 
manifested by the attractors. 
MEMORIZING A SPATIOTEMPORAL PATTERN would seem to be a 
matter of creating a new connectivity, probably in a number of 
hexagons. Although the usual LTP-to-structural-enhancement 
model of learning (some synapses are enlarged in the days 
following LTP) seems to suffice here, remember mat we are super-
imposing some connectivity changes upon a pre-existing cortical 
connectivity, one that already has some attractors inherent in it. 
Tacking on yet another attractor may not always be possible. 
One reason is that strong local attractors can likely capture the 
new pattern once lateral copying is discontinued, altering the 
pattern to the previously stored one, and so the new one is never 
memorized. 
But don't forget the spatial aspect: a successful new spatio-
temporal pattern has probably temporarily occupied dozens to 
hundreds of hexagons. Although some hexagons may capture the 
new pattern once active cloning discontinues, others may be able 
to accommodate the permanent connectivity change that would 
make later recall of the new spatiotemporal pattern possible. This 
redundancy accords well with Lashley's notion that memory 
traces are widespread, while still allowing for some expert areas. 

71 
While the connectivity change, when successfully made, might 
eliminate one of the weaker attractors of the pre-existing collect-
ion, as I will discuss in chapter 9, a locally lost basin of attraction 
probably has stronger versions elsewhere. Once cortical "slots" 
start to fill up, finding a suitable niche for adding a new attractor 
may require hexagonal mosaics that temporarily annex a lot of 
cortex (you might need to pay a lot of attention to a new event, in 
order for it to be recorded). This also means that the new attractor 
may be scattered, evocable from isolated pockets here and there 
(one of the surprises of early chaos theory was that basins of 
attraction could be parcellated), but the scattered nature might 
make it more difficult to get a critical mass going during recall 
attempts. 
Memory recall is now easier to imagine with such attractor 
mosaics: the revival of the ingrained spatiotemporal pattern could 
start from any place in the original annexation territory and, once 
re-ignited, spread by lateral cloning to annex a somewhat different 
territory. This is a nice feature because recall need not begin from 
the very feature detectors (perhaps scattered over some milli-
meters) that started everything, back during acquisition, before 
synchronous recruitment extended some triangular arrays. The 
cloning might even spread back into the original feature detectors, 
but I can see no reason why this would be necessary for either 
percepts or concepts. The criterion for successful output may 
simply be enough active clones of a spatiotemporal pattern to 
instruct the motor pathways, not activity in a particular neuron 
set. 
As an aside, note that neocortical memory capacity might well 
be limited. The price of memorizing a new phone number, well 
enough to recall it tomorrow, might be eliminating a resonance for 
some other memory — say, the name of your first-grade teacher. 
Usually, there would be oilier attractors for that name elsewhere, 
but eventually you might eliminate the last one because the new 
attractor's connectivity change will produce a connectivity pattern 
in those hexagons which can no longer resurrect that characteristic 
pattern. The remaining connectivity might still resonate with 
imposed patterns, so you might continue to recognize the name 
when you heard it, but recall per se will stop working. 

72 
The age at which this gain-one-lose-another state of affairs 
begins is an empirical question. Nothing in the hexagons theory 
suggests whether it should occur at age 10 or age 80, but the 
theory does suggest an experimental strategy of looking for a 
developing gap between recognition and recall of long-term 
memories. 
A SIMPLE SENSORY DECISION now looks rather like that hand move-
ment decision earlier. The cortex would have some resonances for 
Active 
Pattern. 
The connectivity 
that generates 
the spatio-temporal 
patterns must be 
able to produce, 
for different initial 
conditions, dozens 
of active "melodies," 
just as the spinal 
cord generates the 
spatiotemporal patterns 
for the gaits of locomotion. 
Passive 
Connectivity 
c 
c 
«
^
« 6 1 6 
6 1 6 
0*6** 
C 
C 
C*6 
C 6 
< * . 
* 
J*"* pram 
Even when the 
resonances for 
App/e, Banana, 
and Cherry are 
all omnipresent, 
one pattern may 
be able to clone 
more successfully 
(here Apple is 
seen encroaching 
on both Banana 
and Cherry) because 
of extrinsic biases 
arriving from other 
brain regions. 
EMOTIONS 
DRIVES 
SENSES 

73 
Banana and Apple and Cherry; there would be hexagons that reson-
ated to all three, just as the spinal cord circuitry supports multiple 
gaits of locomotion. Some hexagons might resonate to certain 
patterns better than others. 
Which succeeds in cloning the largest territory, however, will 
surely depend on both permanent basins of attraction and some 
temporary ones. For example, hexagons from which the Apple 
spatiotemporal pattern has retreated will likely have some linger-
ing aftereffects; perhaps facilitation and LTP will leave the con-
nectivity in a state more likely to support the reestablishment of 
Apple. Such passive patterns are superimposed on the hexagon's 
permanent connectivity; they might make it easier (or more 
difficult) for them to be activated (psychologists love to talk about 
proactive and retroactive inhibition of memories). 
One can also imagine ways to avoid a resonance, simply by 
using a triangular array on a different slant in the cortex. The 
very same territory might be associated with other rhythms 
operating through triangular arrays on some other slant; they, too, 
could have anchored hexagons in this "alternate universe/' This 
has interesting implications for the multifunctionality of 
neocortical areas, the conflict between Lashley's equipotentiality 
and the neurologists' specialized anomias. In particular, one 
could avoid specialist attractors by using other slants and so 
achieve a temporary work space. 
MANY MEMORY RECALL PHENOMENA seem dependent on recreating 
a physiological state similar to that at initial presentation, as when 
things learned under the influence of alcohol are more easily 
recalled after a few drinks. Some of this might be explained by 
staging attractors, and some by finding the right slant for the 
array. 
But such enhancement by association is only one instance of a 
much more general phenomena: that of setup actions (or, as the 
more extreme versions are known, reconfiguration actions). 
Neuromodulators such as serotonin and dopamine serve to sculpt 
particular circuits out of networks by enhancing some connection 
strengths and reducing others (or shortening and lengthening 
their actions). Some attractors thus fade into the background and 

74 
others pop out. Fading facilitation from earlier triangular arrays, 
ones that are no longer active in the sense of maintaining spatio-
temporal firing patterns, also can serve a setup function, biasing 
what attractors are most easily accessed. 
Much of the foregoing could be said for schemes other than tri-
angular array extension and the consequent hexagonal mosaics. 
As Peter Getting said about motor systems, "input may not only 
activate a network but may configure it into an appropriate mode 
to process that input/' The entrainment of the triangular arrays, 
however, has some specific predictions to make about what gets 
memorized and what doesn't. 
As mentioned earlier (p. 32), the NMDA types of postsynaptic 
receptors for the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate are espec-
ially common in the superficial layers. The connections between 
our recurrently exciting superficial pyramidal neurons surely 

75 
utilize NMDAlike properties. What features might NMDA aug-
ment? 
The NMDA receptor for glutamate also requires the presence 
of some glycine in order to open up its channel through the 
neuron's membrane. (Another "duality" is that, in the spinal cord, 
glycine is an inhibitory neurotransmitter). The channel associated 
with the NMDA receptor seems to allow both sodium and calcium 
ions into the neuron. But its most singular 
"dual" property is that, unlike convent-
ional synaptic channels, the NMDA ion 
channel is controlled by the binding of the 
neurotransmitter and by the pre-existing 
voltage across that membrane. It seems that magnesium ions tend 
to get stuck in the channel, effectively blocking it, so that even if 
glutamate binds to the NMDA receptor, no current flows through 
the ion channel to contribute to an excitatory postsynaptic 
potential. An EPSP may nonetheless be seen, of course, because 
non-NMDA channels are also activated by the glutamate, 
allowing sodium ions in, but the EPSP will not be as large as 
otherwise. Blocked NMDA channels represent a reserve; there's 
extra responsiveness available for special occasions requiring 
emphasis. 
Reducing the voltage gradient across the membrane (depolar-
ization), however, tends to pop loose the trapped Mg **. In conseq-
uence, the next glutamate that binds to the NMDA receptor will 
gate a flow of sodium and calcium ions into the parent channel 
and so raise the internal voltage of the dendrite to make a larger 
EPSP. The functional consequence of this channel clearing is that 
the dendrite becomes much more sensitive to the history of 
arrivals. 
For example, two impulses arriving a few milliseconds apart 
sum together nonlinearly. The second hump may be substantially 
larger than otherwise, thanks to the NMDA channels cleared by 
the first EPSP. In LTP experiments, a long train of impulses in a 
given pathway is produced, likely clearing out most of the 
blocked NMDA channels. The presynaptic terminal also becomes 
more likely to release glutamate when the next impulse arrives, 

76 
thanks to some retrograde transmitter from the NMDA 
postsynaptic response feeding back to the presynaptic terminal. 
But an EPSP arriving in another part of the dendrite may be 
nearly as effective at augmenting the NMDA channel's EPSP; it's 
the voltage change produced at the NMDA channel's location that 
is important, not whether that particular channel contributed to 
the voltage production. This means that near-synchronous inputs 
(say, within about 10 msec of one another) are far more effective 
than would otherwise be the case, and that postsynaptic impulses 
retrogradely invading the dendrites should also unblock some 
NMDA channels (providing yet another mechanism for "Hebbian 
synapses"). Absolute synchrony isn't required, as it is simply a 
matter of how long it takes for another Mg ++to get trapped in the 
ion channel (often tens to hundreds of msec). Well-focused 
triangular nodes would benefit from a narrower window that 
could detect conduction-time coincidences (though surround 
inhibition is also available to shrink and focus the hot spot, once 
it develops). 
Repeated "synchrony" of two inputs, as predicted for the tri-
angular arrays, might be the closest natural situation to the LTP 
experiments that produce enhancements in synaptic strength of a 
few hundred percent. Add to this the widespread suspicion that 
long-lasting changes in synaptic strength are built on a scaffolding 
provided by LTP changes, and you have one plausible recipe for 
triangular arrays embedding a new pattern in the connectivity, 
there to linger for a lifetime. 
Although triangular array extensions can presumably occur 
without NMDA receptors, it seems clear that the NMDA propert-
ies could provide a lot of enhancement to recurrent excitation's 
tendencies to entrain neurons. 
And NMDA isn't the only 
enhancer: the apical dendrite (the tall stalk that rises from the cell 
body toward to cortical surface before branching; see p. 26) seems 
to have many voltage-sensitive ion channels, including the 
persistent sodium channels and calcium channels. They allow 
antecedent depolarizations, in effect, to amplify the currents 
produced by a subsequent synaptic input. Indeed, more than half 
the 2X amplification seen at the cell body, from mimicking 
glutamate synaptic activation a half mm up the apical dendrite, 

77 
seems to be from such mechanisms, with NMDA-dependent 
mechanisms under the synapse contributing a similar amount to 
the overall amplification. 
AUTOMATIC GAIN CONTROLS (AGCs) have become familiar from 
the way that some tape recorders automatically control their 
loudness. On replay, you hear the background hiss fade out, 
shortly after someone begins talking, whereupon background 
voices also become fainter. That is because the recording gain is 
automatically adjusted downward when, averaged over the last 
second or two, there has been lots of input. 
AGC mechanisms per se have not yet been described in neo-
cortex, though surround inhibition accomplishes somewhat the 
same thing, as does long-term depression. AGCs would seem 
useful for avoiding a fog of the characteristic patterns. With all 
the recurrent excitation in superficial layers of neocortex, there is 
a great need to keep the system from becoming regenerative. 
Voltage-sensitive potassium currents help to keep the lid on 
things, but thaf s a mechanism limited to inside one neuron, not 
one that can influence neighbors as well, in the manner of one 
loud voice turning down the loudness of the background voices 
in that tape recording. 
Association cortex lacks a lot of the spontaneous firing that we 
see elsewhere in the central nervous system. Sustained firing is 
usually seen only in the major sensory receiving areas, in response 
to particularly effective stimuli, or in motor areas during preparat-
ion for movement. But while cortical neurons are individually 
capable of firing rhythmically to sustained synaptic inputs, they 
usually don't. One survey shows that they're suspiciously non-
rhythmic, with intervals between impulses being much more 
random than we would have expected. Something such as a 
cortical AGC is presumably limiting the more vigorous rhythmic 
activity. 
From the NMDA properties, we can imagine how a simple, 
nonspecific AGC might work. After all, the extension of a 
triangular array contributes to a lot of nonspecific activation of 
cortical cells. Besides the hot spots where excitatory annuli 
overlap, there is a much stimulation of nonfocal areas by the other 

78 
axon branches. Suppose that Mg++ was released by activity (or 
that some diffusing metabolite served to increase intracellular free 
Mg++ levels), so that there was more opportunity to block the 
NMDA channels that had been cleaned out. This would prefer-
entially reduce the synaptic strengths in those paths. If the 
magnesium messenger diffused for macrocolumnar distances or 
the glia did similar work, it might well dampen the impulse 
activity in the rest of the region, leaving only the more optimally 
stimulated hot spots as the islands of activity that continue to 
maintain the raised "sea level/' 
Inhibitory mechanisms are the usual way of reducing the 
widespread anatomical funnel to the much smaller physiologically 
active area, but simple AGCs of this sort might easily help narrow 
the catchment zone for effective recurrent excitation. The necess-
ity for a little glycine as a co-factor for the usual excitatory neuro-
transmitter at NMDA receptors would fit well with an AGC that 
spread a lot of glycine around as a neuromodulator: while sup-
pressing excitability in general, it could conceivably augment 
NMDA synapses so that their neurons stood out. (Sea level might 
rise, but the hilltops still above water might be stimulated to 
grow!) Contrast is everything. 
WE NEED TO ABANDON THE STRING QUARTET at this juncture. If my 
digital-analog analysis is correct, each of the members of that little 
choral cluster is really a one-note specialist. You will probably 
have some difficulty imagining a specialized soprano that can 
only sing a high C, and nothing else. Because the hexagon has on 
the order of a hundred minicolumns, however, we can refine our 
musical analogy to a harpsichord keyboard; each singer is really 
only one key, either sounding briefly or keeping quiet. You get to 
map the hundred minicolumns to your musical synthesizer 
keyboard in whatever way sounds most pleasing to your ears, as 
each has no inherent tonal quality. My analogy is simply a way 
of translating one pattern into a more familiar one, just as we 
translate high-pitched dolphin vocalizations into our own 
auditory range in order to aid our efforts at detecting patterns in 
the performance. 

79 
Theory cannot yet provide much guidance on some critical 
questions: How many attractors can a hexagon's worth of 
connectivity support before filling up? How easy is it to overlay 
another basin of attraction on the existing ones? Or to dislodge an 
existing attractor? How might "subliminal" inputs to a neocortical 
area (ones that do not themselves generate impulses, much less 
triangular arrays) bias the attractors and their approach basins? 
Note that the present theory does not aspire to the traditional 
goal of cortical circuit models, those transformations of sensory 
input that underlie perception. It aspires, rather, to the more 
abstract aspects of analogy needed for categories and creativity, 
able to generate new levels of sophisticated complexity. Nor does 
this theory have much to say about what determines the temporal 
aspect of spatiotemporal patterning — in the manner, say, of the 
coincidence cascades, postulated by Moshe Abeles, or the 
structuring role of the EEG "carriers" that may aid the widespread 
establishment of synchrony, emphasized by Peter Konig, Wolf 
Singer, and Andras Engel. My theory can, fortunately, say a lot 
more about some of the overall spatial dynamics, the possible neo-
cortical equivalents of boom and bust. 
The more difficult ana novel the problem, the greater is likely to 
he the amount of trial and error required to rind a solution. At 
the same time, the trial and error is not completely random or 
Wind; it is, in fact, rather highly selective. The new expressions 
that are obtained by transforming given ones are examined to see 
whether they represent progress toward the goal. Indications of 
progress spur further search in the same direction; lack of 
progress signals the abandonment of a line of search. Problem 
solving requires selective trial and error. 
HERBERT A. SIMON, 1969 

80 

6 
Partitionibig me Playfielcl 
[The genes vs. bodies] genotype-phenotype duality of the 
living organism is the reason why it is not sufficient in 
biology to search tor a single cause in the study of a 
phenomenon, as is often sufficient in the physical 
sciences. 
ERNST MAYR, 1988 
H
EBB'S DUAL TRACE MEMORY had long seemed to me to 
constitute a possible analog to the genes versus bodies 
distinction. Throughout the 1980s, I kept thinking about 
spatial-only long-term memory traces and contrasting them with 
spatiotemporal patterns for active memory (p. 17), hoping to see 
an analogy to genes somewhere. 
As it turns out, nothing in my hexagons theory is analogous to 
the "germ line," the genes that are unaffected by feedback from 
the body (but whose chances of being successfully copied are 
dependent on the body). The biological two-levels tradition was, 
however, quite influential in how I came to see Hebb's dual-trace-
memory problem. Getting from there to here has depended on 
quite a few additional developments in science. 
John Z. Young kicked off the neural round of selectionist 
thinking with his 1964 book, A Model of the Brain, where he 
discussed tuning up the nervous system by weakening synapses. 
Richard Dawkins touched on the same theme in 1971, extending 
it to selective cell death; outside of prenatal development, 
neuronal death is not currently considered an important 

82 
candidate. Dawkins's real contribution has turned out to be on 
the copying side, not the selection side, of mental darwinism. In 
his 1976 book, The Selfish Gene, he extended the notion of copying 
genes to copying memes (cultural entities such as words and 
tunes). It took awhile before anyone realized its implications for 
copying inside a single brain. 
Jean-Pierre Changeux's selective stabilization of developing 
synapses confirmed me in thinking that selecting among the 
possibilities, and letting self-organization adjust the connection 
strengths, made far more sense of the known neurobiology than 
other approaches. Then Gerald Edelman convinced me in the 
summer of 1977 that a selectionist approach to higher brain 
functions could be made from the level of pathways and synapses. 
It was a very liberating view, helping me make sense out of the 
fuzzy wiring of the brain, the extensive variability between 
individuals (such as a three-fold range in size of primary visual 
cortex among adults), and all of those "silent" synapses that we 
were discovering. Edelman emphasized that to the newborn 
animal, the world was an unlabeled place and that adaptive 
mechanisms in the brain had to partition the objects and events of 
the individual's experience. 
When chaos theory came along (which, for me, is dated to Otto 
Rossler's famous paper of 1983), it started to become evident how 
basins of attraction lived in the connectionists' neural networks. 
When complexity theory and artificial life came along on their 
heels, the possibilities of getting to the bottom of Hebb's dual-
trace memory seemed promising. Then in 1988,1 spent more than 
two months digesting Edelman's Neural Darwinism, thanks to a 
request from Science to write a book review that explained it all. 
I SAID THAT NEURAL DARWINISM was essential reading (and it still 
is) for anyone interested in brains and development, though it is 
an unnecessarily difficult book. What I didn't see, in my reading 
of Edelman, was any role for the repeated copying of active 
spatiotemporal patterns, particularly as a prelude to the selection 
step. He seemed to have an intriguing analogy to evolutionary 
biology, but with the reproducing populations left out. The nature 
of analogies, of course, is that you always leave something out; the 

83 
issue is whether whaf s left out is central to the theme, potentially 
leaving you confused by a hollow or crippled analogy 
Even if you are adding new synapses all the time, selection by 
itself is merely a carving process and, although it sometimes intro-
duces interesting patterns, it has none of the power of the full 
darwinian process with its six essentials and various catalysts. 
Edelman's "reentry," in the sense of repeated interactions with 
other regions providing "differential amplification of particular 
variants in a population," didn't carry the connotation of 
repeatedly copying a spatiotemporal pattern, such as an 
ephemeral "fabric" with many cloned repeats of the unit spatio-
temporal "swatch." 
Most such confusions of darwinian concepts did not detract 
from the power of Edelman's analysis. But some do, as when he 
says, "[This] is a population theory, that is, it claims that brains 
operate by selection upon variance at several levels. Such a 
process leads to differential modification of synapses and the 
selection of particular neuronal groups on the basis of individual 
experience in an open-ended world or environment." All true, 
except something of a non sequitur. Populations — in ecology 
and evolutionary biology, and even in immunology — usually 
involve lots of individuals somehow making near copies of 
themselves, all present at the same time, interacting with one 
another and with the environment. 
I have a difficult time identifying either an individual unit or 
a copying mechanism in Edelman's lots-of-neurons notion of a 
"population." His differential amplification via re-entrant loops, 
although undoubtedly an important process, doesn't really 
involve a population in the way the word is used elsewhere in 
biology. Francis Crick's famous quip, that Neural Darwinism ought 
to be called "neural Edelmanism" instead, is supposed to remind 
us not to conflate selectionist carving with the darwinian 
algorithm, the bootstrapping process that makes quality products 
from crude beginnings. 
But even if Edelman's selectionism and populations do not 
encompass the full-fledged darwinian process (the six essentials 
and those "catalysts," p.21), his term "neural darwinism" did 
correspond to the popular notion of darwinism as a carving 

84 
process, a notion shared by many scientists. If we are to blame 
anyone for the frequent confusion of selectionism with the full 
darwinian process, we would have to start with Charles Darwin 
himself, who named his theory for only one aspect of the six-part 
process: natural selection. 
TRULY DARWINIAN EVOLUTION requires populations of nearly 
identical individuals, with enough variation for selection to skew 
reproduction and enough climate fluctuations to pump the 
process. Could you get darwinian shaping merely from a loop 
between two cortical maps, the back-and-forth interactions 
between them serving to 
adjust both of them? That's ^'oad to wisdom? 
Edelman's 
going-beyond- WeU'it>s plain "^
 s i mP
l e to e xP
r e s s : 
Selectionism idea, t h o u g h h i s 
Err ^d err and err again 
terminology often has to be 
but less and less and W 
translated for the uninitiated. 
PlET H E I N 
Edelman, quite properly, doesn't like the control systems 
connotations of "feedback" (technically speaking, there's a 
standard being compared to an erroneous version that needs 
correcting). But instead of using "loops" to avoid the error 
connotation, he used the term "reentry" — though not especially 
Exciting the neighbors can produce a wavefront... 
...but suppose the excitation 
momentarily fails, here at three 
point© on the wavefront. Lack of 
refractoriness means that a 
retrograde reentry is possible. 
with the "sneaking behind the lines" connotation that the term 
has acquired in automata theory and cardiac physiology, thus 
adding to the confusion. 
I can imagine Edelman's back and forth adjustment process 
between maps serving to implement a shaping-up process, just 

85 
as subsequent versions of a marked-up manuscript show 
improvement. 
Indeed, the analogy to the editorial process 
suggests a useful (though somewhat shopworn) name: revisionism. 
It is surely slower, less amenable to the traditional darwinian 
multiple-species competitions, and less algorithmic than proper 
darwinism; most of the six essentials are hard to identify. 
However appropriate it may be for the days-to-years time scale 
that Edelman discusses, shaping up quality in milliseconds-to-
minutes may require population-based darwinism, all the six 
essentials, most of the known catalysts, and perhaps even some 
unique-to-the-brain shortcuts based on them as well — just to 
keep us speedy enough to avoid avoir Vesprit de Vescalier. 
I like the Edelmanian interacting maps for other applications, 
one of the most important of which is embedding one-trial 
episodic memories into neocortical connectivity. The more usual 
skill-acquisition memories that involve many repeated trials have 
repeated opportunities to embed a new attractor. One-trial learn-
ing does exist, but episodic memories are the first to go if memory 
malfunctions from head injuries, aging, or simply loss of sleep (we 
tend to guess wrong, or confabulate, rather than realize that we 
don't know). Eyewitness memories are notoriously unreliable — 
indeed, they are malleable, with subsequent errors in recall 
becoming memories themselves, more accessible than the truth. 
A rehearsal process during the consolidation of an episodic 
memory, to imitate repeated trials, is one obvious possibility. I 
like to think of hippocampus (actually entorhinal cortex, to which 
hippocampus is a subprocessorlike appendage) triggering the 
neocortex with the first few notes of the melody, perhaps during 
sleep or other idle periods, and the cortex responding with the 
whole line of "music" (or perhaps entorhinal sending the short 
"message digest" and the neocortex elaborating it into the full 
"text" of the episode). 
But rehearsal isn't cloning either, not any more than reentry is. 
CLONING WAS FINALLY ON MY MIND again by 1991. It wasn't the 
first time. A decade earlier, I'd hypothesized cloning of cortical 
spatiotemporal patterns as a way of curing timing jitter, getting 
around the inherent noise of the neuron via an emergent property 

86 
of a common neural circuit. I'd even taken my original notion of 
cloning movement commands and extended it to the hyperacuity 
problem in sensation. No thanks to me, clone had also become an 
everyday word in the 1980s. This time around, I was looking for 
cortical circuitry that could do the cloning job. 
In November 1991, while talking to my old friend Jennifer S. 
Lund at the neuroscience meetings in New Orleans, things clicked. 
She was explaining her monkey visual cortex poster to me when 
I asked about the intrinsic horizontal connection's regularity that 
she mentioned in passing. Oh yes, Jenny said, thaf s nothing new, 
we saw it about ten years ago in the cortex of the tree shrew. 
Earlier I'd been talking about synchronization of relaxation oscil-
lators with some experts, finding out that entrainment was even 
more profound than I'd thought from my earlier work (it could be 
hard to avoid, given slight excitatory coupling). All of what has 
become chapter 2 began to hang together. On the airplane that 
night, and in a standing-room-only waiting room in the Miami 
airport en route to visiting my wife's parents, I sketched out what 
in subsequent months became the hexagons theory. It probably 
helped that my inlaw's apartment had a hexagonal tile floor. I 
gave my first public lectures on the theory about two months later, 
to the Seattle neurophysiologists and to the Boston cognitive 
science community. 
I promptly discovered that I would need to explain niches and 
population thinking while I was at it. 
CONCEPTS FROM EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY and its "population 
thinking" are not well known among nervous system researchers 
or those who would mimic the brain via inventing artificial 
intelligences. I'd only learned about them myself in the 1980s 
when I'd volunteered to teach biology to honors-program 
undergraduates (I'd somehow missed taking introductory biology 
myself, so I'd had the problem of staying ahead of my bright 
students in some areas of biology). Population biology has some 
useful concepts to remember when venturing into the spatio-
temporal aspects of a neocortical darwinism, as do the newer 
concepts of evolutionarily stable strategies, the applications of 
game theory to interacting populations. 

87 
In some sense, it suffices to imagine a dynamically reforming 
patchwork quilt, each patch's fabric pattern having lots of triang-
ular arrays that, on closer inspection of swatches, constitute 
cloning hexagons. But population thinking requires more. It 
involves learning how to phrase the questions in population 
terms, so as to see both the individual and the population in the 
manner of seeing both the tree and the forest. 
There are, for example, barriers to populations such as moun-
tains, deserts, and large bodies of water. They partition the 
playfield into parcels (they parcellate it), creating regionally 
isolated subpopulations (demes) that don't often interbreed. Most 
importantly, barriers have gaps that function as gateways. Hikers 
call them passes while mariners call them passages, which is 
perhaps a better term for our mostly flat paving-the-park analogy. 
The neocortical version of a gateway is what encourages variant 
spatiotemporal patterns to form individuals that differ slightly 
from the clones that serve as their parents. 
ESCAPING ERROR CORRECTION involves keeping most of the six 
neighbors to a hexagon (p. 41) from ganging up on the variant. 
The simplest way to accomplish this is with patchy unresponsive 
areas, where triangular arrays are unable to recruit followers. 
Lack of excitation, the usual tendency of a lot of activity to 
produce surround inhibition a la Bekesy and Hartline (and the 
recurrent connections of the layer 5-6 pyramidal neurons are a 

88 
candidate), preoccupation with other activities — all could serve 
as a barrier that limited the spread of a mosaic. In paving-the-
park, it would correspond to the mindless paver-layers running 
into a curb — or perhaps a ridge line thrown up by an 
enterprising gopher enlarging an underground tunnel. 
A BARRIER will not support triangular 
array extension. The reasons might be 
anatomical (lack of standard-length 
axon segments) or temporary 
(Insufficient background excitation). 
If two copies of the same variant get started, 
A GATEWAY Is an excitable gap In the t)n\e novel spatlotemporal pattern may be 
barrier, about two hexagons wide, where abl« *> clone. If It is closer to a basin of 
the loss of error correcting neighbors 
attraction, It may successfully compete 
can permit variants to arise. 
for 
territory with the parent pattern. 
Wide gateways, like wide slits in the physicists's particle-wave 
experiments, aren't very interesting. Narrow ones, about the 
width of the local "0.5 mm" metric, stop annexation altogether. 
It takes activity in two adjacent hexagons to clone a third: just 
recall that lab coat campaign button that reads Don't Clone Alone! 
But gateway widths between two and three times the metric 
provide a way to escape error correction. 
Just through the gateway, triangular array nodes are only 
subject to the two nodes occupying the gateway. For some of the 

89 
multiple triangular arrays that constitute the hexagon's spatio-
temporal pattern, a failure to recruit might occur. Or a neuron 
will instead be recruited off to one side of the equilateral triangle, 
simply because of imprecise anatomy. It is perhaps only with six 
surrounding neighbors that the nodes are forced into the proper 
equilateral triangles, just as crystals may be imperfect near their 
natural edges. 
On the far side of the gateway, the imperfect hexagon's 
triangular arrays will still be able to take part in producing 
another hexagon, acting 
in combination with one 
^ 5_note IIfeich« ne^on6 meet the 
of the perfect hexagons in 
^note "3eethovene" such that an 
the narrow passage. If 
undecided realon mav receive 
the imperfect pattern is 
again created, then there 
are two imperfect hex-
agons side by side, the 
essential setup for clon-
ing a lot more of them. 
Although a sexually 
reproducing species can 
colonize a new island via 
just one pregnant female, 
the asexual cortical hexa-
gons seem to require two 
to tango. 
COMPETITION with the parent pattern seems quite likely, 
particularly if the parent pattern simply does an end run around 
the barrier. Soon the variants will be contending for the no-mans-
land (p. 59) that separates them from the parent clones. 
Thanks to concepts such as basins of attraction and how they 
might be biased by noncloning long-distance inputs, we can 
imagine why one pattern might succeed better than another in 
annexing no-mans-land. Indeed, we can ask about how this 

90 
battlefront moves and stabilizes by considering a three-array 
spatiotemporal pattern called Bach meeting up with a four-array 
pattern such as Beethoven. 
Suppose that the undecided territory has shrunken to only one 
unfilled tile's worth, and that it has three Bach neighbors trying to 
recruit it via annexing 
If the top center Beethoven is 
replaced by a Bach, then the uncertain 
hexagon rece'wee four doeee of Bach 
for every two of Beethoven. 
nodes in its three triang-
ular arrays. But it also 
has the three Beethoven 
neighbors, also trying to 
recruit the four corres-
ponding nodes of their 
arrays. The underlying 
resonances 
ought 
to 
make the difference in 
which wins: if s the equi-
valent of a memorized 
environment biasing a 
darwinian copying com-
petition. 
(They might 
merely superimpose, a 
topic I'll save for Act II.) 
Boundaries 
seem 
more likely to form 
along an angle, however, 
such that all the hex-
agons on the border 
have four similar inputs but only two of the other pattern. 
Although a well-resonating pattern on the two-side might 
nonetheless invade the territory of a less resonant pattern, four-to-
two probably creates a temporary stability in the midst of change. 
AMBIGUOUS PERCEPTIONS provide a useful example of how copying 
competitions could perform a common mental task. When over-
learned objects are sensed, there is likely no need for a copying 
competition to decide the issue: they probably immediately pop 
through to an appropriate attractor and "early decision" obviates 
A 4-by-2 boundary ought to be a more 
stable one than a 3-by-3 arrangement. 

91 
the need for prolonged copying. 
But a lot of what we see is 
ambiguous, at least temporarily. 
Suppose that you see an 
object go whizzing past, which 
then 
disappears 
beneath 
something. 
You can't take a 
closer look. But what was it? It 
was seemingly roundish, about 
the size of many kinds of balls 
and fruit. How do you guess 
what it was? Perhaps you use 
the cortical equivalent of the 
immune response. 
In terms of a cortical darwin-
ian competition, the first task is 
to take the spatiotemporal 
pattern of the sensory input, 
good old "?" (hereafter called 
unknown), and make a territory 
of clones in a region of cortex 
that we might call the sensory 
buffer. A barrier with a gateway 
will then allow variants to be 
made on this original group of 
triangular arrays. A series of 
additional short end-runable 
barriers with gateways (not 
shown) 
can 
allow 
further 
variants from the original (the 
distorted ? in the figure). Finally 
one of the variant spatio-
temporal patterns gets close 
enough to the lemon attractor to 
be captured by it: a few lemon 
clones form up in one part of the 
territory. About the same time, 
the baseball attractor has been 
Darwin Machine handles ambiguity, 
finding candidates, and making dectoton 
Three candidates have been found via 
variant© being captured by an attractor. 
Critical maee: "It was a baseball]" 

92 
similarly activated by a different variant, aided by the fact that 
you're currently at a picnic (baseball and picnic perhaps have an 
association in your brain). In a third part of the cortical territory 
for handling ambiguous visual objects, apple has been fired up. 
If s possible to simply have a stalemate between unknown and 
the three candidates. But background conditions change much 
more quickly than the weather — and so lemon takes over much 
of apple territory. Finally, baseball not only converts many of the 
remaining unknown variants but also the apple territory. Because 
having a number of clones in sync is a good way for long 
corticocortical paths to get the attention of premotor and language 
cortex (to be discussed in chapter 8), we get the decision: "It was 
a baseball/' 
If s a very simple-minded example of how a perceptual task 
could get some help from a darwinian cloning competition when 
there's too much ambiguity for a quick decision. First, variants 
are spawned. Second, attractors capture some variants and thus 
create standard spatiotemporal patterns for vocabulary items. 
Third, a cloning competition ensues, aided by some fluctuations 
in background excitability. Finally, a decision occurs when there 
are enough of one type singing in a chorus. 
JUST AS CLIMATE FLUCTUATIONS speed up biological evolution, so 
cortical excitability fluctuations might speed up hexagonal 
competitions. Some areas will be converted from prepared-for-
pavers into barriers that partition the playfield. 
A raised threshold in a region 
Tke capacity to blunder sligktly (another way of saying reduced 
is tke real marvel of DNA. 
excitability or increased inhibition) 
Without this special attribute, 
c a n be envisaged as humps thrown 
we would still be anaerobic 
up by that enterprising gopher. It's 
bacteria and tkere would be no 
n o t reaUy a fence, in the Sense of 
music- 
enclosure, but simply the equivalent 
LEWIS THOMAS, 1979 o f underbrush that's easier to go 
around than through. Neither does 
it necessarily partition anything (think instead of those alcoves 
that open out into the more general-purpose parts of the park, 
p.56). 

93 
Barriers help fragment reproducing populations so that they 
can go their own way, unconstrained by interactions with the 
other demes or the main population itself. The second conseq-
uence is, of course, that the narrower gaps between barriers 
permit reproduction of hexagonal spatiotemporal firing patterns 
without the usual error-correction. 
Thus we might expect 
fluctuating thresholds to both protect variants from correction and 
to actually generate more variants. 
Though recorded from the scalp, the electroencephalogram is 
a spatial average of much cortical electrical activity (especially 
synaptic potentials) in the superficial layers. While reminiscent of 
stochastic resonance, speeding up darwinian competitions could 
be done by excitability fluctuations, raising the question of 
whether some EEG component reflects the equivalent of a forcing 
function, analogous to climate change. 
ONE MIGHT REASONABLY SUPPOSE that a bottleneck is my gateway in 
the hexagonal barrier, and that an empty niche is all that 
unrecruited territory that lies beyond, available for organization 
via creeping triangular arrays. A reasonable assumption, but 
nonetheless wrong. They are population-level terms in evolution-
ary biology, invented long ago and with well-established 
connotations, that may prove relevant to the dynamics of 
partitioning neocortex for hexagonal patterns. 
A bottleneck refers to small populations that were once large 
and diverse. Small populations have much less genetic diversity 
and inbreeding diminishes it further. Should this population 
somehow expand to a much larger population, as happened with 
the immigrants across the Bering Straits about 15,000 years ago 
who eventually colonized all of North and South America, its gene 
pool will also lack the diversity of the large original population. 
This is the founder effect — though the expansion itself may 
preserve any new recombination variants that happen via the 
boomtime survivals that would otherwise have been lost to 
juvenile mortality. 
A population of clones lacks the variations of most natural 
populations, what causes us to talk of gene frequencies. But an 
active hexagonal mosaic need not be uniform. Think of the 

94 
barriers to annexation (and error correction) not as fences or curbs 
but as little ridge lines — in the park reverie, they might be 
created by that enterprising gopher burrowing along under the 
flat surface, so invitingly prepared for pavers. Even if they are 
flattened down again, they seem to pop up elsewhere. This makes 
possible an occasional gateway (a flat-enough area between 
ridgelines). 
And that produces an occasional variant by 
preventing error correction from operating. At any one point in 
time, the cerebral park's paver population exhibits variation. 
You'd even expect its temporary alcoves to develop regional sub-
species, just as a natural population of fruit flies in Hawaii tends 
to have somewhat different gene pools in different valleys. 

95 
So, too, excitability declines in some regions of cortex will wipe 
out the local triangular array nodes and prevent new ones from 
forming— in effect, raising a barrier to further cloning. As long 
as this bumpy landscape keeps changing faster than the most 
efficient error correction can conform the entire population, there 
will always be some variation around. If error correction were to 
triumph everywhere, it would constitute a bottleneck as severe as 
that of the single pregnant female that finds an empty island, even 
if the cloned territory is large. Yes, variation will return shortly 
after some new barriers arise, but its base will be the standardized 
spatiotemporal pattern rather than that of the more diverse 
assemblage that preceded the bottlenecking uniformity. 
Even a uniform bottleneck hexagonal mosaic (say, Beethoven 
clones occupying hundreds of hexagons) can create variation as it 
tries to embed a new attractor in the underlying connectivities. 
Because hexagonal territories have stopped expanding at many 
different places in the past, the underlying connectivities vary 
over a mosaic's current territory. To the extent that the old 
embedded attractors interact with the new one, regional variants 
will occur later, when the Beethoven spatiotemporal pattern is 
recreated from scratch. 
SIMILARLY, AN EMPTY NICHE is not just an unorganized region of 
cortex. Even busy areas could also have an empty niche — which 
brings us back once again to multifunctionality. 
Niche is an ecological term that refers to all of the resources, 
protection from predators, nesting sites, and other things that 
allow a population to reproduce itself; toads might not need 
waterholes all the time, but a return to the water's edge is essential 
at egg-laying time and that makes waterholes a part-time but 
essential element of their niche. A niche is the "outward project-
ion of the needs of an organism/' 
An empty niche is a term referring to a niche with significant 
resources that are going unused; lots may be going on in a cortical 
region but an additional hexagonal resonance is available that, if 
activated, would cause minimal impact on the other ongoing 
activities. Mayr describes one extracranial empty niche: 

96 
The tropical forests of Borneo and Sumatra, for instance, provide 
resources for 28 species of woodpeckers. By contrast there are 
no woodpeckers what-so-ever in the exceedingly similar forests 
of New Guinea, and on that island hardly any other species of 
birds make use of the woodpecker niche. The existence of 
insufficiently utilized resources is further documented by 
successful cases of colonization or invasion which do not result 
in a visible decline of any previously existing species. 
Most species are relatively independent of one another, simply 
getting out of one another's way like the proverbial two ships 
passing in the night — but without even the distant wave of a 
hand. 
So too, we might find that the different species of cortical 
spatiotemporal melodies can, if point-to-area inhibition is also 
low, occupy the same cortex without significant interaction: 
perhaps those competing Bach and Beethoven hexagons can 
overlap just as French and Dutch do in Belgium. Avoiding using 
the same minicolumns would presumably aid "bilingualism"; 
changing the slant of the triangular arrays, earlier discussed for 
the passive resonances (p. 73), may also be a possible method for 
active spatiotemporal patterns to avoid one another. 
As Mayr points out elsewhere, the "existence of such potential 
niche space explains, of course, why speciation is sometimes 
successful." To make an economic analogy, we might say that 
there was an unfilled niche for spreadsheet software prior to 1980 
and that the boom in spreadsheets was a speciation event as well 
as an invention. But the empty niche concept, per se, is more 
closely 
associated 
with 
deme 
extinctions 
(a 
regional 
subpopulation dies out, usually from climate change or infectious 
disease) where proven-in-the-past resources are now going 
unused. Subsequent pioneers to this territory may thereby enjoy 
a boom time. 
Some analogies to economics and politics may make this 
clearer. A classical hidden agenda is encouraging bankruptcies by 
predatory pricing; if s a stage-setting strategy for a market 
takeover that establishes a monopoly. The political equivalent 
might be unrealistic promises of tax cuts, or denigrating all 
government accomplishments ("Can't do anything right"). 

97 
Although it seems paradoxical to hear aspiring politicians say this, 
the governing niche itself won't be destroyed by this anarchistic 
maneuver. Thafs because our society has become too complex to 
run without government services and, in a fast-moving world, the 
government pays for the long-term research that no corporation 
has the incentive to perform itself. But even a smaller pie may be 
very profitable for the supporters of such anarchist politicians, 
particularly when the benefits are largely disguised, usually by 
shifting the tax burden to others. (As the lawyers like to say, Qui 
bono? The more pointed journalistic version of "Who benefits?" is 
"Follow the money") One has to imagine such contractions of 
business or government as being temporary, likely followed by a 
re-expansion around a new base, refilling the niche — and ask 
what that base of expansion will center about (likely—though not 
inevitably — the well-situated survivors). 
So too, in this 
neocortical theory, we see the possibilities for establishing sizeable 
pluralities, both by direct competition and by better surviving 
environmental fluctuations. 
Here, even when a pattern falls temporarily silent, the ghostly 
blackboard of temporarily enhanced connectivity makes it 
possible for the pattern to again ignite. And perhaps booting up 
with a novel pattern, a composite of several patterns that had 
recently inhabited the territory — but never simultaneously. 
Although I doubt that it is the most elementary mechanism for 
category formation, overlain hexagons hold the promise of dealing 
with advanced levels of abstraction. 

98 
What makes the wasp's behavior more like that of a computer 
than an architect is the lack of any comprehension of the goal. 
Instead, the insect focuses on a series of immediate tasks. This 
distinction between "local" tasks, which could be accomplished 
by innate programming alone, and "global" goals, which may 
require a more complete perspective and understanding of the 
need a behavior serves, will be crucial to our analyses of more 
complex behavior. 
JAMES L. G O U L D and CAROL GRANT G O U L D , 1994 
Instead of thoughts of concrete things patiently following one 
another in a beaten track of habitual suggestion, we have the 
most abrupt cross-cuts and transitions from one idea to 
another, the most rarefied abstractions and discriminations, 
the most unheard-of combinations of elements, the subtlest 
associations of analogy; in a word, we seem suddenly 
introduced into a seething caldron of ideas, where everything is 
fizzling and bobbing about in a state of bewildering activity, 
where partnerships can be joined or loosened in an instant, 
treadmill routine is unknown, and the unexpected seems the 
only law. According to the idiosyncrasy of the individual, the 
scintillations will have one character or another. They will be 
sallies of wit and humor; they will be flashes of poetry and 
eloquence; they will be constructions of dramatic fiction or of 
mechanical devices, logical or philosophic abstractions, business 
projects, or scientific hypotheses, with trains of experimental 
consequences based thereon; they will be musical sounds, or 
images of plastic beauty or picturesqueness, or visions of moral 
harmony. But, whatever their differences may be, they will all 
agree in this — that their genesis is sudden and, as it were, 
spontaneous. 
WILLIAM JAMES, 
1880 

7 
Tke Browmian Notion 
No image could ever be adequate to the concept of a 
triangle in general. It would never attain that 
universality of tne concept which renders it valid of all 
triangles, whether right-angled, obtuse-angled, or 
acute-angled; it would always be limited to a part only 
of this sphere. Tke schema of tne triangle can exist 
nowhere but in thought. 
IMMANUEL KANT, 1781 
S
TARTING THE SECOND ACT WITH KANT'S TRIANGLES is my way 
of reminding myself of the importance of how you pose the 
questions — and how "answers" often reformulate a 
question rather than answering it. We reposition the foundations 
beneath our feet as we grope for a firmer footing. 
This is 
particularly evident when we deal with abstractions, when we 
move beyond the representations of our sensory worlds and of 
our movements and operate in the realm of meta-representations, 
such as categories or analogies. 
But there are some problems with this. When I was first 
exposed to the problem of generalizing about specific examples of 
triangles, I was fresh from a course in set theory, and so "spring 
loaded" to find subsets and supersets as I looked for a mechanistic 
foundation for such mental categories (as you'll see, I might have 
been better off taking a music appreciation course instead). 
Things look very different to me today, in large part because of 
developments in cognitive science involving categorical percept-
ion, grammar, schemas, scripts, and metaphors. 
Darwinian 

114 
copying competitions, in turn, have provided me with another 
place to stand, a different footing from which to view all of those 
various types of categories — and an ability to imagine how we 
might construct them "on the fly/' even invent new levels of 
abstraction. 
THE NATURE OF CATEGORIES has been discussed at least since the 
ancient Greeks, but the darwinian process provides a fresh way of 
looking at them. 
Yes, the category is a class but there's often a prototype — a 
primitive example that shares a lot of features with other 
members. Eleanor Rosch talks of a basic level category, such as 
"dog," thaf s defined by the ease with which children and new-
comers acquire the concept. Above this is a superordinate level 
with more abstract classes, such as "mammal" and "pet." Below 
the basic level is a subordinate level, subclasses such as "German 
Shepherd." 
Unique individuals, to which we give proper names such as 
"Fido," may be difficult class-of-one categories, requiring much 
more information, such as the features that distinguish that 
individual from all others of the class. One should not assume — 
as I did, fresh from set theory — that 
A tiling "is" wkatever it mdividuals or episodes are the primitive 
gives us Cltllui 
xmit m e m o r i e s ' o u t of which classes are 
tkink it is. Tkere is no 
b u U t Wlth s o m e exceptions such as an 
otker "is" tkan tkis. 
kdan*'s ^presentation of his mother, the 
SAMUEL BUTLER (II) 
""^P16 mdivi<iual is probably a late stage 
of category construction, subject to more 
errors than the populous categories. A 
unit memory is often more like a forest than an individual tree — 
and that means there is no firm line between representations and 
meta-representations. 
Most unit memories are probably the fuzzier categories and 
their associations, not our societal and set theory units. As 
Bickerton observes, "Without categories, there can be nothing to 
attach symbols to, since linguistic symbols, as has been apparent 
at least since Saussure, do not relate directly to objects in the 
world, but rather to our concepts of the generalized classes to 

115 
which raw objects belong. Without associations between stimuli 
(rather than merely between stimulus and response), there would 
be no way in which symbols could be attached reliably to 
concepts/7 To use words in a referential manner, you've got to 
recognize them as more than mere labels for objects. They have 
to be treated as abstract units in a hierarchial network of 
meanings. And meaning, to the followers of Jean Piaget, is 
inseparable from experience — meanings are constructed. 
ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN UNIT MEMORIES are, moreover, a test of 
representation schemes, such as my spatiotemporal firing pattern 
within a neocortical hexagon, as associations, too, must produce 
representations under some conditions. An association between 
various representations, as in the various connotations of a word 
such as "comb," might be expressed as physical contiguity or 
overlap: 
o a cluster of representations, in the manner of photographs 
grouped together on a bulletin board, 
o . a concatenation of representations, in the manner of genes 
strung together on a chromosome, or 
0 a composite made by superposition of representations, in 
the manner of a double exposure, pastiche, or chimera. 
But physical contiguity might not be needed. To what extent 
might a virtual construction suffice? Mere linkages, as in a 
distributed data base, parts of which are maintained in diverse 
locations and assembled only when needed? What would bind 
them together, in the manner of those colored strings on school 
bulletin boards that lead to the portraits of the members of the 
committee? 
1 suspect that the categories we often use, like those that birds 
and monkeys can learn, are simpler than the ones that fill the 
remaining chapters. Feature detection is often fuzzy, with a wide 
range of acceptable shapes still yielding the same perception — 
which is, of course, serving the function of categorization. But 
some of these crude mechanisms may not be very extensible, as 
they say in the software business. Simple foundations may suffice 
for limited purposes but other foundations may prove better when 

116 
you go to add on a second story (in 
archaeology, a ruin's wall thickness is 
considered a clue to its original 
height). 
Relationships, too, are abstract-
ions, ones that particularly concern 
perspective and orientation, or how 
we frame and punctuate messages. 
Analogies, 
metaphors, 
similes, 
parables, and mental models involve 
the comparing of relationships, as when we make an imperfect 
analogy between is-bigger-than and is-faster-than, by inferring that 
bigger-is-faster. 
Given that we seem capable of endless levels of abstraction 
and haven't yet run out of coding space, we may require a repre-
sentation scheme that is dimensionally similar for both the 
elementary (apple) and the high-order (Impressionist Still Life). 
Happily, in gedankenexperiments, hexagons for cerebral codes seem 
capable (to anticipate chapter 10) of handling any level of abstract-
ion, meta- 
and beyond — even representing the 
itself. 
with a new category arising from a darwinian 
emerging from disorder — what my friend 
Doug vanderHoof promptly labeled "the Brownian notion" on the 
analogy to the random movement of dust particles in a beam of 
sunlight — and the way they can eventually coalesce into "dust 
bunnies" that lurk in undisturbed corners. 
ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY IS A BIG SUBJECT and I don't propose to 
explain why Pavlov's dog learned to associate the dinner bell with 
the subsequent appearance of food (there are, one suspects, lots of 
subcortical ways of doing that). Fancy explanations (such as 
hexagonal mosaic competitions) aren't needed for associations per 
se: very simple invertebrates do associations, even within a single 
second-order neuron. Nor are fancy explanations needed for 
categories, as such. 
Cerebral cortex, however, has the reputation for doing 
particularly intricate associative memory tasks, especially in the 

117 
neocortex that mammals have developed so highly. 
The 
superficial layers of neocortex certainly look, from Act I, as if they 
could run a full-fledged darwinian process at the population level, 
mimicking the more familiar darwinian processes that operate on 
longer time scales. This goes far beyond, and seems more robust, 
than anything that I can imagine emerging from a revisionist two-
maps loop. That my neocortical Darwin Machine doesn't maintain 
a germ line, but instead looks Larmarkian enough to overlay even 
inborn wiring patterns, is a very desirable feature for the seat of 
cultural evolution. Presumably some cortical areas are less plastic 
than others, retaining most of their innate attractors over the 
years. 
The cloning competition probably isn't needed as an immed-
iate prelude for making a decision, not for most perceptual tasks 
or movement programs. The tasks illustrated so far, movement 
choice and ambiguous object recognition, are well within the 
capabilities of all of our primate cousins, even tree shrews. The 
question is whether a Darwin Machine might facilitate higher 
intellectual function: our syntactic language, our abilities to plan 
grocery lists and careers, our fondness for making music, for 
inventing new games to play, and for automatically detecting new 
patterns among established relationships. 
Patterns within patterns is what syntax is all about, what the 
two-year-old child is detecting via listening before bursting into 
full sentences with appropriate syntax (and with relatively little 
overt trial and error). 
Relations among relations are what 
metaphor is all about. They're far more abstract than anything 
that our closest cousins seem to do, though skillful teachers of 
apes may yet demonstrate that the ape brain is capable of 
handling the task. Apes could, for example, merely lack the 
child's acquisitiveness for words and their interrelations. Absence 
of evidence, as the archaeologists are fond of noting, is not 
evidence of absence. 
SUPERPOSITIONS ARE CAPABLE OF DOING ASSOCIATIONS within my 
hexagons framework, and we have already seen how one spatio-
temporal pattern may overlay another at a frontier between two 
competing patterns. There is a row of hexagons getting both 

118 
A barrier needs to be thicker if the 
axons have more than one dueter 
of terminate on integer repeat© 
(as some clearly do). Thin regions 
of barrier can then become gateways. 
patterns in various ratios; I usually slip into talking of them 
"competing" for the space, but they might simply overlap (their 
triangular arrays might interdigitate without interaction, just as in 
my example of compacting a Hebbian cell-assembly on p. 46). 
The main problem is whether 
such overlapped hexagons could 
ever have an independent exist-
ence, that is, be able to clone their 
own territory and compete. This 
borderline row is, after all, flank-
ed by already established patt-
erns, limiting its reproductive 
possibilities in a manner remini-
scent of hybrid sterility. Let me 
illustrate two ways to enlarge 
this thin belt of composite hexa-
gons and improve the hybrid's 
chances 
for 
having 
viable 
offspring. 
Intrinsic horizontal axons are 
often longer than 0.5 mm, with additional terminals clustering 
around integer multiples of the local metric. Error correction 
comes not only from the six immediate neighbors but potentially 
from another six backing them up. 
This means that barriers may need 
to be thicker if error correction is to 
be escaped. 
But it also means that the no-
mans-land of composites may be a 
few units wide, enough for a little 
territory of its own if it resonated 
sufficiently, perhaps one that could 
survive better than either of the 
originals. If barriers were appropr-
iately located, one can imagine the 
hybrid colonizing new territory by 
spreading out the narrow end of 
the composite territory. 

119 
Frontiers sweeping back-and-forth are the other setup for wide 
belts of composite hexagons, provided they have lingering effects. 
Think of Alsace, where both French and German are spoken, 
thanks to the fluctuations of the French-German frontier (four 
times in the last century). Or, as mentioned earlier, those parts of 
Belgium speaking both French and Dutch. Louvain — or, if you 
prefer, Leuven — is said to "be on the language border" but both 
languages are mutually understood over a much wider belt. The 
back-and-f orth of hexagonal frontiers could leave a "multilingual" 
belt that is much wider than the no-mans-land of today's 
competition. 
Note that the first type of belt is in the manner of jam sessions 
in jazz, operating directly at the level of active cloning of 
spatiotemporal patterns, overlaying one melody on another. You 
might acquire a new movement program that allowed you to pat 
your head and rub your stomach at the same time. But my second 
wider-belt scheme relies on an intermediary, that of forming a 
new attractor in the connectivity itself. This could happen without 
the two active patterns ever being present at the same time 
(indeed, even if the programs were ordinarily competitors). The 
novelty starts at the level of attractors, rather than that of 
performance, almost as if one sheet of music had been 
photocopied on top of another, and someone then tried to play the 
composite. 
Most such superpositions are, of course, unplayable — but not 
all, and darwinian processes are quite capable of discarding the 
chaff and retaining the workable for 
further rounds of variation, shaping up Species tkat are competitors 
higher quality entities. As work spaces over ecological time may be 
turn Over, 
Superpositions OUght to mutualists over evolutionary 
h a p p e n 
all 
the 
time, 
as 
ghostly time, eack providing a store 
attractors linger after the synchronized of genetic variation tkat can 
triangular arrays have been silenced, ke tapped ky tke otker. 
This could function much like the 
ROBERT HOLT, 1990 
exchange of genetic material between 
species via retroviruses. 
Just think of how Charles Ives used 
those musical snippets, conditioning what followed with the 
fading attractors of Yankee Doodle. 

120 
Basins of attraction, because of their afore-mentioned tendency 
to capture different initial conditions, have that important feature 
of a loose-fitting category: the resulting activity pattern is about 
the same, so the significance is about the same. 
As Walter 
Freeman notes: 
[Neocortex may have one or more global attractors with 
multiple wings. State transitions may occur as brief 
confinements to a wing of an attractor, followed by release to 
another....The concept of an attractor and its attendant basin is 
too rigid, because neocortical dynamics progresses through 
time by continual changes in state that adapt the cortices to the 
changing environment. The change constitutes a trajectory in 
cortical state space, which never returns exactly to a prior 
state, but which (on receipt of a stimulus, for example) returns 
sufficiently close to the prior state that cortical output places a 
target of the transmission into the same basin of attraction as 
did the prior output. 
Such "chaotic itinerancy" might be like the seasonal progress of a 
peddler, revisiting towns that have changed somewhat since the 
last visit. Itinerancy emphasizes the recurrence of similar, rather 
than identical, states. 
This brings us back to my sashimi example, where a train of 
thought serves to stack up fading attractors. This allows a certain 
type of stage setting move. To access rarely used memories (say, 
the name of the street just north of your childhood home), it may 
help to first recall the houses on the block, the playmates, the local 
school — best of all, the direction on your left as you looked at 
sunrise. Then, if this stage setting sufficiently molds the approach 
landscape, you will finally pop into the right basin of attraction 
and activate the street name's spatiotemporal pattern, its cerebral 
code. With some luck, you'll be able to get a big enough chorus 
singing it, and eventually pronounce the word (in my case, "80th 
Street"). 
LINGERING BASINS OF ATTRACTION need not be limited to those 
produced by the triangular arrays within a hexagonal area. A 
synaptic modification can, for example, provide a customary 

121 
"groove" that predicts the path of a familiar moving object. One 
can exploit the time asymmetry of NMDA potentiation; like 
lingering mouse trails on a computer screen, the enhancement 
trails the action and doesn't lead it. But on replay, interesting 
things happen. 
Such synaptic enhancement can, in models of repeated trials, 
convert some "place cells" into "future place cells" (their best 
response becomes centered slightly downstream of where the 
moving object is currently located). In a feedback or efference 
copy system, this offset could tend to move an arm back on to a 
customary path if it was somewhat off the path. This scheme 
doesn't demand basins of attraction or hexagonal copying, yet the 
synaptic modification might well generate them as side effects. 
If s an empirical question that awaits answers, but much of the 
nonhexagonal activity probably modifies actual basins of 
attraction — and thus changes the chances, making some spatio-
temporal patterns easier to clone than others, easier to get started 
de novo. And reigniting a code is the cortical equivalent of 
spontaneous combustion. 
The neocortical projections of the entorhinal area and 
amygdala probably function without creating hexagonal mosaics. 
(Edelman bravely calls these areas "cortical appendages," thus 
risking the charge of "Neocorticocentricism!"— but I agree with 
him for my present purpose of understanding the basis of quality 
novelty.) Certainly the four widely broadcast neuromodulators 
(from subcortical neurons having 10 to 100 times more axon 
terminals per neuron than most) seem to lack the specificity 
needed to generate hexagonal mosaics, yet they might be very 
effective at biasing the basins of attraction. 
It is only recently that scientists were stunned to discover now 
much is actually going on inside the train during sleep. Once 
scientists had gotten used to their counterintuitive discovery 
that internal hrain functions persist at high levels during sleep, 
they gave up the idea that the hrain itself ever really rests. 
Then some cells were discovered in the pons whose activity 
decreased to about half during non-REM sleep and was 
virtually arrested during REM sleep while the rest of the brain 

122 
was active at near seizure levels. What did the cells contain? 
Norepinephrine and serotonin — the amines. . . . When we 
are awake, these cells fire and secrete amines continuously, 
which among other things restrains the cholinergic system. 
Theh iggest clusters of serotonin cells lie right down the middle 
of the pons, and the norepinephrine cells lie on either side of 
them. From these sites, they all project great distances all the 
way up to the cortex and down to the spinal cord. This reach is 
much more widespread than that of the acetylcholine system. 
J. ALLAN HOBSON, 1994 
GIVING EXAMPLES OF A CATEGORY can be challenging. Short of 
selecting a segregated layer, in the modern manner of CAD 
program superpositions that allow you to extract the plumbing 
overlay, how do you decompose one of the hexagonal superposit-
ions? 
First of all, while the static diagrams needed for tree-based 
publication resemble sparsely-filled matrices, ours are not static 
superpositions in the manner of overprinted characters on a dot-
matrix printer. They are spatiotemporal patterns, melodies rather 
than one crashing chord. 
Second, we are not dealing with segregating active patterns 
here; we want to evoke patterns from embedded attractors. The 
issue is how the system can dwell around one attractor out of the 
many that a connectivity implements, a task not unlike how you 
start running rather than walking — which is, after all, another 
wing of the multilobed attractor called locomotion. The exemplars 
of a category may, in effect, be attractor lobes that we need to 
enter. 
Third, we have the distributed database possibility, where 
pointers are middlemen that link scattered elements. 
This 
suggests a series of different representations of the same thing, 
some more useful for recognition than for recall. Recall is always 
more difficult than recognition, so let me postpone the question 
about evoking exemplars until we look at the types of possible 
representations of a category. 

123 
WE ARE FAMILIAR with the search that goes from titles to abstracts 
to full texts, but the nervous system may use other principles in-
house. Recollect from chapter 1 how a hashed message digest can 
be used to find the full text in a database. A hash is like a 
fingerprint, a unique short-form identifier. Hashing indexes a 
sparsely-filled high-dimensional space of detailed attributes with 
stand-ins from a more heavily populated low-dimensional space, 
the elements of which are highly abstract or even random, 
compared to what they point to. 
One simple application is to create a file name that isn't 
already in use, and also isn't unnecessarily long, since you want 
a low-dimensional search space that can be scanned rapidly. A 
hash of a document can simply use the least significant bits of its 
checksum, or alternatively, the seconds and minutes fields of file 
creation time stamps. Just check to make sure it isn't already in 
use; if so, switch to a different hashing technique and try again. 
A message digest using more elaborate hashing techniques is 
exquisitely sensitive to small alterations in the full text, while still 
remaining fairly short. 
Recognition in cognition could simply involve hashing the 
sensory input with the same algorithm used for memorizing — 
and then seeing whether this hash matches any of the stored ones. 
This hash algorithm is, of course, not a truncated checksum but 
simply, like the abstracting algorithm, the sensory processing 
abstraction procedures developed by that individual earlier in life, 
which means that they're unique to the individual, that everyone 
does it differently. 
Whaf s likely to be the most useful short form for recalling 
categories and specifics? A hash is not an abstract, nor is it a short 
version of the long text that lacks details. An abstract would be 
the more useful short form on which to build categories. An 
abstract or prototype category is just the opposite of a message 
digest, insensitive to details (a basin of attraction allows for the 
kind of loose fit that an abstract needs). 
SUFFICIENT DETAIL FOR RECALL PER SE is, however, another matter. 
In chapter 5 (p. 95), I discussed the problem of creating a new 
basin of attraction amidst all the old ones. Remember that every 

124 
hexagon of the cortical work space has a somewhat different 
history, because of where frontiers and barriers were located on 
various past occasions; the apple resonance might not overlap 
everywhere with that of banana. Each hexagon has a different 
sashimi layering, from its particular ghostly blackboard of short-
term attractors and from its particular long-term memories. 
If copying is not actively mamtaining a spatiotemporal pattern 
with error correction, attractors may alter it to fit a locally 
embedded one. A pattern close to one of a hexagon's existing 
attractors will simply be captured, changed to match the one 
encouraged by an old attractor, and the original lost. It is only in 
those hexagons where the new pattern doesn't come close to an 
existing attractor that it stands a chance of being uniquely 
embedded in the connectivity. 
Larger territories make it more likely that a novel spatio-
temporal pattern can escape the straightjacket of old attractors, 
and thus be successfully memorized, for both the short term and 
the consolidated long term. Note that this accomplishes the same 
end as hashing's search for an existing match (though it does not 
guarantee a novel short form version, as a typical hashing 
procedure does, only facilitates it by using a large cloned territory 
to try out many different hexagons). 
And why a short form, rather than the real thing? Judging 
from the difficulties of handling a category-of-one, such as a 
proper name, the details inherent in a long form are likely to 
involve a merry chase around a number of hexagons or global 
attractor lobes in the process of developing details. That suggests 
a lot of stage setting moves to arrive at the correct ones, perhaps 
successively plating the territory with a number of different active 
patterns to shape the sashimi layers into such a form that the 
correct basin of attraction is entered. (Even a book with a good 
index seems to require a lot of page flipping before locating a 
quotable long form.) 
One doesn't evoke characteristic activity patterns from silence, 
of course. If s much more likely to start with random firing 
patterns that converge onto meaningful ones. Such is what giving 
exemplars of a category could involve: setting the stage for a 

125 
detailed category with a series of short forms that warm up the 
orchestra. 
THE FIRST FEW "NOTES" of the spatiotemporal "melody" — as in my 
discussion of training loops as a spatiotemporal mimic of learning 
in building up episodic memories (p. 85) — might suffice as a 
unique "hash" identifier if they are repeatable from one occasion 
to the next and, as a group, exhibit a lot of variation. 
Whatever the short-form prompt for the long-form completion, 
this serves to illustrate how categories (including sequences such 
as novel movements and episodic memories) might decompose 
into detailed parts. The category representation simply needs to 
link the short forms. Because of the arbitrariness of this composite 
pattern, the superposition can be repeated yet again for a category 
of categories (say, food that includesyrwft which includes apple and 
banana). And again, with/ood a part of inanimate objects. 
Note that there is nothing here that requires a consistent 
hierarchy: apple and fruit could both be full members offood even 
though apple is itself a member oi fruit. The real world is full of 
category mistakes and full of shortcuts. I imagine that the brain 
often uses the equivalent of hypertext links: rather than backing 
up in a tree hierarchy to go down another major branch, we seem 
to jump between branches like a squirrel. It's disorderly, but 
quick — and "good enough" usually suffices. 
IN MY MUSICAL ANALOGY, one node of a triangular array is one 
note on the piano keyboard. The hexagon contains the whole 
keyboard (though in no particular order). The spatiotemporal 
pattern within the hexagon is a melody. 
It might be a one-finger melody like the seventh-century 
Gregorian chants, slowly progressing to nearby notes. Or perhaps 
several notes in this hexagon fire together, like the tenth-century 
plainsong of the medieval church, where some voices sang a fifth 
(a 3:2 ratio of frequencies, seven semi-tones apart) or an octave 
(2:1, twelve semi-tones apart) higher than the others, though still 
moving in lockstep. 
Now consider our problem of the spatiotemporal pattern for 
a category It could be similar to overlaying different melodic 

126 
lines, where two voices do not move in parallel (in European 
music, this finally occurred in the thirteenth-century). 
Counterpoint and more complicated aspects of harmony raise 
issues of what goes together besides those octaves and fifths. For 
example, in the major and minor scales (the basis of western music 
starting with the baroque period), only certain semi-tones (7 of the 
12 in an octave) are thought to go well enough together to make 
chords. 
Going well together might, of course, not be a matter of actual 
overlap in performance. Thanks to Hebb's dual trace memory, 
there's another possibility. It could be a matter of recalling the 
spatiotemporal pattern from the spatial-only connectivity: yes, 
you can temporarily overlay anything, but only certain patterns 
are likely to stick long enough to be recalled a minute later. 
Though I intend music only as a teaching analogy, it reminds 
us that what goes well together must have a basis in the brain, 
either innate or acquired. It may be that music will aid us in 
sorting through the many possible local neural circuits within the 
hexagons of memory, simply because music does reflect some-
thing about mind. 
MUCH OF THE WORK OF CORTEX probably isn't even triangular 
(arrays form up because of the superficial pyramidal neurons, 
which are only about 39 percent of all neocortical neurons), and 
therefore not represented in this musical framework of notes, 
chords, counterpoint, and choirs. I have not attempted to account 
for much cortical detail in this Darwin Machines theory; in 
particular, I have not tried to account for the perceptual trans-
formations or learning that most neocortical theorists address. 
Mine is not a more abstract theory, so much as it is a 
mechanistic-level theory about abstractions themselves. It can 
even handle long-distance multimodality categories such as comb. 

127 
When tne theory was in tne course of construction, about 
194)5, I realized tnat tne facts on wnicn tne cell-assembly was 
based also implied tne possibility of what I then called a super-
ordinate assembly. When a group of assemblies are repeate dly 
activated, simultaneously or in sequence, those cortical cells 
that are regularly active following that primary activity may 
themselves become organized as a superordinate (second-order) 
assembly. The activity of this assembly then is representative 
of that combination of events that individually organized the 
first-order assemblies. After a baby has developed assembly 
activities for lines of different slope in the visual field and then 
is repeate dly exposed to some triangular object — to take the 
simplest possible example — the combinations of activity of 
the three assemblies may lead to the formation of a higher-
order assembly whose activity is the perception of the triangular 
object rather than its three sides as such. This might be a 
second-order assembly if the object is seen always in the same 
orientation, or a third-order assembly formed in the same way 
by the repeated excitation of second-order assemblies, fired by 
seeing the object in different orientations. 
DONALD O. HEBB, Essay on Mind, 1980 

Convergence Zones 
with. a Hint of Sex 
Symbolic information is interpreted because we refuse 
to accept tbat any input is meaningless. Shown an 
inkblot, we see bats, witches ana dragons. This refusal 
to accept that input is noise lies at the root of 
divination by tarot cards, tea leaves, the livers and 
shoulder blades of animals, or the sticks of the / Ching. 
JOHN MAYNARD SMITH, 1993 
L
ONG-DISTANCE COMMUNICATION within the brain has to bear 
the task of matching up information across sensory modal-
ities. I say that because, though there are multisensory 
neurons in the cortex, the stroke evidence suggests that the 
memory traces for the visual aspects of an object are kept pretty 
close to visual cortex, while that for auditory aspects of the same 
object are kept on the periphery of auditory cortex. 
Yet we associate them pretty well, most of the time. Here's 
what I said on the subject in How Brains Think: 
The really interesting gray matter is that of the cerebral 
cortex, because thafs where most of the novel associations are 
thought to be made — where the sight of a comb, say, is 
matched up to the feel of a comb in your hand. The cerebral 
codes for sight and feel are different, but they become 
associated somehow in the cortex, along with those for 
hearing the sound /kom/ or hearing the characteristic sounds 
that the tines of a comb make when they're plucked. You can, 
after all, identify a comb in any of these ways. If s 
hypothesized that there are specialized places in the cortex, 

130 
called "convergence zones for associative memories/' where 
those different modalities come together. 
On the production side, you have linked cerebral codes for 
pronouncing /kom/ and for generating the movements that 
manipulate a comb through the hair on your head. So 
between the sensory version of the word "comb" and the 
various movement manifestations, we expect to find a dozen 
different cortical codes associated with combs. 
So how do we integrate those separately-stored codes into a 
master code for comb? Or its equivalent, a process somehow able 
to associate all those aspects with one another? 
DISTANCES IN THE BRAIN are enormous, compared to the scale of 
millimeter-long dendrites. My longest uninterrupted axon is 
probably the one that runs as a trunner-than-hair thread from the 
tip of my big toe to the dorsal column nuclei at the top of my neck, 
the better part of 2,000 mm. Most of the business of deciding to 
send an impulse off on that long trip is done within a 0.1 mm 
segment at the beginning of the axon. 
It also takes a while to make the trip, and measuring distance 
in terms of travel time often makes more sense than thinking in 
terms of miles or kilometers. There are similar considerations in 
the brain: I suggested earlier (p. 36) that my triangular arrays 
might be better measured in travel time than in actual distance. 
Axon conduction velocities vary enormously, even in different 
branches of the axon of one neuron. 
Sending an impulse from one hemisphere to another takes as 
long as sending it to the spinal cord, even though there is a tenfold 
difference in distance. Thaf s because the corpus callosum path is 
so slow. Faster conduction would require more myelin wrapping, 
so fewer axons would fit in the limited space of the corpus 
callosum. In the monkey, about 70 percent of the axons in the 
corpus callosum at birth are withdrawn during the first six 
months of postnatal development. I say withdrawn because 
neuron death in that period is fairly low; the 70 percent figure 
surely represents the withdrawal or pnining of some of the 
branches of a neuron's axon, not the death of the entire treelike 
neuron. 

131 
And what neurons are these, 
anyway, that send their axons 
over such long distances between 
hemispheres and front to back 
within a hemisphere? The major 
pipelines for long corticocorticals, 
such as the arcuate fasciculus 
connecting temporal and frontal 
lobes, have long been noted. But there are also spotty projections, 
discovered a half-century ago in the days of strychnine neurono-
graphy. They are quite widespread and modern neuroanatomical 
techniques have revealed that they may be organized into 
macrocolumris and layers. So what are the pipeline and spotty 
long-distance projections doing? Surely they are biasing the 
distant basins of attraction, at a niinimum. But might they clone 
hexagons like a faux fax? 
THERE ARE TWO TYPES OF CORTICOCORTICAL projections, those that 
stay within the cortical layers and those that loop down through 
the white matter. The former, which are the intrinsic horizontal 
connections of the earlier chapters, are mostly local (though that 
can mean a few millimeters). The latter can go long distances, as 
from one hemisphere to another through the corpus callosum, 
though most only make a U-shaped passage through the white 
matter of one gyrus and then terminate in a nonadjacent patch of 
cortex thafs only a few centimeters away. 
All of those axons can come from one of the superficial pyram-
idal neurons we have been discussing. The long axons taking the 
white-matter routes typically terminate (though not exclusively) 
in the same superficial layers, once they arrive in distant cortex. 
So far, we've been looking at the ramifications of their axon 
branches that run sideways within layers 2 and 3, without ever 
looping through the white matter. These sidestepping connections 
are perhaps analogous to internal phone calls to neighboring 
offices, the U-axons to local calls within the city, and the lengthy 
U's to long distance calls. 
Some cortical areas might be what Damasio calls convergence 
zones, a focal point for disparate modalities. 
I think of a 
" ^ 1 

132 
convergence zone as something like the long-distance operator 
that sets up conference telephone calls, serving as the center of a 
funnel that rebroadcasts. Of course, the linkage could be center-
less, as when a conference call of a half-dozen committee members 
is achieved by chaining, each person using their second phone line 
to link yet another member to the conversation via their phone's 
conference button. 
The analogy to the telephone network may be misleading, 
both because of the phone system's point-to-point nature and 
because of the way open connections are established and 
maintained until hangup. Packet-based networks demonstrate an 
alternative, as when web pages are displayed and manipulated on 
the client machine without further attention from the server or the 
intervening network. 
We tend to think of those long cortico-
cortical axon bundles as if they were fiber optic bundles that 
convey an image by thousands of little light pipes. 
Of course, light pipes can go astray if the 
bundle is not carefully assembled; manufact-
urers have to make sure that neighbors at the 
sending end remain neighbors at the receiving 
end. An incoherent fiber bundle can create 
displaced facial features a la Picasso and 
neural wiring surely has many such imperfect-
ions. 
And the fanout of connections at the far 
end (p. 19) is most unlike optical fiber terrninations in another, 
more serious, way. A given axon fans out to connect with dozens 
of recipients, scattered over the better part of a millimeter. Such 
a point-to-area mapping, in the manner of a flashlight beam, only 
makes matters worse for any point-to-point mapping. 
So, at first glimpse, it appears that corticocortical bundles are 
considerably worse than those incoherent fiber optic bundles that 
are factory rejects — unless, of course, something else is going on, 
not captured by our technological analogies to fax machines and 
fiber optics. 
Indeed, triangular arrays give one a different 
perspective on the fanout "problem" — even converting it into a 
virtue. 

133 
Suppose two adjacent members 
of the same triangular array 
send, in addition to their local 
axon branches, an axon \Aa the 
white matter that terminates 
in a spray of terminals in the 
homologous area. 
- : > • 
/ Even if only two of the sever 
/ overlap, there is a chance 
1 
of reconstituting part of thi 
i 
triangular array in the 
' x distant cortex because of 
v \their synchronous EPSPs. 
\ \ 
* 
?&: 
The off-target axons 
only provide a background 
noise against which the 
synchrony stands out. 
Since many members of the 
original triangular array may 
be contributing to coinci-
dences, the seemingly diffuse 
many-to-many projections 
may nonetheless be capable 
of reconstituting an array. 
Enough such arrays, and 
the original spatiotemporal 
pattern in the hexagon is 
recreated as well, in a 
manner like error correcting 
codes. 
HEXAGONAL 
CLONING with error-
correction standardization could also 
happen in the target cortex, reproduc-
ing the spatiotemporal pattern that is 
being maintained on the sending end. 
I don't mean that in the sense of video 
point-to-point mapping, but rather in 
the sense of reconstituting the "weave" 
of the fabric without mimicking the 
extent of the fabric swatch (that 
dynamically changing patch on the 
quilt). In this scheme, you don't recon-
stitute the whole choir but a lesser 
number of singers, yet they're singing 
the same song and may themselves 
recruit neighbors to form another 
choir. Perhaps even a larger one. 
We need to start with one note of 
that melody and its triangular array, 
indeed, with only one of its synchron-
ized cells. There currently isn't data on 
the distant terminal f anout of one axon, 
nothing comparable in detail to that for 
the point-to-annulus fanout of the 
close-in branches, with the silent gaps 
described in chapter 2. We know that 
distant-terminal fanout exists, spann-
ing macrocolumnar dimensions, but 
not much more. So I had to make a 
theoretician's assumption about the 
long-distance-call termination: that it 
is, on average, a point-to-annulus 
fanout, just like the one back home in 
the 0.5 mm around the parent neuron 
(or rninicolumn, p. 42) that structures 
the short path sidestepping. If s like a 
flashlight beam with a central bright 
spot, plus a bright peripheral ring. 

134 
That little assumption buys quite a lot compared to the point-to-
area alternative. 
Any one point in the target cortex is going to get inputs from 
a number of points in the sending cortex. How many? It might 
get one from the homologous point back home, directly on target 
for a point-to-point mapping. But there is also an active triangular 
array back home, all firing in synchrony. So the same point in 
target cortex might get another input from the fanout of axons 
from an adjacent point in the sending triangular array. Indeed, six 
such triangular nodes back home could make contact with the 
distant point in this manner, for a total of seven synchronous 
inputs — if nothing is lost along the way. 
Let us say that half the potential axon terminals are lost. Still, 
it may only take a few synchronous inputs to recruit a neuron, 
given enough repetition. If the same thing happens 0.5 mm away, 
the pair can get their own triangular array going. Temporal 
dispersion may be less of a problem, as well. The synchrony 
criterion allows for a fair amount of time shift between the two 
arrivals; temporal summation of inputs depends on the decay 
times of the PSPs, and a few milliseconds dispersion might not 
matter very much. The terminals in the superficial layers suggest 
that NMDA mechanisms are involved and, given all the repetition 
to clean out the Mg++ plugs in the NMDA channels (p. 32), 
repeated pairing (at least at room temperature, the reoccupation 
of the NMDA channels by Mg** requires tens or hundreds of milli-
seconds) might help recruit a target neuron into firing in near-
synchrony with its distant "parents." 
Even allowing for a fair amount of imprecise topographic 
mapping and a certain amount of temporal dispersion along the 
way, I think that a large enough sending area can get a small 
territory of similar arrays going in the target cortex (except, 
perhaps, for a change in the "0.5 mm" metric to reflect that typical 
of the target cortex). Error correction can shape up a standard 
version of the one-note triangular array in the distant cortex. If 
that happens for many of the triangular arrays, the spatiotemporal 
pattern at the target cortex is likely to be close to the tune playing 
back home. 

135 
The distant terminals might also prove to have the second 
annular ring of fanout branches as seen back home at twice the 
local metric distance; that would provide another six possible 
synchronized inputs. Only a few of the thirteen could suffice to 
start up a repeater node; only two such adjacent repeaters could 
suffice to start a local triangular array that can extend itself. 
Corticocortical links 
may only succeed with 
aome of the attractsrs... 
•:-•', V : X " 
» & 
a 
o 
....but other attractors 
at the destination 
may help elaborate 
the delivered pattern. 
And, of course. 
links may be reciprocal, ~'wkZ\ 
allowing a distributed 
"data base" to activate 
the elements of a centrally-
located category representation. 
O 
The strays will, of course, provide a certain amount of 
background noise. They might fog the pattern (p. 107) but there 
are two ways of getting around that. First, just as the view from 
two eyes separated by a few centimeters can disambiguate scenes 
that are too noisy for one eye alone, so we are bringing to bear a 
half-dozen or more elements of the sending array, all converging 
on a point. Second, I suspect the local automatic gain controls (p. 
77) can allow the synchronous to be seen to the exclusion of the 

136 
incoherent. Imagine a sea with islands standing out atop its 
surface. 
As error correction begins to operate locally, their 
positioning is sharpened up into a triangular array. As the AGC 
raises the sea level, the potentially fogging incoherent responses 
are submerged. 
So, we have created a distant repeater of the triangular array 
back home. And that applies to each of the triangular arrays 
there, each interested in different features of an input (or 
contributing to different aspects of an output). 
We have cloned the hexagon in distant cortex, the faux fax at 
last. And it is just the type of mechanism needed for linking 
together distributed features of a database, the question raised in 
chapter 7. 
Two ADJACENT HEXAGONS, once started up in the distant cortex 
and singing the same music, are sufficient to clone a choir 
producing the same melody, but success will depend on the exotic 
(literally, in another place) resonances. 
This spatiotemporal 
pattern's relative success in cloning competitions ought to depend 
on the same types of factors as in the sending cortex: biases to the 
local basins of attraction. 
But they ought to differ in detail, to arrive against a different 
set of resonances, biased by different ratio of neuromodulators — 
and so the competitive outcome could be very different than back 
home. Just as emigrants may thrive in distant places, so faux faxed 
spatiotemporal patterns might find a completely different 
reception in the distant cortex. Typically, of course, dying out 
without issue, but occasionally thriving. 
Not all of the parent attractors may arrive intact; even when 
they do, they arrive against a very different background of passive 
attractors than existed back home, both from short-term and long-
term memories residing in the target hexagons. Furthermore, 
there may be several faux faxes arriving at the same time from 
different senders — which means we have a new form of compet-
ition, quite in addition to the side-by-side dog and cat pavers type 
of lateral competition for space introduced in chapter 4. 
For all these reasons, the spatiotemporal patterns in the target 
region may not be mere superpositions of the contributors, those 

137 
jazz performance overlays. In Hebb's other dual trace memory 
system, you can get melding of attractors in "bilingual belts'7 from 
noncontemporaneous occupations of the target area. Such exotic 
combinations are best introduced, probably to no one's surprise, 
after a preliminary reminder about sex. 
AMONG THE ACCELERATORS OF EVOLUTION IS SEX, both in the sense 
of recombination but also in Darwin's sense of sexual selection 
serving to create elaborate peacock tails much more quickly than 
environmental selection would ever do. Among all our dichoto-
mies, is there anything that could be analogous to sex? 
The novel aspect of the biological invention of sex was not the 
exchange of genetic material (bacterial conjugation and retro-
viruses had likely been busy doing that for some time) but the 
development of more specialized vehicles called gametes that had 
storehouses of energy, handy for either mobility or fetal develop-
ment. And the interesting thing about gametes is that equal-sized 
ones weren't stable; once there were slight variants in stored 
metabolic energy, evolutionarily stable strategy considerations 
took them to the extremes of little sperm and big ova. This gamete 
dimorphism is what gives rise to most of the secondary charact-
eristics of males and females, including their differing reproduct-
ive strategies. 
Because sperm are cheap (an adult human male may produce 
40 million a day), one male has the potential of fathering an almost 
unlimited number of offspring. Ova are expensive and so one 
female has a more limited number of potential offspring (a human 
female is born with her lifetime supply of a few hundred, which is 
still an order of magnitude more than she can possibly rear). On 
the other hand, a female is almost guaranteed some offspring, at 
least in comparison to a male who may well get none at all 
because of the competition for access to females. In many species, 
this leads to females being choosy about sexual partners at the 
same time that males are more mdisaiminate. 
Female choice can drive sexual selection; she might prefer 
long, shiny feathers. Male competition (excluding other males is 
the name of the game in harem-style mating systems) selects for 
variants in testosterone production. This can lead to male gorillas 

138 
twice the size of females; female choice is carried to extremes in 
peacocks (though perhaps starting with feathers indicating a 
male's health or genes for resistance to parasites, the simple-
minded more-is-better criterion repeated over and over). 
To ask if such kinds of sexual selection could be going on in a 
system such as neocortical hexagonal competitions, it is not 
necessary to identify a traditional male/female distinction. For 
example, a simple and a complex code, with a tendency to merge, 
might suffice. So long as there are at least two general types of 
codes, differing in some inheritable property that affects 
reproduction, one can have something like sexual selection 
operating. 
Cloning opportunities abound for spatiotemporal patterns in 
neocortex, but the major simple-complex dichotomy so far has 
been short single-note melodies versus long chorded stanzas. 
Neural pattern complexity is obviously a continuum — but so, 
too, was gamete energy invest-
ment, at first sight. 
Might 
Get used to thinking that there is there be the same tendency to 
nothing Nature loves so well as to go to extremes because inter-
change existing forms and to make 
mediates tend to be OUt-
new ones like them. 
Competed? 
MARCUS AUKELIUS, Meditations One set of extremes was 
seen in the chapter 7 analogy 
to the hash versus the full text, 
where mere recognition can be done cheaply (hash the incoming 
and compare it with a low-dimensional database of hashes of the 
higher-dimensional stored memories), but recall is more 
demanding, requiring an expensive investment in reconstructing 
detail (probably starting with an intermediate representation, the 
prototype or some other form of loose-fitting abstract). Still, 
complex spatiotemporal patterns (up to the size that can still be 
contained in a hexagon) can clone, just as simple ones can. 
But the production of new individuals (as opposed to just 
another clone) can involve both error and recombination. Is there 
any possible sexlike dichotomy in recombination? We now have 
three types of superposition: those "in-house" ones associated 
with the intrinsic horizontals and borderline superpositions, the 

139 
"local call" ones associated with U-fiber projections within a 
cortical area (and often within a particular sensory modality), and 
the "long distance" ones where different sensory and motor 
modalities may converge. We also have several superposition 
mechanisms, the active ephemeral ones and the new attractors in 
the connectivity that might blend experiences from different times 
and places in belts of overlap. 
SUPERIMPOSING TWO STANZAS is perhaps more difficult than 
adding a simple trill to an existing stanza. Superimposing a 
complex spatiotemporal pattern upon another complex one, in 
such a way that it can be embedded in the connectivity and later 
reconstituted, is surely a more difficult task than successfully 
superimposing two simples or superimposing a simple on a 
complex. 
In biology, there is always the issue of the recombination's 
viability. Most are unsuccessful in reaching reproductive age, 
whether from juvenile mortality or (as naturally happens with 80 
percent of human conceptions) spontaneous abortion. Matings 
between related species can occasionally produce hybrids, though 
many are dead ends because of sterility. So, too, we have 
compatibility issues when dealing with a hexagonal connectivity 
that simultaneously supports many different basins of attraction: 
some superimposed spatiotemporal patterns are going to be 
captured by the existing attractors, others are going to fail to be 
incorporated, but a few might successfully change some aspect of 
the hexagon's repertoire (likely 
only a trills' worth of one of its 
many melodies) via a connectivity 
alteration. 
Chimeras, as in the she-
monster of Greek mythology that 
had the head of a lion, the body of 
a goat, and the tail of a snake, are 
considerably more rare than hy-
brids. Still, occasionally an indiv-
idual is seen with odd features such as two blood types that 
suggest fraternal twin fetuses amalgamated into one individual 

140 
early in gestation, or that a mother gained some cells from a 
gestating fetus. One can imagine similar amalgamations of 
attractor basins, just as in those Charles Ives melodies with an 
intruded snippet of Yankee Doodle. Though copied everywhere, 
such an intrusion might have meaning in only one cortical area, 
just as only part of the genome is decoded by the specialized cells 
of the liver but all are copied during mitosis there. 
The recombination issue could be avoided, of course, if the 
connectivity were a tabula rasa: so plastic that the hexagonal 
mosaic became a buffer, holding only one very detailed attractor 
in its connectivity (and not dozens). Intermediate levels of 
plasticity might allow multiple melodies from the same 
connectivity, or they might allow anything more than a week old 
to be overwritten. But one can imagine a hexagon's worth of 
connectivity that added attractor lobes only reluctantly, and only 
to some of its dozens of separate attractors. That would mean that 
simple-complex pairings would be the most common "new 
individuals," loosely analogous to the way sexual reproduction 
forms new individuals by recombining a small and a large gamete. 
Tacking on an additional feature creates, of course, an extra-
strange attractor (given that attractors with multiple lobes were 
originally called strange attractors, as in the two-lobe butterfly 
attractor). This makes our hint of sex in convergence zones extra 
strange. 
BUT THIS NEW INDIVIDUAL ISN'T DOUBLY STRANGE: it doesn't carry 
around nearly equal numbers of contributions from both parents 
in the familiar heterozygous manner, with two alleles often 
available. Think of the offspring as very much like one parent 
(indeed, it is that parent, modified — but since the parent exists in 
numerous hexagonal clones, and only a few may be modified, the 
parent pattern may live on elsewhere), with just a touch here and 
there of the other parent. 
What the new individual has, rather than all those alternative 
alleles of the truly heterozygous, may be a working link to the 
minor parent: the umbilical cord hasn't been broken. That trill's 
worth of addition could be the hash that, elsewhere in neocortex 
under some circumstances, evokes a full-text spatiotemporal 

141 
pattern and sends it back. The new individual could inherit from 
its major parent a whole collection of such links to outlying hexag-
ons and their more detailed attractors. So here we have not only 
a candidate for what integrates the sight-sound-feel-pronunciation 
of comb but a suggestion of how we might tack on a new attribute 
(those broken teeth that help identify it as my comb!) with a trill-
like link. 
One can imagine recip-
rocal 
connections 
or 
£*. \v v., ,//(, 
strange 
attractors 
that 
work too well, as when a 
stimulus in one sensory 
modality evokes a strong 
memory in another (an 
element of the condition 
known as synesthesia). 
Links 
that 
fail 
could 
presumably give rise to a 
variety of minor (anomia) 
and 
major 
(agnosia) 
complaints, simply from the failure to make accustomed links. 
An attractor's complexity may, or may not, be expensive to 
create (simple rules can have complex consequences), but it is 
surely expensive to maintain over a long haul, simply from what 
economists would call opportunity costs (in this case, lost opport-
unities, foregone options in the name of persistence or stability). 
No matter how large your hard disk, it rapidly fills up; surely 
your brain has the same accretion problem, even in childhood. 
Maintaining attractors has a cost, commonly noticed as lengthen-
ing access times that slow performance at some tasks (a subject to 
be addressed later, at p.185). 
CONCRETE THINKING provides one example of premature closure, 
of terminating a search for mental links too soon. And we can 
now see one way in which this could happen: with a different 
plurality for successful links than for successful closure. 
The simplest model for closure is the movement choice 
example of chapter 4 (p. 57), where various candidates for a hand 

142 
movement competed until some plurality was reached, at which 
subcortical mechanisms launched the movement with the strong-
est chorus. Call this plurality requirement the N for action, Na. 
Activating the fcth link out of this same territory takes Nk to get 
the same spatiotemporal pattern going with smaller numbers in 
the target cortex. 
Suppose closure for action normally takes a chorus of 100 
hexagons, while establishing a link only takes 50. Then suppose 
that Na is lowered to 40 without changing the linkage require-
ments, or that the Nk requirements were raised to 125 because of 
signal/noise ratio problems at the destination. In either case, you 
would act without considering some of the linked attractors stored 
elsewhere. And so you would have trouble seeing analogies. In 
extreme cases, you might even dissociate the various sensory 
representations of the same object, as in the agnosias. 
The half-second-and-longer reaction times seen in much 
cognitive processing have always been a puzzle from the 
standpoint of conduction times and synaptic delays, all an order 
of magnitude briefer. Add to the time to recruit a local chorus the 
time needed to form a second territory via a link, and cross-
modality matching experiments might require the better part of a 
second, simply because of the repetitions needed to gradually 
develop the links. 
With a darwinian process operating in cerebral cortex, you can 
now imagine how stratified stability could generate a strata of 
concepts that are inexpressible, except by roundabout, inadequate 
means — as when we know things of which we cannot speak. 
Decomposing them via successive links into speakable concepts 
is a lot of additional work beyond that point at which you sense 
the problem's criteria have been fulfilled. 
CORncocORTlCAL IMPROVEMENTS are an interesting issue here, as 
surely the corticocortical axons do something simpler most of the 
time, not arbitrary spatiotemporal patterns. 
The axon fanout at the destination, if not tuned up for 
recreating triangular arrays, presumably produces a distorted 
version of the spatiotemporal pattern at the origin. Presumably 
the receiving cortex handles this in the manner of categorical 

143 
perception, tuning up to recognize special cases. When the 
number of vocabulary items is dozens to hundreds, this probably 
suffices. 
We, however, have vocabularies of 105and can extend them to 
novel concepts, such as when we talk about how many angels can 
dance on the head of a pin. That suggests we have improved our 
corticocorticals to the point that they can transmit arbitrary 
spatiotemporal patterns. I will discuss this again at the end of the 
final chapter, when I engage in a brief digression into Universal 
Grammar, but here I wish to point out the route to improving 
corticocorticals from special-case codes to arbitrary codes. 
Assuming a Darwin Machine already exists on both ends, then 
the size of the sending array could be a major determinant 
of whether the origin's spatiotemporal pattern could be 
recreated at the destination. 
If the axon fanout is not sufficiently point-to-annulus, then 
additional point-to-area inhibition at the destination could 
help develop it. 
If the axon fanout is normally pruned far back during pre- and 
post-natal development, then neoteny might help conserve 
the fanout until Darwin Machine activity began exercising 
it. 
LONG-DISTANCE CONNECTIONS, one is tempted to claim, are some-
thing like an extended family. If an area's local history of cloning 
competitions serves to create a community of interacting 
individuals, then the long-distance links are something like the 
scientific community in the early days of the Royal Society, that 
interacted mostly by letters with many copies, and later, publicat-
ions. 
Or like the virtual communities of cyberspace. Such inter-
acting groups don't have all the features of local communities — 
you can't, for instance, borrow a cup of sugar from the neighbors. 
But then you don't have to listen to the neighbor's barking dog, 
either. 

[A critical approach to education] is kased on evolutionary 
epistemology, wkick claims tkat we never receive knowledge, 
tut ratner create it; we create it Ly modifying tke knowledge we 
already kave; and we modify our existing knowledge only wken 
we uncover inadequacies in it tkat we kad not recognized 
keretofore. Accepting tkis as an explanation of kow knowledge 
grows, I kave suggested tkat teackers construe tkeir roles as 
faciktators of tke growtk of tkeir students' knowledge. 
H E N R Y PERKINSON, 
1993 
It used to ke supposed tkat tke world is just out tkere, on tke 
otker side of a clear sensory window pane. Now we're sure tkat 
tke experienced world is itself a construct, a somewkat unstakle 
patckwork of mental models driven partly ky wkat's outside, 
partly ky genetically ordained internal grammars, partly ky tke 
local cultural templates we imkike from ckildkood on 
(including tke language we use to categorize and communicate 
our grasp of tke world). It's naive to suppose tkat culture and 
language capture "just kow tilings are," and kence to fear and 
kate anyone wkose inner maps confkct witk our own, kut still 
it takes quite an effort to see tkat our worlds are built up in 
accord witk tkese internal maps or tkeories. 
DAMIEN BRODERICK, 
1996 

9 
ClkiiMLes on 
tike Quarter H o u r 
A script is a structure that describes appropriate 
sequences or events in a particular context. A script is 
made up of slots and requirements about what can fill 
those slots. The structure is an interconnected whole, 
and what is in one slot affects what can he in another. 
Scripts handle stylized everyday situations. They are 
not subject to much change, nor do they provide the 
apparatus for handling totally novel situations. Thus, a 
script is a predetermined, stereotyped sequence of 
actions that defines a well-known situation. 
R O G E R SHANK and ROBERT A B E L S O N , 
1977 
W
E HAVE AN URGE, ALMOST A COMPULSION, to finish a 
well-known sequence. Recall how a crying child can 
be distracted, by singing a familiar nursery rhyme and 
then prompting the child to fill in the last word of the line. This 
is so compulsive a response that it often overrides the child's 
crying and eventually stops it. 
We create sequences when we speak a sentence that we've 
never spoken before, or improvise at jazz, or plan a career. We 
invent dance steps. Even as four-year-olds, we can play roles, 
achieving a level of abstraction not seen in even the smartest apes. 
Many of our beyond-the-apes behaviors involve novel strings of 
behaviors, often compounded: phonemes chunked into words, 
words into word phrases, and (as in this paragraph) word phrases 
into complicated sentences with nested ideas. 

146 
Rules for made-up games illustrate the memory aspect of this 
novelty: we must judge possible moves against serial-order rules, 
for example, in solitaire where you must alternate colors as you 
place cards in descending order. Preschool children will even 
make up such arbitrary rules, and then judge possible actions 
against them. We abandon many of the possible moves that we 
consider in a card game, once we check them out against our 
serial-order memories of the rules. In shaping up a novel sentence 
to speak, we are checking our candidate word strings against 
overlearned ordering rules that we call syntax and grammar. We 
even memorize unique sequential episodes without intending to 
do so: when you try to remember where you lost your keys, the 
various places that you visited since you last used a key can often 
be recalled. 
Narrative is one of the ways in which we speak, one of the large 
categories in which we think. Plot is its thread of design and 
its active shaping force, the product of our refusal to allow 
temporality to he meaningless, our stuhhorn insistence on 
making meaning in the world and in our lives. 
PETER BROOKS, 1984 
THERE IS A GREAT DEAL OF INFORMATION hidden in the overall flow 
of even nonsense words, presumably the reason why we 
appreciate Charles Dodgson's youthful poem, "Twas brillig, and 
the slithy toves/Did gyre and gimble in the wabe; All mimsy were 
the borogoves/ And the mome raths outgrabe." 
Sequential form alone, with even less hint of meaning, can be 
sufficient to bring forward a complete phrase from memory. 
Sometimes we can do this from what initially appears totally 
$rturtle, Corner, $ffithfa$trf Qtlt mtt &efcor! 
3d? hmmtt §dfax$ Zi\$t w fcefrctten, niftt, t*3&n n 
IcUn. 

147 
incomprehensible (I am indebted to Dan Dennett for this lovely 
example of just-sufficient disguise). 
Now even if you only know a few words of this language, and 
have never seen the faded, centuries-old font and the spellings of 
the time, you can probably recognize this quotation within a few 
minutes. That is, you can recognize that ifs familiar but you can't 
recall it in detail without a lot more effort. But once you do recall 
it, and its short-form name, X, it will become so obvious that it 
will be difficult to look back and see it as anything other than X 
(thaf s because your X attractor has been activated, firmly 
capturing variants). 
We're used to the idea that we can pop out hidden ^ 
-
objects from fragments, but to recognize something far 
less familiar, and only from the general form of the H ' 
sentence (and perhaps the cadence, if mumbled 4* V 
subvocally), shows how much information is contained in the 
form of a long string. Extreme cases such as Dennett's illustrate 
our exquisite capability for serial-ordered forms that are 
presumably utilized, in more rigid fashion, by scripts - and, of 
course, more generally and abstractly by music. 
In trying to comprehend a sentence, we often seek out missing 
information because of encountering a word that must connect 
with certain other portions of the string. I discuss this in chapter 
5 of How Brains Think as part of linguistic argument structure: a 
verb such as give requires three nouns to fill the roles of actor, 
recipient, and object given. When you encounter give, you go 
searching for all three nouns or noun phrases. One now sees 
billboard advertising slogans that read Give him. We easily infer 
"you" as the implied actor but the still-incomplete sentence sends 
us off on a compulsive search for the object to be given (this is a 
technique to make the ad more memorable by increasing dwell 
duration). 
Can hexagonal cloning competitions help us appreciate the 
underpinnings of these abilities to string things together? And the 
search for the missing segment? 
STATE MACHINES ARE THE TRADITIONAL MODEL for sequencing and 
stage setting. The Barcelona subway, for example, has ticket 

148 
machines that require me to first select the ticket type, then the 
number of passengers, then deposit the coins, then retrieve the 
ticket. The successful completion of one state causes the machine 
to advance to its next state (though it times out if I spend too 
much time fumbling for the correct coins). Barcelona even has an 
automata museum devoted to nineteenth-century state machines 
and robots. State machines are often easy to build but difficult to 
operate intuitively (just think of programming your videotape 
recorder). 
Might switching gaits of locomotion involve a state machine? 
Note that jog or lope is not required as an intermediate gait 
between walk and run; the system can make transitions in various 
orders, suggesting that it is not a simple state machine. Still, 
stage-setting remains an important possibility for advancing a 
chain of thought or action. 
Chimes on the quarter hour were easily heard from my hotel 
balcony in Barcelona, the local church reminding me that time flies 
— and that I write too slowly. Such chimes are the most familiar 
example of combining 
spatiotemporal pattern 
and 
state machine. 
American grandfather 
clocks, such as the one 
my father once con-
structed, use a slightly 
different tune on the 
three-quarter hour. I have persuaded my mother to write out the 
corresponding musical notes that adorn this chapter (I can read 
music but not write it down, another example of recall being more 
difficult than recognition, of production being more difficult than 
understanding). 
J. J J U J J J lo> J J U^M 
mm 
TT 
JJLUJJ 
t$ 
SPATIOTEMPORAL PATTERNS WITHIN THE HEXAGON are, so far, my 
model for an activated cerebral code — not only for objects and 
events but for composites such as categories. For the stored code, 
if s the spatial-only patterning of synaptic connections that give 
rise to basins of attraction. Resurrection of a complex spatio-
temporal pattern might involve changing from one attractor to 

149 
another. Adding on another attractor might, on the chaotic 
itinerancy model, be like adding another city to the traveling 
salesman's route. 
Because the hexagon's spatiotemporal pattern is mappable to 
a musical scale, thanks to having similar numbers of elements, I 
have talked of this spatiotemporal pattern as like a line of music; 
even timeless objects such as Kant's triangles still have a temporal 
aspect to their code in my theory. Note how much temporal 
patterning increases the 
Coding Space Over Chord 
InthtoS-notomekkb, 
. 
combinations alone, even if 
( M f h m ^ j M M f t ^ A , 
time were only to be sliced 
into 64 segments: 
each 
point in the hexagon now 
has 64 possible states. 
But because some of 
the things we memorize 
are themselves extended in time, we have to consider whether the 
category code is strung out in distinct spatiotemporal units, like 
the frames of movie film. We involuntarily memorize brief 
episodes (though not very accurately). On the movement side, we 
produce motor outputs that chain together unitary actions, as 
when we unlock a door or dial a telephone. Asleep, we create 
narratives with improbable qualities that are often signaled by 
nonsensical segues and juxtapositions (nonviable chimeras, as it 
were). 
Is the sequence's representation simply a chain of elementary 
spatiotemporal patterns, skillfully segued like a medley of songs? 
Or is neural sequencing more complicated, like those mental 
models that intervene when recalling a text? Certainly phonemics 
suggests some obligatory stage-setting (one reason that mechan-
ical text-to-speech conversion is complicated is that look-ahead is 
required: some phonemes are modified when followed by certain 
other ones, so a planning buffer is needed). 
Just as in biology, there are two levels of mechanism to 
consider here: active firing and those passive bumps and ruts in 
the road. Active firing, as we have seen, is especially important 
for cloning spatiotemporal patterns; the territory attained may be 

150 
important both locally and in seeding the/awx fax distant version. 
And, of course, it may modify the connectivity beneath it. 
But how does a sequence get started from the passive connect-
ivity and elaborate itself into extended lines of "music"? Is this 
the activation of a multilobed attractor within a single hexagon, or 
a circuit rider visiting different hexagons, each of whom 
contribute a segment? Like the recognition-recall problem, we 
may have another multi-level solution — a hash could serve as a 
fingerprint for a full text, or a loose-fitting, centrally-located 
abstract could have links to outlying details. In the manner of the 
multimodality funnel for comb, recall might be a matter of links 
but with activation in a certain order contributed by a multilobed 
attractor in the temporal equivalent of a convergence zone, acting 
much like the orchestral conductor in adjusting startup times. 
ONE CLUE TO SEQUENCE REPRESENTATION is that we are often able 
to decompose them at will, for both sensory and movement 
sequences. We easily discard the first three words of "Repeat after 
me — I swear to tell 
" when replying. Compare that to the rat 
that thinks life is more complicated than it really is, circling three 
times before pressing the bar in the Skinner box, simply because 
thafs what he happened to have done prior to being rewarded for 
some prior bar press (shaping rats out of superstitious behavior is 
an important bit of customization of experiments to individual 
subjects). 
We can discard the inefficient parts of an exploratory sequence 
when repeating it, just as speakers can often paraphrase long 
questions from the audience before answering them. Indeed, our 
memories seem organized this way: readers tend to remember the 
mental model they constructed from a text, rather than the text 
itself, and such abstraction probably happens as well for "film-clip 
experiences," such as being an eyewitness to an accident. 
Some complicated sequences can, with enough practice, 
become securely enough embedded to survive major insults to the 
brain, for example, the aphasic patient who can sing the national 
anthem, even though he cannot speak a nonroutine sentence, one 
that requires customizing a sequence before actually speaking. If s 
not that different from what happens in all of us, normally. A dart 

151 
throw or basketball free throw, where the object is to do the 
movement exactly the same each time by getting "in the groove" 
appropriate to the standard distance and standard projectile, may 
be secure — at least, when compared to throwing at novel targets. 
Novelty may require a lot of offline planning during get-set, 
customizing the command sequence for the particular situation. 
THE DIFFICULTY OF THROWING ACCURATELY is actually what 
attracted me into postulating that spatiotemporal patterns were 
cloned in the brain (to conclude the history in chapter 6), long 
before any of the detailed physiological studies of throwing 
performance. In the summer of 1980,1 was sitting on a beach in 
the San Juan Islands, looking out the Strait of Juan de Fuca 
between Washington State and British Columbia, and throwing 
stones at a rock that I had placed atop a log. I seldom hit it, so I 
moved closer and finally starting hitting it more frequently. 
I got to thinking about why the task seemed so difficult. It 
was, I realized, that there was a launch window. If I let loose of 
my projectile too early, before the launch window was reached, 
the projectile arched too high and went too far. If I let loose too 
late, the path was too straight and hit below the target. If I moved 
closer, or used a larger target, the launch window lasted longer 
and so was easier to attain. Elementary physics. My motor 
neurons, I reflected, were too noisy — and so couldn't settle down 
to controlling projectile release precisely enough to stay within the 
launch window. 
Thafs where the story, hardly worth retelling, would surely 
have ended — except that I just happened to have some know-
ledge about how jittery the spinal motor neurons were. Indeed, 
I had done my Ph.D. thesis on that very subject 14 years earlier. 
So how wide was the launch window, in milliseconds? Does it 
match up with the noise levels of typical motor neurons? 
On the ferry ride home, I assumed it was just a matter of 
looking up the right formula in my old physics textbooks (I had, 
after all, been a physics major). But as soon as I thumbed through 
both my elementary and advanced mechanics texts, I realized that 
the variables of target size, height of release point above target, 
and the possible range of velocities meant that I was going to need 

152 
to derive an appropriate equation from basic Newtonian princi-
ples. So I customized an equation, reveling in the fact that my 
rusty calculus still worked. And realizing that few things in 
biology could be similarly derived from basic principles, that 
particular histories were all important in a way that they weren't 
in physics. 
For throwing at a rabbit-sized target (10 cm high, 20 cm deep) 
from about a car length away (4 meters), the launch windows 
averaged out at about 11 milliseconds wide. That was also about 
what I figured was the inherent noise in single motor neurons 
while in their self-paced mode. 
Yes, they matched — but I realized that something was very 
wrong. Most of us, I supposed, could hit that rabbit-sized target 
from two car lengths, or even three. The launch window for 8 
meter throws worked out to 1.4 milliseconds. And there was no 
way that the motor neurons I knew so well were ever likely to 
attain that. I couldn't consult the experts — I was the expert (at 
least on cat motor neurons, where the most detailed work had 
been done, and I knew that human forearm motor neurons 
weren't much better from the neurologists's EMG recordings). 
Perhaps, you might 
say (as I eventually did) 
that the spinal motor 
neurons are simply being 
commanded to fire at the 
right time by descending 
commands from motor 
cortex — that is, not 
making 
the 
decisions 
within those basins of attraction in spinal cord itself. The spinal 
motor neurons might be noisy on their own but, with the brain 
serving as a square-dance caller, they might be precise repeaters. 
The precision might be upstream. 
That, too, should have been the end of the story. But I'd done 
a study only five years earlier on motor cortex neurons. And 
those cortical neurons were much noisier than spinal motor 
neurons under similar conditions, not quieter. No escape there. 
I'd been talking informally to neurophysiologists who worked in 

153 
other brain centers, regarding the possibility of accurate "clocks," 
and it didn't look as if anywhere in the brain had superprecise 
neurons that ticked along with very little timing jitter. 
So I had a persisting theoretical puzzle to chew on: how did 
we get precision timing from relatively jittery neurons? Salvation 
arrived in the form of a reprint that crossed my desk shortly 
thereafter, delayed for about one year by the Italian postal system 
and slow boats. It in turn led me to a lovely paper by John Clay 
and Bob DeHaan in the Biophysical Journal, about chick heart cells 
in a culture dish. Each cell, when sitting in isolation, was beating 
irregularly. If they nudged two cells together, their beats would 
synchronize. If they kept adding cells, the jitter declined with 
each additional cell added to the cluster; what sounded as 
irregular as rain on the roof became as regular as a steadily 
dripping faucet. 
The interval's coefficient of variation fell as the inverse square 
root of N. To halve the interbeat jitter, just quadruple the number 
of cells in the cluster. And it wasn't just pacemaker cells but many 
kinds of relaxation oscillator, as J. T. Enrighf s 1980 Science paper 
(subtitled "A reliable neuronal clock from unreliable compon-
ents?") soon made clear. 
All it took to throw with precision, I concluded, was lots of 
clones of the movement commands from the brain, all singing the 
same spatiotemporal pattern in a chorus. But the numbers of cells 
required were staggering: to double your throwing distance, 
while maintaining the same hit rate, required recruiting a chorus 
64 times larger than the original one. Tripling the target distance 
took 729 times as many. 
Clearly, the four-fold increase in 
neocortical numbers during ape-to-human evolution wasn't 
enough to handle this, as I'd hoped; those extra neurons would 
have to be temporarily borrowed somehow, perhaps in the way 
that the expert choir borrows the inexpert audience when singing 
the Hallelujah Chorus. 
Paradoxically, the Law of Large Numbers effectively said that 
the nonexperts could actually help improve performance, beyond 
that of the experts alone. It took me another decade to imagine a 
way of recruiting the larger chorus: that cloning mechanism for 
spatiotemporal patterns of Act I. 

154 
APROPOS THE ADVANTAGES OF NON-EXPERTS, the composer Brian 
Eno tells an interesting story about an orchestra whose members 
were, quite intentionally, a mixture of the mildly experienced and 
the self-selected musically naive. In recounting his experience 
with the Portsmouth Symphonia, Eno said that one would occas-
ionally hear some nimble playing emerge from the too-early, too-
loud, off-tune chaos — which he called "classical music reduced 
to some sort of statistical average/' 
Some amateur-night variation is very much what I imagine 
first happening in our premotor cortex as one "gets set" to throw 
at a novel target: that the variants gradually standardize to 
become the chorus. I imagine the practiced precision appearing 
in the several seconds that it takes hexagonal competition and 
error-correction to stabilize a widespread precision version of the 
most successful variant. 
THE 
CD PLAYER OR JUKEBOX 
on 
automatic serves as a fancier-than-
chimes example of a state machine for 
spatiotemporal patterns, pulling in one 
platter after another and playing them. 
Like chimes on the quarter hour, this 
suggests separate performances that 
don't overlap in time, in the manner of 
the various instrument groups that 
perform one after the other at the 
beginning of A Young Person's Guide to 
the Orchestra. 
One can, with such circuit-riding 
state machine analogies, easily imagine 
how the compulsion to finish a song 
line could arise in those crying 
children. Whaf s being stirred up is 
that central state machine with links to 
the components. As each is activated, 
feedback from it reinforces the forward motion of the state 
machine attractor. The prompting voice advances it too, and the 
omission of the prompt on the last word may not matter, once the 
Path of pendulum attracted 
by two magnets, shown 
superimposed on a hexagon, 
with bifurcation to a 
second attractor. 
Adding third attractor 

155 
endogenous attractor has generated sufficient forward moment-
um. 
One (likely oversimplified) model of schemas for sequence is 
quite similar. A hexagonal code for the calling sequence itself is 
likely a multilobed attractor, one that cycles through its various 
basins of attraction and, in the manner of an orchestra's 
conductor, activates one link after another to outlying hexagonal 
territories that generate their own spatiotemporal patterns. But 
more typical sequencers are probably more like typical orchestral 
compositions, where the conductor brings in a new group to 
overlay the ongoing contributions of the earlier groups of 
instruments. In a canon, a melody repeats after a delay to overlap 
(as in "Row, Row, Row Your Boat"). There is, of course, no 
requirement for a conductor per se; string quartets manage 
without one, and complex patterns can arise from simple rules. 
A more serious problem for the neurological imagination is 
finding the missing nouns in 
that presentence. Sentences too 
^^¥0*m&*im 
are sequences at the perform- 
^^^S^^^^^^^Bb 
ance level (though not in under- 
.JBBsSSlSSSS^ 
lying structure, where trees and 
MSS^S^s^SsuvmSsSSwmk 
Doxes-witnin-boxes are better ' ^ ^ ^ ^ a f f l ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ % 
give starting up an attractor with 
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ M ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ y 
three lobes, each with reinf ore- ^ ^ ^ M ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ y 
ing feedback from its linked 
^ilijB|||^|iip^ 
attractor basins at a distance. It 
. „ 
_ 
,, .. 
. 
, 
, . 
. 
A grand tour of four 
may be that this central attract- 
bagjng ^ attraction# 
or's 
spatiotemporal 
pattern 
undergoes a characteristic change when all side basins have full 
feedback: it changes from unfulfilled to fulfilled and this is one of 
the necessary conditions for you to judge the sentence as making 
sense. So long as it remains in condition unfulfilled, you keep 
trying out different candidates for those actor-recipient-object 
nouns. Actually, I assume that many variations exist in parallel, 
and that they compete for territory until one achieves the 
especially powerful fulfilled spatiotemporal pattern — in effect, 
that particular variant shouts "Bingo!" because all its slots are 

156 
legally filled. (I discuss a lingua ex machina more explicitly in 
chapter 5 of How Brains Think). 
BRIAN ENO ALSO NOTES that doing something well ("becoming a 
pro") can lead to a lack of alertness about interesting variations, 
as if (in my terms) an attractor had created a compelling groove. 
Fortunately, the neocortical Darwin Machine for orchestrating 
movements promises to not only be quicker (seconds vs. lifetimes) 
at producing pros, but also resettable so that amateurs alert to 
interesting variations can still occur a bit later in the same work 
space. 

157 
An internal model allows a system to look ahead to tne 
future consequences of current actions, witnout 
actually cornmitting itself to those actions. In 
particular, tne system can avoid acts tnat would set it 
irretrievably down some road to future disaster 
("stepping oft a cliff"). Less dramatically, but equally 
important, tne model enables tne agent to make 
current "stage-setting" moves tnat set up later moves 
tnat are obviously advantageous. Tne very essence of a 
competitive advantage, wnetner it be in cbess or 
economics, is tne discovery and execution of stage-
setting moves. 
J O H N HOLLAND, 
1992 

10 
Tke Making of Meiapkor 
When people think seriously, they think abstractly; 
they conjure up simplified pictures of reality called 
concepts, theories, models, paradigms. Without such 
intellectual constructs, there is, William James said, 
only "a hloomin' huzzin' confusion." 
SAMUEL P. H U N T I N G T O N , 1993 
K
ANT SAID THAT OUR METAPHORS comprise the conceptual 
spectacles through which we view the world. In part, 
that's surely a matter of our general tendency to borrow 
concepts and vocabulary, selecting them from elements of our 
more accessible physical and social worlds, and trying to apply 
them to reasoning and emotion. Sometimes we do it well, but at 
other times, we get trapped by inadequate metaphors, as when we 
try to propitiate the weather — as if it were a person, susceptible 
to bribes or flattery. 
How we carve up our world depends on whafs out there — 
and on the analogies we bring to bear. We often talk as if ideas 
and thoughts were objects, that words and sentences were 
containers for these objects, and that communication was simply 
a matter of finding the right object, packaging it up, and sending 
it to a recipient who unpacks it. We often talk of rational thought 
as if it were just the algorithmic manipulation of such symbols. 
We go looking for computational elements in the brain that could 
accomplish such logical operations with virtual objects. This, alas, 
leaves no room for guessing or imagination. Our inadequate 
container schemas have boxed us in. 

160 
Without imagination, we have 
no mechanisms by which to use 
reflection to mold experience, to 
bring something new out of the 
old, or to sympathetically project 
ourselves into someone else's 
shoes. There's no room, either, in 
traditional categories from set 
theory, as they box us in with 
necessary and sufficient condit-
ions rather than allowing for 
fuzzy edges. 
Most of us normally function 
at a level of description that 
regards a chair as an object rather 
than a collection of wood grains 
or molecules or atoms. We are comfortable talking about a chair, 
even if we are physicists. We're also comfortable talking about a 
schematic level of representation such as furniture. We use such 
abstractions to make sense of the common features of diverse 
experiences. Our borrowing from the physical and social worlds 
often aids feeling our way around, within a different level of 
organization. 
If we are to have meaningful, connected experiences — ones 
that we can comprehend and reason about — we must be able to 
discern patterns to our actions, perceptions, and conceptions. 
Underlying our vast network of interrelated literal meanings (all 
of those words about objects and actions) are those imaginative 
structures of understanding such as schema and metaphor, such 
as the mental imagery that allows us to extrapolate a path, or 
zoom in on one part of the whole, or zoom out until the trees 
merge into a forest. Can such properties be represented by the 
aforementioned cerebral codes and darwinian processes? 
Thinking is a process by which some pattern is actualized from 
the intentional structure into meaning and deployed into the 
world. Thoughts differ from meanings in being the fleeting, 
unstable, dynamic operants by which meanings are constructed 
[Edgar Allan Poe's Eureka] 
dismissed the methods of both 
Bacon and Aristotle as the paths 
to certain knowledge.... He argued 
for a third method to knowledge 
which he called imagination . . . . 
Imagination, or genius, or 
intuition, lets the classification 
start so that the successive 
iterations, back and forth between 
the empirical and the rational, 
hone the product until it finally 
conforms to nature. Only then is 
the dross of the classifier skimmed 
away and a true order in nature, if 
it exists, revealed. 
ALLAN SANDAGE, 
1995 

161 
and carried. They enact the emergence of meaning as a set of 
relations in a place in an intentional structure, in accordance 
with which representations are shaped by action into the world. 
A representation formed and sent by one brain evoked thought 
that leads to the construction of meaning in a brain receiving 
the representation. 
WALTER J. FREEMAN, 1995 
ANY SCHEMATIC OUTLINE can be called a schema, but the latter 
term 
is 
more 
typically 
used 
for 
particularly 
common 
representations, not only for sensations but for movements as 
well. Though a schema is more abstract than a rich mental image 
of an object, it's grounded in our everyday experiences, often 
making reference to our own body moving through our daily 
world with its visual scene that streams past our head. One 
schema is UP-DOWN, a generalization of many experiences, as is 
the notion of a PATH. 
Schemas are often about one thing relative to another. They 
include the little words of grammar — only a few dozen in 
number — that position things or events relative to each other on 
a mental map: relative location (above, below, in, on, at, by, next to), 
relative direction (to, from, through, left, right, up, down), relative 
time (before, after, while, and the various indicators of tense such as 
-ed), relative number (many, few, some, the -s of plurality), relative 
possibility (can, may, might), relative contingency (unless, although, 
until, because), possession (of, the possessive version of -s, have), 
agency (by), purpose (for), necessity (must, have to), obligation 
(should, ought to), existence (be), nonexistence (no, none, not, un-), 
and more. 
Other common schemas are BLOCKAGE, CENTER-PERIPHERY, 
FULL-EMPTY, MORE-LESS, NEAR-FAR, SPLITTING, ATTRACTION, 
BALANCE, MATCHING, REMOVING A RESTRAINT, ATTRACTS, CIRCLES, 
PART-WHOLE, and the easy-to-misuse CONTAINMENT. Note that 
schemas tend to refer to movement, rather than static properties 
(they're often structures of an activity, not attributes of an object 
such as wet or cold). Even more man abstracts, schemas are 
flexible enough to fit many similar situations with differing 
details. They're few enough in number to be handled as special 

162 
cases, just as the several hundred irregular verbs are handled as 
exceptions to the general rule for past tense, add -ed. 
^-z£f&&1^ 
As chapter 7 discussed, hexagonal cerebral 
aBRBHBBfc codes allow for forming new spatiotemporal 
'•^jjBggpXg patterns from several sources. 
Note that 
~^ljpr 
SUperpOSitions need not keep all of the 
component attractors; the category Fruit can 
amalgamate some the attractors from Apple and Orange into a new 
strange attractor. The same thing can happen in going from 
features such as round and red to an object-level description such 
as Apple. We don't have to amalgamate all the component's 
features into the category. The test is whether one can selectively 
reactivate the object-level codes from the higher category, whether 
one can get back from Apple to red. 
There are two major ways in which categories could arise: 
from active superpositions of hexagonal codes and from linking 
them (as when the U-fibers copy a pattern into another cortical 
area with different attractors, as when recognition-only hashes or 
loose-fitting abstracts are elaborated into full-text spatiotemporal 
patterns). Both results are capable of representing dynamic 
aspects (spatiotemporal patterns can represent both static and 
dynamic things); both can accommodate malleable edges. They 
seem amenable to the fuzzy types of categories that we form up 
from prototypes, with less prototypical members at various 
distances from the category's center. 
Prototypes (a good American English / i / vowel, for example) 
may capture a lot of variants, from the high-pitched ones of 
children to the garbled ones uttered by those with laryngitis. In 
the speech and hearing sciences, this is called the "magnet effect" 
of the prototype. 
Given that its representation is some 
spatiotemporal pattern in cortex, one can think of this as simply 
the capture effect of the attractor in the cortical connectivity that 
produces that characteristic spatiotemporal firing pattern. 
Schemas are one kind of fuzzy category. Metaphors are 
another, and they build upon a foundation of schemas. 
Botn writers [at tne Iowa Writers Wfcrkskop] and 
manics [manic-depressive patients] tend to sort in large 

163 
groups, change dimensions while in the process of 
sorting, arbitrarily change starting points, or use vague 
distantly related concepts as categorizing principles. 
NANCY ANDREASEN and PAULINE POWERS, 1975 
METAPHORS AND ANALOGICAL REASONING are the central means by 
which we project structure across levels. We use schemas as 
source domains for constructing a metaphor, as when UP-DOWN is 
used in the metaphor MORE IS UP. When we say that the stock 
market is up, we refer back to our childhood experiences of 
stacking things in a pile, where more things make a higher pile. 
When we try to understand one domain of experience in 
terms of structures from a different domain, we usually strip some 
detail away from the donor. When we metaphorically speak of 
the electrons orbiting the atomic nucleus as being like planets 
orbiting the sun, we aren't implying that the nucleus is hot and 
yellow, only that the geometry bears some resemblance. We're 
making use of such schemas as MASSIVE, ATTRACTS, REVOLVES 
AROUND, and CIRCLES to help describe something too small to see; 
again, structures are more likely to be mapped than mere 
attributes. 
The power of metaphors, poetic similes, Aesop's parables, 
analogies, maps, and economists' models is that they permit us to 
carry out reasoning within a familiar domain and subsequently 
map our findings back to the domain of interest. The Macintosh 
desktop metaphor allowed people to operate in the familiar realm 
of folders, documents, and trash cans rather than having to think 
about those pesky directories, files, and deletions. 
If analogies map with enough points of correspondence, you 
can reason with some accuracy. You can solve electrical problems, 
for example, using the analogy to water flow [or, if you prefer, the 
analogy to moving crowds]. An object such as a wire maps to a 
pipe [or a sidewalk]. Properties map too: electrical current maps 
to flow rate [or the rate at which people pass a checkpoint]; voltage 
maps to water pressure [or to the push of the crowd]; resistance 
can be narrow pipes [or sidewalk cafes that obstruct]. Relations 
can be imported as well: we can connect wires much as we do 
pipes [or pathways]. 

164 
To serve as the source domain of a metaphor, a schema needs 
to be pervasive in our experience, well understood, and simply 
structured. Anyone who teaches is constantly on the lookout for 
useful metaphors, but most candidates have to be discarded 
because their source domain isn't simply structured or isn't 
familiar enough. More people can solve electrical circuit problems 
using the crowd-flow analogy, probably because few of us are 
sufficiently experienced with fluid dynamics for it to be a good 
source domain. With such an analogy, you can often guess the 
answer to parallel resistor and source impedance problems. 
Schemas constrain our meaning and understanding. If we take 
CIRCLE too literally in our quest for understanding orbiting 
electrons, we will miss out on elliptical paths. 
Metaphors 
similarly constrain our reasoning: MORE is UP might blind us to 
enormous underground fungi. Mark Johnson's analysis of Hans 
Selye's work on stress emphasizes how the BODY AS MACHINE 
metaphor in medicine (breakdowns occur at specific points in the 
system, repair may involve replacement or mending, etc.) blinded 
physiologists for a long time because there was no locale for 
purpose in a machine. Switching to the HOMEOSTASIS metaphor 
(up-regulating, down-regulating within components) allowed 
Selye to envisage a widely distributed system associated with 
response to stress and then predict some of its malfunctions. 
But constraints are also the strength of schemas and 
metaphors, in the sense of a channel, within which the mapping 
can wander with a loose fit. You can be more-or-less "in the 
groove." This is reminiscent of basins of attraction, where many 
starting paths eventually "converge," allowing us to imagine a 
relatively standard spatiotemporal pattern as the underpinning of 
a schema. 
Again, there would seem to be no problem with encoding a 
metaphor (even a gedankenexperiment) as a hexagonal spatio-
temporal pattern, much as in the case of other categories. It would 
just tend to be recombinations of schema codes, rather than those 
of the more concrete mental images needed for making a schema 
code. Linkage would be even more important in implementing 
the metaphor, converting thought into action, but the unit 

165 
hexagonal representation would be what competes with 
alternatives. 
Before tackling analogical reasoning, let us note that high level 
concepts involving relationships need not occupy any more space 
than low level ones for objects. Just as short words and long 
words can equally well refer to complex concepts, so they can 
probably all occupy a single pair of adjacent hexagons in cerebral 
cortex. If s the linkages that must be followed before getting the 
action underway which may become more extensive at the more 
abstract levels. 
The problem is that our states or mind are usually subject to 
change. The properties of physical things tend to persist when 
their contexts are changed — hut the "significance" of a 
thought, idea, or partial state of mind depends upon which 
other thoughts are active at the time and upon what eventually 
emerges from the conflicts and negotiations among one's 
agencies. It is an illusion to assume a clear and absolute 
distinction between "expressing" and "thinking," since 
expressmg is itself an active process that involves simplifying 
and reconstituting a mental state hy detaching it from the 
more diffuse and variable parts of its context. 
MARVIN MINSKY, 1987 
THE ANALOGICAL REASONING PROBLEM [A is to B as C is to...?] can 
now be explored in some mechanistic detail, at least as a gedanken-
experiment Let us assume that the choices D, E, F are either given 
or generated (in the manner of the candidates for the ambiguous 
round object that went whizzing past in chapter 6). What are the 
steps in arriving at an answer — even an incorrect one — 
assuming hexagonal cloning competitions? 
First of all, there is the relationship problem: what attributes 
are shared by A and B? Size, animate-inanimate, movement, 
color, or perhaps one of those exemplar schemas? Let us say that 
ATTRACTS and CONTAINMENT are prominent among AB associat-
ions, that BLUE and BLOCKAGE are among CD's, CONTAINMENT and 
CIRCLES are among CE's, and that CF has no schema associations, 

166 
only less common ones. On this basis, only the CE association 
CONTAINMENT is shared with those of AB. 
Although this would seem to require a staged series of 
hexagonal competitions, remember the lessons of plating rows of 
infectious material and columns of the different antibiotics in 
order to find matches in the matrix — and, hopefully, an antibiotic 
that will attack all the organisms involved. Finding rare higher-
dimensional 
combinations 
in 
the 
"directed 
evolution" 
experiments of molecular biology can now be done by matching 
up fragments of DNA with RNA candidates. All we really need, 
after CD, CE, and CF territories are each formed up, is for them to 
override an AB territory, with its fading attractors in the short-
term memory for ATTRACTS and CONTAINMENT. One then reduces 
the excitability until only the better resonances remain active; AB's 
fading CONTAINMENT attractor will help keep CE going better than 
its competitors. 
One could match for several shared attractors simultaneously 
without additional staging, thanks to the short-term memory of 
AB biasing the competition. And one can always use successive 
layers of staging, as in the sashimi example, each fading with time. 
That gives some additional possibilities, analogous to generations 
of back-crossing of hybrids to the parent population. 
I sometimes begin a drawing with no preconceived problem to 
solve, with only the desire to use pencil on paper and make 
lines, tones and shapes witn no conscious aim; but as my mind 
takes in what is so produced, a point arrives wbere some idea 
becomes conscious and crystallizes, and then control and 
ordering begins to take place. 
HENRY MOORE 
SHORTCUTTING HEGEMONY REQUIREMENTS may, of course, be 
common, especially when we quickly react to something familiar. 
Indeed, a shortcut could be as subcortical as a reflex; many, surely, 
live in the basal ganglia. But some shortcuts are likely descended 
from repeated cortical cloning competitions. Might they still bear 
hallmarks of a hexagonal origin? Might understanding short-

167 
cutting allow us to see how an algorithmic procedure can event-
ually substitute for a cloning competition? 
For coupling of thought to action, there will probably be two 
spatiotemporal patterns involved, a processed sensory stimulus 
such as Apple and a movement program 
such as SAY "APPLE". I will again use the 
butterfly attractor as an easily visualized 
example of how an association can be 
formed, as two separate attractors become 
one strange attractor for Apple, SAY 
"APPLE". 
The rninimal set of attractors for cloning triangular arrays 
involves two adjacent hexagons. I will explore the duet case here 
and rephrase the question: How can a multiple-trial, spatially-
extensive, territory of a sensory schema and a movement schema 
association become, on some future presentation, preemptive? 
Acting before a substantial territory forms? It depends on how 
output pathway gating mechanisms interpret "good enough/' 
Ordinarily, quite a few hexagonal candidates might be 
reporting at once, with no one set of voices clearly standing out 
from the crowd in the manner that Brian Eno called "nimble 
playing/' With plenty of time to await a coherent choir to emerge, 
an economistlike weighing-all-the-factors decision can then be 
made. But sometimes, you operate very quickly. Consider the 
rates at which you can comprehend the sentences on this page; 
surely shortcuts are used for the familiar words, and we only have 
darwinian competitions when we stumble — and, perhaps, for the 
highest levels of sentence meaning. Even there, good-enough 
hegemony may be more like the way committee decisions are 
informally taken, moving on to some other topic without a formal 
vote, yet without total agreement of all parties. Only on some 
occasions is it likely to be like an electoral plurality following a full 
day of voting. 
In the presence of some "hurry up" factor, several strong 
voices from a small choir, early in the competition period, might 
suffice for action to be gated in Hurryllp Mode. How might this be 
done using a foundation of hexagonal cloning? 
On the 
assumption that shortcuts were originally formed via a history of 

168 
large synchronous choirs, we can ask how that history might 
modify certain cortical hexagons within a typical territory to make 
them more successful on their own, during "hurry up" times. 
While one characteristic of a successful territory in ordinary 
competitive times is the size of the recruited choir, no one hexag-
onal Apple, SAY "APPLE" tile of cortex knows how big the entire 
territory is. But there are core areas, ones that are always 
activated for Apple, SAY "APPLE", just as there are peripheral 
patches that are activated on some trials and not others. The core 
areas are more likely to have complete sets of triangular arrays. 
And in these core areas, the nodes of triangular arrays might be 
particularly well-defined, as error correction from crystallization 
tendencies are presumably at their best there. So these centrally-
located hexagons might function particularly well together, 
seldom impeding neighbors with "off-key" notes. 
A perfectly synchronous duet could be easily detected with a 
sufficiently well-tuned NMDAlike synaptic arrangement in a 
neuron having a high threshold from an automatic gain control. 
Although all triangular arrays are approximately synchronous 
and approximately triangular, the ones repeatedly at the core of 
a repeatedly large territory might be more sharply defined and 
truly synchronous — even at startup, before a larger territory 
forms. 
A short but detailed SAY "APPLE" melody would probably be 
needed for a fast track decision. So one can imagine the musical 
equivalent of a characteristic introductory phrase — say, Beeth-
oven's dit-dit-dit-dah — packed into a short period of time. An 
arpeggio might be a faster SAY "APPLE" signature, as it would 
correspond to a half-dozen pairs of cells all firing in succession 
rather than the same cells having to fire again, as in the Beethoven 
example. Fastest of all would be an idiosyncratic chord coming 
simultaneously from two adjacent hexagons. As such, it would 
probably be a hash, good for getting the SAY "APPLE" movement 
started but not actually constituting the full movement program; 
however, details of a movement could follow, after the Go decision 
was made. 
Such a preemptive scheme has its dangers. Whenever in 
HurryUp Mode, the organism would be at the mercy of millimeter-

169 
sized patches of cerebral cortex, trusting them not to get their act 
together too quickly, not to pop into the Apple, SAY "APPLE" spatio-
temporal pattern unless an apple were truly present and the 
situation appropriate. If Apple were even a little ambiguous, 
you'd want the Apple, SAY "APPLE" linkage to be delayed long 
enough by competitors for other such strange attractors to get 
there first. 
As such, it becomes a reaction time problem, where it is very 
desirable to have short latencies for sure bets and longer latencies 
for the others. Longer latencies, in the hexagonal theory, result 
from having to clone more territory before synchrony, from 
crystallization tendencies that sharpen things up, and from 
linkage requirements. 
A COMMON NEURAL MACHINERY, for many tasks involving fancy 
structured sequences, is something that I have discussed 
elsewhere. Most of the ballistic limb movements (not flinging, 
but the more accurate forms of hammering, clubbing, kicking, and 
especially throwing) need extensive planning because, as noted 
earlier, the feedback loop takes so long that the motion is about 
finished before the initial feedback starts to correct the movement. 
Certainly correcting the timing of the higher velocity parts of such 
movements is a task for a subsequent performance, not the current 
one. One way to reduce the performance variability is to use a lot 
of clones of the right movement command, halving the jitter with 
every quadrupling of the chorus size. 
If evolution provides you with the neural machinery for doing 
one such task, maybe it can be used at other times for constructing 
the structures needed for language and planning ahead. Ape-to-
human evolution during the last six million years may well have 
involved natural selection "for" all these skills at various times. 
A common neural substrate has an interesting implication. 
Improving one skill via enlargement might also improve the 
others, for example, selection for language skills could improve 
throwing accuracy (and vice versa, which I consider even more 
likely). Some uses of this common neural machinery for fancy 
structured sequences, such as music and dance and games, have 

170 
probably been under little environmental selection for their own 
usefulness. 
Hexagonal cloning competitions seem possible for many 
cortical areas; they all, so far, have some version of the spatially 
patterned intrinsic horizontal connections in the superficial layers 
that, together with entrainment tendencies, provide the setup for 
synchronized triangular arrays. Language localization in cortex 
is highly variable among individuals, suggesting a widespread 
substrate of cortical areas that are capable of housing the 
particular attractors that form up to implement language during 
the preschool years. So too, planning and the ballistic skills might 
have a variable localization — and be able to borrow nonspecialist 
areas on occasion. 
LAYERS OF MIDDLEMEN are familiar from everyday economics, and 
we expect to see many layers of representation standing between 
our consciousness and the real world. As Derek Bickerton noted: 
[T]he more consciousness one has, the more layers of 
processing divide one from the world 
Progressive 
distancing from the external world is simply the price that is 
paid for knowing anything about the world at all. The deeper 
and broader [our] consciousness of the world becomes, the 
more complex the layers of processing necessary to obtain that 
consciousness. 
But we are also increasingly familiar with the tendency toward 
disintermediation (producers or wholesale warehouses selling 
directly to the public). 
The useful mental shortcut is also disintermediation. 
Sometimes it conflates several different levels of explanation (the 
results of mingling the levels can be either good or bad). Even 
more important than shortcuts may be consolidation, creating a 
firm footing which allows the exploration of new complexities. 
This Rube Goldberg tower of the quasi-stable is what Jacob 
Bronowski liked to call stratified stability. 
Stage-setting and warm-up exercises are probably an 
important preamble to operating in the metaphorical realm. With 
particularly good metaphorical stand-ins for the real world, we 

171 
can even simulate courses of action before coming to closure, 
acting for real. A decision is usually a "good enough" judgment 
but it varies with the setting, Bingo on some perfect-fit occasions 
and "Let's get on with it" when comparisons have exhausted 
themselves. 
KNOWING THAT THE TEMPERATURE OUTSIDE is 26°C may not do you 
much good, unless you compare it to room temperature, or to 
your own criterion for short-sleeve-shirt temperature. "Compared 
to what" can also save you from impulsive decisions, such as 
selecting a box of breakfast cereal that costs twice as much per 
serving as beefsteak. A politician's statement may sound fine, 
until you compare it to what was said to other people or in earlier 
times. The James Thurber aphorism, "You can fool too many of 
the people too much of the time," is all about a common lack of 
"Compared to what?" — and how others exploit it for votes or 
profit. 
Half of education seems, at times, to consist of cultivating a 
habit.of mind that avoids premature closure — to do some 
comparison shopping, at least for long enough to involve some 
standard schemas such as BEFORE-AFTER. When selecting a rental 
car at the airport counter, we invoke LARGER-SMALLER and so bring 
to mind some comfort considerations — and also the memory that 
many garages now have undersized parking spaces, meaning that 
small cars will fit into all of the empty spaces while the large car 
will need to pass up half of the candidates. 
Then the MORE-LESS schema brings up rental costs, and BETTER-
WORSE reminds us of considerations such as crash worthiness and 
poor design. Because there are a limited number of schemas, 
invoking them may eventually become "hardwired" in a way that 
fancier comparisons cannot. Indeed, schemas might not even 
require hexagonal cloning competitions, because they have 
become so routinized that ordinary weighing criteria suffice (and 
so, because the clock is ticking away, we pick the intermediate-
sized rental car, once again). 
It's meeting a high quality criterion that, in the end, makes a 
judgment emotionally satisfying, whether it is detecting compli-
cated patterns or creating fancy maneuvers. In some areas, quality 

172 
is judged against elaborate criteria, not just routine schemas. 
Whatever rationality consists of, its classy reputation is surely tied 
up with narrative structure, with our quest for narrative unity, 
and how well we satisfy it. 
We are evidently unique among species in our symbolic anility, 
ana we are certainly unique in our modest ability to control the 
conditions or our existence by using these symbols. Our ability 
to represent and simulate reality implies tbat we can 
approximate tke order or existence and bring it to serve human 
purposes. A good simulation, be it a religious myth or 
scientific theory, gives us a sense or mastery over our 
experience. To represent something symbolically, as we do 
wben we speak or write, is somebow to capture it, tbus making 
it one's own. But witb this approximation comes tne 
realization tbat we bave denied tbe immediacy or reality and 
tbat in creating a substitute we bave but spun another thread in 
tbe web or our grand illusion. 
HEINZ PAGELS, 1988 

173 
"Ground that metaphor? 

11 
Thinking a Tnougkifc in 
ike Mosaics of die Mind 
We, unlike the cells that compose us, are not on 
ballistic trajectories; we are guided missiles, capable or 
altering course at any point, abandoning goals, 
switching allegiances, forming cabals and then 
betraying them, and so fortb. For us, it is always 
decision time, and because we live in a world of memes, 
no consideration is alien to us, or a foregone 
conclusion. 
DANIEL C. DENNETT, 1995 
O
NCE THEY FINISH WITH THINGS AS BASIC as perceptual trans-
formations and memory phenomena, theories of brain 
function must explain abstractions and associations as 
diverse as categories, abstracts, schemas, scripts, syntax, and 
metaphor. But these too are only intermediate goals for a theory 
of higher intellectual function. Any one worthy of the name also 
aspires, however sketchily, to explaining the unity of conscious 
experience and how it shifts (indeed, can be steered) among topics 
that had, shortly before, been gestating subconsciously. 
Consciousness, as I have discussed in both The Cerebral 
Symphony and How Brains Think, has so many different common 
connotations that discussions are often confusing, everyone 
talking at cross purposes. Even within medicine and neuro-
science, the word means quite a few different things, and there is 
no reason to assume that they share common mechanisms. 
Many follow the long neurological tradition of defining 
consciousness quite narrowly, as mere awareness, but I think that 

176 
we now have the conceptual tools to do better, to approach 
Piagef s problem of what you use when you don't know what to 
do. In the Karl Popper formulation of consciousness: 
Much of our purposeful behaviour (and presumably of the 
purposeful behaviour of animals) happens without the 
intervention of consciousness 
Problems that can be solved 
by routine do not need consciousness. [The biological 
achievements that are helped by consciousness are the 
solution of problems of a non-routine kind.] But the role of 
consciousness is perhaps clearest where an aim or purpose... 
can be achieved by alternate means, and when two or more 
means are tried out, after deliberation. 
We are unaware of most of the things that go on in our heads, and 
sometimes thaf s better, as in Zen archery. When we really learn 
a new movement sequence, it seems to become a subroutine that 
no longer requires conscious attention: tying a necktie or hair 
ribbon required lots of conscious attention in the beginning, but 
once established (perhaps at a subcortical level) we can do it better 
if we don't try to think about it. What is, initially, consciously 
mediated can become subconscious with practice. 
But our subconscious tasks run a spectrum from the expert to 
the amateur, even the random. Here we need to address both the 
expert subroutine that no longer requires conscious attention and 
the subconscious candidates that are being shaped up for quality 
— one of which eventually succeeds in replacing the current 
content of consciousness as it fades. 
A gedankenexperiment for consciousness in this broader sense 
is where this final chapter is heading, but let us first examine the 
security of the footing that this darwinian patchwork quilt has 
provided for such a necessarily ambitious extrapolation. 
LONG kefore tke reader lias arrived at this part or my work, a crowd 
or difficulties will nave occurred to him. Some or tkem are so serious 
that to this day I can hardly reflect on them without being in some 
degree staggered; but, to tke kest of my judgment, tke greater numker 
are only apparent, and those that are real are not, I think, fatal to tke 
tkeory. 
CHARLES DARWIN, 1859 

177 
THE FIRST TASK OF ANY THEORY is to economically account for the 
descriptions, to cover a certain group of facts. The extent of 
coverage of a theory is easily overestimated when the foundations 
are not specifiable. Some theories are reminiscent of fortune 
cookie wisdom: surely true at some place, at some time, in some 
sense. The lack of specification of the when-where-why details 
makes fortunes not terribly useful. We need details to avoid the 
theoretical trap of premature closure, which leaves us holding a 
fortune-cookie explanation that specifies little. 
For a brain theory, economical description is a particularly 
demanding task because of the need to span multiple levels of 
mechanism — from synapses to cells to circuits to modules, and 
more. And also span multiple levels of phenomenological explan-
ation — such as attributes, objects, categories, analogies, and 
metaphors. 
Beyond this descriptive aspect, a theory tries to predict, when-
ever possible, features not yet observed. Prediction is a minor 
aspect of historical theories such as evolutionary theory, but it is 
always valued as a shortcut, its failures warning that it is perhaps 
time to try another formulation. Yet biology is full of exceptions 
to rules, and so theoretical predictions are more likely to be valued 
for the experimental strategies they suggest than they are for 
strategic tests in the falsification mode. 
A number of predictions have fallen out of neocortical hex-
agons, suggesting various experimental handles. If the reader will 
indulge me in another celebratory recapitulation, I'll run through 
a selection of the theory's predictions, together with some related 
descriptive successes. 
As A DESCRIPTIVE THEORY, neocortical hexagons can explicitly 
account for Hebb's dual trace memory, with characteristic spatio-
temporal patterns for immediate memory and attractors 
embedded in the synaptic connectivity for the memories lasting 
minutes and lifetimes. It also describes one aspect of the widely 
distributed synchrony that has been observed in cortex. As a 
predictive theory, it offers synchronized triangular arrays 
extending their reach as the key prediction amenable to present 
recording techniques. 

178 
The hexagons theory describes why many short-term 
memories might not be successfully stored as long-term 
memories. 
It is consistent with the senile dementias that 
seemingly uncover long-ago memories during a period when no 
new short-term memories are being created. It predicts strategies 
for enhancing storage and recall, as in the sashimi staging of 
fading attractors. 
It describes redundancy of memory sites, describes the slow 
loss or modification of memories with age via the redundancy 
being reduced by overlain attractors. It predicts slowed access 
times when fewer pairs of adjacent hexagons remain that possess 
the same attractor within their repertoire. 
It describes simple associations of sensory schemas with move-
ment program schemas. It predicts that this association could 
occur in convergence zones via superposition of active firing 
patterns, or melding of attractors—but, thanks to the faux fax, the 
linkage could even happen in sensory or motor cortices. 
It describes one aspect of cortical plasticity following stroke, 
via multifunctionaUty coexisting with specialization of cortical 
areas. It predicts that an expert region could, by simply altering 
the slant of the triangular arrays, avoid the local permanent 
connectivity specialties — and thereby function temporarily as a 
more general purpose work space. It predicts that a given cortical 
area could have multiple //personalities,/ corresponding to 
different slants of the triangular arrays. 

179 
It describes some of the functional roles associated with mini-
columns and macrocolumns. It predicts a new type of macro-
column-sized, 
hexagonal-shaped 
functional 
structure 
in 
association cortex that, unlike other macrocolumns, may overlap 
with one another. 
It describes the general features of the spontaneous activity 
seen with microelectrode techniques in association cortex: usually 
random in timing and low in average firing rate, with silence the 
norm. It predicts that sources centimeters apart in a given cortical 
area could, via interdigitating triangular arrays, create unit spatio-
temporal patterns about 0.5 mm across, ones that repeat as in 
wallpaper. It predicts that the attractor circuitry critical for the re-
creation of the spatiotemporal patterns in recall can be compacted 
from map-sized circuitry into macrocolumnar-sized structures, 
with much redundancy also achieved. 
It describes why recurrent excitation among superficial pyram-
idal neurons should be associated with NMDA synapses, LTP, 
and standard distance gaps in the intrinsic horizontal connections. 
It suggests automatic gain controls that prevent runaway recruit-
ment and, more uniquely, it predicts that the nodes of triangular 
arrays should shrink over time. It predicts that central regions 
should crystallize into closer approximations to equilateral 
triangles (remembering, of course, the "good-enough" caution, p. 
36) as territories enlarge. 
It describes retrograde inhibition of memories, where a new 
telephone number may impede your access to the old one, via 
chaotic capture. It predicts that regional reductions in excitability 
could erase immediate memories, while leaving fading basins of 
attraction from which active patterns could be rekindled. 
It describes how seizures could fog recent memories, in the 
manner of road resurfacing filling in the gaps in the road that 
constitute the washboard pattern, or in the manner that edema can 
obscure characteristic facial wrinkles. It predicts that maintaining 
a widespread nonsensical "mantra" pattern for the duration of 
neocortical LTP could, by minimizing meaningful associations, 
serve to prevent other temporary attractors from forming. 

180 
It describes both dija vu and premature closure; it predicts that 
an agnosia could be created by a similar clone-too-quickly mech-
anism that preempts slower links from affecting the outcome. 
It describes the long reaction times (so improbable merely 
from conduction delays) of cognitive processing via the time it 
takes for synchronization, local recruitment, and cross-modality 
links via convergence zones. It predicts a shortening of such times 
via cross-modality priming. 
It describes neural equivalents of simple mutations and 
deletions (the "capacity to blunder slightly") and predicts some 
equivalents of recombination via active superpositions by 
triangular array interdigitation. It predicts passive superpositions 
via successively-overlain attractors. 
It predicts geometrical 
arrangements of barriers and battle fronts whereby otherwise 
sterile hybrids might reproduce themselves. 
It describes the construction and deconstruction of attributes, 
objects, schemas, and even analogies; like Hebb's cell-assembly 
theory applied to stabilized image fragmentation, it has features 
of both the holistic and specialization views of mental function. 
It predicts multiple levels of stratified stability, each able to use 
darwinian processes to improve quality and create novelties, some 
of which could constitute a heightened form of consciousness. 
THE DIFFERENT LEVELS OF EXPLANATION and mechanism are import-
ant to distinguish, if we are to avoid the confusions of level (and 
all the arguing at cross purposes) that marked evolutionary 
biology in the several decades after the rediscovery of Mendel's 
genetics in 1900. Eventually most came to see mutations and 
selectionism as two sides of the same coin rather than competing 
explanations, but it took a few decades. As Jonathan Weiner 
wrote in The Beak of the Finch: 
After Darwin's death, many biologists found it easy to accept 
evolution and impossible to accept Darwin's chief explanation for 
it. Evolution, yes; selection, no. William Bateson, the founder of 
modern genetics, wrote an elegy for Darwinism in 1913, calling it 
"so inapplicable to the facts that we can only marvel... at the 
want of penetration displayed by the advocates of such a 
proposition." 

181 
This was one of the inspirations for J. B. S. Haldane's wonderful 
quip about "the four stages of acceptance of a scientific theory: (i) 
this is worthless nonsense; (ii) this is an interesting, but perverse, 
point of view; (iii) this is true, but quite unimportant; (iv) I always 
said so/' These days, confusing variation with selection is on a 
par with confusing genotype and phenotype, something that 
biologists (but few others) successfully avoid. 
It took three decades before the Neodarwinian Evolutionary 
Synthesis straightened out our thinking about the relationship 
between genetics and darwinism, between individuals and popul-
ations; hopefully we won't have to go though it again when talk-
ing about milliseconds-to-minutes darwinism. However, ignor-
ance about levels of explanation abounds, particularly in recent 
writings about quantum mechanics as a basis for consciousness, 
showing how attractive these confusions of level can be. In How 
Brains Think, I call the most grandiose confusion "the Janitor's 
Dream." (Hoping to leap from the subbasement of quantum 
mechanics to the penthouse of consciousness in a single bound!) 
For milliseconds-to-minutes darwinism, the most reasonable 
confusion is surely with the days-to-years selectionism that 
Changeux and Edelman describe so well for wiring up the 
nervous system in ontogeny, and for selecting useful modificat-
ions of that wiring by lifetime experience. I have tended to 
describe this level as involving modifications of the attractors; 
other terms associated with these long-term spatial-only patterns 
are bumps and ruts in the washboarded road, synaptic weights, 
and connectionism. 
Differential alterations of synaptic strengths are surely 
happening much as described, and Edelman's reentrant inter-
actions with "cortical appendendages" are likely a major mechan-
ism for editing and emphasis, much in the manner of the sculptur-
ing selectionism of William James a century earlier: 
The mind is at every stage a theatre of simultaneous 
possibilities. Consciousness consists in the comparison of these 
with each other, the selection of some, and the suppression of 
the rest by the reinforcing and inhibiting agency of attention. 
The highest and most elaborated mental products are filtered 

182 
from the data chosen by the faculty next beneath, out of the 
mass offered by the faculty below that, which mass in turn 
was sifted from a still larger amount of yet simpler material, 
and so on. The mind, in short, works on the data it receives 
very much as a sculptor works on his block of stone. 
Note that mine is not a rival theory to such forms of neural 
selectionism (except insofar as they claim to extend to the James-
Piaget-Popper aspect of consciousness). Rather, the ephemeral 
copying competitions that I emphasize rest on the broad foundat-
ion of such longer-term selectionism, which forms part of the 
environment that biases cloning success (and faux faxing) on my 
short time scale of milliseconds to minutes. As such, my ephem-
eral copying competitions are one layer up from the connectionist 
layer, though they feed back to it when altering the synaptic stren-
gths, just as Edelman's reentry also shapes connectivity changes. 
HEGEMONY IS WHAT ESTABLISHES THE TOPIC of our current conscious 
experience, in the present theory; the remaining mosaics of other 
patterns constitute our subconscious. Leadership or dominance, 
especially of one state over another, 
E PLURIBUS UNUM 
seems applicable to cortical territories 
"Out of many, one" as well as to nation-states. Eventually, 
(Latin motto of tne USA) if no sensory input demands attention, 
one of the nondominant 
take over from the current winner, perhaps a pattern 
with no basis in existing memories, perhaps one that represents a 
familiar worry. 
Passive awareness (and its neural correlates) may be much 
simpler than the creative constructs implied by the James-Piaget-
Popper levels of consciousness; a pop-through recognition of a 
familiar object may not need to utilize a cloning competition in the 
manner of an ambiguous percept or a novel movement. Hexag-
onal mosaics surely aren't everything going on in the brain; 
indeed, they are probably just one mode of operation of some 
expanses of neocortex, and regulated by other brain regions such 
as hippocampus and thalamus. But here-this-minute, gone-the-
next mosaics seem quite suitable for explaining many aspects of 

183 
mind, aspects that have been difficult to imagine emerging from 
quantum mechanics, chemistry, neurotransmitters, single neurons, 
simple circuits, or even the smaller neocortical modules such as 
minicolumns. In some regions, at some times, hexagonal compet-
itions might be the main thing happening. They're a level of 
explanation that looks as if it might be appropriate; we'll have to 
see just how far we can go with it as an explanation for talking-to-
yourself consciousness. 
Edelman quite reasonably forswears a treatment of thought 
itself at one point (this may seem surprising in a book daiming to 
be about consciousness, but remember those self-imposed blinders 
of the neurological tradition). He proceeds to define thought as 
the building of conceptual theories about the world. I too would 
emphasize process over product, though I would also include 
those events at the lower end of the quality scale — the process 
during the four hours of mulling-things-over each night (half of all 
sleep) that rarely makes any progress and that of the fantastic 
juxtapositions of our episodes of dreaming sleep. At the high end, 
I would emphasize the progressive shaping up of quality, the 
discovery of order among seeming disorder, and the creation of 
new levels of abstraction for relation-
ships. 
,1 
j..i 
i 
, 
. 
... 
1 he proper, unique, and 
With hexagonal copymg competat- ^ J J 0tject Vf tkougkt: 
ions, one can sketch out what the tW wkick does not exist, 
thought process might involve, using &ai ^^ is not tefore me, 
neOCOrtical 
aspects 
Of 
(1) 
Spatio- that wkick was, that wkick 
temporal patterns of active firing and will be, tkat wkick is possible, 
(2) the attractors embedded in the tkat wkick is impossible. 
connectivity (thought will, of course, 
PAULVAL£RY 
also involve the thalamocortical loops 
and those cortical appendages, what I have perhaps too briefly 
subsumed under extrinsic biases to the basins of attraction). 
Thought might not be very different in principle from what I 
sketched out in the ambiguous object example of classification (p. 
90), with its problem of finding candidates and then making a 
decision among them. Just imagine ideas competing for space, 
rather than the cerebral codes for candidate objects. 

184 
A major difference, however, is that thought may have to span 
many levels of explanation and locate an appropriate one. As we 
try to speak usefully about a subject, we are often torn between 
dwelling on rock-solid details and speaking in perhaps-too-
abstract generalities. In a book-length work, one may range over 
the spectrum — though readers may not always synchronously 
co-vary in their preferences for details and overviews! 
THEORIES ABOUT THE MIND not only have to explain capabilities; 
they also have to be consistent with what we know about 
pathological processes. This book is not the place for an extended 
discourse on those features of neurological and psychiatric 
illnesses that might involve cloning competitions. Among the 
things that could go wrong 
Men ought to know that from nothing 
m 
^ 
s p e e d 
Q £ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 
else tut the brain come joys, delights 
^ 
Q f 
m t e m i p t i o n S / 
m e 
laughter and sports, and sorrows, griefs, 
m a g n i t u d e o f 
s u c h 
c l i m a t e 
despondency, and lamentations.... And 
, 
., 
1 
,.. 
, 
, 
. * 
" 
. 
. 
changes, the plurality needed 
by the same organ we become mad. 
, 
. 
., 
, 
.. 
£ 
. 
B
 
TT 
for a winner, the duration of 
HIPPOCRATES L. 
, 
' 
. 
,, 
the ephemeral mosaic, the 
„ 
i l l 
1 . 1 1 
r duration of fading short-term 
1 o study the abnormal is the best way or 
.. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
.. 
. 
i , 
i. 
,i 
i 
attractors, the local ratios of 
understanding the normal. 
, , 
, 
„ 
. 
„„ 
neuromodulators, and all of 
WILLIAM JAMES llc"lv'l"""l"auJlc,' «"«• aix vx 
the same things via the inher-
ently noisy faux fax linkages. A few examples may serve to 
indicate the handles available for experimental design. 
Although the "Janitor's Dream" may be improbable, some 
leaping between nonadjacent levels is surely allowed within the 
neocortical representation levels, just from the nature of cerebral 
codes in the hexagonal theory. There's really nothing to keep the 
cerebral code for Apple from competing with that of Fruit. We all 
make categorical mistakes, then try to weed them out. One simple 
pathology would be the failure to weed before speaking, as in the 
illogicality and non sequiturs of positive formal thought disorder. 
Should the neocortex be too excitable, few barriers to cloning 
will form. That means even fewer gateways; not as many variants 
will escape error correction, and so the solution space will be only 
briefly explored. You'd be able to colonize large areas without 

186 
competition along the way. Besides making for results of poor 
quality, the spatiotemporal pattern that succeeds may have the 
large homogenous "choir" normally associated with successful 
memory recalls. Even situations that were unfamiliar might 
thereby seem familiar. D£ja vu experiences might be one result. 
Should the cortex be insufficiently excitable, routine tasks 
might still operate but tasks that required concentration or sorting 
through possibilities would be greatly slowed. Few new episodic 
memories would form, and amnesia might be a typical complaint. 
Patchy versions of too little or too much might give rise to 
dissociations and fugue states. The patient who finds himself in 
San Francisco, but is unable to remember why he traveled there, 
may have a substantial roadblock (an extensive barrier region, 
without U-paths available) in his cortex, or have dead end detours 
(attractor basins that divert attempts to approach those memories). 
Infrequent changes have an interesting pathology as well, even 
when average amounts are normal. Inability to form a large choir, 
as might occur when excitability fluctuations are nunimized and 
allow stalemates to persist, would give rise to other types of 
thought pathology, such as indecision and inappropriate unf famil-
iarity judgments (suggesting jamais vu). If "climate changes" are 
an important part of the rapidity of recognition or decision 
making, some subcortical pathologies might have their effects on 
cortex by insufficient fluctuations, rather than from insufficient 
average levels of cortical input. Or their fluctuations might be too 
slow. 
Too frequent changes, of course, suggest accelerated variation 
and decision making — and bring to mind a classic form of mental 
disorder, the rapidity of thought associated with manic-depressive 
illness. 
There is a particular kind of pain, elation, loneliness, and terror 
involved in this kind or madness. When you're nigh it's 
tremendous. The ideas and feelings are fast and frequent like 
shooting stars, and you follow them until you find better and 
brighter ones. Shyness goes, the right words and gestures are 
suddenly there, the power to captivate others a felt certainty. 
There are interests found in uninteresting people. Sensuality is 

186 
pervasive and the desire to seduce and be seduced irresistible. 
Feelings or ease, intensity, power, well-being, financial 
omnipotence, and euphoria pervade one's marrow. But, 
somewhere, this changes. The fast ideas are far too fast, and 
there are far too many; overwhelming confusion replaces 
clarity. Memory goes. Humor and absorption on friends' faces 
are replaced by fear and concern. Everything previously 
moving with the grain is now against - you are irritable, angry, 
frightened, uncontrollable, and enmeshed totally in the blackest 
caves of the mind. You never knew those caves were there. 
KAY REDFIELD JAMISON, 1995 
RAPIDITY OF THOUGHT, in most of us, varies a great deal. The 
phrase, however, has a special meaning in psychiatry. An expert 
(someone who knows all the common mistakes and how to avoid 
them) may be able to operate quickly in a way that the amateur 
cannot. 
But the speed variations in someone with manic-
depressive illness (or its less extreme relative, cyclothymia) may 
have nothing to do with how well established the links are. Even 
an expert, dealing with familiar material, may go from a fluidity 
of making connections and decisions in hypomania to a slow, 
labored train of thought in depression, lingering too long and 
failing to make obvious connections with what is obviously there 
(as too-late recall eventually proves). 
The effectiveness of the antidepressant medications suggests, 
of course, that depressed mood might involve imbalances in the 
major neuromodulators, especially the norepinephrine and sero-
tonin systems. But the existence of mixed depression keeps us 
from making a simple equation of retarded thought with mood: 
in many bipolar and cyclothymic patients, racing thoughts and 
pressured speech can occur in both high and low states. In hypo-
mania, every new idea may seem promising; in mixed depression, 
equally frequent thoughts may be systematically devalued and so 
one quickly thinks one's way into a gloomy cave. 
While the cortical hexagons theory has nothing to say, at 
present, about global influences on mood or alertness in the 
manner of Hobson's theory, it does offer a number of candidates 
for rapidity of thought (all of those analogs to climate change and 

187 
island biogeography) and making connections (via the faux fax 
mechanism and those Nk< Na linkage requirements). One can 
easily imagine additional ones, equivalents of boredom or 
novelty-seeking, that might be associated with the number of 
simultaneous contenders or the "generation time/' 
The experimental subjects in isolation saw, among other 
things, primitive animals in a prehistoric jungle ana modern 
squirrels wearing snowshoes. . . . Charles Lindbergh in his 
solitary night across the Atlantic was aware or "ghostly 
presences riding in my airplane" and "vapor-like shapes 
crowding the fuselage, speaking with human voices, giving me 
advice and important messages." Solitary sailors, and survivors 
or shipwreck in lifeboats, report having visions. Even on land, 
in apparently normal circumstances, the monotony of long-
distance car-driving on the ^festern plains of the North 
American continent may lead the driver to see things — 
jackrahbits big enough to step over the car in one case — and 
the long-distance truck-driver at night following that endless 
white line down the highway may wreck his truck trying to 
avoid collision with a nonexistent object on the highway before 
him. 
DONALD O. HEBB, 1980 
THOUGHT DISORDERS involve psychosis without a concomitant 
mood change. The two hallmarks of psychosis are hallucinations 
(not counting those of obvious cause, such as Lindbergh's) and 
delusions. Hallucinations are where imagined events or memory 
recalls come to be mistaken for current sensory input: voices may 
be heard, burning sensations felt, shapes or people seen. 
Enthusiasts have been known to seek them out via dehydration, 
sweat baths, drugs, and sensory deprivation. 
Tuberculosis used to be a major hallucinogenic disease, via 
tuberculomas of the temporal lobe; the voices that Joan of Arc 
heard were likely due to this. Today, schizophrenia, manic-
depressive illness, and epilepsy are the brain disorders producing 
most of the unprompted hallucinations (though we all, of course, 

188 
experience psychotic symptoms with every REM-episode dream). 
To understand a mechanistic foundation for thought is, hopefully, 
to pave the way to appreciating and modifying the intrusive 
thoughts of schizophrenia. The hexagonal cloning theory suggests 
that the content of a hallucination is only the stuff of subconscious 
contention, that the pathology might consist of it being taken 
seriously, premature closure occurring before quality can be 
shaped up. 
Delusions are more subtle, long-term failures of reality testing 
than are hallucinations. The common delusions are of persecution, 
jealousy, grandiosity, sin and guilt — like hallucinations in 
dreams, we all experience them; the pathology is more a matter of 
persistence. In schizophrenia, they can extend to bizarre notions 
that have no basis in anyone's experience, such as being controlled 
by men from Mars. And why is the delusion not overwritten by 
corrections, all those things that usually modify our erroneous 
judgments with further experience? 
Or discounted, as we 
regularly ignore our nighttime dreams? Why doesn't an iMefixe 
fade, like my unused calculus theorems? A delusion often seems 
as intransigent as any innate tendency with which we are born, 
difficult to ignore or unlearn. 
The delusion (or, for that matter, the obsession or compulsion) 
could be from a particularly secure basin of attraction. A particul-
arly broad catchment, so that many situations are distorted to fit 
the mold, their cerebral codes captured and standardized in the 
way that a black hole captures neighbors and renders them 
invisible, would result in delusionlike properties. Might a delus-
ion's setup involve unusually widespread clones of the attractor, 
many hundreds scattered over the connectivity of an entire Area, 
perhaps from some long-ago success that created a large choir that 
practiced too regularly? From particularly frequent recall, that 
served to embed the memory even more thoroughly, or obscured 
approach routes to other basins of attraction? 
THE META-THEORY FOR HEXAGONAL CLONING COMPETITIONS is, at 
present, like talking about the weather. Subcortical supervisors 
for quilting seem likely, but some neocortical regions might also 

189 
tend to supervise the cloning competitions of others, regulate their 
habituation, and so forth. 
Yet it need not be some grand supervisor with even more 
intelligence. Until something fancier is clearly indicated, the 
default assumption ought to be that any regulatory process is 
essentially stupid, perhaps only chaotic phenomena on a grander 
or slower scale. As they say in many locales, "If you don't like the 
weather, just wait an hour." The marked seasons of the temperate 
zones have probably been important in species evolution and we 
may yet come to say, "If you don't like the climate, just wait a 
decade." As I argue in How Brains Think, the abrupt climate 
changes superimposed on the ice ages may have helped conserve 
an inefficient ape variant that happened to be a jack-of-all-trades, 
able to adapt to new diets within a generation. In cortex, 
changing the name of the game could happen on the milliseconds-
to-minutes time scale. 
As such, the electroencephalogram may serve as a useful 
indicator. We are accustomed to eschewing any functional assign-
ment, to the various EEG rhythms, but hexagonal cloning may 
allow us to view the EEG in a new light — as drivers of territorial 
expansion and deme extinction. 
IF SO MANY THINGS are happening at once in the neocortex, why do 
we have a unity of conscious experience? We speak with a single 
voice, even if only talking to ourselves. We have a sense of being 
at the center of a convergence of various narratives that we use to 
explain the past, all while trying to choose between several 
speculative scenarios about the future. 
There are some trivial answers to the unity question — as 
when we say that some things, such as sensing one's blood 
pressure, are totally inaccessible to verbal reporting mechanisms 
— and so perhaps the unity is an illusion, simply a problem with 
what's accessible to verbal report. 
In the context of cloning competitions, a more tempting 
answer is to say that we have a unity of consciousness because 
there can be only one winner of a competition — and that if s 
simply the largest patch of the dozens currently to be found 
somewhere on the dynamically reforming patchwork quilt (or, at 

190 
least, ifs the largest one with ready access to output pathways). 
If stalemates are prevented by perturbations from the fickle 
climate, there's always a winner and ifs only a question of your 
threshold for converting thought 
The imagination is tke weatner of 
m t o a c t k ) n / y o m q u a U t y afoatolL 
the mind. 
0 
., 
. 
, 
WAUACE STEVENS, 1957 S ° * e , . C e n t f °f « » « ? » » « 
shifts about, from one cortical area 
to others, as the train of thought 
progresses. This neatly explains why no neocortical lesion seems 
able to abolish consciousness, only to abolish certain types of 
content such as color attributes. 
But if one phrases the consciousness question as a competition, 
then of course one gets a unitary answer. Perhaps we should re-
phrase the question: Can we possibly do two consciousness-level 
tasks at the same time? With a theory like spatially distributed 
cloning competitions, the answer is surely, "Why not?" 
Thaf s because the theory suggests various shaping-up com-
petitions proceeding in parallel. If you can have simultaneous 
quarter-finals and semi-finals leading up to a brain-wide 
championship that we call the current content of consciousness, 
then why not simply simultaneously output both the global 
winner and the second-best from some other area, operating on a 
different train of thought? 
WE WOULD NOT BE EASILY PERSUADED that someone had a "two-
track consciousness" if he merely claimed that he could attend to 
two vigilance tasks simultaneously. Or keep two schemas in 
mind, one visual and one verbal. We'd require sentence-like 
tasks. Two simultaneous narratives would be the most persuas-
ive. If consciousness involves generating novelty and selecting 
between alternative courses of action (rather than consciousness 
as mere awareness), the demonstration would need two such 
tasks proceeding in parallel. 
But comprehension tasks are usually easier than production 
tasks: most of us can read a book while listening to the radio. 
What we need are two simultaneous production-task outputs from 
consciousness-demanding processes. Imagine, for example, a sign 
language interpreter who, when not interpreting spoken language 

191 
into sign language, finds it possible to carry on two conversations 
at the same time, speaking to one person and signing to another. 
Or a touch typist conducting an internet dialogue with someone 
on another continent, while talking about something else with a 
person in the same room. 
It wouldn't be interesting if the phenomenon turned out to 
merely be a matter of clever time-sharing, or of rote replays of 
memorized material. But, were we able to rule out such less-
interesting explanations, a two-track success would suggest an 
interesting interpretation: that our seeming unity of conscious-
ness is simply a matter of most of us having only one major output 
track available for unique representations (such as reporting on 
our current thoughts) — and that said pathway has a serial-order 
bottleneck that admits of only one completed thought at a time. 
Not having two independent output paths means that most of 
us get little experience in managing two trains of thought simult-
aneously; we can only use "on the other hand" tactics. But if we 
became experienced in managing two semi-independent tracks, 
thanks to several output paths to feed, then two internal voices 
might also be able to converse with one another. 
THOUGH INDEPENDENT SIMULTANEOUS OUTPUTS may be infrequent, 
simultaneous competitions that influence one another are prob-
ably common. We regularly evolve our sentences into "good 
stories" at the paragraph or page level, applying the quality 
criteria associated with narrative and epic to guide our product-
ions toward satisfying endings. (I'm doing that right here — and 
certainly in the forthcoming finale.) Why not also evolve them to 
meet some nonstandard criterion that itself evolves, on a some-
what slower time scale? Using a darwinian copying competition 
with short-term memories that fade much more slowly? 
Indeed, there are some situations that might qualify for such 
two-level interactive evolution, such as the orbital frontal cortex 
role in monitoring progress on an agenda, a meta-sequence that 
seems to tick along on a different time scale than individual 
thoughts and sentences. There's no requirement that darwinian 
variations have to be random; a slow darwinian process could bias 

192 
the general direction of the variants of a faster darwinian process. 
There could be a cascade or web of such darwinian processes. 
THINKING A THOUGHT, in this theory, is more than just a current 
competition between the cerebral codes that have cloned mosaic 
territories. It involves the recent history of such competitions, 
plating the various work spaces with attractors that then fade. It 
involves biases from moods and from agendas evolving else-
where. And it involves the attractors of long-term memories, 
different in different areas. 
Habituation processes in dominant areas may allow second-
best areas to take over a moment later. Just as neuromodulators 
serve to sculpt one motor circuit from a network with many 
possible motor circuits, and so set up an action, the faster-acting 
synaptic modifications may also help move our attention from a 
present topic to a new one, from one second to the next. 
From the sashimi layering of fading attractors, we may get the 
appearance of a single-minded person inside, steering the train of 
thought and stage managing our purposeful behavior. Our 
current mental state is always unique because, even if we are 
thinking exactly the same thought as we did yesterday, those 
fading patterns underlying its spatiotemporal patterns differ in 
strength and spatial distribution from that of yesterday's sashimi. 
They will lead the train of thought somewhere else. 
While I think that a Darwin Machine operates in the brain and 
can account for much of higher intellectual function, I am not 
equally certain that making frequent use of the darwinian 
algorithm is what elevated us from the ape level of mental abilities 
— or, for that matter, that it alone is what allows us to operate 
quickly enough to escape esprit de Vescalier. It may be that some 
shortcuts, cortical or subcortical, are absolutely essential in order 
for the darwinian process to operate quickly enough to produce 
useful results within the time span of short-term memory. Those 
shortcuts might structure agendas and the ascending levels of 
abstraction, or keep us from constantly backsliding into a hopeless 
muddle. I suspect that much of fleshing out this theory will 
involve the theoretical, experimental, and neurological identifkat-

193 
ion of shortcuts, that much of its application to education will 
involve learning how to augment or avoid them. 
An example of a shortcut would be that set of constraints on 
word order known as syntax. I'm not thinking of plural and past 
tense formation so much as phrase structure. There's a lot of 
embedding of phrases, as in a sentence such as What you see is what 
you get, where both the subject and the object are themselves 
sentences. Embedding is a key step up in beyond-the-apes 
language abilities. 
PROTOLANGUAGE IS A SIMPLE FORM of language lacking the fancier 
structure provided by syntax. It's the language of the trained 
animals, children less than two years of age, speakers of pidgins, 
the agrammatic aphasics, and American professors trying to 
communicate with Greek shopkeepers. With structureless proto-
language, it takes a lot of time to relate who did what to whom, 
even when supplemented by gestures. 
The linguist Derek Bickerton suggests that there are no real 
intermediates between protolanguage and our full-fledged 
syntactic language. This raises the issue of what improved neural 
mechanism could make such a large difference — and I have one 
to suggest. This isn't the place for serious linguistics or paleo-
anthropology, but, given eleven chapters of hexagons to warm up 
the reader, it is possible to develop a mechanistic outline for some 
of Universal Grammar (features common to all known languages 
except pidgins) in just a few more pages. 
A NOUN AND ITS MODIFIERS, such as black shoe, could be implement-
ed by simple borderline superpositions of hexagons. Superimpose 
this modified noun upon the code for with and you have a prepos-
itional phrase. Keep going and you might achieve a territory of 
clones, each of which represents the tall blond man with one black 
shoe. By this point, however, you are well out of the range for do-
ing all the association via superpositions at a borderline between 
territories; that would merely pour all of the words into a blender 
and leave only a general impression of the intended topic, one that 
becomes even less specific as more associations are added. 

194 
The faux fax would seem, at first glimpse, to produce an even 
more ambiguous superposition. But bi-directional corticocortical 
links allow you to have your cake and eat it too. Back projections 
(six out of seven neocortical areas are reciprocally linked) can use 
the same code, and so immediately contribute to maintaining a 
chorus above a critical size (they are, presumably, always 
adapting and thereby falling silent). 
It would be like missing choir practice but participating via a 
conference phone call. The central chorus of What you see is what 
you get could have two subsidiary choruses for see and get, each 
implementing appropriate roles for its verb; if either subchorus 
falters, the top-level one stumbles. 
A backprojected spatiotemporal pattern might not need to be 
fully featured, nor fully synchronized, to help out with the peri-
pheral site's chorus. It could be more like that sing-along techni-
que where a single voice prompts the next verse in a monotone 
and the chorus repeats it with melodic elaboration; some singing 
at a fifth or an octave above the others, some with a delay, and so 
forth. The backpath could include more code than the subchorus 
uses, just as choirmasters and folk singers manage to include 
exhortations with the desired text. 
Back projections provide a way of resolving any ambiguity 
associated with recursive embedding by maintaining an audit 
trail. ("Who mentioned X? Sing it again, the whole thing!'') With 
such structuring, there's no longer a danger that the mental model 
of the eight-word amalgamation the tall blond man with one black 
shoe will be scrambled into a blond black man with one tall shoe. 
LINKS CAN ALSO IMPLEMENT THE BINDING needed for words such as 
he, himself, and each other, whose referents may be in preceding 
sentences. Thaf s another of the linguists' desiderata, along with 
a neural mechanism for the Wfe-question's long-range depend-
encies. But at the very top of their Universal Grammar wish list 
is recursive embedding, needed to nest one sentence inside 
another. (I think I saw him leave to go home.) 
What keeps the top-level think verb's hexagon happy enough 
to reproduce effectively in a copying competition with other 
variant interpretations? Presumably, a few alternatives assemble 

195 
in parallel until one gains the strong 'legs" needed to allow it to 
become robust enough to establish hegemony. If the leave link 
stumbles, the saw hexagons might not compete very effectively, 
and so the top level dangles. 
That's stratifi-
ed stability at 
work, and it may 
be what enables a 
series of simple 
rules, at the level 
of argument 
structure, to 
generate a proper 
syntax. Each 
verb has a 
characteristic set 
of links: some 
required, some 
optional, some 
prohibited. The 
conglomeration is 
called a sentence 
if all the obligat-
ory links are 
satisfied and no 
words are left 
dangling, unsupported by a structural role. 
A sentence tells a little story with characteristic roles. Most 
verbs require a subject-actor-agent but it can be a noun phrase 
such as The tall blond man with one black shoe or even a sentence 
itself such as What you see). Beyond that near generality, special 
cases abound. The intransitive verb sleep cannot tolerate an object-
patient-theme (He sleeps it is a clanger). The verb give insists on 
both a recipient and an item given. I discuss such required and 
optional roles at more length in How Brains Think and suggest a 
mechanistic analogy for how such argument structure operates. 
So the "meaning of the sentence" is, in this model, an abstract 
cerebral code whose hexagons compete for territory with those 

196 
suggesting alternative interpretations. Phrase structure is presum-
ably a matter of the coherent corticocortical links to contributing 
territories, having their own competitions and tendencies to die 
out if not reinforced by backprojecting codes. Weblike crosstalk 
between subchoruses presumably occurs, and may be quite useful 
so long as it remains weak enough not to show up on the audit 
trail. Argument structure suggests multilobed attractors (p. 155). 
Surface structure, needed to actually speak one word after 
another, is a matter of unpacking the contributors in an order 
commensurate with a particular language's surface structure 
conventions. The 18-to-36-month-old child seems to tune up this 
circuitry for the patterns of a particular language without much 
overt trial-and-error, merely by listening to the speech of others. 
In English, they include a subject-verb-object word order for 
simple declarative sentences, to which you add the inflections for 
plurals or tense, and perhaps some case markings (such as he-him, 
who-whom) to provide the listener with additional clues about 
whether the noun plays a subject or object role in the verb's story. 
So COHERENT CORTICOCORTICALS buy you some essentials of 
phrase structure via a colonizing choir. What might degrade such 
a nice system into a protolanguage? Incoherence will do. Were 
the corticocorticars error correction not well tuned, linkages 
would be restricted to well-practiced special cases, perhaps only 
the spatiotemporal firing patterns for a limited number of 
vocabulary items, perhaps a few schemas and scripts. 
Thaf s because a cerebral code for an item is no longer the 
same, here and there. Jumble and smear means that a muddled 
version must be gradually learned by the target cortex; if sent 
back, a doubly-distorted version must be learned and an equi-
valence constructed to the original. The return path would be 
slow and chancy, and it is what allows a subchorus to be main-
tained and thereby permits an audit trail to resolve ambiguities. 
Lacking such structure would be very limiting, like signal flags on 
sailing ships, giving you a small shared vocabulary with only 
minor possibilities for novel associations. Embedding would 
probably be restricted to stock phrases. Relating who did what to 
whom would take a long time — just as in "protolanguage." 

197 
Adding faux faxing to a base that included regional darwinian 
copying competitions, each using memorized relationships to 
shape up quality, is thus a candidate for what made proto-
language into Language Itself. Corticocortical coherence that 
became good enough to convey even novel spatiotemporal 
patterns could have implemented the recursive embedding and 
long-range links aspects of Universal Grammar — and have done 
it in one step, without semistructured intermediate forms. 
Though there is much for linguists and archaeologists to sort 
out, some now think that a big language step accompanied the 
evolution of Homo erectus to early Homo sapiens about a quarter-
million years ago. The arbitrary cerebral code linkages described 
here, in the context of a Darwin Machine at each end to augment 
quality, might provide the improved capabilities needed to 
convert the infrequently innovating Homo erectus culture (a million 
years of stasis) into our prolific one, capable of occasionally 
producing the incandescent mind of a Plato or Shakespeare. 
THERE EMERGES FROM THIS VIEW OF OUR BRAIN, with its relentless 
rearrangement from moment to moment, some glimpses of the 
neural foundations on which we construct our utterances and 
think our thoughts, some suggestions for how thoughts might 
miscue, and some possibilities for implementing the shortcut rules 
which make possible our kind of language and rational thought. 
Since Darwin's recognition of how biology could have been 
bootstrapped by natural selection operating on inherited variation, 
the immune response has been recognized as more than just an 
analogy: rather, it's the same process, operating on the intermed-
iate time scale of days to weeks (though running out of gas as the 
antigen is eliminated). By now, I think that we can recognize a 
darwinian process per se, what I have called a Darwin Machine, 
capable of operating on various time scales and in various media 
able to reproduce with inherited variation, as one of the key org-
anizing principles of the universe. In the brain, such a process 
need not run out of challenges, as memes from a rich cultural life 
always provide another set of complex patterns to analyze for 
possible hidden structure, repeating the process that we used as 
two-year-olds to figure out the syntax of the utterances we heard. 

198 
The extensive parallelism between Darwin's 1859 formulation 
of principles, and the ones now suggested for hexagonal cloning 
competitions on the milliseconds-to-minutes time scale, can easily 
be seen by paraphrasing Darwin's final paragraph of On the Origin 
of Species so as to emphasize the power of this process as it could 
be manifested in cerebral cortex. And borrowing Darwin's finale 
framework seems only appropriate: it is, after all, his process. 
IT IS INTERESTING TO CONTEMPLATE a tangled mind, clothed with 
memories of many kinds, with prototypical birds singing on the 
hallucinated bushes, with various thoughts flitting about, and 
with wormlike obsessions crawling through the damp cortex, and 
to reflect that these elaborately constructed forms, so different 
from each other, and dependent upon each other in so complex a 
manner, have all been produced by laws acting around us. These 
laws, taken in the largest sense, being Reproduction via clones of 
cerebral codes; Variability from their interdigitation and escapes 
from error correction, and from use and disuse; Inheritance which 
follows from surface-to-volume principles at the perimeter of 
cloned territories; a Ratio of Increase so high as to lead to a 
Struggle for cortical space, and as a consequence to Natural 
Selection from current and memorized environments, entailing 
Divergence of Character and the Extinction of less-improved 
forms. Thus, from the war of random thoughts initially no better 
than those of our nighttime dreams, the most exalted process 
which we are capable of conceiving, namely, the production of the 
higher thoughts, directly follows. There is grandeur in this view 
of mental life, with its ascending powers. From such a darwinian 
ratchet for creating and refining ever more complex levels of 
abstraction, there arose unbidden our own brain of unbounded 
potential, able to discover the syntactic rules that nestle sentences 
within sentences, able to invent new rules that extend mere 
narratives into the long chains of rational thought. Transcending 
its origins in tool use and social life, our reorganized brain can 
now use stratified stability to explore the endless realm of memes. 
Blind to our foundations, we nonetheless created poetry and 
reason; with a clearer footing, we can perhaps contemplate how 
our heightened consciousness evolved and is evolving. 

199 
It is interesting to contemplate a tangled Lank, clothed with many 
plants of many kinds, with birds singing on the hushes, with various 
insects flitting about, and with worms crawling through the damp 
earth, and to reflect that these elaborately constructed forms, so 
different from each other, and dependent upon each other in so 
complex a manner, have all heen produced by laws acting around us. 
These laws, taken in the largest sense, being Growth with 
Reproduction; Inheritance which is almost implied hy reproduction; 
\&riability from the indirect and direct action of the conditions of life 
and from use and disuse: a Ratio of Increase so high as to lead to a 
Struggle for Life, and as a consequence to Natural Selection, entailing 
Divergence of Character and the Extinction of less-improved forms. 
Thus, from the war of nature, from famine and death, the most exalted 
object which we are capable of conceiving, namely, the production of 
the higher animals, directly follows. There is grandeur in this view of 
life, with its several powers, having been originally breathed by the 
Creator into a few forms or into one; and that, whilst this planet has 
gone cycling on according to the fixed law of gravity, from so simple a 
beginning endless forms most beautiful and most wonderful have been, 
and are being evolved. 
CHARLES DARWIN, 
1859 

Glossary and Brief Tutorials 
allele Alternate forms of a gene. Perhaps 20 percent of your expressed 
genes have a different allele on the other chromosome, that is, you 
are heterozygous for that gene and might switch to using it under 
some conditions. One reason that hybrids don't breed true to type 
is that parents are often passing on their less-used allele. Inbred 
strains have less heterozygosity [18,103,140] 
area 
When capitalized, ifs a Brodmann Area, a subdivision of 
cerebral cortex based on the relative thickness of the six layers. Area 
17 is better known as primary visual cortex; it seems to be a 
functional unit but Area 19 comprises at least six major functional 
units. A territory or work space is an area occupied temporarily by 
active patterns of cloned hexagons. 
attractor 
If you plot one variable against another for a series of times, 
the successive points may seem to move along a trajectory, often a 
cyclical one. This phase portrait may well look like an oddly-shaped 
orbit around an imaginary gravitational attractor, from whence the 
name. All of my chaotic illustrations are in such a phase space. There 
are four general classes of attractors: point (say, the neuron's resting 
state), periodic (as in pacemaker cells), quasi-periodic, and chaotic. 
The magnets in my loopy illustrations serve as a stand-in for a quasi-
periodic attractor, as would an organ pipe. Whereas pipes have 
well-defined harmonics, chaotic attractors have overtones every-
where, in the manner of white noise. Chaotic systems are highly 
sensitive to initial conditions; while somewhat predictable in the 
short run, they may do surprising things in the long run. [66] 
automatic gain control (AGO 
A process that reduces gain (loudness, 
in a typical auditory application) as input levels increase. It tends to 
make the output levels about the same for faint and loud inputs — 
unless the faint one occurs soon after the loud one, as it takes time for 
the gain to be raised again. The nineteenth-century speed governor 
for engines was an example of an AGC, and modern tape recorders 
use them. [77] 
axon 
The neuron's "wire," a long (0.1 - 2,000 mm), spiderthread-thin 
portion of the neuron that carries voltages between the neuron's 
input sites (concentrated on cell body and dendritic tree) and the 
neuron's outputs, its many-branched axon terminals that make 
synapses onto downstream neurons. Ifs typically a one-way street, 
messages flowing from the dendrites and cell body to the far end of 
the axon where synapses are made. [26,31,34] 

204 
basin of attraction 
If one thinks of the attractor as the low point of 
a washbowl, then starting points on the counter top lie outside the 
basin of attraction. Starting anywhere within the basin results in a 
trajectory that circles around the attractor. 
Basins can be 
discontinuous, as seen in pinball games. A bifurcation is a change 
from one basin of attraction to another, in the manner of changing 
gaits. [68] 
binding 
In linguistics, binding is the part of the grammar which 
determines the reference of such words as he, himself, each other. In 
cognitive neuroscience, binding is the notion that some process must 
maintain links between the various features of a perceived object 
during cognitive processing, given the dispersal of object features to 
those what specialists in temporal lobe and to the where aspects 
specialists up in parietal areas. One simple proposal is that the 
involved neurons in these dispersed areas actually become synchron-
ized, and that this is what recouples red with the top light on the 
traffic signal (another object's features — say, those characterizing 
the approaching pedestrian — synchronize at different times). This 
proposed use of synchrony is, of course, on a much grander scale 
than I propose for the triangular arrays, which might span a few 
millimeters. Binding may not be needed except for very complex 
sensory scenes, such as the streaming encountered when brachiating 
through the trees or driving a car; some suspect that the perceived 
need for binding to reassemble specialists is a remnant of the 
cartesian theater reasoning that Dennett critiques. [561 
bottleneck 
An evolutionary event that greatly narrows the variabil-
ity in a population. [93] 
cell-assembly Donald O. Hebb's 1949 coinage for a group of cortical 
neurons that subserves and sustains the active memory trace that 
follows perception. [104] 
central nervous system (CNS) The brain, spinal cord, and the retina (all 
the rest is the peripheral nervous system). 
cerebral cortex The outer 2 mm (thafs two thin coins worth) of the 
brain's cerebral hemispheres with a layered structure. It isn't requir-
ed for performing a lot of simple actions but seems essential for 
creating new episodic memories, the fancier associations, and many 
new movement programs. Paleocortex (archicortex) such as hippo-
campus has a simpler structure and earlier evolutionary appearance 
than the six-plus-layered neocortex. [29] 
chaos Complicated patterns that are not truly random. Chaos is a 
cryptic form of order, what a random-number generator produces. 

205 
There is, as the phrase goes, "a sensitive dependence on initial 
conditions." Because chaos was defined in a paradoxical way ("It 
may look random, but ifs merely chaotic"), it is a term often misused 
or misunderstood. See attractor, basin of attraction, itinerancy. 
chunking Collapsing multiple-word phrases into a single word, in the 
manner of acronyms. 
cipher 
A disguising transformation of a message without using 
chunking, such as a simple substitution cipher. 
code 
In cryptography, a disguising transformation that also chunks — 
and thereby shortens — the message, as when a number stands for 
a standard five-word phrase. More generally, as in genetic code, it 
refers to the transformation of a representation's short form into its 
long-form implementation. As such, it is analogous to a matrix. It 
may also simply refer to the short form itself, such as a DNA base-
pair sequence capable of generating a particular protein. 
columns 
A minicolumn is a cylindrical group of about 100 neurons 
extending through all the layers of neocortex and about 0.030 mm in 
diameter, usually organized around a dendritic bundle; the 
orientation column is an example. Macrocolumns are a hundred 
times larger in area (and about 0.5 mm across) and often more like 
curtain folds than cylinders; they are typically identified by common 
inputs, e.g., the ocular dominance columns of visual cortex. [42] 
corticocortical connection 
An axon or axon bundle connecting one 
patch of cerebral cortex to another. Some remain local, within the 
superficial layers of cortex, while others go through the white matter 
to distant targets — some, via the corpus callosum, to the other 
cerebral hemisphere. See photograph, p. 131. 
Darwin Machine My 1987 coinage, on the Turing Machine analogy, for 
any full-fledged darwinian process incorporating the six essentials 
for the darwinian algorithm. 
Species evolution, the immune 
response, some genetic algorithms, and the hexagonal work space 
competitions are all examples. 
deme A geographic subpopulation, mostly inbreeding but with occas-
ional gene flow via migrants from the larger metapopulation. 
dendrite 
Neurons have branches. There is a single thin axon that 
initiates and propagates impulses to distant destinations, and there 
are somewhat thicker dendritic branches that receive synapses from 
other neurons's axon terminals. Pyramidal neurons have a tall-tree-
like apical dendrite plus some rootlike basal dendrites. At least in 
neocortex, dendrites are the receiving branches of the neuron and the 
axon is the sending branch. Elsewhere, some dendrites can also act 

206 
like axon terminals, releasing neurotransmitter in response to 
impulses and local voltage changes. [26,31] 
efference copy 
The notion that, in generating movement commands, 
the nervous system also generates an expected set of sensory inputs 
that will result from the movement, the comparison of expected and 
actual serving to warn of problems in the execution of the 
movement. 
empty niche 
A proven niche space that is temporarily unoccupied by 
a tenant species. 
error correction Schemes that detect (in the manner of checksums) but 
also correct transmission errors using some form of redundancy; 
commonly used in tape backups. 
faux fax 
My coinage for a faxlike telecopying process, one that 
reproduces a spatiotemporal pattern some distance away. 
gene 
A unit of heredity, essentially that segment of a DNA molecule 
comprising the code for a particular peptide or protein. We also talk 
loosely of "a gene for blue eyes" and so forth, but many a DNA gene 
. is pleiotropic: it has multiple (and sometimes very different) effects 
on its body. As for whaf s a unit, here's Helena Cronin's answer: 
The answer must be: When if s a unit that selection can work on... a 
gene and the ramifying tree of all its phenotypic effects (in comparison 
with alternative forms of the gene, its alleles). If it should turn out that 
the bone of a toe and the shape of an eyebrow are pleiotropic effects of 
the same gene, then that bizarre combination is a respectable adaptive 
unit. Natural selection works on genetic differences in populations. If 
a genetic change that lengthens the bone also curves the eyebrow, then 
our adaptive explanation should recognize that; we should be interested 
in the genetic differences that give rise not merely to differences in toe-
length but to differences in toe-length-plus-eyebrow-shape, even if 
eyebrow shape should turn out to be selectively neutral. This is an 
answer that would not have been obvious to the organism-centered 
view of classical Darwinism but comes readily to a theory that is gene-
centered. 
gene repertoires 
When alternative forms of a gene are expressed at 
different stages of development, e.g., fetal hemoglobin is replaced by 
the adult version. 
genetic code 
A table with 43 (64) entries that tells you which of the 20 
amino acids will result from a particular triplet of the four types of 
RNA nucleotides, e.g., CAU yields histidine (as does CAC). 
genotype The full set of genes carried by an individual, whether 
expressed or silent alleles. Similar to genome. Compare to phenotype. 

207 
What makes living matter so different from other self-organizing 
systems is that a cell has an information center, the genes, concerned 
with orchestrating the many different processes going on within the 
cell, and in such a manner that copies of the cell tend to survive. 
grammaiv universal 
Each of the languages of the world has a 
corresponding mental grammar, constructed as we learn the 
language. Though they differ in many ways, the human brain seems 
to have a highly specific menu of possibilities for grammatical 
organization, known as Universal Grammar, or UG, that structures 
language learning even when the input itself is lacking in structure 
(pidgins, home sign, and so on). See JACKENDOFF (1993). 
hash 
A hash is a unique short-form identifier, a "fingerprint" of 
something more complicated. One simple application is to create a 
file name that isn't already in use — and also isn't unnecessarily 
long, since you want a low-dimensional search space that can be 
scanned rapidly. Using the seconds and minutes fields of file 
modification time stamps often suffices for a hash; a document can 
also be hashed by using the least significant bits of a checksum. 
Hebbian synapse 
Hebb proposed that a successful synapse is 
strengthened: "When an axon of cell A is near enough [the synaptic 
cleft hadn't yet been seen in 1949] to excite cell B and repeatedly or 
persistently takes part in firing it, some growth process or metabolic 
change takes place in one or both cells such that A's efficiency, as one 
of the cells firing B, is increased." 
immune response 
Following infection with an antigen, a process 
begins that gradually destroys the foreign molecules — but, in the 
process lasting days to weeks, the initially inefficient antibodies 
evolve into much better fits to the antigen. Because they linger in the 
body for some time, immunity to further infection is achieved. 
impulse Action potential and spike are synonyms; if s the regenerative 
change in the voltage across the neuron's membrane used for long-
distance (more than a millimeter) signaling in the nervous system. It 
is brief (1/1000 sec, quicker than any other signal in the brain but a 
million times slower than computers) and large (only 1/10 volt but 
bigger than any other voltage in the brain). Its threshold property 
can also be used as a simple decision making mechanism. See also 
axon, myelin, sodium channel. 
in vitro 
"In glass" is used to designate experiments carried out in a 
dish on cells that have been removed from their natural setting. [3] 

208 
in situ 
"as situated" is (along with in vivo) the opposite of in vitro. 
[3] 
inheritance principle Darwin's great but often misunderstood insight, 
that variation is not truly random. Rather than variations being done 
from some ideal or average type, small undirected variations are 
preferentially done from the more successful individuals of the 
current generation, exploring the solution space nearby (not jumping 
randomly to somewhere truly unrelated) in the next generation. [21, 
101] 
interneuron 
An "insider neuron." Most CNS neurons are inter-
neurons; the only ones which aren't are the sensory neurons and the 
motor neurons that drive the muscles. An interneuron receives input 
from about 2,000-10,000 "upstream" neurons and transmits its output 
to a similar number of "downstream" neurons — occasionally even 
one of its own input neurons, creating a loop (see figure, p. 32). 
ion 
An atom or small free-floating molecule with a net electrical 
charge. When NaCl dissolves in water, most of its weak chemical 
bonds break, but the CI carries away one of the Na's electrons, and 
so they become the ions CI" and Na+. The major players in the extra-
cellular space outside the neuron's membrane are Ca++, Cland Na+, 
with much of the K+ concentrated inside cells. The Ca++ inside cells 
tends to be tightly regulated ("buffered") by various mechanisms 
because it too can serve a signal function (a "second messenger," the 
first being the neurotransmitter) for the slower processes that follow 
synaptic transmission. 
island biogeography The peculiarities of animal and plant species 
when largely isolated, with just occasional interbreeding. 
An 
"island" can also be a deep ocean basin, a high mountain valley, or 
a patch in a patchy resource distribution that prevents migration. 
Islands often have a reduced number of species, so traditional 
predators or parasites may be lacking. Species often arrive in small 
numbers, so bottlenecks are a standard feature of island populations. 
itinerancy 
Like the seasonal progress of a peddler revisiting towns 
that have changed somewhat since the last visit, chaotic itinerancy 
emphasizes the recurrence of similar, rather than identical, states. 
[120] 
limit cycle 
A type of nonlinear oscillator, such as a threshold device 
with reset (cisterns that automatically flush when refilled). 
linkage 
In genetics, an association between the expression of two 
gene alleles that is greater than could be expected from random 

209 
assortment. For example, two adjacent genes may tend to move 
together during meiosis. 
long-term potentiation (LTP) 
A sustained (minutes to days) change 
in connection strength, largely synaptic, that follows some priming 
events — such as a barrage of impulses. Originally seen via 
conditioning and testing in the same pathway, it has also been seen 
to cross over from separate conditioning and test pathways. LTP is 
thought to provide the physiological scaffolding for slowly making 
(during memory consolidation) the anatomical changes that more 
permanently increase the synaptic strength. [75] 
meiosis 
The cell division used for making sperm and ova (as 
compared to ordinary mitosis), notable for the crossing-over of 
chromosomes that results in a shuffling of the grandparents' genes 
and for the reduction of diploid to haploid. 
meme Richard Dawkins's 1976 coinage, on the analogy to gene (with 
a little aid from mime and mimic), for a cultural copying unit, such 
as the word or melody that is mimicked by others. 
membrane 
All cells are a bag of components, separated from the 
extracellular fluid and other cells by a limiting membrane. There are 
transport systems within this membrane, little pumps throwing 
sodium ions out of the cell while bringing potassium ions into the 
cell. There are ion channels through the membrane, pores that allow 
certain sizes of ions (and therefore certain types) to move inside and 
out. A channel may be controlled by a receptor-guarded gate on the 
external surface (the typical neurotransmitter-activated route for 
producing current flows), by the electrical held across the membrane 
(the typical voltage-gated channels that produce the impulse), or 
sometimes both (see NMD A). 
memory, dual trace 
Hebb's 1949 coinage for separate systems imple-
menting short- and long-term memories: active (spatiotemporal) 
and passive (spatial-only) memory traces. 
memory, episodic 
One-trial learning involving distinct episodes, 
such as being an eyewitness to an accident. Such memories are 
notoriously malleable, influenced by subsequent events and the 
mistakes made in recall attempts. 
message digest 
The fingerprintlike result of a computation (see hash) 
that reduces a long document to a number that serves to uniquely 
characterize it; were any changes to be made in the document — 
even adding an extra space — a different message digest would 
result. Although you cannot reconstruct the document from the 

210 
message digest, nor does it serve as an abstract, you can use it for 
recognition ("I've seen exactly this before"). [17] 
metapopulation 
A population with dispersed demes that replenish 
one another with migrants. 
myelin 
Some of the longer axon branches are insulated with myelin 
(whose fat content is what gives the white matter its characteristic 
color), flat layers of which are wrapped around the axon in the 
manner of a bandage roll. This reduces the electrical capacitance that 
the impulse must charge up (the old capacitors-in-series trick), 
thereby speeding impulse propagation. The sodium channels that 
open during the upstroke of an impulse are confined to unwrapped 
axon regions, little exposed gaps called nodes of Ranvier, thereby 
reducing the metabolic cleanup costs by confining them to the small 
percentage of unwrapped axon cylinder. 
Without myelin, the 
impulse slowly spreads in the manner of a burning fuse; with 
myelin, the impulse seemingly jumps from one node to the next 
(saltatory conduction), achieving conduction speeds a hundred-fold 
greater than seen in unmyelinated conduction, top speeds being 
about 150 mm/msec. 
neocortex All of cerebral cortex except for archicortex (olfactory cortex, 
hippocampus), the simpler layered structure that lacks the patterned 
recurrent excitatory connections and columnar structures which 
make the six-layered neocortex so interesting. [29] 
nervous system 
The whole works, both central nervous system (CNS: 
brain, spinal cord, and retinas) and peripheral nervous system (most 
sensory and muscle connections, plus the clusters of neurons called 
ganglia). 
neuromodulator 
A molecule traversing the synaptic cleft to bind at a 
postsynaptic receptor site is acting as a neurotransmitter but it can 
also act as a neuromodulator (affecting the responsiveness to other 
neurotransmitters), typically by affecting internal processes in the 
downstream neuron over a longer time scale; it need not travel via 
the synaptic cleft, but might diffuse like a local hormone from release 
sites in the neighborhood. The major diffusely broadcasting systems 
for norepinephrine, acetylcholine, dopamine, and serotonin from 
subcortical regions surely involve profound neuromodulator actions 
in neocortex, quite in addition to their more immediate neuro-
transmitter effects. 
neuron 
The nerve cell, whether sensory neuron, intemeuron, or 
motor neuron. There are about 1012 neurons in the human brain and 
spinal cord; the neocortex alone is said to have 10". The cell body of 

211 
the neuron is the widest section (see figure, p. 26), thanks to 
containing the cell nucleus, and there are many processes branching 
off, receiving inputs and distributing outputs. See dendrite, axon. 
neurotransmitter A molecule such as glutamate or acetylcholine that 
is released from an axon terminal (often by the arrival of an 
impulse), diffuses across a narrow extracellular space, and binds 
with a receptor on the surface of the postsynaptic cell. Many dozens 
of neurotransmitters have been identified over the years, and a given 
axon terminal may release more than one kind. 
niche The "outward projection of the needs of an organism" such as 
food resources, camouflage from predators, suitable housing and 
sites for effective reproduction. 
NMDA 
The NMDA channel at glutamate synapses was, 
unfortunately, named after N-methyl-D-aspartate because that 
molecule, rather than glutamate, is what opens the postsynaptic 
channel in the lowest doses. But glutamate opens it almost as well, 
and thaf s what is usually released as a neurotransmitter. The real 
significance of an NMDA synapse is that the current state of the 
dendrite's voltage, at the time the neurotransmitter arrives, is also 
important: Mg++ tends to plug the channels through the membrane, 
blocking Na+ and Ca++ inflows, but an antecedent rise in dendritic 
voltage (whether from the same synapse or neighbors) will unplug 
some such channels, allowing a much larger response. This is a 
major source of dendritic amplification of synaptic currents, along 
with the persistent sodium channels in the apical dendrites, and an 
example of what Hebb predicted in 1949 (see Hebbian synapse). 
node 
The theoretical term for an intersection in one of my triangular 
arrays. 
In the anatomy, it corresponds to a single superficial 
pyramidal neuron (or perhaps to a minicolumn of act-alike neurons). 
[40] 
panellation 
Fragmentation; breaking apart a population into smaller, 
isolated units ("parcels"). Rising sea level converts a hilly island into 
an archipelago. 
phenotype 
Usually "body" but actually the entire constitution of an 
individual (anatomical, physiological, behavioral) resulting from the 
interaction of the genes with the environment. 
As Dawkins 
emphasized in The Extended Phenotype, it can even grade into things 
such as bird nests. 
postsynaptic 
The postsynaptic neuron's dendrite receives neurotrans-
mitter, rather in the manner of sniffing perfume, and changes the 
permeability of its membrane to certain ions, usually Na+, K+, CI", or 

212 
Ca++ in some combination. The ion flows through the membrane in 
turn produce the voltage change known as the postsynaptic potential 
(PSP). If excitatory, it is called the EPSP; if inhibitory, the IPSP. 
pyramidal neurons 
The excitatory neurons of neocortex. 
They 
typically have a tall apical dendrite (an exception is the spiny stellate 
neuron) and a triangular-shaped cell body (from whence the name), 
from which their axon leaves. The neurons contributing to the 
pyramidal tract (alias the corticospinal tract, named for the triangular 
shape of the axon bundle as it traverses the medulla) are themselves 
pyramidal neurons, but most pyramidal neurons send axons 
elsewhere. [26] 
receptive field 
A map of the inputs to a single neuron, e.g., those 
parts of the skin of the hand that produce excitation or inhibition of 
a cortical neuron (antagonistic surrounds are especially common). 
The limited view of the world as seen by a single neuron. [28] 
recombination 
There are several connotations: (1) The shuffling of 
genetic material between an individual's two chromosome pairs that 
occurs just prior to the production of ova or sperm (the crossing-over 
phase of meiosis) and (2) the production of a new individual through 
. the union of a sperm and an ovum from two parents at fertilization. 
recruitment 
In neurophysiology, this means getting other neurons to 
join the action, much as the expert choir "recruits" the audience in 
the Hallelujah Chorus. 
resonance 
A relationship between two periodically moving bodies 
(say, two pendulum clocks on a shelf) in which their cycles 
eventually become locked together ("in sync," though often one cycle 
is some multiple of the other). More abstractly, a moving body may 
resonate with the stationary bumps in the road, or two chemical 
processes may resonate with one another and thereby synchronize 
their cycles. [65] 
sodium channel 
A pore through the membrane of a size to admit 
hydrated Na+ but not most other ions, controlled by gating 
mechanisms near the outer surface that open when the trans-
membrane voltage is becoming less negative. This admits even more 
Na+, making the inside even less negative. When these currents 
exceed those of counterbalancing outward potassium currents (this 
occurs at a voltage called the threshold), you get a regenerative cycle 
continuing for a hundred millivolt rise, known as the impulse. More 
sluggish mechanisms on the inner surface tend to close the channel 
opening, and thereby help (along with potassium entry through 

213 
other voltage-sensitive channels) to terminate the impulse and create 
a refractory period of several milliseconds in which it is more difficult 
to initiate another impulse. 
schema 
As in "schematic outline," it's a mental item more abstract 
than a rich mental image of an object. In some cognitive contexts, it 
is used more narrowly for those things like more, less, bigger, inside — 
things grounded in our everyday experiences, often making 
reference to our own body moving through our daily world. Move-
ments need something similar, and schema is often used to refer to 
standard movement programs. [161] 
spine, dendritic 
A small protrusion, like a thorn, on the shaft of a 
dendrite that receives several synaptic contacts from presynaptic 
axons. See figure on p. 26. 
stellate neurons 
The nonpyramidal neurons in the neocortex, on the 
basis of anatomy. Physiologically, most stellates have inhibitory 
actions, an exception being the spiny stellate neurons. 
synapse 
The synapse is the junction between neurons across which 
communications flow, usually in the form of neurotransmitter 
molecules secreted by the presynaptic axon terminal that diffuse a 
short distance across the extracellular space (the synaptic cleft) to the 
postsynaptic neuron, on whose membrane are some receptor 
molecules to which the neurotransmitter molecules reversibly bind. 
While they are bound, they open up an ion channel through the 
postsynaptic membrane, producing postsynaptic current flow. Most 
drugs affecting the CNS operate by interfering with synaptic 
transmission. See also dendrite, Hebbian synapse, neuromodulator, 
neurotransmitter, NMD A, postsynaptic, spine. [26] 
threshold The word has two connotations in neurophysiology, one of 
which has a lot of imprecise reciprocals. As used in describing the 
sodium channel, the threshold is the transmembrane voltage (say, 
-56 mV) at which the inward and outward currents are in unstable 
equilibrium and above which the inward current becomes regener-
ative (the upstroke of the impulse). But a "high threshold" is also 
used in the same way as saying "low excitability," that you've got, 
say, 20 mV to go from -76 mV before triggering an impulse. The 
phrase doesn't imply that the threshold voltage has risen to, say, -40 
mV. My sea level metaphor for the AGC is based on this latter use: 
increased sea level is a stand-in for lower gain which would decrease 
the chances of exceeding threshold. 

index 
Abbott, L.F., 231 
Abeles, M., 32,79,220,222 
Abelson, R., 233 
abortion, spontaneous, 139, 
220 
Abraham, R. H., 215 
Abraham, F. D., 215 
abstractions, 17,79,108, 
116,123,126,138,150, 
160,175,231 
access times, 141 
acetylcholine, 64,122,210, 
211 
acquisitiveness, 117 
acronyms, 205 
action potential, 226 
defined, 207 
actions, 160 
adaptations, 9,23,24,52 
advertising, 147 
aerodynamics, 53 
Aertsen, A., 220 
AGC, see automatic gain 
control (AGC), 103,227 
age, 72 
agency, 161 
agenda, 64,108,191-193 
hidden, 96 
agent, 194 
aging, 85 
agnosia, 141,180 
alcove, 56,92,100 
algorithm, 4,69,85,159 
abstracting, 123 
darwinian, 83 
hashing, 123 
substitute for cloning, 167 
Alkon,D.L.,231 
allele, 103,110,140,203,206 
Alsace, 119 
alternatives, 176 
Altaian, J., 230 
amateurs, 156 
ambiguity, 92,117,169,183 
amnesia, 185 
amoeba, 61 
amplification, 83,221,227, 
228 
dendritic, 103,232 
EPSPs,226 
NMDA-dependent, 77 
persistent sodium 
channels, 76 
via re-entrant loops, 83 
amygdala, 66,121 
analog, 227 
analogical reasoning, 163, 
165 
analogy, 82,98,116,163, 
177 
abstract, 79 
moving crowds, 163 
water flow, 163 
Andreasen, N., 163,235 
anesthesia, 67 
animation, 8 
annexation, 35,58,69,88 
annulus, 35,42 
anomalous dispersion, 33 
anomia, 73,141 
antagonistic surrounds, 40 
antibiotics, 166 
antibodies, 4,9,20,218 
antidepressants, 186 
antigen, 9,197,207 
apes, 117 
abstraction, 145 
aphasia, 150 
Aquinas, Thomas, 54 
Arbib,M.A.,51,224 
archaeoastronomy, 218 
archaeologists, 117 
archery, 176 
archipelago, 25,102,211 
arcuate fasciculus, 131 
Aristotle, 9 
artificial life, 82 
Artola, A., 226 
Asanuma, H., 222 
association cortex, 13,77, 
179 
associations, 175 
sensorimotor, 178 
sensory-motor, 100 
attention, 176,182 
and subconscious, 108 
selective, 64 
shift, 66 
attraction 
basin of, 68 
attractor 
butterfly, 140 
composite, 102 
defined, 203 
extra-strange, 140 
fading, 101 
fulfilled, 155 
multilobed, 122,150,155 
new, 71 
phase portrait, 203 
state machine, 154 
attractors, 66,119,124,167, 
177,181 
and individual, 103 
and new memories, 70 
chaotic, 66,203 
duration, 184 
eliminating, 71 
evoking particular 
patterns, 122 
fading, 107 
ghostly, 119 
global, 120 
in bilingual belts, 136 
innate, 117 
limit-cycle, 66,69 
melding, 136,178 
more detailed, 141 
number in hexagon, 78 
overlain, 178 
overwriting, 71 
parent, 136 
periodic, 203 
point, 66,67,69,203 
quasiperiodic, 66,203 
repertoire, 178 
short-term, 107 
staging, 73 
strange, 167,169 
successively-overlain, 180 
superposition, 139 
wings, 120 
attributes, 59,123,141,165, 
177,180 
automata, 14,84,148 
automatic gain control 
(AGC), 77,135,168, 
179,203,227 
exclusion of the 
incoherent., 135 
glycine, 78 
awareness, 175,182,236 

242 
axon 
collaterals, 28 
commissural, 221 
conduction speed, 43,130 
Baylor, D. A., 225 
behavioral set, 64,108 
Bekesy, G. von, 28,87,221 
Bekkers, J. M, 232 
Belgium, 96,119 
belts of overlap, 119,139 
beneficiary, 194 
Bergman, H., 220 
Bering Straits, 93 
biasing, 22 
Bickerton, D., 114,170,215, 
235 
bifurcation, 204 
bilingual, 96,136 
binding, 56,115,223,230 
defined, 204 
pronouns, 195 
Bingo, 155,171 
biogeography, 25 
bipolar cell, 40 
bipolar disorder, 186 
black hole, 188 
blackboard, 36,60,66,97 
blood flow, 227 
blood pressure, 189 
Blum, K. I., 231 
body as machine, 164 
boom time, 93,96 
bootstrapping, 83 
border, 60 
boredom, 187 
Borges, Jorge Luis, 51 
Borneo, 96 
bottleneck, 93,208 
error correction, 95 
evolutionary, 204 
island, 95 
serial-order, 237 
thoughts, 191 
Bower, G.H., 233 
bribes, 159 
British Columbia, 151 
Broca area, 17 
Broderick, D., 144 
Brodie,R.,230 
Brodmann Area, 55,203 
Bronowski, J., 170,235 
Brooks, P., 146,233 
Brown, A. M, 226 
Brownian motion, 116 
buffer, 140 
Bullock, T.H., 201,237 
bumps and ruts, 65,181, 
212 
butterfly, 66 
Buzhaki,G.,228 
Byron, Lord (George 
Gordon), 26 
cadence, 147 
Caesar, J., 147 
calcium, 75,226,232 
second messenger, 208 
Calvin, Agnes L., 148 
Calvin, Fred H., 148 
Calvin, William H., 215, 
218,221,223,225,227, 
228,230,232-235,238 
Campbell, D.T., 61,225 
capacitance, 210 
capture, 68,120,124 
retrograde inhibition, 179 
stabilizing selection, 103 
car, 171 
Carroll, Lewis (Charles 
Dodgson),146,229,233 
cartesian theater fallacy, 56, 
204 
carving, 21,65,83 
case markings, 195 
catalysts, 23,25,83,85,101 
at several removes, 102 
catchment zone, 78,188 
categories, 79,100,108,110, 
175,177 
cell-assembly, 230 
empty, 193 
from set theory, 160 
fuzzy, 160 
symbols, 114 
category 
construction, 114 
decompose, 125 
errors, 114 
exemplars, 122,124 
extensible, 115 
hierarchy, 125 
linkage, 125 
loose-fitting, 120 
metaphors, 162 
phoneme, 68 
prototype, 114 
schemas, 162 
well-learned-in-infancy, 
68 
corticocortical, 205 
defined, 203 
fanout, 133 
horizontal, 221 
length, 6,130 
one-way street, 203 
propagation delay, 232 
pruning, 130 
sideways, 131 
superficial, 221 
superficial pyramidal 
cells, 31 
terminal clusters, 40,42, 
121,222,237 
thalamocortical, 223 
U-shaped, 131 
back-crossing, 166 
backslide, 23 
bacteria, 9,24,137 
Baldwin, J., 37,49 
ballistic skills, 170 
balloon, 34 
banana, 43 
bar code, 57 
Barcelona, 148 
barriers, 35,56,59,87,91, 
93,100,118,124,180, 
185 
end runs, 100 
end-runable, 91 
thicker, 118 
basin of attraction, 68,71, 
73,82,100,107,120, 
123,131,139,152,183 
amalgamations, 139 
biases, 136 
bifurcation, 204 
constraints, 164 
defined, 204 
discontinuous, 204 
lingering, 120 
LTP alters, 102 
neuromodulators, 136 
overlay, 79 
particularly secure, 188 
recall, 148 
Bateson,W.,181 

category-of-one, 124 
cats, 102,220 
and flowers, 25 
cause, 81 
CD player, 154 
cell death, 81 
cell-assembly, 6,14,16,17, 
37,39,40,104,180,221, 
232 
and orientation columns, 
105 
compacting, 118 
defined, 204 
Hebbian, 100,106 
hexagonal, 106 
history, 230 
in hexagon, 106 
interdigitate, li8 
minimal, 44,47 
center-surround, 40 
central nervous system 
(CNS),204 
cerebral code, 2,99,120,184 
abstractions, 116 
analog aspects, 70 
arbitrary, 197 
binary, 70 
compression, 179 
copying, 18 
feel vs. sight, 129,130 
hexagon,47 
reigniting, 121 
stored version, 148 
cerebral cortex, 221 
defined, 204 
layers, 6,29,74 
Cerebral Symphony (Calvin), 
175 
chain of thought, 148 
chains, 104,222 
chair, 160 
chance, 21 
Changeux, J.-R, 82,181,228 
channel 
blocked, 75 
calcium, 76 
NMD A, 75 
persistent sodium, 76 
sodium, 221,232 
chants, 37,39 
chaos 
as controlled disorder, 67 
edge of, 67 
introductions, 238 
chaos theory, 71,225 
checksum, 17,123,206 
chemical bonds, 104 
Cheshire Cat, 105 
chess, 157 
children, 117,146,233 
chimera, 5,103,115,139 
chimpanzee, 52 
choir, 39,133,153 
expert, 153,212 
large homogenous, 185 
several strong voices, 167 
synchronous, 168 
choirmasters, 39 
Chomsky, N., 238 
chords, 3,149,168 
chorus, 37,58,92,235 
and closure, 141 
closure for action, 142 
local, 142 
size, 169 
to throw, 153 
variants gradually 
standardize, 154 
via a link, 142 
Christmas tree, 14,15,44 
chromosomes, 5,22,212 
crossing-over, 209 
meiosis, 24 
chunking, 196 
defined, 205 
Cicero, 54,63,224,225 
cipher, 205 
clause, 195 
Clay, J. R., 234 
timing, 153 
climate change, 84,96,102, 
184,185,189,190,231 
clocks, 32,153,212 
clones, 102 
modified, 140 
timing jitter, 228 
to throw with precision, 
153 
cloning, 18,40,56,71,85 
excess, 108 
lateral, 70 
setup, 48 
speed, 184 
within Area, 60 
cloning competitions, 103, 
165,236 
supervising, 189 
closure, 141,171,177 
premature, 180,188 
co-habitation, 53 
cochlea, 28 
code, 78 
bar, 57,99 
category, 149 
cerebral, 2 
compression, 106 
defined, 2,3,205 
digital, 70 
error-correction, 20 
genetic, 2,205,206,238 
hexagonal, 155 
master code for comb, 
130 
simple and complex, 138 
taste, 219 
codes, 217 
arbitrary, 19 
degenerate, 19 
frequency, 2 
neural, 217 
representation, 219 
schema, 164 
coding space, 116 
coherence, 69 
coincidence detection, 76, 
227 
colonization, 96 
color, 12,59,190 
color blobs, 46,222,223 
columns, 232 
macrocolumn, 205 
minicolumn, 205 
ocular dominance, 7,46, 
205 
orientation, 205,222 
coma, 14,67 
comb, 15,108,115,126,129, 
141,150 
committees, 13,45,167 
commons, 54,224 
competition, 97,119,157, 
190 
cloning, 60 
end runs, 100 
lack of, 108,185 
parallel, 190 
complexity, 67,82 
crank for, 104 
from simple rules, 141 

244 
composite, 115,118 
comprehension, 190 
compression, 179 
compulsion, 154,188 
computers, 53,98,207 
Macintosh desktop, 163 
concentration, 185 
concepts, 39,71,113,159, 
160,220 
and cell-assembly, 104 
inexpressible, 142 
concrete thinking, 108 
concussions, 14 
conditioning, 209 
conduction speed, 180 
conduction times, 142 
conductor, orchestra, 150, 
155 
confabulate, 85 
conference telephone calls, 
132 
connectionism, 181,230 
connectivity, 70,97,100, 
177 
alteration, 139 
carving, 65 
corticocortical, 232 
embedding a new 
pattern, 76 
facilitation, 73 
filling up, 79 
ghostly patterns in, 102 
lattice, 36,221,222 
multiple patterns 
inherent, 122 
plasticity, 140 
spatial-only pattern, 65 
stepping, 222 
connectivity change, 70,71 
consciousness, 107,170, 
176,181,189,215 
awareness, 175 
blinders, 183 
center of, 190 
current topic, 182 
gedankenexperiment, 176 
heightened form of, 180 
James-Piaget-Popper, 182 
layers of processing, 170 
Neural Correlate of, 236 
no lesion abolishes, 190 
playoffs, 108 
quantum mechanics, 181 
subconscious, 175 
talking-to-yourself, 183 
two-track, 190 
unity of, 175,237 
William James, 182 
constructionism, 115 
contiguity, 115 
continents, 25,59, 111 
contingency, 161 
contrast, 78 
convergence zone, 68,130, 
131,140,150,178,180 
conversations 
two simultaneous, 190 
conversion of function, 53 
cooperativity, 69 
copying, 58,83,99 
DNA, 18 
from other copies, 27 
lateral, 69 
memes, 82 
copying competitions, 90, 
114,182,183,195 
when not needed, 90 
corpus callosum, 31,130, 
131,205 
cortex 
entorhinal, 85 
motor, 77,152,217 
orbital frontal, 64 
premotor, 154 
primary visual, 28,30,42, 
222 
sensory, 77 
superficial layers, 30 
cortical circuit models, 79 
corticocortical, 19,31,60, 
131,132,196,232 
defined, 205 
corticospinal tract, 212 
courses of action, 190 
Craik,K.J.W.,4,217,236 
creativity, 20,25,79,107, 
235 
Crick, E, 18,83,223,236 
Crill,W.,226 
Cronin, H., 206,215,233, 
236,238 
crying, 145,154,233 
cryptography, 17,205,231 
crystalization, 59,99,168, 
169,179 
crystals, 2 
culture, 20 
curve-fitting, 218 
cyberspace, 142 
cyclothymia, 186 
Cytowic, R. E., 233 
Damasio, A. R., 11,131,219, 
232 
dance, 65,69,145,152,169 
Danchin, A., 228 
dark adaptation, 40 
darkness, 219 
Darlington, R. B., 224 
Darwin Machine, 6,34,117, 
126,156,197,217,218, 
238 
defined, 205 
shortcuts, 193 
Darwin, C, 4,5,9,52,84, 
99,102,109,176,197, 
199,218,224,229 
sexual selection, 137 
darwinian algorithm, 205 
darwinian process, 6,25, 
117,217 
and superpositions, 119 
cascade of, 192 
Edelman's "reentry,", 83 
environments, 63 
essentials of, 21 
isn't truly random, 23 
not an analogy, 103 
run on different 
substrates, 104 
six essentials, 6,22,51,99, 
104,110 
slow guiding fast, 22 
stratified stability, 142 
darwinism, 22,181 
cognitive implications of, 
110 
milliseconds-to-minutes, 
181 
speed, 25 
Das, A., 221 
database, distributed, 136 
Dawkins, R., 27,81,209, 
221,227,230 
Deadwyler, S. A., 217 
decision, 4,109,152,167, 
171,185 
cloning competition, 117 
economistlike, 167 

245 
from plurality, 92 
preemptive, 168 
deer, 24,220 
DeHaan, R., 153,234 
dija iw, 108,180,185 
Delbriick, M., 9 
delusion, 187,188 
deme,87,96,100,210 
defined, 205 
fragment, 93 
dementia, 67,178 
dendrite 
apical, 40,76,203,205, 
212,226 
basal, 60,205 
defined, 205 
receiving branches, 205 
Dennett, D. C, 147,175, 
215,236 
depolarization, 75,76 
depression, 186 
depression, long-term 
(LTD), 77,232 
Descartes, R., 9 
designer, 4 
deterministic, 66 
development, 21,81,137 
diets, 189 
digit span, 195 
digital-analog, 78,227 
discourses, 109 
disintermediation, 170 
dispersion, temporal, 134 
dissociations, 185 
distributed data base, 115 
DNA, 18,99,110,166 
annealing, 235 
dimorphism, 233 
Dobelle,W.H.,228 
Dodgson, C, 146 
dog, 31,114,116 
dolphin, 78 
dominance, 182 
dopamine, 64,73,210 
Douglas, R. J., 221 
Downs, D., 201 
dream, janitor's, 181 
dreaming, 1,5,108,183,218 
Dusser de Barenne, J. G., 
232 
dwarfing, 24,220 
dynamics, 69,103,120 
Ecdes,J.C,236 
ecology, 83 
economics, 96,141,157,167, 
170 
Eddington, D. K., 228 
Edelman, G.M., 82,85,121, 
175,181,183,215,228 
edema, 179 
editorial process, 85 
education, 171,193 
efference copy, 121,206,231 
Einstein, A., 61 
electricity, 163,235 
electroencephalogram 
(EEG),64,67,79,93, 
102,189,225 
electroshock, 107 
embedding, 193,195 
emergence, 28,46,53,109, 
110,226 
emigrants, 136 
end runs, 100 
energy, storehouses, 137 
Engel,A.K.,79,227 
Eno,B.,154,156,234 
Enright,J.T.,153,222,234 
ensemble, 217,226 
cell-assembly, 13 
synchronized, 16 
entorhinal area, 121 
entrainment, 33,37,86 
environment, 23,63 
biases cloning success, 
182 
darwinian process, 21 
memorized, 64,90,100 
multifaceted, 100 
real-time physical, 101 
surviving fluctuations, 97 
environments 
fluctuating, 24,102 
successive, 102 
variegated, 63 
enzyme, 22,23 
epilepsy, 188,225 
episodes, 114,146,149 
EPSPs, 75,212,221,226,227 
amplification, 226 
equipotentiality, 73 
eraser, vs. obscuring coat 
of paint, 107 
Erickson, R. P., 219 
error correction, 59,93-95 
escaping, 87,88 
metric, 88 
relaxing, 100 
target cortex, 134 
errors, 24,61 
esprit de I'escalier, 25,85,192 
essentials, darwinian, 6,22, 
51,99,104,110 
evolution 
accelerating, 24,101,102 
ape-to-human, 169 
cultural, 117 
directed, 166 
extended analogy to, 197 
RNA-based,22 
selective survival, 21 
species, 24,205 
two-level interactive, 191 
evolutionarily stable 
strategies, 86,103,137, 
229 
evolutionary biology, 83, 
86,93,180 
excitability 
dampened, 78 
declines, 95 
fluctuations, 92,102 
insufficient, 185 
reduced, 78,92,179 
threshold, 213 
excitation 
amplification, 76 
annuli,35 
drive, patchy, 60 
flanking, 40 
lateral, 28 
recurrent, 32,48,76-78, 
110,179,221 
uniform, 101 
exemplars, 122,124 
expert, 156,176,179,186 
extinctions, 24,96,100,102 
eye movements, 64 
eyewitness, 64,85,150,209 
fade outs, 105 
familiarity, 185 
fanout,19,40,132,133 
faux fax, 20,131,136,150, 
178,184,187,194-196 
biases cloning, 182 
defined, 206 
parent, 136 

246 
feathers, 53 
feature detectors, 46,47,59, 
71,115 
features, 136,162 
feedback, 23,121,169 
reinforcing, 155 
females, 137 
fence, 92 
fencing, 55 
fertilization, 5,24,212 
Fetz,E.E.,225 
fiber optic bundles, 19,132 
fifth, 125 
figure-ground, 67 
filter, 69 
fingerprint, 123,150,207, 
209 
Finlay,B.L.,224 
firecrackers, 28 
fireflies, 33,222 
fish, 12 
Fisken, R. A., 221 
flashlight beam, 132 
flattery, 159 
flinging, 169 
flowers, 220 
fluctuations, insufficient, 
185 
focussing, 41 
fog, 13,46,77,107,135,179 
forest, 34,96,114 
fortunes, 177 
foundations, 109,113 
founder effect, 93 
fragmentation, 211 
Freeman, W. J., 69,120,161, 
201,215,224,238 
Fried, L, 225 
frontal cortex, 131,191 
frontiers, 102,117,119,124 
Frostig, R. D., 223 
fugue states, 185 
functions 
bundling, 53 
conversions, 53 
invention, 53 
part-time, 53 
stage-setting, 53 
funnel, 78,132 
future, 189 
gain, 77,203 
gaits, 66,73,148 
Game of Life, 14 
game theory, 86 
games, 117,146,169 
gamete dimorphism, 24 
gametes, 137 
gaps, 31,87,133,179,221 
axon terminal, 60 
resourceless, 60 
silent, 33 
Garey,L.J.,221 
gateway, 89,91,94,100,185 
width, 88,229 
gedankenexperiment, 116, 
164,176 
gene 
analogy to hexagon, 103 
defined, 22,206 
heterozygous, 203 
repertoires, 206 
gene flow, 205 
gene frequencies, 93 
generalists, 24 
genes, exchange of, 119 
genes vs. bodies, 81 
genetic algorithms, 22,205, 
217 
genetic code, 3 
genetic diversity, 93 
genetics, 17,181 
genome, 103,140,206 
genotype, 28,81 
confusing, 181 
defined, 206 
genotype-phenotype 
barrier, 103 
Genter, D., 235 
geometry, 35 
Georgopoulos, A. P., 217 
germ line, 81 
German, 147 
Getting, P. A., 74,226 
ghosts, 187 
Gilbert, CD., 221 
Glass, L., 215,238 
Gleick,J.,234 
glia,78 
Glickman,S.E.,201 
glutamate, 31,74-76,211 
glycine, 75,78 
goal, 194 
Goldman-Rakic, P. S., 220 
Goodwin, F. K., 237 
gopher, 92,94 
gorillas, 137 
Gould, C.G., 98,229 
Gould, J. L., 98,229 
Gould, S. J., 1,201,217 
graded effects, 69 
grammar, 113,146,194 
grandiosity, 188 
grandmother's face cell, 11, 
13 
Grant, P., 26 
Grant, R., 26 
grass, 21,48,100 
Graubard, K., 201,238 
Gregorian chants, 125 
Grinvald, A., 223 
growth, 53 
guessing, 159 
guilt, 188 
Haalman, I., 220 
habitat, 24 
habituation, 189,192 
Haldane,J.B.S.,181,236 
Hallelujah Chorus, 153 
hallucinations, 64,108,187, 
188 
hammering, 169 
Hampson, R. E., 217 
hand, 41,72,141,223,225 
Hansel, C, 226 
Hardin, G., 224 
harmonizing melodies, 39 
harpsichord, 70 
Hartiine,D.K.,223 
Hartline, H. K., 28,87,201 
Harvard Medical School, 
239 
hash, 17,100,123,138,140, 
150,168,209 
defined, 207 
Hawaii, 94 
head injuries, 85 
heart cells, 153 
Hebb,D.O.,13,16,39,82, 
104,106,111,127,201, 
204,207,211,215,219, 
229,230 
Hebbian cell-assembly, 6 
Hebrew University of 
Jerusalem, 239 
hegemony, 58,166,182,195, 
236 
shortcutting, 166 

247 
Helmholtz, H. von, 12 
hemoglobin, 206 
Heron, W., 229 
Herrigel,E.,236 
heterozygous, 140,203 
hexagon, 2,65,99,110,218 
anchored, 46 
capture, 70 
centrally-located, 168 
contains whole keyboard, 
125 
doesn't always live and 
die as a unit, 103 
fixed, 46 
hybrid, 118 
introduction, 45 
no-mans-land, 102 
noncloning, 100 
pair, 106,168 
recruitment, 65 
resonances, 70 
hexagonal mosaics, 56,71, 
110,183,223 
and triangular arrays, 45 
boundary, 90 
no-mans-land, 59 
reignite, 47 
superimpose, 59 
size needed, 71 
specificity needed to 
generate, 121 
vs. wallpaper, 47 
hexagons theory, 72 
history, 86 
hierarchy, 194 
hilltop, 60 
Hiorns, R. W., 223 
hippocampus, 85,183,204, 
228 
history, rewriting of, 108 
Hobson,J.A.,5,lll,122, 
187,215,218,230,231 
Hofstadter, D., 238 
holistic, 180 
Holland, J. H., 157,217,234 
hologram, 13 
Hoist, E. von, 231 
Holt, R., 231 
Holtzman, S. R., 231 
homeostasis, 164 
Homo erectus, 197 
Homo sapiens sapiens, 197 
Hopfield,J.J.,217 
Hore,J.,233 
hot spot, 32,40,42,43,77 
focus, 76 
reducing, 232 
size, 41 
How Brains Think (Calvin), 
53,147,156,175,189 
Hubel,D.H.,105 
Hume, 9 
Huntington, S. R, 159,234 
HurryUp Mode, 167,168 
Hutchinson, G.E., 229 
Huygens, C, 32 
hybrids, 103,118,139,166, 
180,203 
hyperacuity, 86 
hypertext, 125 
hypomania, 186 
hypotheses, 61 
ice age, 25 
abrupt climate changes, 
189 
idea, 165 
idee fixe, 108,188 
identifier, 123 
from pattern of first few 
impulses, 125 
illnesses, 184 
illogicality, 184 
illusions, 28,64 
figure-ground, 67 
image 
abstract, 234 
mental, 5 
smear, 105 
stabilized, 105,229 
imagination, 159,190 
imaging, 17,31 
immune response, 5,20, 
197,205,207 
immunity, 207 
immunology, 83 
impulse, 77,79,210,211 
defined, 207,212 
initial site, 130 
refractory period, 213 
spontaneous firing, 77 
sustained firing, 77 
train, 75 
incoherent fiber optic 
bundles, 132 
indecision, 185 
individual, 58,83,98,114, 
138 
survives as a cohesive 
unit, 103 
infant, 114 
infection, 5,207 
inflections, 195 
inheritance, blending vs. 
particulate, 110 
inheritance principle, 23, 
51,201 
defined, 208 
from surface-to-volume 
ratio, 101 
inhibition, 78 
flanking, 40,41 
GABAergic,41 
increased, 92 
lateral, 28,221 
recurrent, 221 
surround, 43,76,77,87 
waves, 60 
inhibition (memory) 
proactive and retroactive, 
73 
initial conditions, 66,68,69, 
120 
chaotic systems, 203 
sensitive dependence on, 
205 
insect, 98 
instability, 104 
instructive theories, 9 
instrument, 194 
insulation, 53 
intellectual function, 107, 
110,117,175 
shortcuts, 193 
intelligence, 1 
some grand supervisor, 
189 
intentional structure, 160 
interdigitate, 118 
interglaciation, 24 
intermediates, 138 
interneuron, 11,13,34 
defined, 208 
multisensory, 59 
interoffice mail, 19,30 
interpreter, 191 
interruptions, 184 
intrinsic horizontal 
connections, 31,131 

248 
ion, 75,208,209 
IPSP,212 
Iriki, A., 222 
island biogeography, 208 
island population, 24 
islands, 4,25,60,95,102 
of activity, 78 
sharpened, 135 
isotopes, 19 
itinerancy, 120,149 
defined, 208 
Iverson, P., 235 
Ives, C, 7,119,140,218 
jack-of-all-trades, 189 
Jackendoff,R.,215,238 
jam sessions, 119 
jamais vu, 185 
James, W., 98,106,110,159, 
181,197,217,229,236 
Jamison, K. R., 186,237 
consciousness, 237 
Janitor's Dream, 181 
Japanese, 68 
Jasper, H., 221 
jazz, 119,145 
jealousy, 188 
Jenkins, W.M., 223,225 
Jerne,N.K.,9,218 
Jersey, 220 
Jessell,T.M.,226 
jitter, 15,151,153,169 
Joan of Arc, 188 
Johnson, Mark, 215,234 
source domain, 164 
Jones, E. G., 223 
Joyce, G.E, 217,220 
jukebox, 154 
Jung,C.,l 
Jupiter, 53 
juvenile mortality, 21,101 
juxtapositions, 5 
Kandel, E. R., 226 
Kant, I., 9,113,159,231 
Kaufman, J., 231 
Keller, A., 222 
Kepler, J., 17 
keyboard, 78 
kicking, 169 
King, D.G., 201 
knowledge, 61,144 
Koch, C, 221,223,232,236 
Konig, P., 227 
Krasne,EB.,230 
Kuhl,P.K.,226,235 
Kupferman, L, 219 
Lagnado, L., 225 
Lamarckism, 103 
landscape,' bumpy, 95 
language, 11,109,117,194-
197 
ape, 117 
localization in cortex, 170 
neural machinery, 169 
sign, 191 
language cortex 
multifunctional, 53 
Language Itself, 195,196 
Larmarkism, 117 
Lashley,K.S.,13,70,73, 
226 
lateral excitation, 28 
launch window, 151 
laundering, 69 
Law of Large Numbers, 153 
lean mean machine, 24 
learning, 9,20,218,226 
episodes, 209 
one-trial, 85 
Leibniz, 9 
levels 
biological two-levels, 81 
confusions of, 180 
of abstraction, 114,116, 
145,193 
of complexity, 79 
of consciousness, 236 
of explanation, 2,170, 
180,181,183,236 
of mechanism, 177,180 
of phenomenological 
explanation, 177 
project structure across, 
163 
stratified stability, 180 
"Janitor's Dream", 184 
levels of sophisticated 
complexity, 79 
Levitt, J. B., 222 
Lieke,E.E.,223 
light pipes, 19,132 
limit cycle, defined, 208 
Lindbergh, C, 187 
lingua ex machina, 156 
linguistics, 193 
linkage, 115,125,169,178, 
187,194 
centerless, 132 
chaining, 132 
faux fax, 184 
in genetics, 208 
inherit, 140 
links 
circuit-riding state 
machine, 154 
failure to make 
accustomed, 141 
search for, 141 
Lister, A. M., 220 
liver, 140 
local calls, 131 
local cortical circuit, 46,106 
Locke, J., 9 
locomotion, 65,66,73,122, 
148 
locus, 16 
Loeser,J.D.,223 
Loftus, E.E, 225 
long-distance operator, 132 
long-term potentiation 
(LTP),32,102,226 
defined, 209 
loop, 32,169,183 
revisionist two-maps, 117 
self-reexciting, 32 
Lorente de N6, R., 32,104, 
106,222 
loudness control, 77 
lunch, free, 53 
Lund, J. S., 31,86,201,221, 
222 
Luria, S., 9 
M.I.T.,239 
Mach Bands, 28,221 
Macintosh, 163 
Mackey,M.C,215,238 
Macnaughton, B. L., 228 
macrocolumns, 19,32,45, 
131,133,179 
magnesium, 75 
magnet effect, 162 
magnets, 203 
Mahowald,M.,221 
mail boxes, 30 
males, 137 
mammals, 117,221 

249 
manic-depressive illness, 
109,162,185,188 
defined, 186 
Manor, Y, 232 
mantra, 107,180 
map, 52,57,163 
mapping, 2,65,103 
constraints, 164 
imprecise topographic, 
134 
point-to-point, 19 
margins, 24,101 
Martin, J., 233 
Martin, Kevan A., 221 
mass action, 224 
mating, 137 
matrices, sparse, 122 
Mauthner cell, 12 
Maxwell, Clerk, 109 
Maynard Smith, J., 129,229, 
231 
Mayr,E.,9,81,95,96,218, 
229 
McCulloch,W.S.,232 
McGrann,J.V.,231 
McGuire,B.A.,31,221 
meanings, 115,160 
medicine, 164 
meditation, 107 
medley, 149 
meiosis, 5,24,209 
Meister, M., 225 
melodies, 39,59,85,96,122, 
125,133,140,155 
clash, 59 
overlaying, 119 
trills' worth, 139 
Yankee Doodle, 140 
membrane, 209 
meme, 18,20,82,175,197 
memorization 
avoiding capture, 124 
memory, 4,11,13, 111 
abstracts, 17 
access slowed, 178 
accretion problem, 141 
acquisition, 71 
associative, 17,115,116, 
130,231 
consolidation, 209 
construction, 64 
distortions, 17 
dual trace, 14,81,82,106, 
126,136,177,209,230 
episodic, 85,185,209 
episodic, rehearsal 
needed, 85 
errors, 17 
eyewitness, 64,85,150, 
209,225 
fog, 13,14,85,179 
head injuries, 85 
hippocampus, 85 
imagination, 64 
immediate, 179 
interconversions, 17 
long-term, 14,81,100,209 
malleable, 85 
overwritten, 140 
passive-vs-active, 15 
permission to record, 108 
pigeonhole, 11,12 
primitive unit, 114 
rarely-used, 120 
recall, 16,17,64,70,71, 
85,148,188,232 
recognition, 17,71,148, 
232 
redundancy, 13,178 
retrograde inhibition, 179 
reverberatory, 14 
selective, 178 
sequence of events, 64 
serial-order, 146 
short-term, 101,193,209 
skill-acquisition, 85 
spatial-only, 15,81 
spatially distributed, 13 
spatiotemporal, 14 
storing, 70 
superpositions, 117 
trace, 13,63,204 
trace, reactivating, 104 
uncovering in dementias, 
178 
unit of, 13 
unreliable, 64,85,108 
weakened synapses, 227 
what gets memorized, 74 
working, 14,17,64,196, 
220 
Mendel, G., 110,180 
menstrual cycles, 33 
mental image, 57,160,213 
schema, 161 
mental models, 116,150 
recalling a text, 149 
mental states, 67,106 
Merzenich, M. M., 223,225 
message board, 13,14 
message digest, 17,85,100, 
123 
defined, 209 
meta-representations 
analogies, 113 
categories, 113 
metabolic energy, 137 
metabolism, 227 
metabolite, 78 
metaphor, 100,103,108, 
110,116,117,160,171, 
175,177,234 
donor, 163 
encoding, 164 
Kant on, 159 
linkage, 164 
Macintosh desktop, 163 
source domain, 164 
strip some detail, 163 
metapopulation, 205 
defined, 210 
metric 
and gateways, 88 
change, 60 
local, 118 
target cortex, 134 
Mexican hats, 28 
Meyer, M., 8,201,240 
Michael, D., 107 
microcolumns, 179 
microelectrodes, 16 
micronystagmus, 15,104 
middlemen, 122,170 
migrants, 205 
migration, 208 
Miller, B., 233 
Milner,RM.,219,230 
mimicry, 33 
mind-clearing techniques, 
107 
Minerva, 53 
minicolumn, 7,31,40-42, 
78,96,211,223 
MinskyM.,165,215,235 
mitochondria, 3 
mitosis, 140,209 
Mittelstaedt, H., 231 
mixing, 66 

250 
model of visual world, 64 
monkey, 52,68 
Monod, J., 9 
monopoly, 96 
mood, 186 
Moore, R, 166,235 
Morrow, D. G., 233 
mortality, 139 
mother, 114 
motor cortex, 224 
mouse trails, 121 
movement 
cloning competition, 117 
initial feedback, 169 
preparation, 77 
movement commands 
cloning, 86 
movement program 
fast track decision, 168 
overlaying, 119 
movement schema, 57 
movements 
ballistic limb, 169 
combing, 130 
hand, 141,235 
holds, 64 
multifunctionality, 53,73, 
95,178 
multiplexing, 237 
muscle, 15 
music, 15,66,113,117,150, 
169,234 
as a teaching analogy, 126 
basis in the brain, 126 
capability for, 147 
photocopied, 119 
written, 39 
musical history, 231 
counterpoint, 126 
Gregorian chants, 125 
harmony, 126 
plainsong, 125 
musical scale, 3 
mutations, 5,101,180 
myelin, 210,232 
limits on, 130 
mythology, 139 
N-methyl-D-aspartate {see 
NMDA) 
narrative, 109,146,190,233 
convergence, 189 
dreaming, 149 
structure, 172 
unity, 172,236 
nation-states, 182 
natural selection, 5,84 
necessity, 161 
Necker cube, 67 
neocortex, 204 
Neodarwinian 
Evolutionary Synthesis, 
181 
nesting, 145,195 
Neural Darwinism 
(Edelman),82,83 
neural networks, 226 
neuromodulator, 64,66,73, 
121,186 
defined, 210 
local ratios, 184 
norepinephrine, 122 
sculpturing circuits, 192 
serotonin, 122 
neuron (nerve cell), 
axon, 203,211 
cell body, 203,210 
command, 12,13,219 
dendrite, 203,211 
diagram, 26 
sensitivity, 12 
neuron death, 130 
neuronography, 131 
neurons 
basket, 222 
firing rhythmically, 77, 
227 
inhibitory, 222 
large stellate cells, 43 
layer 5 pyramidal, 87,226 
motor, 15,151,152 
motor cortex, 152 
multisensory, 59 
noisy, 151 
orientation-sensitive, 219 
pyramidal, 30,205,212, 
221 
self-paced mode, 152 
smooth stellate, 41 
spiny stellate, 212 
stellate, 213 
subcortical, 121 
superficial pyramidal, 41, 
74,126,131,179,222 
neurophysiologists, 28 
neurosurgeon, 54 
neurotransmitter, 31,74, 
208,213,219 
and neuromodulator, 210 
and pre-existing voltage, 
75 
glutamate, 75,211 
glycine, 78 
inhibitory, 75 
retrograde, 76 
newborns, 68 
Newton, I., 17 
niche, 54 
defined, 95,211 
empty, 24,60,93,95,%, 
102,206 
new attractor, 71 
potential, 96 
Nietzsche, F.W., 63 
NMDA (N-methyl-D-
aspartate), 32,43,74, 
134,168,211,226,232, 
234 
glycine, 78 
magnesium plug, 75 
time asymmetry, 121 
no-mans-land, 89,102,118, 
119 
nodes, 134,227 
at gateway, 88 
centering via 
crystalization, 89 
define, 43 
failure, 59 
off focus, 88 
repeater, 135 
shrink over time, 179 
nodes of Ranvier, 210,232 
noise, 66,85,151,152,233 
refusal to accept that 
input is noise, 129 
synaptic, 230 
non sequiturs, 184 
nonexistence, 161 
nonsense, 146 
norepinephrine, 64,122, 
186,210 
noun, 194 
noun phrases, 147,194 
novelty, 119,121,151,180, 
187,190 
nursery rhyme, 145 

objects, 114,160,165,177 
from fragments, 147 
virtual, 159 
obligation, 161 
obsession, 188 
octave, 125 
ocular dominance columns, 
46 
pjemann, G. A., 215,225, 
235 
On the Origin of Species 
(Darwin), 197 
ontogeny, 6,181,237 
tuning-up period, 237 
open space, 54,57 
opportunity costs, 141 
orchestra, 154 
order, discovery of, 183 
ordering rules, 146 
Organization of Behavior 
(Hebb),16,230 
orientation, 116 
Osborne, H., 234 
oscillations, 67 
oscillators 
harmonic, 33 
relaxation, 33,66,86 
output pathways 
access to, 190 
ova, 24,137 
pacemaker, 230 
packet-based networks, 
132,237 
packing principle, 37 
Pagels,H.,172,236 
pairing 
repeated, 134 
paleoanthropology, 193 
parable, 116,163 
paraphrase, 150 
parasites, 138 
parcellation, 24,87,102 
basins of attraction, 71 
defined, 211 
parietal lobe, 204 
park, 54,92,100 
Parkinsonism, 67 
pastiche, 115 
patches, 169 
patchwork quilt, 52,99,100 
patchy distribution, 60,87 
paths, 155,160 
pattern 
characteristic, 99 
convergence, 68 
darwinian process needs, 
21 
defining, 99 
fogging, 135 
nonsense, 107 
novel, 102 
patterns 
discerning, 160 
endogenous, 69 
firing, 16 
free-floating, 14 
new, 117 
passion for discovering, 
109 
spatial-only, 15,65 
spatiotemporal, 15,17,65 
within patterns, 117 
pavers, 55,88,136 
Pavlides,C,222 
Pavlov, I., 116 
peacock tails, 137 
peddler, 120 
pendulum, 65,67,212,234 
Penrose tilings, 223 
peptide, 206 
perception, 13,39,54,64, 
67,71,79,104,160,204 
ambiguous, 90 
categorical, 68,113 
cloning competition, 117 
fuzzy, 115 
perfume, 211 
periphery, 25 
Perkinson,H.J.,144,233 
persecution, 188 
persistence, 141 
perspectives, 67,98,104, 
116 
phase portrait, 203 
phase space, 203 
phase transition, 67 
phenotype, 24,28,81 
confusing, 181 
defined, 211 
philosophers, 9 
phone calls, 131 
phonemes, 68,145,226 
discovering, 109 
phonograph, 66 
photocopying, 70,119 
photoreceptors, 28,40,219 
tremor, 104 
physics, 230 
physiological state, 63 
physiologists, 164 
Piaget,J.,l,115,217 
piano, 15,69,108,125 
Picasso, P., 232 
Pierce, A., 201 
pigeonholes, 54 
place cells, 121 
plainsong, 125 
planning, 109,117,169 
during get-set, 151 
plans, 111 
plasticity, 140 
following stroke, 178 
Plato, 9 
plural, 193 
plurality, 57,97,141,161, 
167,184 
establishing a link, 142 
for movement, 141 
point-to-annulus, 42,100, 
133 
point-to-area, 31,132,133 
point-to-point, 132-134 
pointers, 122 
politics, 96 
polyphonic music, 39 
pop-through, 182 
Popper, K.R., 61,176,225, 
236 
population biology, 23,86 
population explosion, 23 
population theory 
and Edelman, 83,228 
population thinking, 6,9, 
86,218 
populations, 82-84,103,206 
fragment, 93 
island vs continental, 25 
small, 93 
Portsmouth Symphonia, 
154 
possession, 161 
possibility, 161 
postsynaptic, 211,213 
postsynaptic potential 
(PSP),212 
posture, 15 
potassium, 77 
potassium currents, 212 

252 
potentiation, long-term 
(LTP), 32,36,70,73,75, 
180,226 
as scaffolding, 76 
defined, 209 
neocortex, 222 
Poundstone, W., 219 
Powell, T. P. S., 221,223 
Powers, P. S., 163,235 
precision, 234 
throw, 153 
timing, 153,222 
variants gradually 
standardize, 154 
predator, 12 
predatory pricing, 96 
predictions, 177 
prefrontal cortex, 17,64 
premotor cortex, 17,154 
preparedness, 64 
preposition, 194 
primary visual cortex, 82, 
203,222,228 
priming 
cross-modality, 180 
Pritchard, R. M, 229 
process, darwinian, 6 
projectile release, 151 
proper names, 114,124 
protein, 18,22,99,205,206 
protolanguage, 1% 
prototype, 114,138,162 
Prut, Y, 220 
psychiatry, 186 
psychosis, 235 
pyramidal neurons, 221 
pyramidal tract, 212 
quality, 4,25,30,85,121, 
171,180,183,185 
narrative, 191 
premature closure, 188 
shaping up of, 183 
quantum mechanics, 181 
quilt, 2,52,87,99,100,133, 
176,190 
quokka, 221 
random, 22,61,66,80,204, 
218,226,227 
rat, superstitious behavior, 
150 
rationality, 172 
Ratliff,R,221 
Rausell,E.,223 
re-excitation, 32 
mutual, 33 
reaction time, 169,180,224 
cognitive processing, 142 
reality, 64,159,172 
reasoning, via analogies, 
163 
rebroadcasts, 132 
recall, 70,71,122,138,148, 
150,188,232 
abstract, 123 
errors, 85 
prototype, 123 
sufficient detail for, 123 
receptive field, 40 
defined, 212 
receptors, 32 
recognition, 17,122,138, 
148,232 
and hashing, 123 
pop-through, 182 
recombination, 5,20,22,24, 
93,101,102,138 
defined, 212 
equivalents of, 180 
reconfiguration, 73 
recruitment, 35,65,71 
defined, 212 
runaway, 179 
recursive, 66 
recursive embedding, 195 
Reddy,M.,234 
redundancy, 13,20,44,70, 
178,179,206,222 
reentry, 84 
referents, 194 
reflection, 160 
reflex, escape, 12 
refractory period, 32,213 
regenerative, 28,77,212 
regulation, 189 
rehearsal, 85 
reification, 159 
relationship, 163,165 
comparing, 116 
mental map, 161 
reorganization, 221 
repeaters, 152 
representation, 13,111,113, 
219,226 
cluster, 115 
compact, 46 
composite, 115 
different versions, 122 
dimensionality, 116 
dissociate, 142 
distributed, 122,194 
hand, 223 
layers, 170 
linkages, 115 
metastasis, 18 
schematic level of, 160 
schema, 161 
sequence, 150 
shaped by action, 161 
reproduction 
media capable of, 197 
reproductive strategies, 137 
reservoirs, 25,66 
resolution 
experimental, 100 
resonance, 60,65,69,72, 
124 
additional, 95 
and chaos, 66 
and cloning territory, 70 
and widespread cloning, 
108 
biasing, 100 
defined, 212 
eliminating, 71 
exotic, 136 
hexagon's, 66 
stochastic, 93 
resonance/attractors, 68 
resource space, 229 
resources, 22,95 
distribution, 60 
proven-in-the-past, 96 
unused, 24 
retina, 14,40,101,225 
retroactivation, 232 
retroviruses, 24,119,137 
reverberating circuits, 32, 
104,106 
revisionism, 85 
rhythm, 46,67 
Richards, R. J., 217 
Ricoeur, P., 236 
right-brain schemes, 107 
rigidity, 67 
Rivlin, P. K., 221 
RNA,22,166 
robot, 56 
Rockel,A.J.,223 

Rockland, K.S., 31,221 
roles, verbs, 195 
Rosch,E.,114,231 
Rossler, Otto, 228 
routine, 176 
running, 122 
Rutter,MP.,201 
Sameshima, K., 223,225 
San Juan Islands (US-
Canada), 151 
Santayana, G., 63 
sashimi, 107,120,124,166, 
178,192 
Saussure, F. de, 114 
scales, major and minor, 
126 
scenario, speculative, 189 
schema, 13,108,110,113, 
160,175,180 
constructing a metaphor, 
163 
container, 159 
defined, 161,213,234 
discovering, 109 
flexible, 161 
for sequence, 155 
grammar, 161 
hardwired, 171 
movement, 15,57,151, 
213 
sensations, 57,161 
structures of an activity, 
161 
superpositions, 106 
up-down, 161 
schizophrenia, 188 
Schneier, B., 231 
Sdirodinger, E., 220 
Schwartz, J. H., 226 
Schwindt,P.C.,223,226 
Scott, Sir Walter, 26 
scribes, 27 
scripts, 108,113,145,147, 
175,233 
sea level, 24,25,102,103, 
136,211 
search 
closure, 141 
terminating, 141 
space, 61 
seasons, 189 
second messenger, 208,226 
Segev,I.,232 
seizures, 14,67,179 
fogging memories, 107 
Sejnowski, T. J., 217 
selection 
artificial, 22 
carving, 83 
confusing variation with, 
181 
environmental, 21,101, 
137 
jack-of-all-trades, 24 
margins of habitat, 24 
natural, 5,26,84,206 
sexual, 21,101,103,137, 
220,233 
sexual, female choice, 137 
stabilizing, 103 
unit of, 103 
selectionism, 9,215 
confusion with darwinian 
process, 84 
days-to-years, 181 
neural, 182 
selective survival 
vs. darwinism, 21 
self, no partial cortical 
lesion abolishes, 109 
self-organization, 36 
Selfish Gene (Dawkins), 27, 
82,221 
Selye,H.,164 
sensation, 16,64,101 
hyperacuity, 86 
sensory buffer, 91 
sensory code, 16 
sensory modality 
confusion of, 140 
sensory-motor associations, 
100 
sentence 
discovering patterns in, 
109 
roles, 194 
shaping up a novel, 146 
Septuagint, 27 
sequence, 16 
movement, 176 
urge to finish, 233 
of events, 64 
firing, 228 
novel movements, 125 
script, 145 
structured, 169 
sequencing 
small muscle, 109 
ticket machines, 147 
serial-order rules, 146 
serotonin, 64,73,122,186, 
210 
set theory, 113,114 
setup actions, 73 
sex, 137,140 
Shakespeare, W., 147 
Shank, R., 145,233 
sharpening, 28 
Shaw, G.L., 231 
Shaw, CD., 215 
Shenoy,K.V.,231 
Sherlock Holmes, 31 
Sherrington, C.S., 104 
shortcuts, 166,170 
syntax, 193 
sidestepping, 131 
simile, 116,163 
Simon, H. A., 80,227 
simulation, 8,171,172,218 
sin, 188 
singer, 78,133 
Singer, W., 222,226,227 
singing, 153 
aphasic patient, 150 
Skaggs, W.E., 228 
Skinner box, 150 
sleep, 67,85,121 
agendas, 237 
mulling-things-over, 183 
replay firing sequences, 
228 
Slovin, H., 220 
Smith, Hugh, 222 
Smith, J. M. (see Maynard 
Smith, J.), 231 
social worlds, 159 
borrowing, 160 
sodium, 75,212,226,232 
Softky,W.R.,227 
solipsism, 69 
solitaire, 146 
Somers, D., 222 
songs, 16,58,149 
sorting, 163 
space, coding, 116 
spatial summation, 43 
retrograde, 76 

254 
spatiotemporal pattern, 3, 
19,46,65,99,120 
aftereffects, 73 
capture by attractor, 68 
central attractor's, 155 
cloning, 100 
cloning for reducing 
jitter, 85 
complex, 138 
composite, 97 
composite upon re-
ignition, 97 
concentrating, 106 
distant-terminal, 134 
ephemeral "fabric", 83 
extent, 71 
for immediate memory, 
177 
history, 150 
in target cortex, 136 
less than a hexagon pair, 
235 
maintaining, 74 
memorizing, 70 
metaphor, 164 
plurality, 142 
re-ignite, 47,97 
resonances, 69 
resurrected, 46,64,71, 
148 
setup, 74 
silenced, 102 
standardization, 20 
temporal aspect, 79 
to throw with precision, 
153 
specialization, 24,53,54, 
100,108 
speciation,96,109 
species, 4,9 
speech, 68,226 
speed governor, 203 
sperm, 24,137 
spike, defined, 207 
spinal cord, 30,66,73,75, 
130,152 
spine, dendritic, 213 
spontaneous activity, 179 
spontaneous combustion, 
121 
Sporns, O., 215 
spreadsheet, 96,229 
square dance, 69 
stability, 23,101 
opportunity costs, 141 
uses of instability, 104 
stabilized image, 180 
stage managing, 192 
stage setting, 53,96,101, 
120,124,148,157,170 
phonemes, 149 
staging, 73,166 
stanzas, 138,139 
state machine, 147,154 
circuit-riding, 154 
state of mind, 165 
state space 
trajectory, 120 
Steiner, G., 237 
Stensaas, S. S., 228 
Stephanis,C,221 
sterility, 139 
Stevens, C. E, 201,218,226, 
230,232,233,239 
Stevens, E, 201 
Stevens, Wallace, 190,237 
Stewart, I., 215,222,238 
stratified stability, 3,170, 
180,195 
streaming, 204 
stress, 164 
string quartets, 47,155 
Strogatz,S.,222 
stroke evidence, 129 
strychnine, 131 
Stuart, G., 221 
stupor, 67 
Suarez,H.H.,221 
subconscious, 108,188 
subcortical areas, 66 
subjacency, 195 
subliminal, 79 
subroutines, 108,176 
sugar, 2 
Sumatra, 96 
summation, temporal, 232 
Sunsten,J.W.,232 
superficial pyramidal 
neurons, 30,41,131 
axon collaterals, 42 
superposition, 70,117,119, 
180,194 
attractors, 162 
CAD, 122 
in convergence zones, 178 
long distance, 139 
modifiers, 194 
static, 122 
superstitious behavior, 150 
supervisors, 189 
surface-to-volume ratio, 101 
survival, selective, 5,220 
survival of the fittest, 6 
sustained firing, 104,106 
swatch, 83,87,133 
symbolic ability, 172 
symbolic information, 129 
symbols, 172 
linguistic, 114 
manipulation, 159 
sympathy, 160 
synapse 
activity-dependent, 226 
defined, 213 
enhancements, 76 
facilitation, 66,73 
structural changes, 226 
synapses, 221 
adding, 83 
differential modification, 
83 
enlarged, 70 
excitatory, 31 
facilitation, 74 
glutamate, 211 
Hebbian,76,106,207, 
211,230 
numbers of, 34 
retrogradely-
strengthened, 230 
selective survival, 21 
weakening, 81 
synaptic cleft, 210 
synaptic connectivity, 65 
synaptic delays, 142 
synaptic modification, 120 
synaptic strength, 36,76, 
106,181,209,232 
augmentation, 43 
LTD, 232 
reduce, 78 
reduction, 232 
silent, 41 
synchronization, 86,153, 
180,222 
long-range, 227 
synchrony, 32,35,56,58,71, 
76,79,134,169,228 
for binding, 204,230 

255 
NMDA synapses, 43 
tolerance, 76 
widely-distributed, 177 
synesthesia, 141,233 
syntax, 100,108,117,146, 
175.193.195 
faux fax linkages, 195 
discovering, 109 
synthesizer, 78 
Sypert, G. W., 223,227,234 
system, 67 
adaptive, 67 
regenerative, 77 
tabula rasa, 54,140 
takeover, 96 
talking to ourselves, 189 
tangled bank, 199 
tape recorders, 77,203 
tasks, local and global, 98 
taste, 12 
telecopy, 18,206 
telephone, 17,132 
template, 18 
temporal lobe, 131,204 
temporal summation, 75, 
226. 
temporal tagging, 223 
tense, 161,193 
territory, 58 
extension, 70 
sequential occupations, 
97 
test pattern, 237 
testosterone, 137 
thalamocortical, 183 
thalamus, 30,64,66,183 
theme, 194 
theoretical edifices, 109 
theoreticians, 230 
theories, 177,181 
about the mind, 108,109, 
184 
four stages of acceptance, 
181 
thinkers, 63 
thinking, 160 
concrete, 141 
convergent, 67 
divergent, 67 
thought, 58,98,104,160, 
165,183,188,192 
into action, 2,167,190 
positive formal thought 
disorder, 184 
rapidity of, 186,187 
rational, 159 
retarded, 186 
speed of, 109 
serial-order bottleneck, 
191 
threshold, 33,43,92,207, 
208,222,226 
defined, 212,213 
fluctuating, 93,102 
thought into action, 190 
• throwing, 151,169,233,234 
and language, 169 
Thurber, J., 171 
tidal period, 65 
tiles, 56,86 
timing, 25,153,169,191, 
228 
Tonini, G., 215 
topography, 19 
tournaments, 25 
train of thought, 106,120, 
186,190 
manic-depressive illness, 
109 
steering, 192 
transformation, 205 
inverse, 19 
perception, 79 
perceptual, 175 
translation table, 2 
travel time, 130,232 
variability in axon 
branches, 130 
traveling salesman, 149 
tree shrew, 31,117 
Trehub,S.,233 
tremor, 15 
eyeball, 104 
physiological, 66,104 
rhythmic, 67 
' 
trial and error, 61,80,117 
triangle, 105,113,149 
generalization, 68,106 
triangular array, 35,74,76, 
87,100,110,227 
and hexagon, 70 
as one musical note, 125 
at gateway, 91 
choir, 37 
core areas, 168 
distant repeater, 136 
driving time, 36 
extension, 77,177 
facilitation, 74 
generating, 47 
imperfect, 224 
interdigitate,43,106 
modality, 59 
nodes, 40 
one note, 133 
orientation, 73,179,223 
redundancy, 106 
stability, 41 
well-defined, 168 
trill, 139 
truth, 63 
Ts'o,D.Y,223 
tuberculosis, 188 
Turing Machine, 2,4 
Tweed, D., 233 
umbilical cord, 140 
understanding, 98,160 
unfamiliarity, 108 
uniformity, 95 
unit pattern, 46,47 
unitary processes, 238 
unity of consciousness, 191 
unity question, 189 
Universal Grammar, 193, 
195 
University of Washington, 
239 
Vaadia, E., 220 
Val6ry, Paul, 183 
valleys, 25,60,94 
vanderHoof,D.,116,201 
variability, 218,228 
between individuals, 82 
bottleneck, 204 
reducing, 169 
variations, 24,53 
amateur-night, 154 
at gateway, 91 
biasing, 22 
error correction, 59 
from embedding 
attractor, 95 
generate, 93 
inherited, 110 
nonrandom, 192,208 
randomness, 22 
wise-in-advance, 61 

256 
verb, 194 
arguments, 195 
verbal reporting, 189 
verbs, irregular, 162,196 
viability, 139,195 
videotape recorder, 148 
vigilance, 190 
virgin, 27 
virus, mental, 107,230 
visual cortex (see primary 
visual cortex) 
vocabulary, 196 
borrowing, 159 
voices, 125,189 
walking, 67,122 
Wall, P. D., 228 
Wallace, A. R., 4 
wallpaper, 46,101 
Wang, X., 223,225 
A workspace template 
washboarded road, 65 
Washington State, 151 
water flow, 163 
Watson, J., 18 
Watts, S., 233 
weather, 189,190 
weave, 133 
web pages, ii, 132,231,239 
weighing criteria, 171 
Weiner, J., 26,180,220,236 
Weiss, K.R., 219 
Wells, M., 8,201,218,240 
Wernicke area, 17 
white matter, 131,205 
Wiesel,T.N.,105,221 
Wilson, F. R., 234 
wing, 53 
wiring principles, 42 
wisdom, 23,61 
Wittgenstein, L., 5,218 
woodpeckers, 96 
words 
acquisitiveness, 117 
referential vs. label, 115 
work space, 21,103,203 
evolutionarily stable 
strategies, 229 
evolutionary, 60 
jack-of-all-trades, 52 
partition, 107 
temporary, 179 
Wrap, 45 
Yankee Doodle, 7,119,140 
Yoshioka,T.,222 
Young, J. Z., 81,227 
Young, X, 12 
Zen, 108,176,236 
zoom, 160 

In Permission Notes 
CHARLES DARWIN 
T
HIS IS THE FIRST JUNCTURE at which we can see all six 
essentials of a darwinian process (p. 21) emerge from the 
hexagonal cloning theory for a neocortical patchwork quilt. 
So indulge me in a little celebratory recapitulation about principles 
before we delve more deeply into their products. 
The six 
essentials are: 
1. There is a characteristic pattern involved. We have identified 
a pattern (spatiotemporal firing pattern within a "0.5 mm" 
hexagon in the superficial layers of neocortex) that can be 
standardized in a crystalline manner. The pattern is as 
abstract as a bar code; just as the DNA string looks nothing 
like a folded protein, these cerebral codes bear little 
resemblance to the objects or movements they represent. 
2. The pattern must be copied somehow (indeed, that which is 
copied may serve to define the pattern). Copying identified a 

100 
way of compacting the essential Hebbian cell-assembly, 
and its connectivity changes, into only two adjacent 0.5 
mm hexagons of neocortex (it's Dawkins' minimum replic-
able unit). Thanks to the point-to-annulus tendencies of the 
same neurons that recurrently excite one another, two 
adjacent "parent" neurons seem capable of entraining a 
third and fourth to initiate a triangular array, one that can 
be extended for some distance. But the overall effect is to 
clone the spatiotemporal pattern of all the active triangular 
arrays within a hexagonal-shaped area; thus we can often 
speak of hexagonal cloning. Even noncloning hexagons 
may have an important function: to serve as a barrier. 
3. Variant patterns must sometimes be produced by chance. 
Variants can be generated by relaxing error correction at 
gateways through the barriers. But superpositions readily 
occur; because these patterns are a fairly sparse fill of the 
hexagon, the superpositions may be able to code for 
supersets such as categories, sensory-motor associations, 
and even relations between relations such as syntax and 
metaphor. It all doesn't have to be crammed into one 
hexagon because "message digest" hashes may suffice to 
call forth the "full text" from elsewhere. 
4. The pattern and its variants must compete with one another for 
occupation of a limited work space. Indeed, with end runs 
around barriers, competition is hard to avoid. The cortex 
is certainly limited, just as is a patchwork quilt. The work 
space is probably the equivalent of that paved park, with 
its alcoves in which demes can go extinct. Whether all 
neocortex functions this way or whether specialization 
may often prevent cloning competitions is an empirical 
question to be answered as experimental resolution 
improves. 
5. The competition is biased by a multifaceted environment, for 
example, how often the grass is watered, cut, fertilized, and 
frozen, giving one pattern more of the work space than another. 
No, we haven't yet identified which cortical pattern is the 
crabgrass. 
But long-term 
memory is a memorized 
environment (via connectivity changes that create basins 

101 
of attraction). Sensory inputs from our real-time physical 
environment (arid more distant cortical inputs) should be 
able to bias resonances without actually cloning distinctive 
spatiotemporal patterns. Short-term memories in the form 
of fading basins of attraction, established by cloned 
patterns a few minutes earlier, can form part of this 
environment and so facilitate stage-setting moves. 
6. There is a skewed survival to reproductive maturity 
(environmental selection is mostly juvenile mortality) or a 
skewed distribution of those adults who successfully mate (sexual 
selection), so new variants always preferentially occur around 
the more successful of the current patterns. Nothing I've said 
so far has demonstrated that the more populous patterns 
have a tendency to generate most of the next generation's 
variants — but perhaps you've guessed why. If s the 
ubiquitous surface-to-volume ratio relationship that 
provides Darwin's inheritance principle. In a basically 
two-dimensional world such as retina or cortex, if s called 
. the perimeter-to-area relationship. Bigger areas have more 
edge, and the edges are where error correction can be 
escaped more easily, thanks to the very excitability 
fluctuations that help make the margins marginal. So the 
more successful patterns tend to be the base from which 
most variants form. 
So far, so good. But what about those five additional features that 
influence the rate of evolutionary change? Happily, we can also 
see stability plus the four "catalysts" that speed evolution in this 
same neocortical patchwork quilt: 
7. Stability may occur, as in getting stuck in a rut (a local minima 
in the adaptational landscape). Variants occur but they backslide 
easily. An even background of excitation that avoids the 
formation of barriers seems a good setup for achieving a 
stable uniform wallpaperlike pattern. More in a minute. 
8. Systematic recombination generates many more variants than do 
copying errors and the far-rarer point mutations. An end run 
around a barrier demonstrates one way for variants to met 

up with clones of their parents. Recombination can occur 
at those frontiers where different spatiotemporal patterns 
meet. Though the no-mans-land hexagons, surrounded as 
they are, are unlikely to start cloning unoccupied territory, 
the back-and-forth of the frontier leaves behind a 
composite attractor that could subsequently be activated if 
the parent active patterns died out in the region. 
9. Fluctuating environments (seasons, climate changes, diseases) 
change the name of the game, shaping up more complex patterns 
capable of doing well in several environments. For such jack-of-
all-trades selection to occur, the climate must change much faster 
than efficiency adaptations can track it. Fluctuating excitabil-
ity is highly likely, just from the EEG evidence, and, 
because its time scale is the milliseconds of the PSPs, it is 
indeed much faster than the minutes-long LTP 
mechanisms of neocortex that alter the basins of attraction, 
sometimes permanently. Thus in cortex, we have the 
essential setup for evolving elaborate patterns offline, ones 
that are well in excess of current behavioral requirements. 
10. Panellation, as when rising sea level converts the hilltops of one 
large island into an archipelago of small islands, typically speeds 
evolution. As threshold levels rise or background excitation 
fades, there are many opportunities for chopping up 
neocortical territories with noncloning barriers. 
11. Local extinctions (as when an island population becomes too 
small to sustain itself) speed evolution because they create empty 
niches. In the systematic recombination explanation above, 
there were ghostly patterns in the connectivity, lingering 
after the active spatiotemporal patterns had died out. 
Should an active pattern come close to this basin of 
attraction and start up its spatiotemporal pattern in two 
adjacent hexagons, it could clone away without any 
competition for awhile. For a novel pattern, that could 
represent the chance to "establish itself" — and some 
variants. 
There are also catalysts acting at several removes, just as in Darwin's 
example of how cats could improve the clover, and we have no 

103 
difficulty imagining how this could happen with cortical work 
spaces. Cloning competitions at the object level could occasionally 
overrun another competition at the event or metaphor level. 
IT IS USEFUL TO LOOK FOR BIOLOGICAL ANALOGIES, for some of the 
reasons that I noted at the beginning of the last chapter, but one 
shouldn't expect to find perfect parallels. For example, the cortex 
may well be the appropriate home for Lamarckism (the pre-
darwinian notion that skills acquired during life can be somehow 
fed back to the genes, and so inherited by one's offspring). In 
cortex, after all, there are generations of lateral copying attempts, 
and their improved versions can feed back into the connectivity 
changes to influence what happens tomorrow when another 
copying attempt is made. In biology, whaf s wrong with 
Lamarckism is the Weismannian genotype-phenotype barrier, the 
difficulty of making chimeras, and a distinct individual that 
survives as a cohesive unit. So far, the cortex only has a copying 
unit (the hexagonal activity doesn't always live and die as a unit, 
though embedded attractors encourage that) and it readily 
produces chimeras with hybrid vigor in a most unbiological way. 
You can, of course, ask: 
Does capture by an attractor 
constitute stabilizing selection? Does the hexagon correspond to 
an allele of a gene? A genome (one average organism's worth of 
genes)? Even a population can potentially be a unit of selection in 
biology. But here, much as I like finding traditional parallels, I 
suspect that we are better off focusing instead on the neural 
substrate — such as the geometry, chaos, and connectivity 
concepts of the last few chapters — rather than seriously seeking 
parallels in other levels of biology. We have profited from 
importing island biogeography concepts, even if our hot-spot 
islands also grow via dendritic amplification mechanisms and 
raise their sea levels via AGCs. So, too, we may profit from asking 
about clades, neutral evolution, evolutionarily stable strategies, 
and (coming up in chapter 8) sexual selection. 
But we shouldn't expect an exact mapping of either the 
immune system or cortical darwinian dynamics onto the 
individuals-that-copy-and-die 
framework 
that 
biological 
evolution has settled into. Yes, they all feature the darwinian 

104 
process — yet the darwinian process isn't really an analogy: it's 
a crank for complexity that can be turned by instability, whenever 
a mechanism exists that implements all six essentials. This 
process just happens to be a major law of the universe, right up 
there with chemical bonds as a prime generator of interesting 
combinations, and one apparently able to run on different sub-
strates, each with their own distinctive properties that may, or 
may not, correspond to those seen elsewhere. 
HEBB'S DISCOVERY OF THE CELL-ASSEMBLY is not 
only a useful historical tidbit for the inter-
mission, but his concerns about what he 
perceived as failures of his cell-assembly 
theory may help us judge the strengths and 
weaknesses of my competing hexagons. 
What got Hebb to thinking about cell-
assemblies was the problem of perception and 
thought. 
When, in 1938, Lorente de No 
suggested how cerebral cortex could generate 
DONALD O. HEBB sustained activity with reverberating circuits, 
he opened up some new possibilities, ones that 
had seemed closed since Sherrington's day. Hebb wanted a way 
to think about reactivating a memory trace by thought, without a 
new sensory stimulus interceding. Lorente's idea gave him 
sustained activity (the first reason he needed chains of many 
neurons), but Hebb was still worried about how objects seen from 
different perspectives were nonetheless perceived as the same 
object. He considered it a failing of his 1945-1949 cell-assembly 
theory that it couldn't handle such a key property of concepts. 
Experimental work in Hebb's own lab in Montreal about 1960 
eventually provided evidence for various specialized groups 
participating in what seemed to be a unitary percept, such as that 
of a triangle or square. It was a surprise finding from quite a 
different experiment. The physiological tremor of the eyeball is 
called micronystagmus; it causes a light-dark boundary in the 
image to sweep back and forth over a band as wide as a half-
dozen photoreceptors. That can potentially smear the image quite 
a bit. You can, however, force the image to move with the eye by 
t 

105 
an ingenious system of mounting 
the square or triangle just in front 
of a contact lens. Whenever the eye 
moves, so does its target — and so 
the image is stabilized on the 
retina. 
But what happened was not that the image became sharper. 
Instead, the subject reported that the image was incomplete; parts 
of it had a mysterious tendency to fade away and then reappear. 
In a series of six presentations, controlled by turning on a little 
light bulb that was also getting a free ride from the eye's move-
ments, the triangle might 
lose one or another of its 
three sides. Squares had 
similar problems, and 
even faded out entirely 
on some of the presentat-
ions. Images of a face would sometimes lose a nose or eye. I seem 
to remember, in the excitement over this in the early 1960s (one of 
the reasons that I switched about then from physics into neuro-
physiology), that someone claimed to have finally seen a Cheshire 
Cat doing its disappearing act. 
Hubel and Wiesel's orientation-sensitive cortical neurons, 
found about the same time, suggested an obvious mechanism. 
Together with the Cheshire Cat fade outs, they resolved the theor-
etical failing that Hebb identified. It also gave him another reason 
[This time tne cat] vanished 
quite slowly, beginning with tne 
end. of tne tail, and ending witn 
tne grin, which remained some 
time after tne rest of it had 
gone. 
"Well! I've often seen a cat 
without a grin," thought Alice; 
"out a grin witnout a cat! It's 
tne most curious thing I ever 
saw m my life!" 
" ^ > -

106 
why a cell-assembly of multiple cortical neurons would be 
needed: to handle all the line orientations that form the outline of 
an object. 
In retrospect, this committee of feature detectors was the most 
important reason for a cell-assembly. Lorente's reverberating 
circuits may have gotten Hebb to thinking about neuronal 
ensembles about 1940, but they really aren't needed to get 
sustained activity—something we only learned about in the early 
1960s, once we were able to control the firing rate of a single 
neuron during intracellular recording. 
All of Hebb's arguments and evidence (summarized in his 
1980 book, Essay on Mind) carry over to my more restricted notion 
of a hexagonal cell-assembly. My triangular arrays add quite a bit 
of redundancy but their interdigitation also serves to "compress 
the code" into a half-mm hexagonal space. Such concentrating of 
the elements allows for lots of little local neural circuits to form, 
and perhaps change some synaptic strengths in a long-lasting 
manner. Hebb's dual trace memory is thereby implemented: any 
adjacent pair of these hexagonal circuits could later reconstitute 
the firing pattern in all of the multiple triangular arrays that were 
originally formed during the original stimulus presentation. 
Hebb unfortunately died in 1985, well before I figured this out. 
He might have liked how his dual memory traces, his synapses 
strengthened by success, and his cell-assemblies all came to 
theoretically hang together in a little hexagon. 
JUST AS THE FIRST ACT introduces the cast and poses the problems, 
so the second act tends to show the surprising consequences. My 
second act is about the possible products of a fast-acting darwin-
ian principle in neocortex, things such as categories, metaphors, 
good guesses, and the train of thought. I'll start with Hebb's 
triangle generalization problem and some static-seeming super-
positions of schemas, but if s all dynamic underneath: keep 
James's train of thought in mind, that series of mental states that 
preceded your current one, each one fading into the background 
but overlain on its predecessors — and all capable of contributing 
to what connections you're likely to make right now. 

107 
Just imagine those various fading attractors as like that Japan-
ese technique of finely slicing some raw fish, then tilting the block 
sideways (fallen dominos are another analogy, if you are sashimi 
impaired). The bottom layer may be hardest to reach but it goes 
back furthest. 
Stage-setting with multiple layers of fading 
schemas 
may be handy for 
promoting creativity, getting the 
. , . , 
£ ^__ J. 
. 
°, 
. 
Train© of thought 
right layers of attractors m about 
ag ^ |ayarg 
the right order and so adjusting 
ofeaeHm 
their relative strengths. (I can hear 
it now: The Sashimi Theory of 
Creativity, a suitably raw successor 
to all those half-baked right-brain 
schemes). 
But such histories can also be distracting, and we often try to 
let them fade, try to avoid reexciting them with further thinking. 
There are various mind-clearing techniques (I take half-hour naps, 
myself). My friend Don Michael suggests that forming large 
quasi-stable hexagonal territories might be what meditation with 
a mantra is all about, preempting the everyday concerns that 
would otherwise partition the work space and plate out new 
short-term attractors. 
By replacing it all with the mantra's 
nonsense pattern, and holding it long enough for neocortical LTP 
to fade, the meditator gets a fresh start (for things other than the 
mantra!). Sounds good to me, but you might forget your grocery 
list if you carry it too far. 
An ordinary mantra won't, of course, wipe the work space 
clean: to prematurely erase those fading attractors, you'll need a 
fancier mantra that disrupts instead. Short of fogging with 
seizures, as in electroshock therapy, I don't know of any such 
eraser schemas — though one can imagine mental viruses that 
might preempt entry into those fading basins of attraction, more 
analogous to an obscuring coat of paint than to a true eraser. 
A NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL THEORY of higher intellectual function is 
the focus of the rest of this book. Ultimately, if s about 
consciousness (as the currently dominant patch of the quilt!). 
Though you'll never encounter such a list in most of the popular 

108 
and academic books about consciousness, any such theory is 
going to need to account for: 
How items of our vocabularies are represented. 
How memories are stored and recalled. 
How darwinian shaping-up takes place. 
How "new ideas" arise, perhaps as pattern variants. 
Those four, at least, have pretty much fallen out of our search for 
the darwinian essentials. The rest are harder: 
The existence of hallucinations and dreams. 
De*ja vu experiences. Abnormally widespread cloning of an 
input pattern (perhaps due to lack of competition) might 
produce the conscious experience usually associated with 
strong memory resonances that allow widespread cloning. 
Jamais vu unfamiliarity with the familiar would also be nice 
to explain. 
Unreliable memories. Because the long-term synaptic connectiv-
ities can be modified by a new active pattern, this could 
often happen; to avoid this rewriting of history, the 
subcortical regulation of the cortical competitions probably 
includes giving permission for the modification of 
connectivities. Similarly, we'd like something appropriate 
for concrete thinking and the idiefixe. 
How abstractions and categories are represented and created. In 
particular, a theory of mind needs structures suitable for 
schemas, scripts, syntax, and metaphors. 
How the various connotations of a word such as "comb" are linked, 
given that they're likely stored in different cortical areas. 
The presence of specialized cortical regions that can also participate 
in nonspecialist tasks. 
The ability to hold a behavioral set, after selecting it from among 
possibilities. What might an agenda look like? 
Subconscious shaping up, while one's attention seems directed 
elsewhere. 
Creation of efficient subroutines that function outside of conscious 
processing, something suitable for Zen archery. A "well-
grooved" pattern might "play" from a small cortical 
territory, like the roll for a player piano, to tie a necktie 
without competing in the playoffs for consciousness. We 

109 
do, after all, occasionally manage to do two things at the 
same time. 
Serial-order specialties for language and speculative planning, not 
to mention all the small muscle sequencing that a child 
needs to tie a shoelace. 
Speed-of-thought correlates, mechanisms that could vary from 
time to time in the same individual. During the transitions 
of manic-depressive illness, a person can go from a fluidity 
of making connections and decisions to a slow, labored 
train of thought that lingers too long and fails to make 
obvious connections. And back again. 
Our passion for discovering patterns. In our first year of life, we 
discovered phonemes within words. A year later, we were 
busy discovering schemas and syntax within sentences, 
and then we went on to discover narrative principles 
among more extended discourses. 
The impression of a narrator, juggling decisions, and speculating 
about tomorrow. Any explanation needs to be consistent 
with the neurological evidence that no partial cortical 
lesion abolishes the "self." 
That's the kind of coverage needed for a useful theory of mind. 
It may not have to explain all of two centuries of neurology, one 
century of psychology, and a half-century of neurobiology and 
cognitive neuroscience — but it can't be truly inconsistent with 
any of it. A theory of mind needs a lot of explanatory power, 
while still being specific enough to make experimental 
predictions. 
THEORETICAL EDIFICES have held some surprises in evolutionary 
theory, quite aside from all the emergent phenomena. 
For 
example, one is accustomed to thinking that, if a piece of the 
foundation fails, the whole edifice collapses and should be 
abandoned. But that isn't necessarily true when dealing with 
robust processes such as Darwin's; one can be wrong about 
elements of the foundation (as Darwin himself was about 
inheritance in 1859, as Clerk Maxwell was in 1865 about the ether) 
and still gain many insights about superstructure. 

110 
Darwin didn't know about Mendel's genes; he thought in 
terms of blending inheritance, not the particulate inheritance that 
went on to find its basis in DNA segments called alleles. 
Although I will use triangular arrays from recurrent excitation and 
their resulting hexagons as my examples in the coming chapters 
about the cognitive implications of darwinism in the brain, 
remember that other mechanisms might prove to be the 
foundation of what is copied with inherited variation in our 
neocortex. I'm trying to piece together a general theory for how 
the superficial layers of neocortex could run the darwinian ratchet, 
but I'm also — in Act II — carrying on William James's project, 
attempting to show how any such darwinian theory could account 
for higher intellectual function. 
As I give examples of how categories could be created, and 
elaborated into schemas and metaphors, try to distinguish the 
emergent structures per se — and perhaps guess how they could 
be implemented with different darwinian building materials, ones 
that still satisfy the six essentials and provide a few accelerating 
factors in the manner of my triangular arrays and hexagonal 
mosaics. 
WILLIAM JAMES 
(self portrait, 1873) 

Notes 
Because good medical libraries are few and far between, I have 
attempted to cite the most widely available articles and books (though 
I often have to cite specialty journals instead). Short-form citations such 
as DENNETT (1995) either refer to a book in my Recommended Reading list 
or to a nearby full-length citation. 
Rologue 
page 
1 STEPHEN JAY GOULD, Ontogeny and Phytogeny (Harvard University 
Press 1977). 
1 
See the last chapter of JEAN PIAGET, he langage et la pensee chez 
I'enfant (Neuchatel 1923). 
3 
This use of code subsumes the more common uses of neural code, 
e.g., those referring to firing rate, spike timing, etc., all derivative of the 
1950's auditory place versus frequency code debates. Code often just 
means representation or mapping. For some modern discussion, see 
TERRENCE J. SEJNOWSKI, "Time for a new neural code?" Nature 
376:21-22 (6 July 1995); 
JOHN J. HOPFIELD, "Pattern recognition computation using action 
potential timing for stimulus representation," Nature 376:33-36 (1995); 
SAM A. DEADWYLER and ROBERT E. HAMPSON, "Ensemble activity 
and behavior: what's the code?" Science 270:1316-1318 (1995); 
A. P. GEORGOPOULOS, A. ASHE, N. SMYRNIS, M. TAIRA, "The motor 
cortex and the coding of force," Science 256:1692-1695 (1992). 
4 
KENNETH J. W. CRADC, The Nature of Explanation (Cambridge 
University Press 1943), p. 61. 
4 
DENNETT (1995). 
4 
WILLIAM H. CALVIN, "The brain as a Darwin Machine," Nature 
330:33-34 (5 November 1987). 
4 William James's development of his darwinian theory of mind, see 
pp. 433ff of ROBERT J. RICHARDS, Darwin and the Emergence of Evolutionary 
Theories of Mind and Behavior (University of Chicago Press 1987). The 
modern chapter of mental darwinism starts in 1965 with DAN DENNETT'S 
D. Phil thesis, published as Content and Consciousness (Routledge and 
Kegan Paul 1969) 
4 
Other examples of darwinian processes include so-called "genetic 
algorithms" in computer science and molecular biology techniques seen 
in the RNA evolution experiments. See 
JOHN H. HOLLAND, "Genetic algorithms," Scientific American 
267(l):66-72 (July 1992). 

218 
GERALD F. JOYCE, "Directed molecular evolution/' Scientific 
American 267(6):90-97 (December 1992). 
5 LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN, Philosophical Investigations (Basil Blackwell 
1953). 
5 J. ALLAN HOBSON, The Dreaming Brain (Basic Books 1988). 
5 
CHARLES DARWIN, On the Origin of Species (1859). 
6 
"...most "darwinian" discussions...." See articles in SPORNS AND 
TONINI (1994). 
6 
The background is in WILLIAM H. CALVIN, "Islands in the mind: 
dynamic subdivisions of association cortex and the emergence of a 
Darwin Machine," Seminars in the Neurosciences 3(5):423-433 (1991). 
WILLIAM H. CALVIN, NVThe emergence of intelligence/' Scientific American 
271(4):100-107 (October 1994; also appears in the Scientific American 
book Life in the Universe, 1995 - N.B., the hexagons figure is an editorial 
error; simply ignore it or see the web page for the unaltered version: 
http:lIweber.u.w ashington.edu/~wcalvinlsciatner.html 
6 
This book-length consideration of the issues was delayed by 
several other books in progress, though I did manage some brief 
treatments, e.g., in the last chapter of Conversations with Neil's Brain and 
in the latter half of my Scientific American article. Chapter 7 of How Brains 
Think summarizes my neocortical Darwin Machine scheme but The 
Cerebral Code is its first complete description. 
7 
Charles Ives, see p. 366 of JOSEPH MACHLB, The Enjoyment of Music, 
"5th ed. shorter" (W W Norton 1984). 
8 
Mac Wells illustrated my archaeoastronomy book, How the Shaman 
Stole the Moon (Bantam 1991). 
8 
Simulations were half of my Ph.D. thesis, a means of seeing if 
observed noise could account for the actual stochastic interspike interval 
variability of cat spinal motor neurons. I have been skeptical of free-
parameter curve-fitting that is hidden from view even of the simulation's 
proprietor ever since. See W. H. CALVIN and C. F. STEVENS, "Synaptic 
noise and other sources of randomness in motoneuron interspike 
intervals," Journal of Neurophysiology 31:574-587 (1968). 
9 
ERNST MAYR, "Population thinking and neuronal selection: 
metaphors or concepts?" In Selectionism and the Brain, edited by Olaf 
Sporns and Giulio Tonini (Academic Press 1994), pp.27-34 at p.29. 
9 
NIELS K. JERNE, "Antibodies and learning: Selection versus 
instruction," in The Neurosciences: A Study Program, edited by G. C. 
Quarton, T. Melnechuk, & F. O. Schmitt (Rockefeller University Press 
1967), pp. 200-205 at p. 204. 

219 
Ckapter 1. 
Tke Representation FVoDiem ana tne Copying Solution 
11 ANTONIO R. DAMASIO, Descartes' Error (Putnam 1995), p.12. 
11 
Those aware of the philosophical battles over the word 
representation should realize that I'm always using it in the sense of a 
cerebral code, not an external symbol or sign. 
For a similar 
neurophysiologically-based perspective that bypasses unnecessary 
hangups, see FREEMAN (1995), pp. 106-108. 
11 
Christmas dinner quip: FREEMAN (1995), p.55. 
13 
Taste coding: ROBERT P. ERICKSON, "On the neural bases of 
behavior/' American Scientist 72:233-241 (May-June 1984). An endnote in 
my The Cerebral Symphony, at p. 359, discusses its application to 
orientation-sensitive neurons of visual cortex with eighteen types of 
elementary templates. 
13 
IRVING KUPFERMAN, KENNETH R. WEISS, "The command neuron 
concept," Behavioral and Brain Science l(l):3-39 (1978). 
13 Schemas, see JOHNSON (1987). 
13 DONALD O. HEBB, The Organization of Behavior (Wiley 1949). And 
see PETER M. MILNER, 'The mind and Donald O. Hebb," Scientific 
American 268(1):124-129 (January 1993). 
13 
It is just as important that the other lights are off: indeed, it is well 
to occasionally recall that vertebrate photoreceptors have their maximum 
rate of neurotransmitter discharge in darkness; what the image of a star 
against the night star does is to create a local hole in a sea of 
photoreceptor activity. That this isn't necessarily seen at later stages of 
the visual pathway only testifies to the amount of spatial and temporal 
differencing that occurs in other layers of the retina. 
14 
Automata, see WILLIAM POUNDSTONE, The Recursive Universe 
(Morrow 1985). 
15 
HEBB (1949), p. 62. 
16 
Representations don't have to be codes, so long as they remain 
local. The withdrawal reflex is wired up so that various combinations of 
threatening stimuli get an appropriate set of motor neurons up and 
running. Yes, there's a representation of threat, but not necessarily a 
code in the sense of a cell-assembly of stereotyped pattern. 
16 
DONALD O. HEBB, Essay on Mind (Erlbaum 1980), epigram at p.l, 
history at p.81. 
17 
Predicting movements, see GEORGOPOULOS et al (1992). 
17 
PATRICIA S. GOLDMAN-RAKIC, "Working memory and the mind," 
Scientific American 267(3):73-79 (September 1992). 

220 
17 
MOSHE ABELES, Corticotonics: Neural Circuits of the Cerebral Cortex 
(Cambridge University Press 1991). 
E. VAADIA, I. HAALMAN, M. ABELES, H. BERGMAN, Y. PRUT, H. 
SLOVIN, A. AERTSEN, "Dynamics of neuronal interactions in monkey 
cortex in relation to behaviourial events/' Nature 373:515-518 (9 February 
1995). 
18 
ERWIN SCHRODINGER, What is Life? (Cambridge University Press 
1944). 
22 
GERALD F. JOYCE, "Directed molecular evolution/' Scientific 
American 267(6):90-97 (December 1992). 
22 
HOLLAND (1992). 
23 
There is potentially an enormous difference, in some species, 
between whafs conceived and what survives in utero long enough to be 
born. In humans, only about one in five conceptions results in a term 
birth, suggesting that environmental factors could play a large role in 
biasing the characteristics of a human population. 
24 
"Lean mean machine.../' CALVIN (1996). 
24 
A. M. LISTER, "Rapid dwarfing of red deer on Jersey in the last 
intergladal," Nature 342:539-542 (30 November 1989). 
25 
DARWIN (1859) writes in Chapter III: 
The number of humble-bees in any district depends in a great measure 
upon the number of field-mice, which destroy their combs and nests; and 
Col. Newman, who has long attended to the habits of humble-bees, 
believes that "more than two-thirds of them are thus destroyed all over 
England." Now the number of mice is largely dependent, as every one 
knows, on the number of cats; and Col. Newman says, "Near villages and 
small towns I have found the nests of humble-bees more numerous than 
elsewhere, which I attribute to the number of cats that destroy the mice." 
Hence it is quite credible that the presence of a feline animal in large 
numbers in a district might determine, through the intervention first of 
mice and then of bees, the frequency of certain flowers in that district! 
25 JONATHAN WEINER, The Beak of the Finch (Knopf 1994). 
25 avoir Vesprit de Vescalier is from HOWARD RHEINGOLD, They Have a 
Word for It (Tardier 1987). 
25 
A female that selects a mate on the basis of quick mental 
performance in a male thereby augments the quickness of both her sons 
and (unless the gene is on the Y chromosome) daughters. 
Chapter 2. 
Cloning in Cerebral Cortex 
For the local circuits of cerebral cortex, see the special issue of the journal 
Cerebral Cortex 3 (September/October 1993) edited by KATHLEEN S. 
ROCKLAND. An introduction to the iterated architecture aspects is 

221 
WILLIAM H. CALVIN, "Cortical columns, modules, and Hebbian cell 
assemblies," in Handbook of Brain Theory and Neural Networks, M. A. ARBIB, 
ed. (MIT Press 1995), pp. 269-272. Primary visual cortex is the best-
studied area: JENNIFER S. LUND, "Anatomical organization of macaque 
monkey striate visual cortex," Annual Reviews ofNeuroscience 11:253-288 
(1988). 
27 
RICHARD DAWMNS, The Selfish Gene (Oxford University Press 1976). 
28 
Von Bekesy's lateral inhibition experiments are recounted in FLOYD 
RATLIFF'S Much Bands: Quantitative Studies on Neural Networks in the 
Retina (Holden-Day, San Francisco 1965). 
28 C. STEPHANIS, HERBERT JASPER, "Recurrent collateral inhibition in 
pyramidal tract neurons," Journal of Neurophysiology 27:855-877 (1964). 
28 
R. J. DOUGLAS, C. KOCH, M. MAHOWALD, K. A. MARTIN, H. H. 
SUAREZ, "Recurrent excitation in neocortical circuits," Science 269:981-985 
(18 August 1995). 
31 
Ifs not that the axons lack synapses in the "gaps" but that they 
have many-branched terminal trees clustering around the metric 
distance. See figure 3 of BARBARA A. MCGUBRE, CHARLES D. GILBERT, 
PATRICIA K. RIVLIN, TORSTEN N. WIESEL, 'Targets of horizontal 
connections in macaque primary visual cortex," Journal of Comparative 
Neurology 305:370-392 (1991). Their Cell 1 is reproduced with permission 
in the present illustration. 
31 R. A. FISKEN, L. J. GAREY, T. P. S. POWELL, "The intrinsic, association, 
and commissural connections of the visual cortex," 
Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society (London) 272B:487-536 (1975). 
31 
The lattice connectivity in the superficial layers has been seen in all 
mammals examined except rats; even a marsupial, the quokka, has them 
(J. S. LUND, Seattle lecture, 27 February 1996). 
31 
GREG STUART, BERT SAKMANN, "Amplification of EPSPs by axo-
somatic sodium channels in neocortical pyramidal neurons," Neuron 
15:1065-1076 (November 1995). 
32 
A. DAS, CHARLES D. GILBERT, "Long-range horizontal connections 
and their role in cortical reorganization revealed by optical recording of 
cat primary visual cortex," Nature 375:780ff (29 June 1995). The inset 
illustration is a gray scale version of their color figure, as is the earlier 
"Mexican hat" figure. 
32 
ATSUSHI IRDCL CONSTANTINE PAVLIDES, ASAF KELLER, HIROSHI 
ASANUMA, "Long-term potentiation of thalamic input to the motor cortex 
induced by coactivation of thalamocortical and corticocortical afferents," 
Journal of Neurophysiology 65:1435-1441 (1991). 

222 
32 
RAFAEL LORENTE DE NO, "Analysis of the activity of the chains of 
internuncial neurons," Journal of Neurophysiology 1:207-244 (1938). Also 
see his article on cerebral cortex at pp. 288-315 in the 3d edition of John 
F. Fulton's Physiology of the Nervous System, Oxford University Press 
(1949). 
32 
ABELES (1991). 
33 
DAVID SOMERS and NANCY KOPELL, "Rapid synchronization 
through fast threshold modulation," Biological Cybernetics 68:393-407 
(1993). 
J. T. ENRIGHT, 'Temporal precision in arcadian systems: a reliable 
neuronal clock from unreliable components?" Science 209:1542-1544 
(1980). 
33 
HUGH SMITH, "Synchronous flashing of fireflies," Science 82:51 
(1935). 
33 
STEVEN STROGATZ, IAN STEWART, "Coupled oscillators and 
biological synchronization," Scientific American 269:102-109 (December 
1993). 
33 WOLF SINGER, "Synchronization of cortical activity and its putative 
role in information processing and learning," Annual Review of Physiology 
55:349-374 (1993). 
36 
"Stepping connectivity" is a more general term than lattice, used 
to cover the instances where axons also terminate in stripes. The gaps 
and clusters are thought to be tuned up prenatally, perhaps secondary 
to the inhibitory actions of the large basket neurons of the superficial 
layers, whose axonal branches spread just wide enough to cover the 
gaps, but not so wide as to inhibit the next axon terminal path. If 
intermediate axon terminals were never successful during development 
because of countervailing inhibition, they might have been eliminated. 
The basic cluster and gap pattern of the superficial pyramidal neuron 
might therefore be secondary to that of the large basket neuron. The 
axons of the large basket neurons of the other layers do not spread 
widely enough to match the lattice spacing (and the ones in the rat are 
insufficient in all layers). See 
JENNIFER S. LUND, TAKASM YOSMOKA, JONATHAN B. LEVITT, 
"Comparison of intrinsic connectivity in different areas of macaque 
monkey cerebral cortex," Cerebral Cortex 3:148-162 (March/April 1993). 
37 
Other organizing principles may well be at work, competing with 
perfect triangles. In primary visual cortex, for example, the orientation 
columns, color blobs, and ocular dominance factors may be pulling the 
clusters here and there. 

223 
Chapter 3. 
A Compressed Code Emerges 
39 
HEBB (1980), p. 88. 
40 
LUND et al. (1993). 
41 
E. RAUSELL, E. G. JONES, "Extent of intracortical arborization of 
thalamocortical axons as a determinant of representation in monkey 
somatic sensory cortex," Journal ofNeuroscience 15:4270 (1995). 
X. WANG, M. M. MERZENICH, K. SAMESHIMA, W. M. JENKINS, 
"Remodeling of hand representation in adult cortex determined by 
timing of tactile stimulation," Nature 378:71-75 (2 November 1995). 
41 
DANIEL Y. TS'O, 
R. D. FROSTIG, E. E. LBEKE, A. GRINVALD, 
"Functional organization of primate visual cortex revealed by high 
resolution optical imaging," Science 249:417-420 (27 July 1990). 
41 
WILLIAM H. CALVIN, PETER C. SCHWINDT, "Steps in production of 
motoneuron spikes during rhythmic firing," Journal of Neurophysiology 
35:311-325 (1972). 
WILLIAM H. CALVIN, JOHN D. LOESER, "Doublet and burst firing 
patterns within the dorsal column nuclei of cat and man," 
Experimental Neurology 48:406-426 (1975). 
WILLIAM H. CALVIN, GEORGE W. SYPERT, "Fast and slow pyramidal 
tract neurons: An intracellular analysis of their contrasting repetitive 
firing properties in the cat," Journal of Neurophysiology 39:420-434 (1976). 
WILLIAM H. CALVIN, DANIEL K. HARTLINE, "Retrograde invasion of 
lobster stretch receptor somata in the control of firing rate and extra 
spike patterning," Journal of Neurophysiology 40:106-118(1977). 
42 
A. J. ROCKEL, R. W. HlORNS, T. P. S. POWELL, 'The basic uniformity 
in structure of the neocortex," Brain 103:221-244 (1980). They estimate 
about 110 neurons in a mimcolumn. 
43 
There is a reason for starting with color: the blobs might help to fix 
the orientation of the triangular arrays. 
43 
Binding (see Glossary), e.g., the "temporal tagging" hypothesis of 
FRANCIS CRICK AND CHRISTOF KOCH, "Some reflections on visual 
awareness," Cold Spring Harbor Symposiums in Quantitative Biology 
LV:953-962 (1990). 
45 
Also, let me repeat my caution (p. 36) about perfect regularity: just 
as the triangular array nodes might be equidistant in travel time rather 
than distance, so the hexagons need not be perfect in terms of equidistant 
corresponding points. The possibility that the terminal patches simply 
self-organize in development, in only roughly triangular fashion, also 
suggests that the mosaics could look more like Penrose tilings than 
hexagonal mosaics. This would be particularly likely where cortex is 
markedly curved, as at the top and bottom of a sulcus (any volleyball 

224 
will demonstrate how a spherical surface can use hexagons intermixed 
with pentagons). 
45 WILLIAM H. CALVIN, "Error-correcting codes: Coherent hexagonal 
copying from fuzzy neuroanatomy," World Congress on Neural Networks 
1:101-104 (1993). 
Chapter 4. iVianaguig tne Cerebral Commons 
51 
MICHAEL A. ARBIB, In Search of the Person (University of 
Massachusetts Press 1985), pp.52-53. 
52 
BARBARA L. FINLAY and RICHARD B. DARLINGTON, "Linked 
regularities in the development and evolution of mammalian brains," 
Science 268:1578-1584 (16 June 1995). 
53 
CHARLES DARWIN, On the Origin of Species (John Murray, London, 
1859, p. 200) notes that "every detail of structure... may be viewed as 
having been of special use to some ancestral form... — either directly, 
or indirectly through the complex laws of growth." 
53 
Conversion and coexistence of functions in the same structure: 
DARWIN (1859), p.137. 
53 
Language cortex isn't exclusively related to language: see the first 
few chapters of CALVIN AND OjEMANN (1994). 
54 
CICERO, De oratore. 
54 
GARRETT HARDIN, 'The tragedy of the commons," Science 
162:1243-1248 (1968). 
56 
Cartesian theater fallacy, see DANIEL C. DENNETT, Consciousness 
Explained (Little, Brown 1991). 
58 
For human motor cortex, there is nice evidence that, as one learns 
a serial reaction time task, the excitability of relevant regions of cortex 
increases, as seen by wider areas from which a standard transcranial 
magnetic stimulus could elicit an EMG response from relevant muscle 
groups. By the time that reaction time finally reaches a maintained 
minimum, however, the area drops. 
See ALVARO PASCUAL-LEONE, 
JORDAN GRAFMAN, MARK HALLETT, "Modulation of cortical motor output 
maps during development of implicit and explicit knowledge," Science 
263:1287-1289 (1994). While this expansion might correspond to bigger 
hexagonal territories, it could also correspond to generating a variety of 
alternate motor programs, with the final drop corresponding to no 
longer needing to flounder around. 
58 
Mass action in the nervous system (also the title of a classic 1975 
book by the neurophysiologist Walter J. Freeman) is an old theme in 
neurophysiology, best presented in Freeman's Societies of Brains (Erlbaum 
1995). 

225 
61 
KARL POPPER (1979), quoted by Raphael Sassower in Cultural 
Collisions: Postmodern Technoscience (Routledge). 
61 DONALD T. CAMPBELL, "Epistemological roles for selection theory/7 
in Evolution, Cognition, and Realism: Studies in Evolutionary Epistemology, 
edited by N. Rescher (Lanham, MD: University Press of America 1990), 
pp. 1-19 at p. 9. 
Ckapter 5. Resonating witn your Ckaotic Memories 
63 CICERO (104-43 B.C.), Tusculan Disputions. 
FRIEDRICH WILHELM NIETZSCHE, p. 360 in W. H. Auden and L. 
Kronenberger, The Viking Book of Aphorisms (Viking 1962). 
GEORGE SANTAYANA, p. 323 in Auden and Kronenberger (1962). 
63 
Finches, see WEINER (1994). 
64 
"Activating the EEG" in small regions of neocortex: ITZHAK FRIED, 
GEORGE OJEMANN, EBERHARD FETZ, "Language-related potentials specific 
to human language cortex/' Science 212:353-356 (1981). 
64 
ELIZABETH F. LOFTUS, Eyewitness Testimony (Harvard University 
Press 1979). 
See SPORNS AND TONINI (1994) and CALVIN AND OJEMANN (1994, 
chapters 7 and 8) for a summary of the editing of preexisting 
connections. 
66 
Chaos, see ABRAHAM et al (1990), FREEMAN (1995), and STEWART 
(1995). 
66 
Flutters like a butterfly: FREEMAN (1995), p. 63. 
67 
The bursting behavior that one sees in epileptic foci of cerebral 
cortex in between seizures is not necessarily a little seizure: W. H. 
CALVIN, 
"Normal repetitive firing and its pathophysiology." In: 
Epilepsy: A Window to Brain Mechanisms, J. Lockard and A. A. Ward, Jr., 
eds. (Raven Press 1980), pp. 97-121. 
For an application of chaos theory to the bursting problem, see 
STEVEN J. SCHIFF et al, "Controlling chaos in the brain," Nature 370:615-
620 (1994). 
For the role of synchronous input, see X. WANG, M. M. MERZENICH, 
K. SAMESHIMA, W. M. JENKINS, "Remodeling of hand representation in 
adult cortex determined by timing of tactile stimulation/' Nature 
378:71-75 (1995). 
MARKUS MEISTER, LEON LAGNADO, DENIS A. BAYLOR, "Concerted 
signaling by retinal ganglion cells," Science 270:1207-1210 (17 November 
1995). 
68 
PATRICIA K. KUHL, "Learning and representation in speech and 
language." Current Opinion in Neurobiology 4:812-822 (1994). 

226 
69 
FREEMAN (1995), p. 67. 
70 
A discussion of LTP, and of activity-dependent structural changes 
at synapses, can be found in most neurobiology texts, such as ERIC R. 
KANDEL, JAMES H. SCHWARTZ, THOMAS M. JESSELL, Principles of Neural 
Science, 3d edition (Elsevier 1991). 
70 
KARL S. LASHLEY, Brain Mechanisms and Intelligence (University of 
Chicago Press 1929). 
71 
For some background on the problem of assembling the ensemble, 
see WOLF SINGER, "Development and plasticity of cortical processing 
architectures/' Science 270:758-764 (3 November 1995). 
74 
PETER A. GETTING, "Emerging principles governing the operation 
of neural networks," Annual Reviews of Neuroscience 12:185-204 (1989). 
75 
NMDA channel properties, see CHARLES F. STEVENS, 'TWO 
principles of brain organization: 
a challenge for artificial neural 
networks," in The Neurobiology of Neural Networks, edited by Daniel 
Gardner (MIT Press 1993), pp. 13-20 at p.18. 
75 
This is perhaps not the time to talk about temporal summation (see 
the random arrivals examples in CALVIN 1980, cited later) but it should 
be noted that NMDA channels also contribute to a slower decay of EPSPs 
and thus greater summation for an additional reason. Furthermore, the 
calcium ion entry through an NMDA channel likely stimulates various 
second messenger mechanisms inside the neuron. 
76 
Information is just becoming available for the layer 5 pyramidal 
neurons from loose patch recordings on both soma and apical dendrite. 
Action potentials consistently following EPSPs may enhance them by 20 
percent but it takes fairly large voltage changes, perhaps even calcium 
spikes nearby, to effectively condition the EPSPs. See GREG STUART AND 
BERT SAKMANN, "Amplification of EPSPs by axosomatic sodium channels 
in neocortical pyramidal neurons," Neuron 15:1065-1076 (1995). 
A. M. BROWN, PETER C. SCHWINDT, WAYNE CRILL, "Different voltage 
dependence of transient and persistent Na+ currents is compatible with 
modal-gating hypothesis for sodium channels," Journal of Neurophysiology 
71:2562-2565 (1994). 
77 
One simple theory is that there are two calcium-current thresholds 
in dendrites, the lower one associated with long-term depression and the 
higher one with long-term potentiation. See C. HANSEL, A. ARTOLA, 
WOLF SINGER, "Ca2+ signals associated with the induction of long-term 
potentiation and long-term depression in pyramidal cells of the rat visual 
cortex," Society for Neuroscience Abstracts 711.3(1995). 
77 
Cortical neurons are individually capable of firing rhythmically to 
sustained inputs: WILLIAM H. CALVIN, GEORGE W. SYPERT, "Fast and slow 
pyramidal tract neurons: An intracellular analysis of their contrasting 

227 
repetitive firing properties in the cat," Journal of Neurophysiology 
39:420-434(1976). 
77 
W. R. SOFTKY, CHRISTOF KOCH, 'The highly irregular firing of 
cortical cells is inconsistent with temporal integration of random EPSPs," 
Journal of Neuroscience 13:334-50 (1993). 
77 
Mea culpa. I spent a fair amount of time trying to convince people 
that cortical neurons ought to fire rhythmically, just like motor neurons, 
that they were impressively analog: W. H. CALVIN, "Normal repetitive 
firing and its pathophysiology," in Epilepsy: A Window to Brain Mechan-
isms (J. Lockard and A. A. Ward, Jr., eds.), Raven Press, New York, pp. 
97-121 (1980). The analog aspects may, of course, still be a major factor 
in the dendritic amplification of synaptic inputs, even in those cases 
where coincidence detection seems to be the name of the game: see 
Coincidence Detection in the Nervous System, edited by JENNIFER ALTMAN 
(Human Frontier Science Program, Strasbourg 1996). 
78 
Lots of triangular array activity would be my favorite candidate for 
a region of neocortex doing something interesting, not overall levels of 
activity as indicated by blood flow or metabolism. Note that, in the 
transition from disorganized activity to sharpened-up triangular arrays, 
an AGC might effectively mask such more traditional indicators of 
neocortical "activity." More firing would occur at nodes of triangular 
arrays, and less would occur nearby, thanks to the AGC — and there 
might be no net change in the activity spatially averaged for a blood-
flow-based technique to detect. 
79 
ABELES (1991). 
79 PETER KONIG, ANDRAS K. ENGEL, WOLF SINGER, "Relation between 
oscillatory activity and long-range synchronization in cat visual cortex," 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences U.S.A. 92:290-294 (1995). 
79 HERBERT A. SIMON, The Sciences of the Artificial (MIT Press 1969), 
pp. 95-96. 
Ckapter 6. Partitioning ike Playfield 
81 
JOHN Z. YOUNG, A Model of the Brain (Claredon Press 1964). His 
"The organization of a memory system," Proceedings of the Royal Society 
(London) 163B:285-320 (1965) introduces the mnemon concept in which 
weakened synapses serve to tune up a function. A later version is his 
"Learning as a process of selection," Journal of the Royal Society of 
Medicine 72:801-804 (1979). 
81 RICHARD DAWKINS, "Selective neurone death as a possible memory 
mechanism," Nature 229:118-119 (1971). 

228 
82 
JEAN-PIERRE CHANGEUX, A. DANCHDM, "Selective stabilization of 
developing synapses as a mechanism for the specification of neuronal 
networks," Nature 264:705-712 (1976). 
82 
GERALD M. EDELMAN, "Group selection and phasic reentrant 
signaling: a theory of higher brain function," in The Neurosciences Fourth 
Study Program, edited by F. O. Schmitt and F. G. Worden, pp. 1115-1139 
(MIT Press 1979). 
82 
Three-fold range in size of primary visual cortex among adults: 
SUZANNE S. STENSAAS, D. K. EDDINGTON, AND W. H. DOBELLE, "The 
topography and variability of the primary visual cortex in man," Journal 
of Neurosurgery 40:747-755 (June 1974). 
82 
For a recent version of the silent synapse story, see PATRICK D. 
WALL, "DO nerve impulses penetrate terminal arborizations? A 
pre-presynaptic control mechanism," Trends in Neurosciences 18:99-103 
(February 1995). 
82 
OTTO ROSSLER, "The chaotic hierarchy," Zeitschrift fur Natur-
forschung 38A:788-802 (1983). 
82 
GERALD M. EDELMAN, Neural Darwinism (Basic Books 1987). 
WILLIAM H. CALVIN, "A global brain theory (a book review of 
Gerald Edelman's Neural Darwinism)" Science 240:1802-1803 (24 June 
1988). 
83 
"Differential amplification of particular variants in a population," 
is from EDELMAN (1989), p. 39. 
83 
"[This] is a population theory," EDELMAN (1987), p. 31. 
85 
Overwriting: LOFTUS (1979). 
85 
Hippocampus does replay firing sequences during sleep: see 
WILLIAM E. SKAGGS, BRUCE L. MACNAUGHTON, "Replay of neuronal firing 
sequences in rat hippocampus during sleep following spatial 
experience," Science 271:1870-1873 (29 March 1996). 
85 
G. BUZHAKI, A. BRAGIN, J. J. CHROBAK, Z. NADASDY, A. Snc, M. Hsu, 
A. YLINEN, "Oscillatory and intermittent synchrony in the hippocampus: 
relevance to memory trace formation," pp. 145-172. in Temporal Coding 
in the Brain, edited by G. BUZHAKI et al (Springer 1994). 
85 
"Timing jitter" is also easily solved via lots of clones. The modern 
version of the "throwing theory" is in WILLIAM H. CALVIN, 'The unitary 
hypothesis: 
A common neural circuitry for novel manipulations, 
language, plan-ahead, and throwing?" pp. 230-250 in Tools, Language, and 
Cognition in Human Evolution, edited by Kathleen R. Gibson and Tim 
Ingold (Cambridge University Press 1993). 
86 
Hyperacuity in sensation: WILLIAM H. CALVIN, "Precision timing 
requirements suggest wider brain connections, not more restricted ones," 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 7:334 (1984). 

229 
86 Evolutionary stable strategies (ESSs), see JOHN MAYNARD SMITH, 
The Evolution of Sex (Cambridge University Press 1978). 
88 
Actually, because axons may have several clusters of terminals 
along a run, spaced "0.5 mm" apart, gateways do not have to be open, 
only thin. 
95 
Niche quote is from ERNST MAYR, Toward a New Philosophy of 
Biology (Harvard University Press 1988), p. 135. In G. E. Hutchinson's 
definition, niche is a multidimensional resource space. 
95 
Borneo quote is from MAYR (1988), p. 136. 
96 
Potential niche space: MAYR (1988), p. 129. 
96 
Spreadsheet evolution is discussed in my book, The River that Flows 
Uphill (Sierra Club Books 1987), Day 13. 
97 
Evolutionarily stable strategies (ESSs) surely constitute a meta-
level for the cortical competitions. Just as they explained why immediate 
self-interest wasn't always the name of the game for the prisoner's 
dilemma and the like, so ESSs will probably prove relevant to the work 
space competitions. Once simulation of a neocortical Darwin machine 
handles the simple competitions, it will be interesting to see what 
cooperative phenomena are like. But it lies beyond the capabilities of the 
present analysis, that primarily relies on the mosaics of plane geometry 
for explanatory power. 
98 
JAMES L. GOULD and CAROL GRANT GOULD, The Animal Mind, 
Scientific American Library, p. 43,1994. 
WILLIAM 
JAMES, "Great men, great thoughts, and the 
environment," The Atlantic Monthly 46(276):441-459 (October 1880). 
Intermission 
Notes 
The chalk drawing of Charles Darwin in the 1840s is by Samuel 
Laurence. A color reproduction can be seen on the dust jacket of JANET 
BROWNE'S Charles Darwin, Volume 1, Voyaging (1995). The original is at 
Darwin's country home, Down House, in the London suburbs 
(directions: 
http://weberM.washington.edu/~wcalvin/doztm_hse.html). 
100 RICHARD DAWKINS, The Extended Phenotype (Freeman 1982). 
104 ROY M. PRITCHARD, WOODBURN HERON, DONALD O. HEBB, "Visual 
perception approached by the method of stabilized images," Canadian 
Journal of Psychology 14:67-77 (1960). 
The subject's profile, adapted from HEBB (1980, the source of the 
history), was redrawn from a photograph appearing in ROY M. 
PRITCHARD, "Stabilized images on the retina," Scientific American 204:72-
78 (June 1961). 

230 
105 The Cheshire Cat makes its (dis)appearance in LEWIS CARROLL, 
Alice's Adventures in Wonderland (1865). 
106 Sustained firing can occur from sustained inputs or from a bias in 
leakage currents that creates a pacemaker: see, for example, WILLIAM H. 
CALVIN, CHARLES F. STEVENS, "Synaptic noise and other sources of 
randomness in motoneuron interspike intervals/' Journal of Neurophysio-
logy 31:574-587 (1968). 
106 
For an appreciation of Hebb by his former student and long-time 
colleague, PETER M. MILNER (who also helped extend Hebb's cell-
assembly to categories and to synchrony), see "The mind and Donald O. 
Hebb," Scientific American 268(1):124-129 (January 1993), and "Neural 
representations: some old problems revisited," Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience 8:69-77 (January 1996). 
106 Hebb introduced all three major concepts for which he is now 
celebrated — first the dual trace memory, then the cell-assembly, and 
finally the Hebbian synapse — in just two consecutive pages (pp. 61-62) 
of The Organization of Behavior. In many places in the book, he is most 
apologetic and defensive about burdening readers with his speculations 
— but Hebb, in addition to the physiological orientation he received as 
a student of Karl Lashley's, had an overriding conviction that theory was 
worth doing. This conviction was seldom shared by neurosdentists of 
his day, who were thoroughly impatient with theory. The situation was 
nothing like the healthy competition between experimentalists and 
theoreticians that has long existed in physics. Indeed, in the midst of my 
two decades of experimental work when I started doing theory part-
time, theory was much maligned and there were only several full-time 
theorists working in neurosdence-like departments. It was only when 
connectionism caught everyone's attention in the mid-1980s that doing 
theory finally became halfway respectable among neurosdentists. And 
one of the things that everyone was then talking about were those 
retrogradely-strengthened synapses, predicted four decades earlier 
amidst much apology by Hebb. 
107 
RICHARD DAWKINS, "Viruses of the mind," in Dennett and His 
Critics: Demystifying Mind, edited by Bo Dahlbom (Blackwell 1993). And 
see RICHARD BRODIE, Virus of the Mind (Integral Press, Seattle 1995). 
108 Permission to memorize: FRANKLIN B. KRASNE, "Extrinsic control 
of intrinsic neuronal plastidty: a hypothesis from work on simple 
systems," Brain Research 140:197-206 (1978). 
Ill J. ALLAN HOBSON, The Chemistry of Conscious States (Little, Brown 
1994),p.ll7. 
Ill 
HEBB (1980), p. 5. 

231 
Chapter 7. 
Tne Brownian Notion 
113 IMMANUEL KANT, Critique of Pure Reason (1781; translation St. 
Martins Press 1965), p. A141. 
114 
Eleanor Rosch, see JOHNSON (1987). 
114 
SAMUEL BUTLER ("11"), quoted at p. 333 by W. H. Auden and L. 
Kronenberger, The Viking Book of Aphorisms (Viking 1962). 
114 BlCKERTON (1995), pp. 51-52. 
116 Simple associative memories: see DANIEL L. ALKON, Memory's Voice 
(HarperCollins 1992). 
119 
ROBERT HOLT, 'The microevolutionary consequences of climate 
change," Trends in Evolution and Ecology 5:311-315 (1990). 
120 
FREEMAN (1995), p. 100. 
121 
"Future place cells," see L. F. ABBOTT, K. I. BLUM, "Learning and 
generating motor sequences," Nervous Systems and Behaviour 
(Proceedings of the 4th International Congress of Neuroethology), p.106 
(1995). 
121 Efference copy dates back to E. VON HOLST, H. MnTELSTAEDT, "Das 
Reafferenzprinzip. Wechselwiskungen zwischen Zentralnervensystem 
und Peripherie," Naturwissenschaften 37:464-476 (1950). 
122 J, ALLAN HOBSON, The Chemistry of Conscious States (Little, Brown 
1994), pp. 59-60. 
123 
"Titles to abstracts to full texts" is going to be extended, thanks to 
web pages where five-minute audio-visual presentations can be added. 
And even the half-hour canned lab tour, for the very curious, with 
options that demonstrate lab techniques. 
123 BRUCE SCHNEIER, Applied Cryptography (Wiley 1994), p.28. 
125 My musical history is taken from that of STEVEN R. HOLTZMAN, 
Digital Mantras: The Languages of Abstract and Virtual Worlds (MIT Press 
1994), pp. 18-33. 
126 Particularly relevant among the cortical theories is KRISHNA V. 
SHENOY, JEFFREY KAUFMAN, JOHN V. MCGRANN, GORDON L. SHAW, 
"Learning by selection in the trion model of cortical organization," 
Cerebral Cortex 3:239-248 (1993). 
127 
HEBB(1980),p.l07. 
Chapter 8. 
Convergence Zones and a Hint of Sex 
129 
JOHN MAYNARD SMITH, The Theory of Evolution (Cambridge 
University Press 1993), p. 41. 

232 
130 Conduction speed in axons is a function of their diameter, the 
extent of their myelin wrapping, and the density of sodium channels at 
their nodes of Ranvier. Because sodium channels are regularly replaced, 
up-regulating the insertion of new channels could easily be used to 
increase conduction speed on a side branch. Minor hesitations at branch 
points also enter into consideration, though the synaptic delay is the 
largest hesitation — and the most easily varied, if tuning to equalize 
travel time. For a theoretical analysis, see Y. MANOR, CHRISTOF KOCH, 
IDAN SEGEV, "Effect of geometrical irregularities on propagation delay in 
axonal trees/' Biophysical Journal 60:1424-1437 (1991). 
131 I thank my colleague JOHN W. SUNSTEN for the whole brain photo-
graphs; they are among the excellent collection at httpillwwwl.biostr.-
washington.edu/DigitalAnatomist.html. 
131 Mapping corticocorticals with strychnine: 
J. G. DUSSER DE 
BARENNE, W. S. MCCULLOCH, "Functional organization of the sensory 
cortex of the monkey/' Journal of Neurophysiology 1:69-85 (1938). 
131 
For the columns and layers summary, see WILLIAM H. CALVIN, 
"Cortical columns, modules, and Hebbian cell assemblies," in Handbook 
of Brain Theory and Neural Networks, M. A. ARBIB, ed. (MTT Press 1995), pp. 
269-272. 
131 Convergence zones, see ANTONIO R. DAMASIO, "Time-locked 
multiregional retroactivation: a systems-level proposal for the neural 
substrates of recall and recognition," Cognition 33:25-62 (1989). For a 
good example of corticocortical connectivity, see TERRY W. DEACON, 
"Cortical connections of the inferior arcuate sulcus cortex in the macaque 
brain," Brain Research 573:8-26 (1992). 
132 Detail of PABLO PICASSO, Woman in an Armchair (1941), MusSe 
Picasso, Paris. 
134 Temporal summation of inputs, see p. 105 of CALVIN AND OJEMANN 
(1994). 
134 Time window of NMDA channel (at room temperature): J. M. 
BEKKERS, C. F. STEVENS, "Computational implications of NMDA receptor 
channels," Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology LV:131-
135 (1990). 
136 Another contributor to submerging the less successful is long-term 
depression (LTD), a reduction in synaptic strengths that occurs with 
conditioning stimuli that are insufficient to evoke long-term potentiation 
(LTP). While it is still unclear whether LTD is actually a synaptic 
mechanism or a reduction in dendritic amplification by calcium and 
sodium currents, it should have the desirable feature of reducing the size 
of the hot spot. 

233 
137 Gamete dimorphism, see LYNN MARGULIS and DORION SAGAN, 
Origins of Sex (Yale University Press 1986) and MAYNARD SMITH (1978). 
138 Setup for sexual selection to operate: 
for a more complete 
discussion, see CRONIN (1991), p.114. 
140 I say "loosely analogous" because the sperm-ova dimorphism isn't 
due to small vs. large quantities of DNA but rather of stored energy. 
Still, ova do have somewhat more DNA because of the maternal-only 
mitochondrial mtDNA and the female's two X chromosomes. 
141 Synesthesia is described in RICHARD E. CYTOWIC, The Man Who 
Tasted Shapes (Putnams 1993). 
144 HENRY J. PERKBMSON, Teachers Without Goals/Students Without 
Purposes (McGraw-Hill 1993), p. 34. 
DAMIEN BRODERICK (1996). 
See http://odyssey.apana.org.au/-
~terminus/iq-14.html#Interviezv with Damien Broderick 
Chapter 9. 
Chimes on die Quarter Hour 
145 
ROGER SHANK and ROBERT ABELSON, Scripts, Plans, Goals and 
Understanding (Erlbaum 1977), p. 41. 
Urge to finish known sequence serving to quiet crying children: 
SANDRA TREHUB, University of Toronto, personal communication (1995). 
PETER BROOKS, Reading for the Plot: Design and Intention in Narrative 
(Random House 1984), pp. 1-2. 
146 Jabberwocky later appeared in LEWIS CARROLL, Through the Looking 
Glass. 
147 
DENNETT (1995), p.139. 
147 
Hint: the next line is "The evil that men do lives after them 
" 
The answer is in the notes for the last chapter. 
150 
GORDON H. BOWER and DANIEL G. MORROW, "Mental models in 
narrative comprehension," Science 247:44-48 (1990). 
151 J. HORE, S. WATTS, J. MARTIN, B. MILLER. "Timing of finger opening 
and ball release in fast and accurate overarm throws," Experimental Brain 
Research 103:277-286 (1995). 
J. HORE, S. WATTS, D. TWEED, "Arm position constraints when 
throwing in three dimensions," Journal of Neurophysiology 72:1171-1180 
(1994). 
151 
WILLIAM H. CALVIN, CHARLES F. STEVENS, "Synaptic noise as a 
source of variability in the interval between action potentials," Science 
155:842-844 (1967). 

234 
152 
WILLIAM H. CALVIN, "A stone's throw and its launch window: 
timing precision and its implications for language and hominid brains/' 
Journal of Theoretical Biology 104:121-135 (1983). 
152 
WILLIAM H. CALVIN, GEORGE W. SYPERT, "Fast and slow pyramidal 
tract neurons: An intracellular analysis of their contrasting repetitive 
firing properties in the cat," Journal of Neurophysiology 39:420-434 (1976). 
153 
JOHN R. CLAY, ROBERT DEHAAN, "Fluctuations in interbeat interval 
in rhythmic heart-cell clusters," Biophysical Journal 28:377-389 (1979). 
153 J. T. ENRIGHT, 'Temporal precision in Orcadian systems: a reliable 
neuronal clock from unreliable components?" Science 209:1542-1544 
(1980). 
154 BRIAN ENO, radio interview on Fresh Air (1990) and personal 
communication (1995). 
154 See my mention of NMDA effects in chapter 7. There my example 
was correcting offcourse arm trajectories, but it equally applies to 
subvocal sequences. 
155 A good physiologically oriented book on music is by the 
neurologist FRANK R. WILSON, Tone Deaf and All Thumbs? (Viking Penguin 
1986). The illustration showing the bifurcating path of a pendulum 
attracted by several magnets was made using James Gleick's CHAOS: The 
Software (Autodesk 1991). 
157 
JOHN HOLLAND, "Complex adaptive systems," Daedalus (Winter 
1992), p. 25. 
Ckapter 10. Tne Making of Metapkor 
159 SAMUEL P. HUNTINGTON, "If not civilizations, what?" Foreign Affairs 
72(5):186-194(1993). 
159 
MICHAEL REDDY, "The conduit metaphor," in A. Ortony (ed.), 
Metaphor and Thought (Cambridge University Press 1979). 
159 
The art of the good guess is discussed by CALVIN (1996). 
159 
ALLAN SANDAGE, quoted by Timothy Ferris in The New Yorker, p. 
50 (15 May 1995). 
160 
"Without imagination...": HAROLD OSBORNE, Aesthetics and Art 
Theory (Dutton 1970), p.208. 
161 FREEMAN (1995), p. 107. 
161 
Schema is used for knowledge structures in general, but I am using 
it in JOHNSON'S (1987, p.2) sense of an image schema, a dynamic pattern 
that functions somewhat like an abstract version of an image, thereby 
connecting up a vast range of different experiences that manifest similar 
properties. 

235 
161 
My grammar exposition derives from that of DEREK BlCKERTON, 
Language and Species (University of Chicago Press 1990). In human 
language cortex, the layer 3 pyramidal neurons are consistently larger in 
the left hemisphere: J. J. HUTSLER, M. S. GAZZANIGA, "Acetylcholin-
esterase staining in human auditory and language cortices: regional 
variation of structural features," Cerebral Cortex 6:260-270 (April 1996). 
161 Containment, see JOHNSON (1987), p.126. 
162 P. IVERSON, PATRICIA K. KUHL, "Mapping the perceptual magnet 
effect for speech using signal detection theory and multidimensional 
scaling," Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 97:553-562 (1995). 
163 
NANCY J. C. ANDREASEN, PAULINE S. POWERS, "Creativity and 
psychosis: An examination of conceptual style," Archives of General 
Psychiatry 32:70-73 (1975). 
164 
DEDRE GENTER, DONALD GENTER, "Flowing water or teeming 
crowds: mental models of electricity," in Dedre Genter and Albert 
Stevens (eds.), Mental Models (Erlbaum 1983), pp.99-129. 
164 Hans Selye, see JOHNSON (1987), chapter 5. 
165 MARVIN MINSKY, The Society of Mind (Simon & Schuster 1987), ch. 
20. 
166 
"One then reduces the excitability until only the better resonances 
remain active." This is not unlike reducing the temperature in the DNA 
annealing technique, judging the percentage of zipped-up DNA 
fragments from the temperature at which the solution's surface first 
coalesces. 
166 
HENRY MOORE, quoted at p.26 by KEN MACRORIE, Telling Writing, 
3d ed. (Hayden Book Company 1980). 
167 Note that if a spatiotemporal pattern did not need to be spatially 
cloned, in order to gain the attention of output pathways, the spatial 
extent of attractors could be less than a hexagon pair. But that would 
give a lot of power to very few cells, and a chorus requirement would be 
safer. 
169 
I have discussed the common neural machinery for speech and 
hand movements most recently in WILLIAM H. CALVIN, "The unitary 
hypothesis: 
A common neural circuitry for novel manipulations, 
language, plan-ahead, and throwing?" pp. 230-250 in Tools, Language, and 
Cognition in Human Evolution, edited by Kathleen R. Gibson and Tim 
Ingold (Cambridge University Press 1993). 
169 
"Vice versa...." CALVIN (1993). 
170 GEORGE A. OJEMANN, "Brain organization for language from the 
perspective of electrical stimulation mapping," Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences 6(2):189-230 (June 1983). 
170 BlCKERTON (1990), p.86. 

236 
170 
JACOB BRONOWSKI, The Origins of Knowledge and Imagination (Yale 
University Press 1978, transcribed from 1967 lectures). 
171 
KENNETH J. W. CRAIK, The Nature of Explanation (Cambridge 
University Press 1943). 
172 Narrative unity: see, for example, PAUL RlCOEUR, Time and 
Narrative (University of Chicago Press 1984). 
172 HEINZ PAGELS, The Dreams of Reason (Simon & Schuster 1988). 
Chapter 11. 
Thinking a Thought in the Mosaics of the Mind 
175 
DANIEL C. DENNETT, Darwin's Dangerous Idea (Simon & Schuster 
1995), p. 460. And, since I did promise you the answer to Dennett's 
puzzler, X is: 
Pdun Dqwrqb'v idprxv ixqhudo rudwlrq lq Zlooldp 
Vkdnhvshduh'v Mxolxv Fdhvdu, 
Dfw LLL Vfhqh 
2: 
"Iulhqgv, Urpdqv, frxqwubphq, ohqg ph brxu hduv; 
L frph wr exub Fdhvdu, qrw wr sudlvh k i p . " 
Well, to keep you from involuntarily seeing the answer, I've encrypted 
it with the famous Caesar Cipher where each plaintext character is 
replaced by the one located three to the right in modulo 26. I've left the 
number and the punctuation unencrypted. 
ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ plaintext 
DEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZABC ciphertext 
176 
KARL R. POPPER AND JOHN C. ECCLES, The Self and Its Brain (Springer 
1977) 
176 EUGEN HERRIGEL, Zen in the Art of Archery (Pantheon 1953). 
180 
JONATHAN WEDMER, The Beak of the Finch (Knopf 1994), p. 129. 
181 J. B. S. HALDANE, Journal of Genetics 58 (1963). 
181 
For a history of the confusions about levels of explanation and 
mechanism, see HELENA CRONIN, The Ant and the Peacock (1991). 
181 
Ignorance of levels of explanation: see my How Brains Think, 
chapter three, "The janitor's dream." 
181 
WILLIAM JAMES, Principles of Psychology (1890). 
182 
FRANCIS CRICK and CHRISTOF KOCH, NVThe problem of conscious-
ness," Scientific American 267(3):152-159 (September 1992). The Neural 
Correlate of Consciousness (their NCC) is some relevant group of 
neurons firing in some relevant pattern for a sufficient duration. It is 
easy to imagine how population-style hegemony could be their NCC, but 
I would caution that passive awareness may be much simpler than the 
creative constructs implied by the James-Piaget-Popper levels of 

237 
consciousness; a pop-through recognition of a familiar object may not 
need to utilize a cloning competition in the manner of an ambiguous 
percept or a novel movement. 
183 EDELMAN (1989), p. 148. 
183 
PAUL VALERY, quoted at p. 346 in W. H. Auden and L. Kronen-
berger, The Viking Book of Aphorisms (Viking 1962). 
183 Dreaming: HOBSON (1988). 
185 
"Too slow." One of our best ways of compensating for insufficient 
amounts of neurotransmitters is to increase the time it dwells in the 
synaptic cleft. 
But drugs that delay transmitter breakdown or 
sequestration thereby change the time constants, and so slow the natural 
fluctuations. 
186 
KAY REDFIELD JAMISON, An Unquiet Mind: A Memoir of Moods and 
Madness (Knopf 1995). 
186 Mixed depression: FREDERICK K. GOODWIN, KAY REDFIELD J AMBON, 
Manic-depressive Illness (Oxford University Press 1990), p.48. 
187 HOBSON (1994). 
187 HEBB (1980), p. 26. 
188 Joan of Arc: CALVIN & OjEMANN (1994), p. 79. 
188 
"Some long-ago success" might, at one extreme, be the tuning-up 
period of ontogeny when diffuse wiring is pruned, leaving only those 
terminal clusters that have been engaging in a test pattern. 
189 Functional roles for EEG rhythms: discussed by THEODORE H. 
BULLOCK/'How do brains work?" chapter 10 in Induced Rhythms in the 
Brain, edited by E. Basar, T. H. Bullock (Birkhauser 1991). 
189 
WALLACE STEVENS, from "Adagia," in Opus Posthumous (Knopf 
1957). 
191 
Our modern experience with packet data transmission illustrates 
one way that a serial-order bottleneck can be circumvented, allowing the 
same channel to be simultaneously used for several tasks (internet 
telephony, text file transfer, and image download, all going over the 
same twisted pair wire). Frequency multiplexing is another, as is time 
slicing. So until we have pushed the issue hard enough with experi-
mental techniques, it may be well to remember that the "unity of 
consciousness" is not the settled issue that it first appears. 
191 Attractors that fade more slowly might still fade out overnight, 
provided that sleep processes protected the cortical area from writing 
new ones. REM sleep process do, after all, inhibit many muscles; also 
inhibiting the cortical areas used for agendas might function much like 
the mantras of my Intermission Notes. 
192 GEORGE STEINER, "Has truth a future?" Bronowski memorial 
lecture, reprinted in Bernard Dixon, editor, From Creation to Chaos (Basil 

238 
Blackwell 1989), pp. 234-252 at p.250. Simply "being interested in 
something/' as Steiner likes to say, is a form of evolving agenda that 
structures the daily lives of creative people. There are likely multiple 
evolving agendas in no particular hierarchy, as when one interrupts 
writing the magnum opus to do the laundry — and then again, an hour 
later, when one remembers to water the dehydrated house plants. 
194 
BlCKERTON (1990). For some of the elements needed for a Univer-
sal Grammar, see JACKENDOFF (1993), p. 81, pp. 159-164; BlCKERTON 
(1995), pp.30ff; and NOAM CHOMSKY, "A minimalist program for 
linguistic theory/' pp. 1-52 in The View from Building 20 (MIT Press 1993), 
edited by K. Hale and S. J. Keyser (it's a WW2 "temporary building" at 
M.I.T.; back in 1961-62,1 had an office in 20B-225). It is thought that a 
mechanism for recursive embedding buys you the most important 
aspects of UG. 
196 
WILLIAM H. CALVIN, "The emergence of Universal Grammar from 
protolanguage: corticocortical coherence could enable binding and 
recursive embedding," Society for Neuroscience Abstracts 22 (1996). 
199 
DARWIN (1859). 
Glossary and Brief Tutorials 
203 See STEWART (1995), p.117. 
204 For more on chaos, start with chapter 8 of STEWART (1995) before 
progressing to ABRAHAM (1990), GLASS AND MACKEY (1990), and 
FREEMAN (1995). 
206 
Discussions of unitary processes can be found in WILLIAM H. 
CALVIN and KATHERINE GRAUBARD, "Styles of neuronal computation," 
chapter 29 in The Neurosciences, Fourth Study Program, edited by F. O. 
Schmitt and F. G. Worden (MIT Press 1979). 
206 
HELENA CRONIN, The Ant and the Peacock (Cambridge University 
Press 1991), p.107. 
206 
Genetic code: see any biology text or DOUGLAS HOFSTADTER 
Metamagical Themas (BasicBooks 1985), pp.672ff. 
212 Resonance: see, for example, STEWART (1995), pp. 24-25. 

A&erthoughfa 
I thank Jennifer S. Lund for introducing me to the properties of the 
intrinsic horizontal connections of neocortex, and for regularly attempt-
ing to straighten out my misconceptions. David G. King was heroic, 
marking up two versions of the manuscript from his unique viewpoint 
in both population biology and local circuit neurobiology, and 
suggesting I emphasize that variation need not be truly random. 
Stephen Jay Gould kindly looked over the six darwinian essentials and 
suggested emphasizing Darwin's inheritance principle. Theodore H. 
Bullock, Walter J. Freeman, and Dan Downs were most helpful in their 
comments on the finished manuscript, as was Katherine Graubard in the 
preceding four years. Mac Wells managed to sketch most of my wild 
ideas for text illustrations and cartoons, and Mark Meyer did the 
wonderful painting "Hexacode" for the cover. Doug vanderHoof and 
Mark Crawford labored mightily to get an author portrait. I thank them 
all, together with Fiona Stevens, Amy Pierce, and Michael Rutter at MTT 
Press. 
Many neuroscientists can trace their scientific roots back to the 
pioneers via only several generations of mentors. Mine go back to 
Donald Hebb via Steve Glickman, now professor of psychology at 
Berkeley, who, when I was a physics undergraduate at Northwestern in 
the late 1950s and he was the closest thing to a neuroscientist on campus, 
told me about how Hebb posed the important problems and arranged for 
me to visit Montreal. My relevant roots also go back to Keffer Hartline 
and the lateral inhibition problem via his student Chuck Stevens, with 
whom I subsequently did my Ph.D. thesis a few years later in Seattle. 
So, I was in possession of most of the essential components of the 
problem long before a solution finally coalesced in 1991, all thanks to the 
way others had formulated the problems they studied, even when they 
couldn't solve them. The missing key was the "dog that didn't bark in 
the night," those silent sidestepping gaps that pattern the recurrent 
excitation, that Jenny Lund told me about in 1991. No wonder that 
everything fell together so rapidly thereafter. 

Recommended 
FREDERICK 
DAVID 
ABRAHAM with 
RALPH H. 
ABRAHAM, 
CHRISTOPHER D. SHAW, A Visual Introduction to Dynamical 
Systems Theory for Psychology (Aerial Press, Santa Cruz 1990). 
DEREK BICKERTON, Language and Human Behavior (University of 
Washington Press 1995). 
WILLIAM H. CALVIN, HOW Brains Think (BasicBooks 1996). 
WILLIAM H. CALVIN, The Cerebral Symphony (Bantam 1989). 
WILLIAM H. CALVIN and GEORGE A. OJEMANN, Conversations with 
Neil's Brain: The Neural Nature of Thought and Language 
(Addison-Wesley 1994). 
HELENA CRONIN, The Ant and the Peacock (Cambridge University 
Press 1991). 
DANIEL C. DENNETT, Darwin's Dangerous Idea (Simon & Schuster 
1995). 
DANIEL C. DENNETT, Kinds of Minds (BasicBooks 1996). 
GERALD M. EDELMAN, The Remembered Present (BasicBooks 1989). 
WALTER J. FREEMAN, Societies of Brains (Erlbaum 1995). 
LEON GLASS and MICHAEL C. MACKEY, Prom Clocks to Chaos: The 
Rhythms of Life (Princeton University Press 1988). 
DONALD O. HEBB, Essay on Mind (Erlbaum 1980). 
J. ALLAN HOBSON, The Chemistry of Conscious States: How the Brain 
Changes its Mind (Little, Brown 1994). 
RAY JACKENDOFF, Patterns in the Mind: Language and Human Nature 
(BasicBooks 1993). 
MARK JOHNSON, The Body in the Mind (University of Chicago Press 
1987). 
JOHN MAYNARD SMITH and EORS SZATHMARY, The Major Transitions 
of Evolution (Freeman 1995). 
MARVIN MlNSKY, The Society of Mind (Simon & Schuster 1986). 
OLAF SPORNS and Giuuo TONINI, editors, Selectionism and the Brain 
(Academic Press 1994; also appears as volume 37 of the 
International Review of Neurobiology). 
IAN STEWART, Nature's Numbers (BasicBooks 1995). 

240 
About the Artists 
MALCOLM WELLS, who did most of the freehand 
sketches that are inset into the text, is, among many 
other things, an architect, author of Underground 
Buildings, the illustrator of my book How the Shaman 
Stole the Moon, and a proprietor of the Underground 
Art Gallery in Brewster, Massachusetts, out on the 
biceps of Cape Cod. 
MARK MEYER, who did the cover art, is also a 
neurobiologist in the Department of Zoology at the 
University of Washington. Other examples of his art, 
and guides to his recent paintings, can be found at his 
web page: http:llweber.u.washington.edul~tnrmeyer. 

T h e A u t h o r 
After an early flirtation with photojournalism and 
electrical engineering, I majored in physics at 
Northwestern University (B.A., 1961), spent a year 
at M.I.T. and Harvard Medical School absorbing 
the atmosphere of what eventually became known 
as neuroscience, then went to the University of 
Washington to do a degree in physiology and 
biophysics (Ph.D., 1966) working under Charles R 
Stevens. I subsequently stayed in Seattle, spend-
ing 20 years on the faculty of the Department of 
Neurological Surgery at the other end of the 
building, a wonderful postdoctoral education as 
well as a home for my theoretical and experimental work on neuron 
repetitive firing mechanisms. After a 1978-79 sabbatical as visiting 
professor of neurobiology at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, my 
interests began to shift toward theoretical issues in the ensemble 
properties of neural circuits — and to the big brain problem of hominid 
evolution. Friends in psychology, zoology, archaeology, and physical 
anthropology tried hard to educate me as I stumbled into their fields 
during the 1980s. As I began writing books and royalty advances 
arrived, I increasingly took unpaid leave, stopped writing grant applicat-
ions, and shed responsibilities. Other university researchers may spend 
a third of their time teaching students and coping with the bureaucracy; 
I now spend about the same proportion of my time writing books for 
general readers and coping with publishers. For some years now, I have 
been an affiliate member of the faculty of the Department of Psychiatry 
and Behavioral Sciences at the University of Washington — again a 
wonderful education, though I am no more a psychiatrist now than I was 
a neurosurgeon before. Pressed for a specialization, I usually say that 
I'm a theoretical neurophysiologist. 
Details can be found via my web pages, such as the full text of 
many of my articles and chapters from each of my books. The links start 
at http://weberM.washington.edu/~wcalvin/. 

