
The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler Volume 6

 
Journal Articles: 1927-1931
Structure & Unity of Neurosis Reason, Feeling, &
Emotion Dream Theory
Alfred Adler
New Translations by Gerald L. Liebenau Edited by Henry T.
Stein, Ph.D. 
Classical Adlerian Translation Project
© 2004 by Henry T. Stein, Ph.D.
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or
any information storage and retrieval system, without prior permission in writing
from the editor. All inquiries should be sent to Henry T. Stein, Ph.D., Classical
Adlerian Translation Project, 2565 Mayflower Lane, Bellingham, WA 98226.
Tel (360) 647-5670 or email to HTStein@att.net .
Published 2004 by The Classical Adlerian Translation Project.
Printed in the United States of America
ISBN 0-9715645-6-6
Table of Contents
Table of Contents
Editor’s 
Preface
2004.............................................................................................. ii About the
Translator .............................................................................................. ii Chapter
I: Chapter II:
Chapter III: Chapter IV: Chapter V: Chapter VI: Chapter VII: Chapter VIII:
Chapter IX:
Chapter X: Chapter XI: Chapter XII: Chapter XIII: Chapter XIV: Chapter
XV: 
Chapter 
XVI: 
Character 
and 
Talent
[1927]..........................................................1 The Feeling of Inferiority and the 
Striving for Recognition [1927] .................................................12 Linkages
Between Neurosis and a Joke [1927] ..........................18 More on Individual
Psychological Dream Theory [1927] ........21 The Cause and Prevention of

Neurosis 
[1927] 
...........................26 
Education 
for 
Courage 
[1927]
....................................................33 Individual Psychology and Science [1927]
................................36 
Alfred 
Adler 
on 
America 
[1927]
................................................43 Feelings and Emotions From the 
Standpoint of Individual Psychology [1927]...............................49 Erotic
Training and Erotic Retreat [1927] ..................................54 The Burning of
Widows and Widow Neurosis [1927] ...............60 Reason, Intelligence, and
FeebleMindedness 
[1928] 
................64 
Neurotic 
Role 
Play 
[1928]
..........................................................70 
Psychology 
and 
Medicine 
[1928]
...............................................77 
The 
Psychology 
of 
Power 
[1928]
...............................................84 Individual Psychology and the Theory of
Neurosis [1929] ........88
Chapter 
XVII: 
A 
Consultation 
[1929]
................................................................96 
Chapter 
XVIII: 
Sleeplessness 
[1929]
.................................................................107 
Chapter XIX: Chapter XX: Chapter XXI: Chapter XXII: A Case of Enuresis
Diurnal [1930] ..........................................149 
Chapter 
XXIII: 
Individual 
Psychology 
and 
Crime 
[1930]
.................................159 
Chapter 
XXIV: 
The 
Meaning 
of 
Life 
[1931]
.....................................................170 
Chapter XXV: Trick and Neurosis [1931] ........................................................178
Chapter 
XXVI: 
The 
Structure 
of 
Neurosis 
[1931]
.............................................186 
The Individual Criminal and His Cure [1929] .........................111 
Individual Psychology [1930] ..................................................124 
Again—The Unity of the Neuroses [1930] ..............................135
Index 
.........................................................................................195
Appendix: “Basic Principles of 
Classical Adlerian Psychology” ...............................................216
i
Editor’s Preface - 2004
Editor’s Preface - 2004
This volume opens with a provocative article wherein Adler challenges
traditonal assumptions about character and talent, and argues his belief in the
potential of intensive training. In twenty-six articles published from 1927 to
1931, Adler devotes several to the varied aspects of neurosis, including: cause,
prevention, structure, unity, theory, role-playing, and the similarities to tricks

and jokes. In three articles, he amplifies earlier discussions of dream theory,
including the related issues of sleeplessness, and enuresis. Two articles address
crime and criminals, while another offers a penetrating, timely insight into the
psychology of power. Several miscellaneous topics are discussed in articles
covering: courage, feelings, emotions, reason, intelligence, mental retardation,
and an unusual issue, widow neurosis. Perhaps the most controversial article of
all is “Alfred Adler on America,” notes taken at one of his lectures by a
physician, where Adler compares the American and European cultures,
critiquing our preoccupation with ambition, competition, and speed, as well as
our tendency to pamper children. One of the most important statements of his
philosophical position appears in “The Meaning of Life,” translated by Sophia
de Vries. From this article, we can see why Alexander Mueller considered
Individual Psychology a dynamic stimulus to the discipline of philosophical
anthropology.
The odyssey of completing “The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler”
has now spanned nearly fifteen years. Hampered by limited personal funding for
costly translations and only a couple of volunteer editors to assist with the
thousands of hours of editing and proofing, the project has slowly, but steadily
progressed. The task of being faithful to Adler’s meaning and style, yet
providing the reader with minimal hindrances to understanding, proved to be
more difficult than initially anticipated. Adler’s spontaneous, sometimes
wandering lecture style is not always easy to follow on the page. We hope our
careful revisions will make a deep study of Adler’s writings much more
manageable..
For readers unfamiliar with Adler’s ideas, a brief overview, titled “Basic
Principles of Classical Adlerian Psychology,” is included in the appendix. Other
comprehensive articles, titled “Classical Adlerian Theory and Practice” and “A
Psychology of Democracy” have been published in Volumes 1 & 2 of The
Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler.
About the Translator - Gerald L. Liebenau
Gerald L. Liebenau was born in Berlin, Germany. During World War II he
served with the Office of Strategic Services as an interpreter and translator. He
graduated from Yale University and embarked on a career with the Central
Intelligence Agency. He is the translator of Nicholas Gonner's Luxemburgers in
the New World, and Janusz Piekalkiewicz's World History of Espionage. He
currently resides in Arlington, Virginia.
ii
Chapter I
Character and Talent1

[1927]
The thesis advanced by the group of psychological thinkers known as the
Individual Psychologists--the thesis that talent is not inherited, and that the
possibilities and potentialities of any individual for performance are not fixed-
has been a bombshell in the camp of the old-line academic psychologists.
Individual Psychology has given evidence to show that talent, potentiality,
endowment, special gifts are merely elements in the structure of an individual. It
has been further shown that these elements may be variously employed,
depending upon their relation to the total activity of the individual.
The Individual Psychologists have decided to understand the totality of the
individual before regarding the partial phenomena of his existence. They hold
that a partial phenomenon, such as a talent, a gift, an endowment, can be
properly understood only when the total is first known and thoroughly
understood. In other words, we can judge the potential performance of an
individual in some specific situation only when we can determine his total
reactions, his total behavior pattern, his general style of life, his "distance" from
the normal goal of life.
An example will show us how valueless any other viewpoint than that of
Individual Psychology becomes in the face of an actual problem. Consider the
case of a thirteen-year-old boy who gives the general impression of a backward,
mentally retarded, neglected child. He has not made the usual progress at school,
has been forced to repeat several grades, and is brought to a social agency
because of thievery and vagabondage. The reports concerning this boy are
uniformly bad. He is irritable, unsocial, has a poor memory, is unable to
concentrate, inattentive. These reports are the results of psychological tests as
well as the schoolroom experiences of his various teachers. Closer study of his
character and history shows that he was the younger of two children for some
eight years, during which time he was inordinately spoiled by his mother. Then
his younger brother was born, and at the same time financial difficulties
occurred in his family, with the result that the mother had to leave the home to
help earn a living. The net result was that the boy began to receive far less
attention and love than he had previously been accustomed to experiencing.
School, therefore, found him in an entirely new situation. His thievery
occurred chiefly outside of his own home; but everything that he gained by
stealing he gave away as presents to other children, in order to gain their
friendship and affection. We can see by this incident that we should not make
final conclusions when we brand a child as a "thief."
1 Originally Published in Harper's Magazine, June 1927. Translated by Walter
Beran Wolfe, M.D. Edited to improve readability by Laurie J. Stein, 2004.

We next learn that this child often ran away from home when his father was
particularly brutal to him, but that he always managed to deposit a bundle of
stolen kindling on the doorstep for his mother to cook with. This done, he spent
the nights in the streets, sleeping in alleyways or old barns.
We can hardly evaluate this "truancy" or "delinquency" according to the
timeworn conceptions. It is quite evident that his thievery is more than mere
stealing, and his truancy more than running away from school. And we must call
attention here to the inadequacy of branding the actions of an individual with
some set label and then believing that we have understood him!
This "delinquency" and this "thievery" mean something different. It is as
though this boy were saying, "I want to force my parents into a situation in
which they will pay more attention to me, love me more, sympathize with me. I
can best do this by showing my mother that I care for her needs!"
I should like to ask whether there is anyone who could suggest to a boy like
this, for whom normal activity in the schoolroom seems hopelessly distant
because of his bad preparation for life, a better method of winning the affection
and love of his parents and school friends than he has chosen? I shall later show
why this normal activity seems to him so impossible of realization. For the
present I simply want to indicate that we cannot call such a child "delinquent,"
"criminal," or "backward." If we want to characterize this boy, we could say that
he is a child who demands and needs an inordinate amount of motherly love.
That he seeks this affection in an asocial way, which he does not particularly
like, is because the normal approach to his goal seems to him effectually barred
by circumstances. The normal paths to affection would be industry and progress
in school, giving pleasure to his parents and teachers by helpfulness, attention to
work, etc. But we have already heard that he was a spoiled child. It is the
characteristic of all spoiled children that they cannot change the behavior pattern
which they have developed as a result of being spoiled. It is their tragedy. A
child has formed and shaped his behavior pattern at the end of his third year of
life. A change in the nature of his character as a result of external influences
seldom occurs thereafter. Particularly in the case of a child with the behavior
pattern of the spoiled child. Such a child never learns from experience. His
experiences, good and bad, are all assimilated into his pattern. He takes an
experience and twists, turns, distorts, reshapes it until it fits into his
predetermined scheme of things.
Naturally, he does not want to go to school, because the warmth and
affection which he is used to is found in greater abundance at home. As a result,
he comes to school on the first day against his will and resistant to all attempts at
instruction. His teachers will say that he is inattentive, lacks concentration,

daydreams, spoils the games of other children, cannot concentrate, has a bad
memory. All these things are explained when we know that he has an entirely
different goal in life than that of a normal schoolboy. The truth is that our boy
finds himself in a new situation for which he was never adequately prepared.
And in this situation occurs the tragedy of the petted child. He is always right!
Since he does not play the game in school, school becomes a very unpleasant
place for him. To make matters worse, he now finds his home also unpleasant.
Bad school reports turn his mother against him. She does not show her love and
affection to the same degree as before. The child blames the school for his
misfortune at home, but he does not change his style of life. Love and affection
he must have. He seeks it in other places, and with other means.
Enough for our example. It proves very simply that when someone
characterizes an individual with a definite character trait we really know nothing
about him. We are in much the same situation as a musician who is asked for his
opinion of a symphony after hearing three chords. But let the musician be
acquainted with musical history, play him a simple melody, and he will be able
to say "That is Bach!" or "That is Wagner!" We cannot judge a personality
unless we have its dominant motif, unless we understand it as a totality.

II
The Individual Psychologists have also shown that the development of a
personality cannot be foretold from the phenomena of physical inheritance. The
inherited instruments with which we fight the battle of life are extremely varied.
How we use these instruments, however, is the important thing.
We can never tell what actions will characterize a man if we know only
whence he comes. But if we know whither he is going, we can prophesy his
steps and movements toward his objective. It is for this reason that we have
found the concept of goal-attainment, of goal-appropriateness, the essential one
for the understanding of human behavior.
In the case of our boy, knowing that his purpose in life is to achieve warmth
and affection, we can understand the means that he will choose toward that end.
And we know also what our therapeutic approach must be, for we understand the
tragedy of this child's life. Suppose, for instance, that we could discover that the
father and the grandfather of this child were also thieves. This would in no way
be responsible for the activity of this particular boy. To be sure, it is interesting
to know just why the boy should choose thievery as a means of gaining love and
affection. This issue must be cleared up in order to rule out a possible hereditary
influence. But we shall clear up this point, too.
In the earliest remembrances of childhood, we often find the key to later
activities. Among this boy's earliest remembrances is the following: He
recollects that he was present at the burning of a delivery truck. The men on the
truck threw many rubber balls out on the street, in order to save them from the
fire. Children and adults who had gathered around the burning delivery truck
seized upon these balls as the acknowledged booty of the onlookers. Nobody
seemed to have any scruples about helping himself to this property. This
remembrance served the boy as a model, as a training, if you will, for his future
career as a thief. He found that there were, so to speak, extenuating
circumstances even in thievery. Later, when the normal development of a child
seemed barred to him, he chose the way to enrichment and power for which this
scene had prepared him.
A word now about his development in school. In kindergarten things went
rather well. He had a very tender, loving teacher, who was not unlike his mother.
But in the primary grades he met a very strict, stern teacher. He immediately
withdrew into himself, failed miserably in class, and resigned himself to the
conduct mentioned above as a protest.

The great majority of our opponents believe the really important factors in
the development of a character or personality are hereditary and congenital.
These opponents are always anxious to show that subsequent developmental
"trends" modify the result. In support of this theory they often make very keen
observations, as for instance Kretschmer and his school. We do not deny the
findings of Kretschmer; in fact, we have anticipated them long ago when we
stated that if an individual gets off to a bad start in life, by reason of congenital
defects or hereditary anomalies, it requires an extraordinarily beneficent
environment to prevent him from developing a warped style of life. Lacking this
beneficent influence of a fostering environment, the individual assumes a false
and unwholesome behavior pattern which fits perfectly with his defectively
developed physique, his inadequate endocrines, his sickly condition. He is just
like a man on a slippery incline: if he falls and sprains his ankle, it is not to be
wondered at. But wondering is not enough. We must attempt to keep him erect,
and actually that is what we have succeeded in doing.

III
What I have said about the development of character also holds for talent.
In discussing this issue, I rule out those individuals whose equipment is so
woefully inadequate as hardly to come under consideration. I mean the
congenital idiots and imbeciles whose condition is actually due to a failure of
organic development, to enormous defects in the actual nervous substance of
their brains.
There remain, however, the great majority of children and adults, who have
the resources but have not developed them to the full extent. Is it absolutely
impossible for such people to render a good performance with relatively modest
tools? In the early days of our human race were there not accomplishments
which could be compared with ours of today, even though our forefathers lacked
our modern techniques and worked with poor instruments? Are we capable of
imitating today what the old guild workers accomplished with relatively
primitive tools? Of course we are!
And here we are back at the problem of hereditary faculties and talents.
Again I must deny that heredity has a great deal to do with accomplishment or
performance. It is not true that with heredity the last word is said, that the
chromosomes are inexorable determinants of subsequent genius. In fact, it is
probable that an organism equipped with deficient organs, with inadequate tools,
will actually develop a better and more ingenious strategy to combat the rigors
of its environment. Such an organism will pay a great deal of attention to detail,
will devise more unerring "short-cuts," will undergo a more intensive training.
This brings us to the surprising, terrifying conclusion of reality. The great, really
worthwhile achievements have been made by individuals whose equipment was
not exceptional.
Normal individuals with normal organs approach the typical adjustments of
everyday life with a greater equanimity, since accomplishing these tasks seems
easily within reason. They lack the tremendous tension that is characteristic of
an individual who sees less clearly than his fellow, or a left-hander who is forced
to work with his weaker and more poorly coordinated right hand. The normal
individual seeks for no tricks, no deception, because he can adjust without them.
Try to drive a nail with a hammer. The hammer almost does it by itself, because
it is an efficient instrument. But try to drive that same nail with a pair of scissors,
or with a pocket-knife! You need tricks and deception now, and a refinement of
technique, to accomplish the same result that comes easily with a hammer.

We must recognize that it is one of the greatest advantages to be born with
defective organs. That is the surprising conclusion we arrive at when we regard
the issue of heredity in a purely objective fashion, the great majority of
psychologists, physicians, and laymen to the contrary notwithstanding. The
average layman believes that he carries his future with him into life, like his milk
teeth: a given quantum of creative ability, which need only be unpacked, so to
speak, to make him a dolt or a genius. This superstition lies at the basis of the
premise which so many investigators use when they say, "Let us see how far this
individual has developed his native talent."
We are constantly hearing people say, "Yes, there is a definite quantum of
talent given every human being!" But this is not true. There is a definite human
constant of talent and potentiality, but this constant remains only so long as no
effort is made to develop and train it. The boy whom I discussed in the
beginning of this paper certainly belonged to the "untalented." He had been
forced to repeat two grades by the time he had reached the fifth grade. After
treatment, he became the best student in his class. The psychologist of the old
school will counter, "Yes, he had a latent talent." That is precisely my point.
Everyone has latent talent.
I shall cite several examples from our experience of so-called "untalented"
children who developed a marked "talent." This development, however, does not
take place by magic or occur overnight. I am choosing for illustrative purposes
some of the easy cases, but we must not believe that it is always so simple to
make a brilliant student out of a backward child. Sometimes we succeed easily;
often it requires great effort and greater patience. In the end, however, it is
always better to be able to say that one boy has talent because he was properly
and encouragingly trained to overcome a defect, and that another boy is
untalented because this or that error was made in his education.
If we disregard professional activity for a moment and investigate, rather,
very small details of child activity, we can best see the developments of talent.
Take for instance a little three-year-old girl who tries to sew dresses for her
dolls. She takes a few stitches which are certainly far removed from works of art,
and her mother comes to her and says, "Do you know, that is a very good
beginning. Now if you take a few more stitches like this" (showing the child),
"then you will have a beautifully dressed doll!" Such a mother, by encouraging
this child in her efforts, giving her new fields to conquer, appealing to her ability
to do more, is preparing the way for a "talent." Contrast another mother whose
three-year-old daughter makes the same clumsy stitches in a doll's dress, and is
met with, "For heaven's sake, don't bother with that needle! You'll only prick
yourself! Little girls can't sew dolls' dresses!" In the first case the child is

encouraged to find new combinations, new colors, new models, and develops her
technique because her efforts are met by encouragement and applause. The
second child loses all desire for activity in which her clumsiness is held up as a
cause for shame and punishment. The first develops a talent. The second will
complain all her life, "I have absolutely no talent for needlework!"
Weeping, an eight-year-old girl came into the office, weeping, with her
mother. The latter explained that the child made no progress in school. She had
come in from the country with excellent reports having finished the third grade.
She was put in the fourth grade in a city school, failed, was demoted to the third
grade, failed again, was finally demoted to the second grade, and was doing very
poorly there. The disparity between the previous excellent reports and the
present bad reports was very marked. From the standpoint of Individual
Psychology, the change in reports represented not a change in talent, but the
substitution of a bad environment for a good one.
Investigation of the child's life disclosed that until recent months she had
lived in the country with foster parents. The mother had been divorced from her
husband and while trying to exist by work in the city had sent her daughter to the
country. Now that she had succeeded in establishing herself financially, she had
brought the child home to live with her.
From our standpoint, this amounts to a psychological experiment which had
been unsuccessful. The reasons for the child's failure are not hard to find. We
can imagine that this child living in the country with foster parents expected that
the return to her mother would be something of a triumphal entry into a
promised Eden. She expected her mother to be the apotheosis of beauty,
kindness, goodness. One question gives us our clue. I ask, "Did you like it out in
the country with your foster parents?" The girl answers, "Yes. They were very
kind to me, treated me like their own child, and bought me pretty playthings."
Now I ask the mother, "How did you receive the child, and how do you
treat her?" The mother answers, "I have had a very sad life with my husband. He
was an habitual drunkard, and I was afraid that the child had inherited his bad
traits, and so l have tried to educate her very strictly, and prevent, if possible, the
curse of drunkenness falling upon her, too!" "How do you do this?" I ask. "How
does one educate a child to prevent the curse of drunkenness from showing
itself?" The mother replies, "One must be very strict and severe with the child;
not allow her to play with bad children, criticize all faults, punish all lies and
moral failings."
Now put yourself in the child's position. This is the Promised Land; this is
the mother from whom one expects the goodness of an angel, the beauty of
motherly love! And the mother turns out to be a nagging, anxious, criticizing,

punishing sort of an avenging witch.
I take the mother aside and tell her that perhaps under other circumstances
her actions would be advisable, but that in this case it might be better if she
attempted to win over the child to her with love and affection. "If I were in your
shoes," I tell the mother, "I should go so far as to admit to the child that I had
made a mistake, that I had meant well but I had followed a bad method, and that
now I wish to be reconciled, and to try to forget the past and do better in the
future. I know that you will not follow my advice entirely, because it requires
great courage on the part of a mother to admit an error to her child, but you can
at least try love and affection.”
This mother, however, did have the courage. "I shall do exactly as you
would do," she said. Mother and daughter were reconciled before my eyes in the
midst of ceremonial tears and sobs. Fourteen days later, mother and daughter
returned. The picture was entirely different. Both were laughing; both were
happy. The little girl was leading her class in the third grade, and brought a note
from the teacher saying that a miracle must have occurred.
We have the records of a number of similar cases. With the more
complicated cases I do not wish to burden my readers, but it is precisely these
most complicated cases which come into our hands as psychiatrists. These are
the cases of patients who have suffered a total shipwreck of their personality
upon the rocks of somebody's prejudice and have been miseducated in their
childhood. Either the individual believes he is totally untalented and unworthy,
or as frequently happens, the individual or his relatives believe that he is
enormously talented, but the talent does not appear because the individual is "so
nervous!"
There are hundreds of such individuals who find themselves duty-bound to
live a life of sickness and “nervousness" in order that their "talent" (which they
inwardly fear does not exist) shall not rise to the surface. We can see what
mischief this conception of "talent" can accomplish in a life. The paradox is that
the poorly equipped man, the man who starts behind the line, has the greatest
advantage. Progress and achievement result only from the conquest of
difficulties. He who conquers difficulties wins.
The issue of talent, particularly in America, England, and Germany where
the need for trained technicians is great, has reached such importance that
nowadays half-grown children are tested for their "talent" for some adult
profession. It is my duty to point out that the most expert and highly trained
experimental psychologists all make timid, unconvincing reports concerning
tests of ability. All their experiments demonstrate that no well-defined, actual
judgments can be rendered concerning the "talent" of an individual for any

particular task. All of them agree that reality is quite different from the tests, and
that we finally have to take the stand that the average man can perform the
average task. The riddle really begins when we find an individual who cannot
pass the tests.

IV
What science has designated as organic defects are a very general
phenomenon. No one has ever seen a normal child, and we can find some kind
of organic defect in everyone. What is important is the sense of defect which the
child feels because he has an inadequate organ, and more particularly, what that
child's environment says about his defect. There. are families who believe their
children are sick if they do not weigh twice as much as normal children. As a
result, a perfectly normal child grows up in an atmosphere of a chronic invalid.
We have seen many children who have grown up with the idea they had weak
hearts. Despite the fact that no cardiac lesion could be discovered, these
individuals could not run or exercise, and shrank from every effort. Their anxiety
and care for their preservation from excitement went beyond the bounds of all
reason, and the tendency to guard and defend themselves as though they were
fragile porcelain remained long after their discovery that they were quite healthy
and as capable of work as anyone else. They had prepared a soft berth for
themselves in life, and were loath to leave it. But in fact, we find many children
who suffer from organic defects, particularly of the sense organs. And we know
well that such individuals suffer much more in life than normal children. They
experience the deficiencies of their bodies, as for instance a weak digestive tract,
bad skin, poor eyes, and suffer more intensely. They feel a certain pressure
which under normal circumstances would develop into added attention, greater
training, a better technique for overcoming their difficulties.
All poets probably belong in this class. Goethe and Schiller both had bad
eyes, and the German poet Gustav Freytag writes in his diary that at the age of
fourteen he could imagine better than he could see, as his ignorant father refused
to let him wear glasses. The organic defect often gives direction to the total
activity of the individual.
Under unpropitious circumstances, an organic defect is compensated in a
useless way. In such cases, we have problem children, criminal children,
neurotic children. It may be stated with certainty that wherever we see a child
occupied with useless, criminal, or neurotic behavior, it is because he has felt
himself "untalented" for the normal activity demanded by our world. Here is
another angle to the difficult matter of "talent." The language which other
psychologists use to describe their beliefs constitutes a challenge to Individual
Psychologists to do something about the problem. A boy learns that he is not
talented for mathematics and finds himself in a group of similar boys who have

been branded in the same way. Or a girl finds herself in a group who "cannot
learn Latin." These individuals present us with a very ticklish situation, because
if we cannot prove them otherwise, they maintain that they are right, that they
are untalented, or talented only to a certain degree.
One of the greatest contributions of Individual Psychology has come in the
discovery that there need be no actual organic deformity or inferiority for a child
to consider himself hindered at the start. The sense of pressure which I have
described as occurring in the actual presence of organic inferiorities may occur
also in the presence of purely social difficulties, or as a result of the position of
the child in the family constellation. In other words, a child with a normal
digestive tract but bad nutrition may assume a behavior pattern similar to that of
a child with a malformed stomach.
It is possible to burden a perfectly normal child with a pressure so great that
he feels himself unable to cope with it. This point explains the fact which has
been the thorn in the side of other psychologists. Occasionally, we find an
individual with perfect organs, with good inheritance, and of good family, who
is nevertheless untalented, incapable, a poor performer, the proverbial black
sheep. We have determined that this is entirely due to the relative picture, the
context within which this child finds himself, and that the blind fate of his
behavior pattern has been fixed in previous relationships.
Similarly, in children who are educated without love or affection, we find a
characteristic behavior pattern. The unbelievably large number of illegitimate
children who are tossed from pillar to post by our society come in this category.
But a child does not need to be illegitimate to grow up with the idea that he is
hated. The petted child sooner or later comes to the same conclusion. A petted
child in a situation in which he does not get his accustomed love and affection
shows all the reactions of a hated child. This becomes particularly evident in the
case of firstborn children who are followed by other children. The parents may
not actually change their attitude toward the firstborn, but he interprets the
presence of the second born as an insult to his prestige. He considers himself a
dethroned monarch and acts accordingly, making every effort to regain his lost
power. Suspicion, hate, envy of the rival are the natural consequences. This type
is particularly frequent among firstborn children.
It is at this point that I wish to blast another superstition. It is generally
believed that children who grow up in the same home pass through the same
environmental influences. This is a fallacy. The tension, the relative context is as
different for each individual as can be. No other child ever lives through the
same situation that a firstborn experiences. Every other child always has a
pacemaker. The firstborn constantly occupies the family limelight for a time. Put

a child in the limelight, accentuate the situation strongly, and we build up an
unmistakable behavior pattern. This will be the style of life in which he strives
always for the center of the stage, in which he must always occupy the main
position. Quite different is the second-born. He directs all his energies at making
power crash from its throne. He is always under steam, on the go, looking for
short-cuts to power. I do not say that every firstborn son and every second-born
must follow this pattern; but we are more accustomed to finding these reactions
in these situations.

V
If I have now given brief proof of the influence of the environment in
determining the social and professional capabilities and talents of an individual,
their preparation or lack of preparation for the solution of the problems of life,
what remains of that mystic quality which we have been solemnly accustomed to
calling talent? Where is this alchemic thing which psychologists want to weigh
and evaluate with scientific instruments? Our problem is quite another one: To
make talented individuals out of untalented ones.
The opposite school of thought has always suffered shipwreck. Wherever
people have tried to foster so-called talented individuals, the subjects have come
to no good end. The schools for talented, psychologically tested “over-average”
pupils hide their heads in shame because of their poor results. What of classes
for talented and untalented children? I have always found, particularly in
Vienna, that the classes for talented children consisted mostly of relatively well-
nourished individuals from the better classes, whereas in the untalented classes
the poorly fed and poorly dressed children of the proletariat were to be found.
Binet, the father of psychological tests, made the same discovery. In the very
beginning of his researches he called attention to the remarkable fact that there
was a constant relation between talent and body-weight. We should not be
surprised at this constant relationship. But it is not a cause and effect relationship
at all.
The elements which the Individual Psychologists have found most
necessary to the development of a child into a useful social being are a good
relation with the rest of humanity and the feeling that he is equal to other
children. Training toward social feeling should begin in the earliest years, and
continue through life. Courage, the consciousness of confidence, and equality
should be fostered wherever possible. If this is done, we find an individual
always on the useful side of life, showing the personality of a worthwhile,
courageous, sociallyminded man or woman.
Rob this child of his courage and the feeling of his equal chance, and we
thwart his development. The fallacy of talent is one of the most effective means
of limiting the development of a child. If we tell a child offhand he is untalented,
and he then proves untalented, this does not prove that we were right. We
"fixed" him! And we must not wonder at our evil results. Similar damage can be
done to the so-called "talented" individual. By constantly giving him tests of his
prowess, usually useless ones, we run the risk of serious damage to his self-

confidence and self-esteem. At any rate, a pathological ambition is bound to
develop and the chances are that this talented individual will soon have to hide
behind a smokescreen of "nervousness" to defend himself from useless tests of
his powers.
The courage which is the basis of talent must be combined with adequate
training. Many seemingly untalented individuals are simply poorly trained. Their
slightest actions bear the inhibitions of this inadequate technique. We know that
there are individuals who walk badly, who have no talent for speaking, and of
course others who seem to have no talent for studying, reasoning, thinking, or
reading books. It is simply a question of finding the right technique for training
them to accomplish their tasks.
Let us refer to the biography of Charlemagne and read the amusing words
of his biographer: "Although Charlemagne tried with might and main to learn to
read and write, he never accomplished these things because he obviously had no
talent for them." But since the days of Pestalozzi,2 it is no longer necessary to
have talent to read and write. Every child can do it.
Growing insight into technique and training will doubtless open up new
fields for the formerly "untalented," and I prophesy that soon the delusion of
"talent" will vanish into the limbo of witchcraft, the evil eye, and the casting of
spells. If we could develop the technique of teaching composition better, we
could make a half-way adequate composer out of everyone. This sounds like
heresy to the composers, to the musical genius. But remember that while
Beethoven's mother was pregnant with him, his father said, "If this will be a boy,
he will be a second Mozart!" We can say that he guessed correctly, that the boy
had the appropriate talents. But what was the most outstanding feature about
Beethoven? A hereditary organic defect: Otosclerosis, a hereditary disease of the
ear ossicles which results in severe deafness about the twentieth year. What
would one of our modern vocational guidance psychologists have said to the
young Beethoven? Would he have prophesied talent as a musician? Certainly
not. He would have made a shoe salesman out of him, would have directed him
to leave music strictly alone. And had Beethoven followed his advice, become a
shoe salesman, the vocational guidance psychologist would have claimed that he
was right. No musical genius would have developed in him!
2 (Editor’s note) Johann Pestalozzi: (1746-1827) – A Swiss educational
reformer. Chapter II
The Feeling of Inferiority and the Striving for Recognition1
[1927]
I. The situation in early childhood

We are certainly now prepared to recognize that those children who have
been treated as step-children by nature have an entirely different attitude toward
their fellow human beings than those for whom the joys of life were guaranteed
at an early age. We can state as a fundamental law that children who come into
the world with organ inferiorities become involved at an early age in a struggle
with the facts of existence which results only too soon in the strangulation of
their social feeling. Such children are continually preoccupied with themselves
in an adjustment to their fellows. What holds for organic inferiorities is just as
valid for any social or economic burden which creates an additional load capable
of producing a hostile attitude in children. The deciding trend becomes
determined at an early age. Such children have a sentiment in their second year
of life that they are somehow not as adequately equipped for the struggle as their
playmates; they sense that they cannot trust themselves in the common games
and pastimes. As a result of past privations, they have acquired a feeling of being
neglected which expresses itself in their tendency to hold themselves in an
attitude of anxious expectation. We must remember that every child occupies an
inferior position in life and were it not for a certain amount of social feeling on
the part of his environment, would be incapable of independent existence. At the
commencement of life, every child must experience a deep feeling of inferiority
when he becomes conscious of his inability to cope single-handedly with the
problems of existence. This feeling of inferiority is the driving force, the starting
point from which every childish striving originates. It determines how an
individual child acquires peace and security in life; it determines the very goal of
his existence and prepares the path along which this goal may be reached.
Every child's educability in this peculiar situation, closely bound up with
his organic potentialities, may be shattered by two factors. One of these factors
is an exaggerated, unresolved feeling of inferiority. The other is a goal which
demands not only security, peace, and social equilibrium, but a striving to
express power over the environment, a goal of dominance over others. Children
who have such a goal are always easily recognized. They become "problem"
children because they interpret every experience as a defeat, and because they
consider themselves neglected and discriminated against both by nature and
men. We need only to consider all these factors to see with what compulsive
necessity a crooked, inadequate, error-ridden development may occur in the life
of a child. Every child runs the danger of such a development, because every
child finds himself at some time in a precarious situation.
1 Originally published in Understanding Human Nature, by Alfred Adler,
translated by Walter Beran Wolfe, M.D., 1927. Edited to improve readability by
Laurie J. Stein, 2004.

Since every child finds himself in an environment of adults, he is
predisposed to consider himself weak, small, incapable of living alone. In such a
situation he is also quite unable to trust himself to accomplish those little tasks
that we think him capable of doing without mistakes or clumsiness. At this point
most of our errors in education commence. By demanding more than the child
can accomplish, we throw the idea of his helplessness into his face. Some
children are even consciously made to feel their smallness and helplessness.
Other children are regarded as toys or animated dolls, considered valuable
property that must be carefully watched, or made to feel that they are so much
useless human freight. A combination of these attitudes on the part of parents
and adults often leads a child to believe that he can accomplish only two things,
either give pleasure or displeasure to his elders. The type of inferiority feeling
which is produced by such an attitude on the part of the parents may be further
intensified by other peculiar characteristics of our civilization. A child gets the
impression that he is a nobody, without rights. A child is to be seen, not heard,
must be courteous, quiet, etc, etc.
Numerous children grow up in constant dread of being laughed at. This
laughing at children is close to criminal. It has a lasting effect on the soul of a
child, and it is transferred into his actions as an adult. We can often recognize an
adult who was laughed at continually by his parents as a child; such individuals
cannot rid themselves of the fear of being made ridiculous even in maturity.
Another aspect of not taking children seriously is the custom of telling children
palpable lies, with the result that the child begins to doubt not only his
immediate environment, but also to question the seriousness and reality of life.
Cases have been recorded of children who laughed continually at school,
seemingly without reason. When questioned, they admitted that they thought
school was a joke of their parents, not worth taking seriously!
II. Compensating for the feeling of inferiority. The striving for recognition
and superiority.
It is the feeling of inferiority, of inadequacy, of insecurity which determines
the goal of an individual's existence. The tendency to push into the limelight, to
compel the attention of parents, makes itself felt in the first days of life. These
are the first indications of the awakening striving for recognition which develops
under the concurrent influence of the feeling of inferiority, and pursues a goal in
which the individual seemingly dominates his surroundings.
The degree and quality of social feeling also helps to shape the goal of
dominance. We can not judge any individual, whether it is a child or adult,
without drawing a comparison between his goal of dominance and the degree of
his social feeling. His goal is so erected that its achievement promises the

possibility of either a sense of superiority, or at least an elevation of the
personality to such a degree that life seems worth living. It is this goal which
gives value to our sensations, which links and coordinates our emotions, which
shapes our imagination and leads our creative powers, determines what we shall
remember and what we must forget. Not even our sensations are absolute
quantities, uninfluenced by the striving for a definite goal. Our very perceptions
are prejudiced by this goal, chosen with a secret hint at the final end toward
which the personality is striving.
We orient ourselves according to a fixed point which we have artificially
created, a fiction. This assumption, necessary because of the inadequacy of our
psychic life, is very similar to other fictions which are of use in other sciences,
such as dividing the earth with meridians, which actually do not exist, but are
very useful assumptions. In the case of all psychic fictions, we have to do with
the following: We assume a fixed point even though closer observation forces us
to admit that it does not exist. The purpose of this assumption is simply to orient
ourselves in the chaos of existence, so that we can categorize every sensation
and every emotion according to this fixed point.
Therefore, Individual Psychology creates a heuristic system and method: to
understand human behavior as if a final state of affairs were produced out of
inherited potentialities as a result of a striving for a definite goal. Our
experience, however, has shown us that the assumption of a striving for a goal is
more than simply a convenient fiction. The striving for a goal, the purposiveness
of the psychic life is not only our philosophic attitude, but actually a
fundamental fact of the conscious or unconscious life.
When we consider how to abolish the striving for power, that most
prominent evil of our civilization, which evidences itself in the life of a child at a
time when he is not easily approached, we come upon the difficulty of making
ourselves understood to him. We can begin to make attempts at improvement
and clarification only much later in life. But living with the child at this time
does offer the advantage of an opportunity to so develop his social feeling that
the striving for personal power becomes a negligible factor.
A further difficulty lies in children not expressing their striving for power
openly, but hiding it under the guise of charity and tenderness, and carrying out
their work secretly behind a veil. They modestly expect to escape disclosure this
way. Their uninhibited striving for power seeking can result in an exaggerated
drive for security and might, when courage becomes impudence, obedience turns
to cowardice, tenderness degenerates into a subtle treachery for dominating the
surroundings, with a final result that every natural feeling or expression carries
with it a hypocritical afterthought whose final end is the subjugation of the

environment.
Conscious education works upon the child with the conscious or
unconscious desire to remove his insecurity, school him in the technique of life,
give him educated understanding, and furnish him with a social feeling for his
fellows. All these measures from whatever source they come are to be
understood as attempts to give the growing child new ways of ridding himself of
his insecurity and feeling of inferiority. What happens in the soul of the child
during this process we must judge by his character traits which are the mirror of
the activity in his soul.
The importance of the feeling of insecurity and inferiority depends largely
upon the interpretation the child gives it. The objective degree of inferiority is
important of course, and makes itself felt for the child.
We must not expect a child to have the correct estimation of himself in any
situation, just as we do not expect it of adults. It is precisely here that the
difficulties grow quickly. One child will grow up in a situation so complicated
that errors concerning the degree of his inferiority are absolutely unavoidable.
Another child will be better able to interpret his situation. But taken by and
large, the interpretation which the child has of his feeling of inferiority varies
from day to day until it becomes consolidated, and finally expresses itself as a
definite selfestimation. According to this crystallized selfestimation, the
compensation trends which the child creates to guide him out of his inferiority
will be directed toward his goal.
The mechanism of the striving for compensation with which the soul strives
to neutralize the torturing feeling of inferiority has its analogy in the organic
world. It is a well known fact that those organs of our body which are essential
for life produce an overgrowth and over-function when through damage to their
normal state their productivity is lessened. Thus in difficulties of circulation the
heart enlarges and becomes more powerful, seeming to draw its new strength
from the whole body, until it reaches a stage in which it is more powerful than a
normal heart. Similarly, under pressure of the feeling of inferiority, of the
torturing thought that the individual is small and helpless, the soul attempts with
all its might to become master over this "inferiority complex." Where the feeling
of inferiority is so intensified that the child believes that he will never be able to
compensate for his weakness, the danger arises that in his striving for
overcompensation, he will aim to overbalance the scales.
The striving for power and dominance may become exaggerated and
intensified until it must be called pathological. The ordinary relationships of life
will never satisfy such children. Well adapted to their goal, their movements
must have a certain grandiose gesture about them. They seek to secure their

position in life with extraordinary efforts, with greater haste and impatience,
with more intense impulses, without consideration of any one else. Through
exaggerated movements toward their exaggerated goal of dominance, these
children become more noticeable. Their attacks on the lives of others necessitate
that they defend their own lives. They are against the world, and the world is
against them.
Some children express the striving for power in a manner which does not
come into conflict with society for a long time, and their ambition may be
considered not abnormal. But if we carefully investigate their accomplishments,
we will find that for the most part society at large does not benefit from their
triumphs, because their ambition is asocial. Their ambition will always put them
in the path of other human beings as disturbing elements. Little by little, other
characteristics appear which take on an increasingly antisocial color, if we
consider an individual in full relationship to his fellowman.
In the forefront of these manifestations we find pride, vanity, and the
striving to conquer everyone at any price. This latter may manifest itself subtly
in the relative elevation of the individual, through the degradation of all those
with whom he comes in contact. All that matters is the distance which separates
our individual from his fellows. But such an attitude is not only uncomfortable
for the environment, it is also very uncomfortable for the individual who
practices it because it brings him continually in contact with the dark side of life
and prevents him from experiencing any joy in living.
By means of the exaggerated straining for power with which these children
wish to assure themselves a place over their environment, they soon situate
themselves in a position of resistance against the ordinary tasks and duties of
everyday life. Compare such a power-hungry individual with the ideal human
being, and we can identify his social index, that is, the degree to which he has
removed himself from his fellow man.
In observing one of these individuals, if we know human nature, we will
recognize immediately that some difficulties in the evolution of the psychic life
must have occurred, even though we have our eyes open to any deficiencies and
inferiorities of the body before us. If we keep this fact paramount in our mind,
we can do no damage to the individual's social feeling, provided that we have
developed an adequate social feeling ourselves. We can only help that
individual. We must not blame the bearer for his physical defect or disagreeable
characteristic. We must indeed admit his right to be indignant to the last limits,
and we must be conscious that we bear part of the common blame for his
situation. The blame belongs to us because we, too, have taken part in the
inadequate precautions against the social misery which has produced his

difficulty. If we stick to this view, we can help him. We approach such an
individual not as a degraded, worthless outcast, but as a fellow human being; we
give him an atmosphere in which he will find that there are possibilities for
feeling himself the equal of every other human being in his environment. We
have only to remind ourselves how unpleasant the sight of an individual whose
organ or bodily inferiorities are externally visible, may be to us, we can judge
the amount of education which we ourselves need in order to come to an
absolutely just evaluation of our social feeling. And we can judge then, too, how
much our civilization owes to such an individual. Those who come into the
world with organ inferiorities feel the weight of existence from their earliest
days, and thus find themselves in a position of pessimism about the whole matter
of existence. Children who have organ inferiorities not nearly so noticeable, but
in whom the feeling of inferiority has become intensified through whatever
cause, right or wrong, find themselves in a similar situation. Such a feeling of
inferiority may be artificially so intensified, as for instance by very severe
education during the critical period, that the result is exactly the same as though
the child came into the world greatly crippled. The thorn which has been stuck
into their side in the early days of their existence, is never removed, and the
coldness which they have experienced prevents them from approaching other
human beings in their environment. The result is they believe themselves in a
world devoid of love and affection with which they have no common point of
contact.
An example: A patient continually telling us about his great sense of duty
and the importance of all his actions lives with his wife in the worst possible
relationship. Both he and his wife measure to the thickness of a hair the value of
any event as a means toward the subjugation of their partner. The result is
continual wrangling, reproaches, insults in the course of which the two become
entirely estranged from one another. Whatever small portion of his social feeling
for his fellow men this individual retained is strangled by his striving for
superiority, at least so far as his wife and friends are concerned.
We learn the following facts from the story of his life. Up to his
seventeenth year, he was practically undeveloped physically. His voice was still
the voice of a boy, he had no bodily or facial hair, and he was among the
smallest boys in his environment. Today he is thirty-six. Nothing is noticeable
about his outer appearance which is not entirely masculine, and nature seemingly
has caught up with herself and completed everything which she had hardly
begun to fashion when he was seventeen. But for eight years he suffered from
this failure of development and at that time he had no guarantee that nature
would ever catch up. During this period, he was tortured with the thought that he

would remain a "child" and already then the beginnings of his present
characteristics could be noted. He acted as though he were very important and
every action of his had the utmost weight. Every movement served the purpose
of bringing him into the center of attention. In the course of time, he acquired
those qualities which we see in him today. After he married, he was continually
impressing upon his wife that he was really bigger and more important then she
thought and she was busy showing him that his assertions concerning his value
were untrue! Under these circumstances, their marriage which showed signs of
disruption even during their engagement could hardly develop favorably, and
finally ended in a social cataclysm. However, at this point the patient came to the
physician, since the break-up of his marriage served only to accentuate the
dilapidation of his already battered self-esteem. To be cured, he had to first learn
from the physician how to know human nature, how to appreciate the error he
had made in life. And this error, this wrong evaluation of his inferiority, had
colored his entire life up to the time of his treatment.
Chapter III
Linkages Between Neurosis and a Joke1 2
[1927]
It is striking in how many ways neurosis and a joke agree in terms of
technical construction and particular failures in human development (for
example, the neglect of a child). In cases of slight neuroses or in a child's
transgression, it is hard to avoid being reminded of a good or bad joke. Often
with adult patients, or where a child has failed in something, we say: "There is
no such disease." We have frequently suggested a subterfuge in order to
establish the degree or intensity of nervousness without delving deeper into the
extended context. In such cases, once we start questioning the circumstances
under which suffering makes sense or whether it is justified, then to a certain
degree we gain some insight. We assume that we are dealing with a person who
has set himself other tasks, has given himself another ultimate goal than what we
normally would expect or that life demands. That is because we assume a typical
final goal for everyone, whether a person is ill or well, which is that he owns the
responsibility for his life’s tasks.
The neurotic, however, sets for himself a totally different agenda. As long
as we continue in the manner of other pathologists, we shall never be able to
understand why, for example, a boy is lazy, despite the unpleasant results that
this causes him. Only when we ask ourselves whether his intent is possibly
something quite different, and whether in that context he acts appropriately can
we establish that what we see actually is correct, and that this person has a
different style of life than what is normal. However, the normal way of life is

also apparent to the nervous person; everyone is aware of what life expects from
him. Nevertheless, his behavior and his actions, in spite of such knowledge,
follow another system.
We are faced here with two frames of reference. One of these is the normal,
the average social life that is in accord with common sense. It is in that context
that we expect everyone to act normally. Next to that, however, is a personal
frame of reference that can no longer be identified with the first. This is the case
of a pampered child who has demanded from earliest childhood that everything
be handed to him on a silver platter and that someone should always be found to
serve him so that he can attain without any effort what others must achieve
through hard work.
We frequently meet people who know they are intelligent, are aware of the
meaning of a normal social frame of reference, and are even willing to submit to
it. Yet, by their behavior they can be recognized as actually having a totally
different frame of reference. Our discussions during therapy for nervousness
often have a light, friendly, and humorous atmosphere, which sometimes gives
the impression that the psychologist is unaware of the weight of his task.
1 Based on a lecture held in the Internationale Verein für
Individualpsychology, Vienna. Originally published as "Zusammenhänge
zwischen 
Neurose 
und 
Witz" 
in 
the 
Internationale 
Zeitschrift 
für
Individualpsychologie, Vol. V, p.94-96, 1927. 2 New translation by Gerald L.
Liebenau, 2003.
In light of what has been said above, a humorous anecdote has similar
strains. While a listener to such an anecdote brings to it the normal frame of
reference, the teller of the story suddenly introduces another frame of reference
that relates only marginally to the first but otherwise provides a wholly new
insight. A short, well-known anecdote will show how these two frames of
reference collide and thus give the story a comical, peculiar, and conspicuous
aspect:
A horse dealer tries to recommend his horse and tells the customer: When
you get on that horse at six in the morning, you can be in (Albany) by nine. The
customer counters: What am I supposed to do in (Albany) at nine in the
morning?
Both talk past each other and what happens is a splitting into two different
viewpoints. The significance in that story is these two frames of reference. Here
we can see the connection to the other "deception," the neurosis.
Actually, many neurotic manifestations appear to us as a bad joke. They
attempt to throw us off balance and surprise us, at times like a joke. We often

have a strong tendency to explain to a nervous person his shortcomings by
means of anecdotes. We try to show him that he acts from another frame of
reference and that he attempts from that standpoint to reconcile his problem with
logic, applying great effort and assuming false values. It is here that we have our
primary starting point for therapy. We try to uncover the false values that
underlie the actions of a neurotic person, such as making his work seem too
difficult, like someone who tries to avoid it. We also may have to persuade him
that his life problems are not as great as he sees them, and that we estimate his
strength to be much greater than he does. We present values differently and in
accordance with a frame of reference that appears to us as ideal. The tendency of
the patient to live by another perspective also affects his feelings, which relate to
a false set of values.
The argument cannot be made that this reflects a lack of intelligence.
Among our patients are highly intelligent people. More likely, one must see it as
a subjugated intellect. Whenever a person seeks to withdraw from his normal
responsibilities, he must subjugate his intellect, since it is the latter that deals
with those responsibilities.
As for the other points that touch both humor and neurosis, the same rule
governs jokes as the one applied to an examination of the inner life and its
connection with social interest. Here we also find that the striving for
selfenhancement seeks the deprecation of others. There is no question but that
the joke is a revolt against the normal social point of view. A good joke,
however, can only be one in which the two perspectives appear to have equal
validity. If one of these clearly is invalid, we no longer have a good joke. The
neurosis, therefore, is more like a bad joke because the actual frames of
reference appear invalid from the standpoint of Individual Psychology.
(A further development of this theme follows.)
Chapter IV
More on Individual Psychological Dream Theory1 2
[1927]
Unfortunately, Individual Psychology papers on the subject of dream theory
and on understanding dreams have not been collected to this day. However, they
are a part of the basic findings of this science and art. They are scattered among
various writings of which I shall name here: Der nervöse Character, (The
Neurotic Character) Praxis und Theorie der individualpsychologie, and
Menschenkenntnis (Knowledge of Human Nature). These are ahead of every
other dream theory in that they require no preconditions other than those that
have been confirmed by the experiences of Individual Psychology. The last word
on this subject was: "The dream shows traces of a probing for a way the

dreamer will attempt to solve an existing problem in accordance with his style of
life." In the last treatise on this subject, "Training im Traum" (Training in
Dream) (Intern. Zeitschr. f. Ind.-Psych., 3rd year), I tried to show that the dream
reveals how the dreamer plans to train himself in preparation for the attitude that
he will assume.
The further development of this Individual Psychological insight led me to
conclude that:
1. The dream is a means toward selfdelusion necessary for the dreamer to
solve his problem not logically and realistically, but in accordance with his goal
of superiority.
2. The dream has the task of creating the mood in the context of this selfdelusion.
A theory might be regarded as practical if in its application it leads to
something beneficial and useful. On the other hand, it is a sign of pessimi ominis
when every year revisions or additions need to be made, drawn from other
regions of the thought process in order to buttress a wavering theory. What
comes to us nearly effortless for the continuation of our theory arises from
Individual Psychology's findings regarding the "arrangement" of the neurosis.
By this we mean the discovery of patients' creative achievements on "the useless
side of life”; the detection of the existence of tendencies to "shut off" those life
tasks that seem to threaten the goal of superiority; our understanding of the
underlying discouragement that leads to neurosis; of the "safeguarding devices"
which force symptoms to prevent a return to activities useful for the common
good and that deter the unfolding of social interest, etc.
1 Originally published as "Weiteres zur individualpsychologischen
Traumtheorie" in the Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol.
V, p.241-245, 1927.
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
Our proven suspicions also have stood us well about an antithesis in human
inner life, and about viewing manifestations in terms of rigid opposites
(ambivalence, polarity, etc.) We also gained an advantage from our insight into
the so-called conscious and unconscious, not as opposites but only as variations
of expressions of the inner life, always striving after the same goal of
superiority. In the same sense, we see sleep not as the opposite of being awake,
but only as a variation of the latter. This also applies to dreaming as being not
the opposite of thinking in an awakened state, but only as another form of
thinking while awake, striving toward the same goal by other means than the so-
called conscious. Therefore, in dreaming, as in every other expression, the entire
style of life must appear along with its striving toward its individual goal of

superiority.
This again agrees with our concept, which we can confirm with many
examples that the movement of a dream ranges from an inferior position to a
higher one, and eventually toward a goal of superiority.
Our basic theory concerning the arrangement of neurotic symptoms brought
us naturally to the recognition that the dream within this arrangement also plays
a significant role. From this follows that this arrangement could not be aimed
directly toward the goal of a neurosis, but had to relate to what we described as a
"safeguarding device." This safeguarding tendency also could be discerned in the
dream. It was always directed, against all logic, toward evading the problems of
life.
We see the artful construction of neurosis as the result of training since
childhood, instigated by the ambitious goal of a weak person devoid of social
interest and courage. Therefore, in the face of a problem, it invariably tended
toward useless activity. Independently, even of our own preconceptions, we
were able to show the same tendency in dreams. This led to the discovery that
during periods of sleep the dream takes over most effectively the task of training
in order to carry out that function more precisely than would be possible in an
awakened state. We have highlighted the following characteristics of dreams
which also apply to awakened thinking: using events that are temptingly similar,
the tendentious selection of memories, and the deceptive simplification of
existing problems. The extensive use of these means allows the dreamer to
discard logic and to find a way to gain his neurotic goal of superiority. This can
better be done while dreaming than awake when reality and logic intercede
forcefully to make corrections.
Such new comprehension of dreams has provided evidence of the mistaken
attempts by neurotics to attain a goal of superiority without resolving the
problems of life in a manner beneficial to society. We find nothing new in
dreams, only a confirmation of what was well established long ago by the
network of Individual Psychology. Therefore, the dream does not serve us as
"via regia" to uncover dark regions of the "unconscious." It is for us and for the
understanding of the patient, new evidence of his mistaken, faulty style of life.
We show him that he uses a destructive lie, that he lies to himself not only while
awake but in particular when dreaming, in order to escape and to cover up his
problems. At the same time, we demonstrate to him that he follows this wrong
path because he lost social interest and with that the courage to solve his
problems in a useful manner.
There remains only one weighty question: How can all this occur; how does
this lead to self-deception whereby the dreamer (and with him the whole

scientific field) does not understand his dream? We established long ago that this
selfdelusion, this being led by the nose, could be possible only when someone
wants to hide from the sharp impact of logic. What is then left from the dream?
What makes it effective? What is its function? Its purpose?
We can answer that today: the mood! 
Actually, we have known this all along. At the very beginning of Individual
Psychology, when we first discussed the dream ("Ueber den nervösen
Character," 1912 [Concerning the Neurotic Character]), we said that the dream
incites or warns. It is the voice of the dream that determines the mood beyond
the night. This mood, tricked by the dream, is drawn further away from reality as
a means of security for the neurotic's final goal. Some examples should explain
this theory further. 
A thirty-year old man filled with socially ambitious ideas, the youngest child in
his family, led a normal life beyond the period of puberty. He constantly boasted
that he was the center of attention, just as he had been in childhood among his
family. Later, admiration for his father became more apparent than heretofore.
After several attempts failed to prove his successful superiority in society,
business, and love, he withdrew, depressed because of the constant criticism by
his father. The striving of the youngest, as well as the second child, when not
prevented by particular circumstances appears somehow irrepressible. He thus
came to me, willing to start again, although encumbered with the poison of a
great inferiority feeling from which his timid attitude was derived. He had not
found a satisfactory relationship with others. His normal reaction was one of
opposition. He was hesitant in his profession, but as is often the case with
neurotics, driven by the need to make a living, he managed somewhat. In his
romantic life, which is predicated on a developed social feeling, he was an
almost total failure. He complained about impotence and premature ejaculations.
During treatments, he was receptive and gained in courage and self-confidence.
However, the image of his criticizing father was a constant factor which made
him self-conscious. In questions of romance, the moral tradition of his father
stood in the way and provided him with a welcome excuse to escape failures,
and avoid new ones. When he tried against my advice to approach a girl without
being in love, his efforts aborted with premature ejaculation followed by
exhaustion. Even in this arrangement the intent to create a counter-productive
mood becomes clear. When this trick was explained to him, he tried again,
despite his tendency to reject it, without any premature ejaculation. During that
time he had the following dream, which he easily interpreted himself: 
"It seemed as if I were in an unfamiliar house with several others for a secret,
conspiratorial purpose. Suddenly, there was an explosion and the house

collapsed and buried us under its debris. At the end, we escaped with our lives,
but my nose was cut off." 
The secret conspiracy was directed against a girl who, in his opinion, mistreated
him. The unfamiliar house represents an unfamiliar house of prostitution. The
explosion points to his ejaculatio praecox. The collapsed house stands for the
collapse of his love affair, also probably for his prevailing moral beliefs. The
loss of his nose is the consequence of syphilis. 
The sense of the dream is toward avoiding sexual relations. We already know
this direction from the life of this diffident patient. The interpretation of the
dream and his understanding of it only came about after I confronted him.
Without an interpretation, this dream would have fulfilled its purpose in that it
instilled in the patient a fear of secretiveness and an anticipation of a threatening
disaster. The dream and the mood that it created was to trick the patient into his
goal of evading. The trick was produced with the means mentioned above, that
of establishing apparent similarities, a tendentious selectivity, stringing together
various dangers, and by simplifying problems of love. Only after interpreting the
dream was it possible to uncover the selfdelusion, and to alert the patient to the
dangers that lurked within him. Of course, this is possible only when one has
learned that "the dream entails an attempt to solve an existing problem not by
logic, but in accordance with whatever uniquely guides that person." In this case,
the guiding principle was the neurotic's final goal of evasion which he could
attain only by tricks and selfdelusion. 
Long before his courage was lost, the same patient dreamed that his father had
the sexual organ of a dog. He was able to interpret that dream easily also. In his
struggle with his father who he overrated, he applied the deprecating tendency
and driven by his feeling of inferiority, wished to see himself more manly than
his father, as if he were actually less masculine than his father. 
In the case of a cured melancholic, her last dream just before she was cured was
as follows: "I sat on a bench. Suddenly, an immense snowstorm developed
which I was lucky to escape by running home to my husband. When I arrived, I
helped him find a suitable job from employment ads in the newspaper." 
This dream, which also was interpreted by the patient, clearly shows the
conciliatory mood with the husband, whom she hated for his weakness and
laziness when it came to making a living. She explained the dream as follows: It
is better to stay with my husband than to be exposed to the dangers of being
alone. As much as we wish to support the present intent of the patient, the
manner in which she decided on her marriage and her reconciliation with her
husband point more to the persuasive powers often used by concerned relatives.
The dangers posed by having to be alone appear in this case to have been

strongly exaggerated.
Chapter V
The Cause and Prevention of Neuroses1
[1927]
I feel greatly honored by having been invited by your Association to lecture
to you on the science of Individual Psychology. You are rightly expecting me to
set before you what is perhaps a novel point of view, and I may define my
attitude by giving you as an alternative title, "The Feeling of Inferiority and its
Consequences." To me it appears that every child, indeed every human being,
for some reason, is continually striving to answer questions, to overcome
difficulties, to solve riddles, and to develop himself in some degree toward a
self-satisfying completion, the full achievement of his life purpose. No matter
what the age of an individual, you will find tendencies which have their
beginnings--if one may venture to use the phrase--in the dawn of life, and which
persist in demanding development to a higher level. Such tendencies can exist
only if there be a goal, and I will endeavor to put before you what, to my mind,
this must be.
In the face of reality, we must define our position and form a conception of
our relationship to our environment, which determines our standards of behavior,
our attitudes and our demands. Whatever is revealed in the character of a human
being, there is always manifested this persistent demand for greater development
and a continual striving for the achievement of a certain goal. Think about the
wish of a child to become a coachman, or that of an adult to become a physician
or a judge. In every walk of life, in every situation where the problems of living
are being attacked, this striving for superiority and power, and you can properly
understand the particular reaction of the moment only if you realize the existence
of this fundamental undercurrent. A symptom can be recognized only when it is
defined as an incidental object in the general current of the striving toward a goal
of superiority. The goal of a normal man is easily distinguished, and he has, in
the main, three great problems to solve.
The first of these is the ambition to mix with and be accepted by others.
This is the problem of social relationships, the desire for fellowship, to take
some place in the world of men. The approach to other men takes devious routes,
but if we fail to find the actual social ideal of any one individual, we can yet
judge by how much he falls short of the normal achievement in regard to this
first question of life. For example, he may have no friends, or he may not interest
himself in societies or in social functions, or he may have a positive distaste for
companionship. You can, in this way, measure approximately the failure of
achievement in this direction, and its is noteworthy that in the case of the

neurotic, the degree of failure is usually very marked. So, as you can imagine, he
must have another goal, and in consequence, he is always trying to escape from
the normal aim of social life.
1 Originally published in English in the Journal of Mental Science, Vol. 73.,
pages 1-8, 
1927. Reprinted in the Int. Z. Indiv. Psychol., Vol. 5., pages 245-252, 1927.
Edited for readability by Laurie J. Stein, 2004.
The second problem, which cannot be avoided without increasing the
difficulty of solving the first, is that of occupation, and the two are not wholly
separated. The problem of occupation resolves itself literally into: "How can I be
useful to the whole of mankind?" Every occupation is a beginning of this trying
to be useful, to live on the useful side. To be useful induces a feeling of great
confidence and wellbeing. The person who feels useless is always more or less
shy. He feels isolated and finds great difficulty in carrying out his work. As I
have already remarked, this leads us to suspect the presence of another goal.
The third problem of life is that of sex. People live together in two sexes,
and so an aim with everyone is to unite with someone of the opposite sex as a
partner. This solution is the normal one; it is the normal goal for everybody. The
degree of failure of achievement of this natural solution will betray to what
extent the problem is being evaded. If you ask what reason there can be for such
an evasion, I restate that throughout the whole world there is one reason for it: a
lack of self-confidence, a lack of courage; in the mind of the individual
concerned is the idea that he cannot reach this goal. You will realize this if you
consider your experience of neurotic subjects. The question at once arises as to
how it has happened that so many people have such a fear, so much so that they
are averse to trying to solve this problem in the natural way.
I come from work in the pathological field, and in connection with
psychological questions I have always noted that one of the most important
reasons for such a lack of courage is the existence of an organic burden in
childhood. Delicate children differ very much from the healthy in their view of
the world, because they suffer from organic deficiencies and defects; they do not
eat and assimilate as easily, they cannot see or hear so well, they have troubles
due to abnormalities of the endocrine glands. To such children the world is a
great difficulty, an embarrassing problem, yet in the first years of their life they
must arrive at some answer. The attention the child has to give to the world
shapes for him his style of life. He experiences the difficulties and the burdens of
his own body, and these make a great impression on him. The investigation of
the adult life of such children convinces me that these burdens are remembered.
I hope I may succeed in presenting the matter so that you may see how the

whole attitude throughout life is based on what takes place and on the equipment
in childhood, in short, on this feeling of personal inferiority, and that feeling, in
the case of children burdened with physical defects and deficiencies, is greatly
intensified. We have to remember that these defects, in many cases, are
inherited, and therefore, there arises the question of the relation of inherited
defects to the development of character. However, character is not everything.
Even the ordinary child suffers in a difficult situation, and if he has disturbances
of vision or hearing, or some similar disability, he feels his efforts are futile. In
all cases there is a relationship between the child's defects and the particular
problems that confront him in life. I have come to another conclusion, also. In
considering the lives of children in general, it appears to me that there are two
situations which are peculiarly inimical to normal development. One of these
arises where the child is made to face greater difficulties, in which case there is a
greater feeling of inferiority. The other is concerned with the process of
"spoiling," which is much worse. Such a child is always leaning on another
person. He lives in a symbiotic manner, like a parasite, and he receives
everything from others.
As a consequence he cannot develop a normal style of life, for he is always
demanding and receiving, and he never feels the necessity for using his own
powers. If a child, or an adult, never attempts to stand alone, he always lacks
confidence and courage, and we are justified in regarding such spoiled children
as not properly prepared to meet the constantly changing situations of life.
If you inquire into the goal of such children, i.e., those with organic
deficiencies, or those who have been spoiled, you will find that their aim is to
overcome the difficulties of life in the most complete fashion. They are not
satisfied with that to which the normal child aspires; for them there must be no
less than the complete command of the situation, an absolute security, and their
demands upon others are unlimited. You will agree that this is a habit, or an
attitude, which does not make for happiness in life. If you ask your nervous
patients you will find, very often, that they have begun in such a way, as spoiled
children, and the two types I have mentioned are very often combined.
Sometimes it is impossible to educate the delicate child without spoiling him,
and better methods are needed. As a rule, the custom in education, is to make no
distinction between the abnormal and the normal child who has the normal goal,
which is to mix with others, to be useful, to give and not always to receive and to
demand. For the abnormal as well as for the normal child, however, new
situations must continually arise. With every change the child, as it were, makes
an experiment in adaptation, and it is obvious to the observer, as it no doubt is to
the child, that the experiments are mainly unsuccessful, for children such as we

have in mind are not capable of independence, of working with others for a
common usefulness. As a consequence, the abnormal child will always be torn
with conflicts.
I will describe a third type, the hated child, who grows up without warmth
and love, very often illegitimate, or at any rate unwanted, and it will be apparent
to you that for such a child the world is to a great extent comparable to an enemy
country. He meets with nothing but enmity; kindness and love are unknown to
him, and he experiences nothing but insult and attack. It follows that children of
this type develop what may be termed a defensive attitude; they have no desire
to join in with the efforts of others, and they have no wish to be useful in a
hostile community. Thus, they too create conflicts for themselves.
The general reactions of the third type are the same as those of the first and
second; they are unhappy in school, in work, and in love, and they generally feel
restricted. The only satisfaction for them is to feel superior to every other man,
to conquer, to be the first, to be Godlike in their power and domination. They
have no patience, opposition irritates them, and they feel that by any means they
must defend themselves, justify themselves morally, and shine in the highest
sphere. To accomplish this they adopt the only possible course of restricting
their environment, for they cannot hold complete sway in the whole of society
where they feel that their efforts are being curtailed. They evade occupation, and
they evade love; their eccentricities are always signs of evasion, but those signs,
or we may say symptoms, of the attempt to escape the solution of the three
questions of life are not obvious, for patients as well as others will justify their
attitude by rationalizations. I have never met a man who said frankly, "I do not
want to mix with others," but I have met many people who told me, "I cannot go
into society because the people are so bad; the people around me cannot
appreciate me, and they are distasteful."; I have never seen such a man frankly
avoiding occupation; he will say only, "I am tired, I cannot sleep, I have a
headache," or "I have symptoms which hinder me from making up my mind in
this matter." Another will say, "This occupation is not good enough for me; I
must have something better; I don’t have a good memory," and so on, while
another may say, "I cannot concentrate." Such are the justifications for evasions,
but we physicians know there are no real reasons for these "symptoms."
Now I should like to say a few words about the appearance of symptoms.
Symptoms do not arise suddenly in the night. There is always a long period of
development which can be traced back, often to childhood, and I have found that
the history of the case invariably indicates such antecedent situations as we have
considered in the three types of children. For instance, the spoiled child will tend
to cling to the individual who spoils him; as a rule this is the mother, and these

tendencies seem to be prompted by anxiety. With nervous people this symptom
is in the foreground, for they attempt to justify the carrying out of their wishes
by commanding other persons on the grounds of their anxiety. People who
cannot be alone, who have agoraphobia, require and command that another
person shall be with them, and this other person must obey. His life is ruled and
ordered by the patient. If the neurotic person has a headache, all the family must
be silent, must obey, must take care not to irritate him. There is constantly this
striving for superiority and for domination by any means, however petty, and we
can understand some of these symptoms because they are nurtured and
developed in childhood. In some cases the symptoms arise from a condition of
emotional tension, and to thwart such a patient induces an almost inconceivable
reaction of depression, even to the extent that there may be an attempt at suicide.
Even in their play such individuals are very deeply moved emotionally, and it is
only by realizing their life aims that we can appreciate the subjective
disturbance.
The foregoing is a short description of the tendencies among nervous
persons. In every single reaction you can recognize the attitude toward life if you
have previously grasped the distortion of the personality. I am only in agreement
with the whole current of medicine when I insist that we cannot treat symptoms;
we can but treat the individual, and, in this matter, to be of any help you must
change his whole outlook on life. So long as the patient persists in his morbid
attitude, you cannot get rid of the symptoms. It is not sufficient to treat the
consequences of a fault; we must go deeper, and perhaps by relating one or two
cases, I can show you what I mean.
I will cite the case of a young woman, twenty-six years of age, in good
bodily health, who had been suffering considerably for about a year from
agoraphobia and depression. She dated the onset of her trouble as a year ago in
time, but, as is usual, on inquiring more fully I found that her symptoms really
originated in a change of her life situation. When I asked this young woman
what had happened a year before, she said that she had then become a mother for
the first time. The connection is not at once obvious, but it is soon clear that such
an event is full of possibilities in the hands of a spoilt person. Such an individual
always aspires to be the center of attention; the coming of a child of her own
makes the difficulty greater for her, and sometimes neurotic symptoms will
commence from the time of the first confinement. In this case, however, that was
not all. When I hinted at the point, she told me this story: "I like my husband
very much and he likes me also. He went away to Paris three days after my
confinement. He amused himself there and I have intended to go to Paris in spite
of him. I was very angry." Also, this woman had, as very often happens, an

annoying and foolish mother-in-law. She was a very critical woman, and the
young wife was the spoilt child, the only child of weak parents; she could not
tolerate this new situation. She often cried and became angry when her husband
differed from her. They frequently quarreled in spite of the love they had for
each other. It appeared to me that when the child came and the husband went off
to Paris, she felt that the time had come to re-assert her own position. She no
longer felt herself to be in command, to be the most important person, and first
in her husband's love. The husband loved the child very much and took great
interest in it, while she became more and more irritable and depressed. It was
clear to me that what she did then was repetition of what she had done in her
childhood: she aimed at being the center of attention. Feeling herself displaced,
she developed anxieties, so she suffered from an anxious depression, forcing her
husband to be with her, an indication which enables us to understand her actions.
She could not go on a tram, or travel by train, but she could drive in a car. The
point of that is easily seen if we bear in mind the underlying aim. In the train or
in the tram the passenger is one of many: definite stopping-places are arranged
and individual rights must be subordinated to the rules laid down, but with a
private car the route and the stopping can be controlled. People constituted in the
manner of our patient always feel they can "travel by car." This little
characteristic is typical of their whole attitude toward life. They have the feeling
of superiority, the Godlikeness, the desire to dominate, to always be first. Such
signs should be carefully noted. They are very informative and indicate clearly
in what direction the general attitude of the patient is tending. This woman came
into the sanatorium, which is often in itself an ameliorating situation, because to
be in a sanatorium is to command much weight of sympathy. The whole family
is probably much more amendable when one is in a sanatorium. While she was
there our patient improved considerably, but when she returned to her home she
had a bad relapse. It appeared that in the sanatorium she found a physician
whom she regarded as a very charming man; he flattered her and was attentive to
her; she responded to him and she regarded herself as on close terms of
friendship with him. When she left the sanatorium she wrote him a letter full of
kind thoughts and good sentiments to which she had no reply, and from that time
her symptoms increased, for she then became convinced that she could no longer
make an impression on other men. In her fantasies there was the fear that she had
lost the capacity to attract men. She had never put the matter to the test of
experience, but she complained of such fancies, especially as they were
accompanied by sexual irritation, and these irritations gave her a new reason for
feeling depressed. By this time she had built up a guilt complex, concerning
which she was very reticent; she had spoken to no one about it except me. Still,

she felt guilty about it. This guilt complex could feasibly have been the cause of
her depression and illness, but closely examined, it constituted an excellent
means of overcoming the husband. She was in a menacing mood, for she said, "I
could betray my husband, because he has left me, he does not flatter me now as
he used to and is not so attentive to me." In the logical sequence of events, it is
only one more stage to the betraying of the husband and the actual breaking of
the marriage tie. I have always found this breaking of the marriage tie to be an
act of revenge against the partner.
In other directions, too, there were further indications of her attitude toward
life. For instance, if she had a quarrel with her husband her feelings would be
expressed. She dreamed once on these lines: "Once I was going shopping with
my friend and I met this physician, but he did not want to greet me." I read this
to mean that after this quarrel, she had the desire to meet the physician. She held
back, not because she was too chaste, or too modest, but only because she feared
she could not make an impression on him. So, though she was a very beautiful
woman, she had lost her self-confidence. Her whole demeanor showed that she
feared defeats and rebuffs. There was, in fact, a feeling of great inferiority. She
said, "I am sure only when I am with my parents or with similar people, when I
feel this great warmth, this great love. I have been defeated by my husband, and
now I have been defeated by the physician, so now I can command only in a
restricted field, that is, in my family circle, where I can dominate my husband
through my agoraphobia and by means of my depression."
As time is short, I will conclude briefly. The development of such an
attitude toward life can be prevented. The best course is to begin in childhood, to
avoid spoiling the child, and not to overlook deficiencies in various organs. The
aim should be to make the child independent, to make him free, to give him
enough self-confidence and courage. Every effort should be made to give such
children enough courage to develop their social feelings, to be useful, and not to
be terrified by the other sex, and if this could be done, there would be no more
nervous adults. If the patient has reached adult age, he must be re-educated and
given a fresh start. The patients must be approached with affection; the attitude
of the physician must be parental. They must be stirred to the depths of their
personality; they require honest and frank handling and no demands should be
made upon them; we should simply seek to strengthen their courage, so that later
they may feel independent.
In the treatment, it is of the greatest importance to find out what mistake
has been made in the past, to show what has been to blame for their neurotic
attitude toward life, to expose the connections between that attitude and the
symptoms. The symptoms always fit the case. The nervous patient can be

understood only if we recognize that his behavior harmonizes with his
symptoms. When he has been convinced about this, then his personality will
change, and with the change will come a new determination toward life; we can
then say his neurotic tendencies have been cured.
Chapter VI
Education for Courage1 2
[1927]
If we are to dedicate ourselves to an educational goal, the difficulty lies in
trying to encompass all that wewishe to express in one concept so accurately that
the possibility of misunderstanding or self-deception is nearly impossible. The
guiding principle would have to be posed so that even when dealing with
problem cases it would protect both the educator and the child from going astray.
Furthermore, the guiding principle must not arise solely out of tradition, since
life can force us by necessity to change our lifelong habits and needs. The
principle also must not stem solely from an emotional urge. It should not serve
other guiding principles, whether religious, national, or social, even if they hold
a prominent place for the educator. While we should avoid solidifying our idea
into a powerful dogma, it should play a leading role in child development.
Education, religion, nationality, or social consciousness, are only aids to help
find the approximately correct way for the best possible development of the
child; failing to serve that purpose would require these for better or for worse to
be given the lowest priority.
Since the best possible development of the child is so closely intertwined
with the presumptions of the educator, it would be a useful task to evaluate these
presumptions before the goal of education is uniformly established. It would be
invaluable to have agreement on at least some of the points which, because they
are scientifically uncontestable, or because they are at least common sense, must
take their rightful place in the goal of education.
If we exclude those children who have been condemned as mentally
stunted, then there appear to us three requirements that are currently most
noteworthy. (1) The educational ideal must be universal; (2) it must be
intelligible; (3) it must guarantee to be generally beneficial.
1. The educational ideal must be universal Any system that tends to divide
youngsters in the sense that it makes some to be subservient and others to
become a ruling caste must be eliminated. Instead of a selection process that
favors those who currently appear to be more talented, every method must be
given preference that eases the progress of those who appear to be untalented.
No longer should the search for those with hidden abilities (by testing) be
allowed to take precedence. Instead, precedence should be given to uncovering

abilities in all children. The meaning of the right way for intellectual and moral
training must be better understood by educators. The capacity for intellectual,
physical, and moral development has currently been set too low. In order for it to
be extended considerably requires freeing oneself of the superstition that these
limits are a given and constant. Therefore, in applying his methods the educator
first of all must seek to foster striving and courage among his pupils and not
restrict them.
1 Introduction to a lecture given in connection with the Konferenz für neue
Erziehung (Conference for modern education), held in Locarno on August 3,
1927. Originally published as "Die Erziehung zum Mut" in the Int. Z. Indiv.
Psycho., Int. Z. Indiv. Psycho., 326, 1927. Reprinted in Alfred Adler:
Psychotherapie und Erziehung, Ausgewählte Aufsätze Band I: 1919-1929, pages
189-192. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenbau, 2003. Editing assistance by Kurt A.
Adler, M.D., Ph.D.
2. The comprehensible educational ideal
Traditions and emotions must not be the determining factors. An
agreement, which is particularly necessary in educational affairs, can only be
accomplished by way of understanding. The conviction that this is the right way
by educators and their pupils will indisputably be confirmed in their
independence and self-confidence when they begin to approach their problems
with a mature discretion. Similarly, the courage and self-assuredness with which
they strive forward can bring success only when they have drawn on their
knowledge and insights. As a basis for understanding their tasks, I should like to
recommend the precepts of Individual Psychology according to which life is a
constructive achievement directed toward finding approximately correct
solutions for the relationship of man to the cosmos, to society, and to the other
sex. The results of this constructive achievement are evidence that only those
with courage can dedicate themselves fully to this task.
3. Beneficial for the community
Every accomplishment that is not commonly beneficial diminishes the
feeling of self-worth in the individual, imbues him with a feeling of his own
inferiority, and puts him in conflict with the continuous social demands and
connections of life. He will experience everyone's opposition, as well as all the
problems and penalties that necessarily arise from going against the logic of
human social relationships. He will find that his life does not become easier, as
he might have presumed, but more difficult. He will not experience being a part
of the whole, but will live as if in a hostile land. The value of life can only be

found by worthwhile accomplishments benefiting the community. His lack of
interest in others stems from his fear that he lacks the ability to be useful.
Therefore, as Individual Psychology has demonstrated, he will seek assurance in
a life-lie with all sorts of tricks and self-justification, far from the truth of life,
and will try by self-deception to find importance and a sense of his personality
outside of a commonly beneficial existence. With this recognition, truth,
courage, and value flow together as social factors. Different aspects of well
developed social feeling, they are merely different sides of the same style of life.
As long as the child has the confidence to follow the path of usefulness, he will
not think of becoming useless. Bringing about this awareness is the first step for
Individual Psychology in awakening courage. Attaining the highest
achievements with appropriate means, or at least striving to attaining them in
that way, and not through inheritance or being deterred by being constitutionally
different, is possible only through understanding.
These three points of view come together as a unity and can serve as the
basis for a discussion of educational ideals. At the same time, they demonstrate
the central meaning of education for courage as practiced consciously and
always with a view toward understanding by Individual Psychology.
If I had to provide briefly some evidence for the correctness of this view, I
would point to the following fault in education that will most strongly disturb the
educator. It concerns the problem children, the neurotics, the candidates for
suicide, the criminals and prostitutes. In all these cases, we will find they chose
that path because they lost the courage for beneficial accomplishments. How far
they thought themselves excluded from the commonly accepted educational
ideal, justifiably so or not, how little they comprehended the educational ideal
expounded here scientifically, is not difficult to see, but nevertheless needs to be
shown through the reality of their lives. It is as easy to see that they had missed
the road that benefits all and that they, therefore, were led into conflict with
society, as it is to see the total inadequacy of today's measures to rehabilitate
them.
It should be just as understandable that they can be won over again only
when they gain the courage to lay claim to their self-esteem in the direction of
social feeling and not in opposition to it.
Chapter VII
Individual Psychology and Science1 2
[1927]
In his paper, "Lying by Children and Young People as a Psychological
Problem,"3 Karl Reininger presents a lucid piece of work, greatly influenced by

Charlotte Bühler, and in line with the idea of a norm against which the
development of a child's inner life can be measured. He begins with a familiar
observation: "The lie is a conscious false or falsified representation of facts that
has the purpose of attaining a particular goal by means of the deception that was
created." The transition to the pathological lie becomes much clearer as soon as
we are aware of how much there is unconscious, or unknown, that resides in the
so-called conscious. Furthermore, the indivisible connection with other forms of
safeguarding devices becomes much clearer if one accepts our view of
constructive, but not mistake-free, achievements in life. In establishing the
sociopsychological function of the lie, the much further advanced approach of
Individual Psychology does not regard the lie as a moral and philosophical
problem.
Charlotte Bühler categorizes the lie as: social, asocial, and antisocial
dependent upon the social attitude of the liar. We can go along with that view of
the lie as being part of the whole, examined separately from the whole.
Reininger adopts this three-part categorization. However, it no longer belongs to
the "phenomenological analysis of the lie," as the author claims. Our concept
adds here that the lie in every case springs from a feeling of weakness and that it
is an avoidance of reality by escaping into fantasy. We regarded it as the
arrangement of a fictitious, protecting, and relieving reality. Bühler's
classification above is already under the pressure of an evaluation, a question:
how can this fictitious reality be made useful? This approach is harmonious with
that of Individual Psychology from a philosophical, psychological, and
pedagogical viewpoint. On this point, the answer to that question clearly is with
reference to a human ideal. Under that condition, the category of an "asocial" lie
can no longer be sustained, or only when one has personal doubts about that
ideal. However, that would not even come close to "an absolutely correct answer
to the problems of mankind" (Adler) since, with regard to finding an answer, we
unfortunately must impute flaws to human judgment. It might be that the clerk,
Mrs. Bühler, or we, cannot decide whether a salesman lying to a customer at the
behest of his employer regarding the quality of a piece of merchandise represents
a final social attitude. Perhaps we cannot resolve such doubts. The last word on
that matter will be spoken by the logic of human social life.
1 Originally published as "Individualpsychologie und Wissenschaft" in the
Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. 5, pages 401-408,
1927. 
2 Translated by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. 
3 From Die Lüge (The Lie) by O. Limpmann and P. Plaut. Leipzig, J. A. Barth,

1927.
The fact that the social lie, and even the "heroic lie" as our deceased friend
Stanley Hall called it,--the social lie made to give pleasure; the heroic lie made at
one's own expense--stems from a feeling of weakness when a person feels
himself incapable of attaining the same goals by being truthful, demonstrates
that only Individual Psychology is able to trace the dialectic of human actions.
As long as the lie can be recognized either as generally useful or useless, the
category of the asocial lie disappears, as does the ostensible social lie. Only
where one begins to doubt (whether the lie is useful or useless), or where the
liar's or the psychologist's philosophy of life does not extend far enough to detect
the difference, can such cases (i.e. asocial or social lies) exist temporarily, that is
until "the Last Judgment."
What, however, if we find--which is possible only with the insight of
Individual Psychology--that the individual who appears to lie for social reasons,
but who doubts everything in his own life, wants to appear socially conscious
and still lies? Should this inclination toward the easier, but not useful side of life,
be totally unimportant for psychological research? Is it still a science, if I
consider in line with phenomenology only a segment and not the less apparent
basic outlines of the whole? Reininger provides the following example for the
above: "The boss orders the clerk to lie about the quality of the goods. The clerk
then can formulate the following question for himself: does customary obedience
to the boss take precedence over the truth?" Must a scientifically thinking
psychologist disregard the subordination of the liar who is struggling with his
doubts? Can he ignore that the clerk's future depends on his decision? That as the
weaker one, he must justify his submission morally so that his personal feelings
do not come to the fore? The boss probably would never succumb to moral
qualms at such a suggestion from his clerk.
Now let us approach the question of Individual Psychology and science. It
was not we who posed the question whether Individual Psychology to a greater
or lesser degree is a scientific psychology. However, if we see only that aside
from the findings of phenomenology, of experimental psychology, etc., there is
something else to investigate in order to understand the context, to determine
what is a part of the whole, is it that we or the others have then lost the scientific
ground? Spranger, Köhler, William Stern, Messer, Goldstein, and others,
William Brown, Stark, and many American psychologists, such as Stanley Hall
and Morton Prince, already have come much further, and follow the same path
taken by Individual Psychology.
Let us make a test. The clerk could well be freed from his doubts if his clear
recognition, his knowledge, had developed to the point where he could shed his

insecurity. What he could take from the foregoing discussion is that when he
lies, he still follows a moral code, that is, he would be justified and would in any
case have no responsibility. He would understand decidedly more about his
psyche if we could show him that if he were stronger, he would act differently.
On the other hand, his feelings of impotence, which are more deeply embedded
than his reason, drive and deceive him into doubts and to moral justifications.
Well meaning psychologists who have not yet learned that only Individual
Psychology can educate and heal with truth and insight would like to point out to
us that scientific psychology is not our business and that our unquestioned
achievements lie solely in the area of therapy, not pedagogy. We cannot accept
that dichotomy. Only the better-qualified psychologist can heal and educate. One
example might illuminate that issue. A fifty year old well-established man
complains that every time he has to climb steps, as often required in his job, he
must fight the urge to jump out a window. Let us leave healing aside. Let us also
not discuss a theory of psychology that does not understand the significance of
dreams and does not even consider them as part of their consideration, which
cannot claim to have deep scientific insight. An analysis by such a school of
psychology cannot be taken very seriously against that of Individual Psychology,
when it brought never-before solved puzzles of man's inner life to a solution. We
also don't know how to integrate psychologically the symptoms, such as those in
this example of the man who wants to jump out a window. Therefore, we search
for the root of these symptoms in the attitude of the individual (as in Individual
Psychology) toward his life and his style of life. I am unable to find it in this
symptom, and doubt that anyone else can do so. I am certain that
phenomenology, experimental psychology, etc., do not have the grasp to come
up with an explanation.
Individual Psychology has demonstrated with scientifically irreproachable
methods a way to find what is hidden in this case that neither the sufferer nor
other psychologists understand. Individual Psychology also is convinced that the
demonstrated mechanisms of the internal life in all of its comprehensible and
initially incomprehensible manifestations are effective. One of the most
important of the various methods, and one that can never be circumvented, is to
search for the common denominator of the individual in other symptoms that
occurred at the same time or earlier, when that person's actions might have been
more comprehensible, or where by comparison with various psychological
expressions a clue might be found.
Since this particular patient had to leave on a trip, I promised him that I
would solve his puzzle in one session, a commitment that would enrage other
"puzzle solvers," who would require months and years to discover a solution. I

need not justify to other psychologists that the solution of my task in such a case
would not mean healing. We are here primarily making the claim that Individual
Psychology is an advanced science of psychology that serves as a network for
the illumination of psychological phenomenon. Healing follows only after the
patient has gained the same scientific insight as the psychologist or physician.
This, obviously, is more successful the closer the teacher has approached the
truth, and the better he is able to transmit it to the student.
There are two pieces of information that bring us closer to a solution. With
the conclusions that we can now begin to reach, we leave the field of
phenomenological psychology. Our patient states emphatically that since
childhood he had been fearful, and that he has struggled against everything that
causes him fear. We are very careful about reaching a conclusion, but we believe
that we can establish that we are dealing with a person who certainly is not
courageous, but who still has enough self-confidence not to give up without a
struggle. From the natural history of the pampered child, that we had established
empirically, we know--just as a naturalist can determine the shape and the life of
a bird from its bone structure--that we are dealing with a person whose style of
life was fashioned from a pampered background. Apparently, it was formed with
a nuance, a twist in its construction that clearly stems from his striving for
recognition in his childhood (he was the youngest), a tendency to fight, and to
overcome fear. The unity of his person, therefore, is not marked by his fear
alone, but by both his fear and struggle against it. One is going to find in that
person, depending upon the phase he is in, at times more fear, and at other times
the courage to fight it. This unity is also expressed in his constant fear of
jumping out a window while we see him still alive.
In such cases, the mistake made by all psychologists who assume an
ambivalence, contrasting psychological action, feelings or characteristics, is that
they do not see the development of one expression out of the other (striving for
compensation). In their one-sided analysis, they also overlook the connection
between goals in life and style of life and instead of seeing psychological
movement which flows through everything, they believe they have found
separate parts (feelings, intellect, worth, character, conflict etc.) which they
evaluate and compare "one against the other." To be sure, they avoid this
mistake, if in language there existed one term for such types (such as Don
Quixote,etc.).
The second piece of information concerns childhood memories. The science
of psychology owes to Individual Psychology the art of being able to interpret
the earliest and early childhood memories; better put: the possibility of
interpreting these. It seems that its "scientific" apparatus at this time is just as

inadequate to grasp their significance as clues for the structure of the style of life
as it has not been able to understand the dream as an attempt, by creating mood
and feeling, to misguide the automatically flowing individual life line.4 Item: A
childhood memory is the psychological revelation of characteristics of the style
of life. It reflects in its dynamic the same course as the entire way of life. In the
case under discussion, it is as follows: "As I entered school, I was attacked by a
boy. I had terrible fear and trembled awfully. However, I threw myself on the
boy and beat him up."
Since we Individual Psychologists seek to establish in movement the
correct facts concerning a psychological impulse, we try to uncover the contents
of the psychological impulse. What is left shows us that part of the movement
that derives from a feeling of inferiority seeking the goal of overcoming. In this
case, trembling and feelings of impotence mark the “low point” in a particularly
emphatic way. The goal, clearly, is to overcome; the result is victory. "Despite
my terrible fear, I won," could be the message of his attitude toward life that
everyone can clearly recognize.
4 See Chapter IV, “More on Individual Psychological Dream Theory,” in this
volume.
With these two points in his style of life, therefore, we have found the same
movement: despite fear, struggle through! We now claim that this cannot be by
happenstance. We maintain that in all of a person's expressions and symptoms,
his lifestyle will come through. Those who have no "musical ear" obviously will
not understand this until they learn music. The advantage of Individual
Psychology is that it can discern this theme, make the patient "musically aware,"
and allow him to hear the theme. For the time being, we have to be satisfied that
not everyone is able to hear, for example, the theme of a "Bach" composition
from pieces of his music. We also have to be content that some doubt this and
will attempt to prove mathematically that there is no such thing. However, we do
not ignore our duty to bring further proof, perhaps even until some believe that
they had discovered the theme and not we.
Therefore, additional proof! This patient complains that he is constantly in
danger of wanting to jump out a window. Here also, well-established points of
view of Individual Psychology come to our assistance.
First of all: as long as someone only “wants to,” only one thing is for
certain: nothing will happen! This standpoint of Individual Psychology is
contrary to other doctrines on willing. Thomas Aquinas: The will is a rational
striving that by nature is directed toward possession.5 Kant: The will is a store of
desires destined for decency--a wealth of imagined objects to be produced, or at

least to be obtained, i.e. to determine their causality. Fichte: The will is the
resource of absolute self-determination with regard to a concept. Hegel: Will is
thought as a drive to give oneself existence. Schopenhauer: The will is the core
of all being and consciousness, the essence of things. Natorp: Will is setting
goals, the purpose of an idea. Münsterberg: The will encompasses all
phenomena of independence. Pfänder: Wanting is the victorious striving of the
self. Wundt: Will ... the original energy of the conscious. Narciss Ach: An
intended act can be traced back to the effectiveness of an intellectual unfolding
of earlier "determined tendencies," an "imagined goal." William Jones: Will is....
a perception of movement plus the "fiat" ... by which the sensual consequences
of a motion are to become a reality. Kern: Willing ... is the energy of conscious
thought. Spencer: The will springs out of reflexes. Ostwald: The will ... is a form
of energy. A. Spir: The will is the expression of the contradiction that rests in
our being which makes it its goal to remove. Rehmke: The will ... is being
conscious as far as it relates "causally to an imagined change seen in the light of
passion." Spengler: The will is the representative of the historical sentiment.
The depth of all these definitions does not compensate us for their
insufficiency to answer psychological questions. They are all identical attempts
at formulating expressions and descriptions for that which everyone vaguely
feels when given the assignment to describe what he thinks about will, in
particular, when the word is taken out of the context of its psychological totality
and made central for an examination. This is not to say that in this context there
has not been an accounting, but always as if in the course of such an examination
other psychological processes have to disappear. The Individual Psychological
question, however, is posed as follows: In this case what is the role of this
psychological movement, which hardens here into will, in the framework of the
psychological connection? All descriptions that have been offered provide us
with no clues to answer that question.
5 Cited from Eisler, Wörterbuch der Philosophie (Dictionary of Philosophy).
However, we know from earlier findings that the individual creates
artificially, almost deceitfully, an obstacle that he dares to overcome, and that by
overcoming it, he gains pleasure, satisfaction, a feeling of pride and superiority.
The individual, as in a children's game, poses tasks for himself which in their
certain solving are able to raise his feelings for his own person, just as a boy will
punch a straw man and believes he has conquered an enemy. The individual in
this case could also invent other games for the same purpose, such as
sleeplessness, and then still manage his business excellently so that his
achievement will seem the greater. In doing this, he impresses himself and others
with his accomplishments, which are in no way a real measure of what he could

achieve if he did not have the fear, or the will, to jump out a window.
At that, or better yet, despite that, he had achieved much in life. In the
client’s manner, in all of his actions, also partly in his conscious thought, the
Individual Psychologist clearly recognizes the idea: "What could I have achieved
had I not been hindered by my illness!" Now, however, the patient is so
absorbed with this arrangement, "consciously" as well as "unconsciously," for
saving his style of life, that he gives no thought to our considerations, no more
so than do our adversaries, or even those who were "analyzed." Curing this
person who deceives himself and who seeks the prestige of his goal of
superiority only on the useless side of life is possible only when he is freed of his
"irrational" style of life and is brought back to the useful side of life. That is
possible, of course, only when he understands his useless style of life that grew
out of a pampered childhood as well as he understands his anguish. I have never
encountered among my patients, children as well as adults, anyone whom I was
not successful in making understand his flawed mechanism. True, almost all of
my patients are intelligent.
This is not to say that clarification by itself is the end of a successful cure. It
also requires an artistic penetration into his life and his level of cooperation in
order to uncover individually all of his dysfunctions. Furthermore, it will require
constant training for the patient to be led back to the useful side of life. This
cannot occur if the patient is not won over to cooperate and to be kind, and if we
fail in generating in him a social interest directed toward helping others, the
second function of a mother. This, to me, is the great accomplishment of
Individual Psychology in that it can show how inhibiting social interest must
lead naturally to personal and general problems in life.
On this important point, we also maintain that indoctrination and teaching
are the only means by which the individual as well as society develops; "virtue
can be taught."
Part of being successful in this effort is adherence to the following guidelines:
I. There is only one reason that an individual deviates to the useless side of
life: fear of defeat in a productive life. We can see in that fear the intensified
inferiority feeling of the patient. Also apparent is his hesitation, faltering, or
flight from a resolution of one of the social problems (there are no other) in his
life. Since all questions of life require a developed social interest, which the
patient misses in his lifestyle, he is in a sense justified in deviating as long as he
is not better qualified. For that reason, we reject any form of judgment and
demand better preparation for a sense of community to prevent the potential
neurotic, psychotic, problem child, criminal, potential suicide, prostitute, etc.,
naturally also for those who are allied with such persons. The courage to

advance productively can obviously be achieved only by those who regard
themselves as a part of the community, who are at home on this earth and among
its people. This clearly burdens them with the task of having to realize their
developed 
social 
interest 
by 
favorably 
structuring 
circumstances
("Circumstances make the person, but the person makes the circumstances" -
Pestalozzi).
II. What Griesinger and after him others have called "the flight into
sickness" provides only a small part of the totality that has been uncovered by
Individual Psychology. We must always take into consideration: heightened
inferiority feelings in the first five years of life, the intimately related lack of
social interest and courage, the searching after proof of superiority, the tendency
of the patient to disconnect, seeking seeming relief in unproductive living, i.e. in
ostensible superiority instead of trying to overcome difficulties. A graphic
representation results in a picture that needs no further interpretation for those
who understand it; however, the attempt to capture the psyche in a static picture
is condemned to failure from the outset. Allow me to add only two remarks in
order to avoid superficial and unnecessary controversy. First, it is fortunate that
the progress of mankind does not have to wait for every infant to learn the
difference between what is useful and useless. That discovery lies outside human
judgment and can penetrate the sharper mind more easily than the dull.
According to all human experiences, however, that difference affects the
individual as well as the masses. Secondly, the course of the neurosis, etc, and
that of maladjustment runs to different degrees on both sides of life (useful and
useless) to which I cannot give expression in this scheme at this point.
Chapter VIII
Alfred Adler on America1 2
[1927]
Alfred 
Adler, 
the 
publisher 
of 
Internationale 
Zeitschrift 
für
Individualpsychologie, returned to Vienna on April 17 after an approximately six
months stay in England and America. On Monday, April 25, he gave his first
lecture at the International Association for Individual Psychology on his
impressions of the United States and on the success of Individual Psychology
there.
Adler was received by several hundred joyful and enthusiastic listeners in
the great hall of the Histologische Institut and greeted warmly by the chairman,
Professor E.E. Oppenheim. Adler's first lecture on his America trip was devoted
to the tremendous interest in education shown by the entire population of North
America. This interest in education, supported by the entire press and by almost
unlimited funds, is one of the major reasons that Alfred Adler's lecture tour in

American turned into a triumph for Individual Psychology. During his
approximately four and one half months stay in America, his more then 300
lectures and courses in English held in the largest cities before scientific and
private organizations on the teaching of Individual Psychology and its decisive
impact on new education were received with the greatest appreciation.
During the course of his report, Adler established that the extensive efforts
in the United States in the field that is generally described as "Mental Hygiene"
is by and large an actualization of the same goals he and his associates from the
International Association for Individual Psychology have already realized in
several countries in Europe, albeit without any significant financial means or
state support. These goals are the establishment of educational counseling
centers; recognition of and treatment for problem children; the healing of anxiety
in adolescents; facilitating, advising, and fostering the education of teen age
children in the home and at school.
Adler considered a significant reason for the popular interest in education in
America is the remarkably large number of women who support this movement
and who serve in the enormously large organizations for "Mental Hygiene." The
women of America have found in this area a wonderful place to affirm their
knowledge, express their social striving, and utilize available funds. However,
physicians, psychologists, teachers and educators are also involved with the
varied groups of this movement that consists of hundreds of special institutes
concerned with caring for youth, as well as those that exercise official
jurisdiction over youth. Perhaps there is not a single physician who has not
established his own institute, his own mental health facility. This activity as well
as counseling adults encompasses the entire field of caring for orphans and the
supervision of parolees. The whole field of social welfare is more developed
than in most of our cities and countries since it can function in America with
incomparably large material means. A tremendous number of volunteers as well
as paid employees are engaged in this activity. The daily press also takes an
unusually great interest in this matter and universities provide free advice and
literature in response to any particular question. Among the advantages of life in
America is that universities form no closed circle, but are open and accessible to
every intelligent person seeking an education. In addition to innumerable
courses, American universities, are also in constant, close contact with large
segments of the population and involved with their daily problems. Every
scholar sees one of his primary tasks as popularizing his teaching and research
by making them available to the people of his community.
1 Summary of Adler’s lecture by Dr. L. Zilahi. Originally published as
“Alfred Adler Uber Amerika: das Geltungsstreben in Amerika” in the Int. Z.

Indiv. Psychol., Vol. 5, pages 225-228, 1927. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
Adler sees a darker side in the organization of "Mental Hygiene" in
America in that the leadership of the unquestionably large movements and of the
most significant educational institutes for social welfare are in private hands
even though the state and various organizations and groups of individuals
provide the most active support. According to Adler, our Individual
Psychological activity in the field of education, as opposed to welfare in
America, has the great advantage in that our educational counseling facilities
work in closest conjunction with the schools where the direct intercession by
outside Individual Psychologists slowly will become superfluous. Furthermore,
this work, which is so important for the youth, is transferred into the hands of the
teacher who has the most natural calling for this task. Adler expressed particular
gratification that the most important aspects of our efforts were attained
especially in Vienna, but also in other cities. Successful work by our counseling
facilities was possible only in the context of school reform, a point that was of
particular interest in America. In the "mental hygiene" movement, and our
Individual Psychological educational counseling facilities closely associated
with the activities of teachers, Individual Psychology sees the natural path
toward a better system of education developed under the influence of the
schools. Alfred Adler represented this position before his American audiences
and in particular when speaking to American teachers, with whom his views
found the strongest resonance. For example, in Chicago Adler spoke on this
subject to an audience of 1,500 teachers. His explanation of the significance of
Individual Psychological educational methods for schools was received with the
greatest enthusiasm. Great applause greeted his energetic opposition to the usual
arguments that teachers are unable to carry out Individual Psychological
educational tasks in school because they are overburdened with class work or
otherwise, or because they are incompetent.
Adler's exposition, for example in Chicago, found such support that the city
council of Chicago wished to try the exchange of five Chicago teachers for five
persons schooled in Individual Psychology. This would give the Chicago
teachers the opportunity to experience Individual Psychology educational
methods and at the same time be trained in this famous Viennese educational
reform system. The Viennese teachers who would be sent to Chicago would
train teachers in the Individual Psychological education of children and thereby
prepare the way for the practical introduction of this method in the schools of
Chicago. They would also acquaint the Chicago teachers with Glöckel's
educational reform methods as practiced in Viennese schools. Adler believes in

the future of this type of teacher exchange and hopes that Chicago or New York
would one day put it into practice.
In all the other American cities where Adler spoke and gave courses,
particularly in New York, Boston, Providence, Philadelphia, Cincinnati, Ann
Arbor, etc., large audiences attended his presentations on the doctrines of
Individual Psychology, making his lecture tour a triumphal parade throughout
the New World. Adler sees this development to be of the greatest significance
for the future of the science of Individual Psychology and for the Individual
Psychological movement. He was greatly pleased that the work that he had just
begun in America would be continued by his friends and by the most famous
representative of Individual Psychology, Dr. Leonhard Seif, who is already on
American soil.
Adler then discussed various details concerning his lecture tour and the
organizational and practical successes of the Individual Psychological movement
in the United States. In particular, he said that at the invitation of the "Institute
for Juvenile Research" in Chicago, directed by the prominent and meritorious
psychiatrist, Dr. Hermann Adler, he worked several weeks to demonstrate the
educational and psychiatric advantages of Individual Psychology from a
practical as well as theoretical standpoint. Finally, Adler advised that as a result
of his efforts at enlightenment, a large number of prominent American visitors
should be expected to arrive in Vienna during the coming months to study our
local work in Individual Psychological education, our guidance facilities, the
schools in Vienna and the welfare organizations.
Dr. Alfred Adler's message, which was also sent to the Vienna school
committee, was received with great enthusiasm by the members of the Vienna
section of the International Union for Individual Psychology as well as by the
several hundred guests and was given particular attention by Vienna's daily
newspapers. At the conclusion of his address, Adler announced three
forthcoming lectures on his observations in America: 1. concerning certain
"heightened character traits" among Americans that can also be found in certain
sections of our population; 2. on the causes of unusually strong waves of crime
in America; and 3. on the meaning of the American feminist movement.
The general acknowledgment of Adlerian teachings in the United States is
also reflected in the large number of invitations from American scientific
institutes and universities for lectures and courses by Adler. Alfred Adler
actually is considering spending several months again next year in America to
present lectures.
The Striving for Esteem in America
Among his friends and associates Alfred Adler expressed his observations

on various aspects of American life. Some of these also were reported in a
number of Vienna dailies including the "Allgemeine Zeitung," "Neue Wiener
Abendblatt," "Morgen," and "Abend." A significant portion of Adler's remarks
on America and Americans is particularly instructive for readers schooled in
Individual Psychology. We wish to summarize for our readers abstracts of
Alfred Adler's remarks based on the articles published in those newspapers:
As Adler explained, the two extremes between which Americans live are an
extraordinary strong personal ambition and a strong striving for organized
groups. These two extremes define the attitudes and actions of Americans: a
very openly displayed strong image and unbridled expression in the realm of
business and work and in striving for personal success,--on the other hand, a
strong social tendency that is given much greater expression there than here in
Europe. These social tendencies dominate social life; sociability is cultivated
much more extensively than here.
This ambition, expressed not only in sports, must be apparent to the
observer as well as to those acquainted with America as not only dominant, but
as being much more open and frank. "Competition," the craving for recognition,
generally is regarded as virtuousness, despite what also has become known here
as "Inferiority" complexes. To be the first, even in evading the law, for example
Prohibition, is everyone's striving, especially among the youth.
Ameliorating this enormous ambition is its expression in social relations.
The tendency to gather in social groupings is exceptionally great in the United
States. It is very unusual, for example, for someone to sit alone at a table; the
American likes to sit among many people, which is an expression of his
character. When someone speaks of America, usually one has the impression of
intensive work, tempo, and restlessness. Actually, the average American works
no harder than the average European. However, his social life demands much of
his time; the same goes for meals; the large number of automobiles in the streets
impedes traffic as much as they enliven the street scene. Life is very much
centered on the dinner table since the American requires much time for meals,
which leaves little cause to wonder about the shortness of the working day.
Herein lies the source of the "great race" which gives the stranger the impression
that he is perpetually in a railroad station where everything takes place at high
speed. Even homes are designed for "moving," as if they could be vacated any
day. As one can see, nothing is further from the mind of the American, this
record racer, than to be glued pitifully to his own four walls. The servant
situation is also considerably different from here. Servants are an exclusive
luxury of the wealthy; they lead a totally independent life. After six o'clock in
the evening, even the employees of large hotels leave for the day and no one is

there for service, leaving the innocent stranger in wonderment. The laborer has
won for himself special rights and knows how to retain them, wherein he is
clearly assisted by laws prohibiting immigration.
The social tendencies of Americans are particularly strong when they have
succeeded in satisfying their need for esteem; once the American has reached his
goal, has made his money, he does not rest before he has created a public
institution. Now the time has come to do something for the general public, and
he creates or supports welfare organizations, hospitals, universities, etc.
The question of feminism is very interesting, even if it still has a long way
to go before being resolved. More extensive education in America has
encompassed a much larger circle of women. Women play a much more
significant role in the cultural and social life than here. Culture in America to a
large extent rests in the hands of women. They participate in all scientific
endeavors, although they have greater opportunities for education than in Europe
because they pay no students' fees. As stated earlier, many universities were
created out of "Competition" with funds from donations and foundations
provided by wealthy people who wish to make a name for themselves. Despite
the fact that women are active in all occupations, they are paid less than men;
their greater esteem is only specious. The privilege of the male, who by the way,
strives to detach himself from the ever-increasing female emancipation, is here
also not disturbed. Outwardly, the American female enjoys a higher value. This
circumstance accounts for American women being stronger and more secure
than women here. However, since women effectively control only certain
spheres of activities because they do not yet have the same opportunities as men,
they have assumed some of these spheres exclusively for themselves, for
example, the enormous striving for education that dominates the American
people.
This enormous striving for education probably is most important in
America. This striving is also a sign of America's racing for records. The
problem of rearing children is the focal point of general interest, more so than
anywhere else, and is supported by extensive institutions with large financial
means. Despite and probably also because of that, the issue of education is
extremely difficult in light of the encroachment of ambition even into the lives
of American children. Children and the growing youth are frequently educated in
schools and colleges away from their parents. These institutions, often
experimental schools, do not always have a favorable influence since, in the final
analysis, the mother cannot be replaced. Aside from that, in most cases the right
educational method has not yet been found, and substantively incompetent
personnel direct facilities at times. In other cases, these schools have not yet

attained the pedagogical levels of European schools. The children are more
spoiled than in Europe, play a greater role, and at times lead their parents to
despair with misbehavior. For these reasons, the method of Individual
Psychological education, which recognizes the roots of faulty upbringing in the
home and corrects these by appropriate means in school, is found to be of much
greater value in America for ensuring a secure and proper life. The solution to
pedagogical problems based on the views of Individual Psychology now appears
to Americans as much more plausible and easier than before.
Chapter IX
Feelings and Emotions From the Standpoint of Individual Psychology1
[1928]
It is obvious that the style of life does not solely rule an individual. The
attitudes alone do not create the symptoms, nor do they alone build up the whole
neurosis as security for not moving ahead. To this must also be added feelings
which do not hinder the person's strivings on the useless side.
This is a new view in psychology and is presented in contradiction to other
conceptions. Individual Psychology does not consider the mind and psyche as
separate, but rather as a whole. What we see in this approach is no longer
physiological or biological and cannot be explained by chemical or technical
examination. We presuppose all the right physiological results, but we are more
interested in the goal. Our interest is not that anxiety influences the nervous
sympaticus and parasympaticus, but what is the end and the aim?
We are very interested in where a feeling has arisen, but we mean the
psychical rather than the bodily roots, striving toward totality. We do not believe
that anxiety arises from suppression of sexuality or as a result of birth. We are
not interested in such explanations, but we know and understand that a child who
is accustomed to being accompanied by the mother uses anxiety--whatever its
source may be--to arrive at his goal of superiority in order to control the mother.
In this situation, we are not concerned with a description of anger, but we are
experienced enough to see that anger is a means of overcoming a person or a
situation. We believe that only such a viewpoint is a psychological one, and not
other views such as the description of feelings, emotions, and affects, or such as,
for example, that of inherited instincts. It can be taken for granted that every
bodily and mental power must have inherited material, but what we see in mind
and psyche is the use of this material toward a certain goal.
In all these cases we have described up to now we have seen the feelings
and emotions developed in such a direction and to such a degree as was essential
to attain the neurotic goal. The anxiety, sadness, and all the characteristics have
run the way we could predict, and have always agreed with the style of life. We

have also seen that dreams have a similar purpose of arranging the feelings and
that they are influenced by the neurotic goal. They give us a remarkable insight
into the workshop of the soul. A person who accomplishes his goal of superiority
by sadness cannot be gay and satisfied in the accomplishment. He can be happy
only when he is unhappy. We can also notice that feelings appear and disappear
when needed. The patient suffering from agoraphobia loses the feeling of
anxiety when he is at home or ruling another person. We come to the point of
view that neurotic patients exclude all the parts of life in which they do not feel
well and strong enough to be the conqueror.
1 Originally published in Feelings and Emotions: The Wittenberg
Symposium, M.L. Reymert (Ed.), Worcester, Mass., Clark University Press,
pages 316-321, 1928. Edited for readability by Laurie J. Stein, 2004.
Character is much more fixed. For example, a coward is always a coward,
even though he shows arrogance (against a weaker person) or courage when he
is shielded. If he locks the door with three locks, protects himself with
watchdogs, guns and policemen, and insists he is very courageous, nobody could
prove a feeling of anxiety. However, that he sought protection, proves he is
cowardly in character.
The realm of sexuality and love is similar. The feelings belonging to it
always appear when a person has a desire to approach his sexual goal. His
attention and concentration have a tendency to exclude contradictions and
conflicting tasks, thus evoking the right feelings and functions. The lack of these
feelings and functions--such as impotence, ejaculation praecox, perversions,
frigidity--are all established by not excluding other tasks and by contradictions.
Such abnormalities are always influenced by a neurotic goal of superiority and a
mistaken style of life. In these cases, we find the tendency to expect and not to
give. No social feeling, courage, or optimistic activity exist.
As we have shown, social feeling is of the greatest importance in treatment
and education. This feeling is the inevitable supplement of the organic
weaknesses of human beings. From the biological side, we cannot think of a
human being without thinking of social feeling. The new-born animal needs to
be supported for a certain length of time, as does the human child. A pregnant
animal needs much more care before, during, and after birth, as does a woman.
Mankind could not persist without cooperation and social culture. This culture
demands common efforts for education. To accomplish the three tasks of life it is
necessary, as we have seen, to develop sufficient social feeling. As far as we can
see, only the possibilities for the development of social feeling are inborn.
There is no use in trusting social instincts because these can be destroyed or
increased. The most important factor in the development of social feeling is, as

we have shown, the mother. In his mother every child has his first contact with a
trustworthy fellow-creature. This is the first change in the behavior of a child
and the first circuitous expression of his desires and organic drives. His interest
includes himself and his mother. The goal of all his strivings is, as before, to
overcome the difficulties of life and to gain superiority.
We can presuppose that such a helpless being striving for satisfaction has a
feeling of inferiority. This feeling of inferiority becomes later the stimulus
among all individuals, whether children or adults, to establish their actions in
such a way that they arrive at a goal of superiority.
The first influence on the concretization of this goal is the spoiling mother.
This goal cannot be fixed permanently. She must, therefore, in this phase try to
give the child freedom so that he will be able to establish a style of life which
will enable him to seek superiority on the useful side. The mother must then
serve a second function, which is to spread the interest of the child to other
persons and situations. In this way she makes the child independent so that he
feels a part of the whole environment and at home in the world. In this way, the
mother inevitably creates social feeling, independence, self-confidence, and
courage. The goal of such a child will be to become a fellowman, such as a
friend, a useful worker, a true partner in love. Whatever place he may occupy,
the degree of his social feeling, courage, and optimistic activity will be
influenced by his goal to be superior as a fellowman on the useful side of life.
We cannot emphasize too much that all the feelings of an individual are
dependent upon the content of social feeling in his individual goal of superiority.
We can now understand why all actions on the useless side of life among
problem children, neurotics, criminals, suicides, sexual perverts, and prostitutes
are caused by a lack of social feeling, courage, and self-confidence. We can
understand it even better when we realize that all the tasks of life are social, such
as kindergarten, school, companionship, occupation, love, marriage. All these
questions demand a well-trained and automatized social feeling. For example, if
a boy terrified by illness and death wishes to overcome this fright by being a
doctor, he has selected a more social goal than another boy in the same situation
who wishes to become a grave digger.
A lower degree of this automatized social feeling is the same as too great an
interest for one's self. Therefore, we can add at this point--what we have pointed
out before--that, as a rule, we find this lower degree of social feeling among
individuals with a great feeling of inferiority, and this appears in the style of life
of spoiled or hated children with imperfect organs. We can also conclude that
feelings are always in connection with the whole. They are never independent
expressions and never in themselves real arguments for action. They will

nevertheless be used in this way and influence our secondary decisions from
time to time.
The most important single factor in Individual Psychology is what we have
called a feeling of inferiority. This forms the background for all our studies. We
can ascertain this feeling of inferiority only from the actions of an individual. In
the beginning of life it is very varied, for we see many expressions of the attempt
to overcome it.
We find that these expressions are connected with the strength or weakness
of the organs and the environment. They react upon each other and influence the
degree of the feeling. The remarkable part of this dynamic is that neither the
inherited material nor the milieu are responsible for the degree of the feeling of
inferiority; neither is it the result of both together. The degree of the feeling of
inferiority is due to both of these plus the reaction of the child. We cannot expect
that a child, normal or abnormal, reacts to a stimulus in an absolutely right way.
Living material as opposed to dead material always reacts more or less in a
mistaken manner. 
In a study of children in their earliest years we discover three types:
1. Children with imperfect organs. They need more time and more effort than
others to integrate.
2. Spoiled children. They are not free to function alone and they develop in
the direction of always wishing to be supported. They are attacked on all sides
because of this behavior, find themselves in a hostile environment, and are,
therefore, under strain.
3. Hated children (illegitimate, not wanted, ugly, crippled). They have the
same difficulties as the second type, but are without the aid of a supporting
person.
After some time these strained efforts, particular interests and attention
become mechanical, and this living machine has its own life plan of how to
accomplish the three tasks of life. The tension among these children gives them
greater impetus, forcing them to seek a higher goal of security and superiority
than the average.
After this goal has been established, the characteristics, attitudes, and
feelings are fixed and agree wholly with the purpose of attaining it. The
impressions, perceptions, and expressions are now selected and seen in this
perspective through a prejudiced mind. Such an individual views everything he
experiences from all sides, until he can assimilate it into his style of life. This is
equivalent to how he wishes to solve the three problems of life. Because these
three types have a greater feeling of inferiority, they have less social feeling and
a greater visible interest in themselves. We thus come to the conclusion that the

feeling of inferiority and social feeling are connected with, and belong to, the
lifeplan with which they must agree.
It is not a contradiction, if the surface view does not appear so. I once met a
very rich old lady, who dominated her whole family. She had no interest for
society and associated only with her own relatives. She had great fame as a
benevolent woman. This feeling of pity does not seem to agree with her unsocial
life. One day I visited her and found her crying. Before her stood an old man
weeping. I asked her, "Why do you cry?" She answered, "Look at this poor old
man. He has five starving children. He cannot pay his rent and must leave his
home unless he pays the 10 pounds due. I can give him only 5 pounds." I replied,
"You must not cry; let me add to your great gift my small gift of 5 pounds." She
thanked me and said, "I have always known you are a good man." I replied, "Oh,
I am only a quarter as good as you are." As we can see, this feeling of pity and
sadness has only agreed with her desire to feel superior over this poor man.
If we judge a feeling separated from other expressions and the style of life,
we recognize only the physiological factors. For a psychological understanding,
we must know the goal toward which the feelings are directed.
A patient of mine, a second boy in a family, developed a feeling of guilt.
The father was very honest, as was also the older brother. The older brother was
very much beloved and the second boy strove to overcome him, as is usual with
second children. He was seven years old when he deceived his teacher in school
by telling him he had achieved a task alone, although his brother had done it for
him. After concealing his guilty feeling for three years, my patient went to the
teacher and told him how he had lied. The teacher merely laughed at him. He
went to his father and discussed this matter with him with a great feeling of
sadness. The father enjoyed this love of truth and praised and consoled his son.
But the boy always felt depressed, thinking in his compulsion neurosis that he
was a liar in spite of the fact that he had been pardoned. Considering the
circumstances, we cannot help the impression that this boy wished to prove his
great integrity by accusing himself for such a trifle. The high moral atmosphere
of the home gave him the impulse to excel in integrity because he felt inferior to
his brother in schoolwork and attractiveness.
Later in life he suffered from other self-approaches as a sinner, because he
masturbated and was not wholly honest in his studies. This feeling always
increased before he took an examination. As we can see, he collected difficulties
so that he felt himself much more burdened than his brother, therefore, having an
excuse for not being superior.
When he left the university, he planned to do technical work. However, his
compulsion neurosis increased so greatly that he prayed all day to God to forgive

him, and so was unable to work. He was put in an asylum and was there
considered as incurable. When he had improved, he left the asylum and asked
permission to be readmitted if he should have a relapse. He changed his
occupation and studied the history of art. Before he was to have an examination
in this, he visited a church. It was a holiday and the church was very crowded.
He prostrated himself and cried, "I am the greatest sinner." He was thus the
center of attention.
He again went to the asylum, where he remained a long time. One day he
came to lunch naked. He was a well-built man and could compete in this point
with his brother and others. His feeling of guilt was a means of making him
appear more honest than others, but on the useless side of life. His escape from
examinations and occupations was a sign of cowardice and a too-great feeling of
inferiority. For these reasons he purposely excluded of all activities in which he
feared defeat. His prostration in the church and his shocking entrance to the
dining room were also cheap expressions of his striving for superiority.
We conclude rightly that in the same way his feelings of guilt also meant an
effort to be superior.
Chapter X
Erotic Training and Erotic Retreat1 2
[1928]
The importance of biology and the progress made in that field, particularly
with regard to our problem, would make it seem appropriate that I approach
significant issues from a different viewpoint. In addressing such topics, I shall
also be able to clarify again the basic principle of biological influences. This
should not surprise those who have been engaged in our research in sexual
psychology since the point of departure for this research was a work on organ
inferiority in which I tried to show that the child experiences his bodily
functioning at an early age and from that experience draws certain conclusions.3
From this starting point I eventually determined that what we have here is not a
coerced development, but relational conditions, that a feeling of an inferiority of
organs is created that can also be influenced by external causes that in a very
similar way can cause the developing psyche of the child to come under pressure
thereby bringing about exactly the same results as if the child would become
aware of his inferior organ and would then encounter certain problems.
Consequently, regarding the origins of an inferior organ, it is not a matter of the
unfolding of certain failures, but far more so that the child sees himself as a
particular problem. This problem is not one that is apparent to us, but one
constituted differently and consequently one to which we must bring to bear a

particular form of education and external influences, so that it does not take on a
wrong form that might seem very desirable or enticing to the child.
I would like to show how we approached this issue with a case that does not
concern inferior sexual organs and gonads, and how we arrived at certain
particular knowledge and impressions by casting the problem in that way. Think
of the large number of left-handed children, that is children who are born with a
poorly developed right hand and body. When such children come into a situation
for which they are poorly prepared, and organically inadequate, their fate has
been determined in a particular way. In relationship to righthanded people, they
will always be seen as inept, inadequate, useless and inferior, and consequently
will experience a number of failures. However, we know from experience and
from results we had in education that when we accept that such a child has a
particular problem and therefore, apply certain correct educational methods, it is
possible that despite these apparent or real inadequacies for life the child can
achieve satisfactory, even exceptional feats. We were able to observe the same
factors in all other manifestations of deficient organs and came here in particular
upon an area in sexual dysfunctions that is well known to us from another
common perspective. It was shown, for example in cases of sexual organ
failures, that exactly the same problems emerge that appear in the descriptions of
human characteristics which are also presumed to be immutable and frequently,
if not most of the time, regarded as necessitated by the nature of the organism.
We also find this when discussing the problem of the so-called talented. In those
cases, specialists, sexual psychologists, and educators everywhere presumed that
there were specific boundaries which the lesser talented cannot cross and are,
therefore, regarded as a constant.
1 Originally published as “Erotissches Training und erotischer Ruckzug” in
M. Marcuse (Ed.), Verhandlungen auf dem I. internationalen Kongress für
Sexualwissenschaft (Discussions at the First International Congress for Sexual
Science), Berlin/Köln (Publisher, Marcus & Weber), pages 1-7, 1928. Reprinted
in Alfred Adler: Psychotherapie und Erziehung, Ausgewählte Aufsätze, Band I:
1919-1929Band I: 1919-1929 223. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. 
3 Studie über Minderwertigkeit von Organen. See The Collected Clinical Works
of Alfred Adler, Volume 2.
Sexual psychology, which approaches this subject from a different
perspective, came naturally to the following conclusion: What is missing here is
an absolute proof; because when we put people with certain defects in a situation
in which they are constantly aware of those defects, they will have great

difficulty compensating for them. Rather, we must regard such people as having
a different and unique problem in order to treat them equitably. With regard to
the three questions that we identified, we must proceed as physicians have
always done when not satisfied with a given situation and determine whether
unfavorable conditions that caused deficiencies in the course of the patient's
development could to a large extent be cleared up. It can hardly be expected of
us physicians to talk of removing deficiencies when the organ, the substrata for
any kind of development, or compensation as we have called it, is missing.
The outward manifestations that we encounter in problems of sex and
sexual failures are comparable to failures that we observe in rearing and
education and that we can also find in the framework of all of neuropsychology
and pathology. Therefore, it was natural for us to make the same assessment for
all three problems, which is that in all our tests, whether initiated by us or
brought to us by the patient, we determine only how far the individual has
developed.
At this point I should like to inject what to me is worth noting. It pertains to
the most turbulent issue in the field of pathology today: that the external
requirements for life and upbringing influence all organs, certainly also the
development of glands with internal secretions. Therefore, it is unquestionable
that certain wrong ways of upbringing can lead to effeminate boys, or to girls
who will posture themselves in masculine ways. For example, if you remember
evidence of American biologists who established that American girls because of
changes in their way of life had totally differently constituted bodies, then you
will somewhat understand what I mean here. Therefore, it is poor judgment to
make a prognosis for all times based on the current state of an organ or its value.
Instead, there is the possibility, as demonstrated in biological research as well as
by other ways and means, for stimulating a normal development.
There is now a point of view on human development that draws our interest
because it brings together various manifestations of the inner life as well as the
course of biology. This aspect that I wish to develop briefly for you today, to
touch on and to show you which viewpoint sexual psychology and sexual
pathology represent, is training. There is no question that all expressions that we
can observe in an individual depend on his self-developed lifestyle. This lifestyle
can be traced back fully. It would prejudice a psychological examination were
we to select one manifestation, resolve it out of context, and examine it and
judge it on the basis of earlier formed impressions, i.e. with preconceived ideas.
Here also the same process takes place that applies to all psychology. In order
for you to understand what I mean, I point to the following. When you remove
from a song a number of sounds and examine them as would a good musician,

then you will certainly be able to say something about these sounds, but not what
really is of interest to us. If you wish to relate what is of interest to us, then you
must keep the sounds in their context; they gain value only in their wholeness,
which only then allows us to make a judgment.
If I may briefly speak on the psychology of children then you have, for
example, a boy who suffers from a character defect: he steals, and he runs away
from home. According to the usual methods, you will assume that this is a
delinquent child who has a number of vices and with whom for the moment
nothing can be done, but who must be broken of these habits either by force or
with kindness. How this is to be done, of course, is not said. However, a more
careful sexual psychological examination results in the following: The boy has
an enormous need for affection, and when he steals it is only to give something
to his comrades, to win their friendship, and to thus force them into offering
affection. He runs away from home only when he has the feeling that no one
cares for him. With this in mind, we would normally say: Outwardly, this is a
thief, and a vagabond, but actually he is a child strongly constrained by a need
for affection who has only one goal in mind which is to draw it out of his
surroundings.
You would have to proceed similarly in some cases of so-called functional
disturbances in the sexual area. All these dysfunctions that can be described so
nicely and dealt with in writings attest only to that which the whole personality
expresses. Therefore, impotence, ejaculatio praecox, prolongation, and all
manner of perversions, frigidity, vaginismus, take on meaning only in the
context of the individual's personality: they are forms of expression with partly
outwardly treacherous indications of a self-contained style of life that is neither
suitable for sexuality, nor for what we understand as normal eroticism. However,
these forms of expression are well suited for the style of life of that individual.
 
For simplicity's sake, I have divided the life problems which every person
must solve whether he likes it or not into three areas: 1) that which concerns the
question of sociability--the relationship between the "I" and the "thou"; 2) On the
question of occupation--how can I make myself useful?; and 3) With regard to
sexual matters--how can I structure my relationship with the other sex? When a
personality has been established, whether from organic causes, or for reasons
stemming from external influences, which can be equally harmful when not
properly handled and corrected, then at that moment of solving one of these
questions of life, given the difficulties, instead of finding a solution that fits his
personality, that is a normal one, the individual will arrive at a solution that

according to our understanding and estimation is abnormal. You can think of this
as taking place within a circle that, starting in childhood, exhibits for us the
preparation and completion of the lifestyle about which we can say: Whether
shaped by biology, whether by external influences, or because of faulty
upbringing and education, the preparation within that circle, normally the family
circle, was not successful, and that the subsequent questions of life must now be
dealt with in a larger circle. That is the reason that at this border line you will see
some fateful event arising that will soon bring us into the field of medicine
where we speak of illnesses, which include certain sexual perversions and sexual
functional problems, or you will find this individual in other cases, or because of
coercion, already in that circle. You will then regularly be able to observe acts
on his part that will betray the striving to leave that circle. In such cases, it is
interesting to note that the individual not only unconsciously, as it is commonly
called, but we prefer to say:, “not having understood,” attempts to sustain the
total personality. Here, however, very conscious emotions and judgments
appear; I should say a unique neurotic logic that follows the same course. I
constantly tell my students: When you don't understand a symptom, and are
uncertain about its meaning and the value it has for the lifestyle of the
individual, then put the symptom aside and look at the rest of the person because
then you will find the same thing. Regarding the manifestations that we are
discussing here today, the individual involved usually raises counter arguments
that from his vantage point are quite clear. He suffers not only from a sexual
dysfunction, but he also has a number of counter arguments at hand that would
be just as meaningful were he to accept them honestly and draw the right
conclusions from them. However, all those who fail to solve sexual problems in
somewhat normal ways can be found in that circle of seriously discouraged
people. Consequently, with regard to the other questions of life (that we have
named), you will find the same hesitating attitude that we also see in the sexual
sphere. These are people who, for example, find it difficult to establish contact
with others. Obviously, this is not something that can be accepted as an easy or
simple situation. There are people like this who are observed with others, who sit
at beer tables, etc., but you will not find in them what we understand by
friendship, which is offering and receiving warmth.
However, much more significant indicators confirm that the lifestyle of the
person about whom I speak exerts considerable influence in order to support the
abnormality of the individual. For some time now, I have pointed out some of
these connections that can be traced back to childhood. For example, a very frail
homosexual was the only child born late of a mother who had an extraordinary
need for affection and who drew the child very close to herself, occupied him

with women's work, and brought him up like a girl. Since she also had very
rigorous moral ideals, as is often found in women of this type, she never failed to
frighten the boy by constantly creating difficulties and punishing him whenever
he did not obey her. This kept him from making friends with other boys. He
grew up like a wallflower and took on all the appropriate characteristics. He
looked feminine so that when other boys who were more masculine than he, but
who, as is so often the case with children, were more inclined to be perverse
rather than act normal, liked to be around him and caressed him and when he
finally was cast as a girl in a play, he won every child's sympathy.
Parenthetically, I should like to show that this problem of developing
sexually is not as simple as psychoanalysis, for example, teaches us. This is
because whatever is always presumed to be a normal, natural sexual
development cannot occur when external circumstances cause an enforced
development. It is very instructive to see that in childhood there is no more
serious infraction than development deviating from an external norm. When
children act in some form of childish abnormal sexual behavior, they are not
looked upon with kindness, and may even be punished. However, the dismay
exceeds all bounds when a child does what comes normally to him. What we
know to be occurring in the life of a child cannot be seen as solely under the
influence of external circumstances, i.e. we cannot know the direction sexual
development will take until we recognize the limits we establish.
The boy of whom I spoke to you shortly won friends and as soon as his
sexual development reached a certain point, he entered into a homosexual
relationship with a young man. At that time, he had already passed puberty.
Several difficulties arose with regard to certain aspects of the homosexual
relationship that required overcoming loathing: fellatio and similar activities.
One night, the young man awoke and found himself holding a urinal that was
almost empty. You can easily draw your own conclusion: he entered a phase in
training to rid himself of loathing.
We can encounter such training events from another side that will support
our interpretation. It is a fact that sleep and the events occurring during sleep
provide opportunities for making imagined goals more accessible, and fro
training ourselves for them. In the dreams of such patients, we find time and
again that when functionally disturbed they practice perversions and satisfy
themselves until the next morning. This is an immensely interesting process that
I can only touch on here.
In this context, I should like to point out something else that also throws
light on difficulties in treating perversions, especially when these are not being
taken into account. This also is part of training. There is no doubt that the more

or less normally developed person continually trains for his imagined sexual
ideal, and that the sum of this training cannot be exaggerated: it is his bearing in
the street, his relations with the other sex, comparing himself with others of his
sex, etc. In short, we can well say: there is a continual training for the sexual role
and the sexual ideal that a person imagines. Consequently, it should not surprise
us that after we have uncovered the mistakes in the development of a person, we
still face a new problem. It is almost like making a left-handed person cognizant
of his deficiency when he was unaware that nature had mistreated him with a
clumsy right hand; that alone does not achieve for him an equal footing (with
righthanded people). This, then, is a difficult question--I would say the prize
question
-that I would bring close to your heart and to which you should give thought:
How does one begin training people who in their sexual development have
strayed outside the norm, for them to catch up, when training plays such an
enormous role for normal people? For example, when you believe as I do that I
would never want someone to visit a prostitute, and that I also have no desire
that such a person embark on a casual sexual encounter, then you can imagine
the difficulty of this task. I do not even know whether there is an answer to this
question. However, we encounter the same difficulties in all problems in
education where we speak of a dearth of aptitude when it really is nothing other
than the lack of the right methods. We obviously need to discover better training
for people poorly trained without harming either them or society. There is no
doubt that the method here plays the decisive role. I leave it to your judgment
whether possibly by way of biology a substitute can be found for developing
social consciousness, sensitivity, and logic which belongs to the development of
a normal sexual life.
I regret that I must already conclude; much can still be said on this
question. On the other hand, I am not sorry, since I can hardly give you more
here than to point briefly to certain important problems and to indicate certain
difficulties that arise with their solution.
Chapter XI
The Burning of Widows and Widow Neurosis1 2
[1928]
Every neurosis and psychosis begins in the face of a new situation. When a
woman becomes widowed, mild or more serious neurotic symptoms often
appear. This became clear to me in a number of such cases. We can put it this
way: Here stands a woman confronted by a new situation to which she responds
as if to an experiment and makes known how she is prepared for a life without a
husband. It is difficult to judge a person in a favorable situation. Consider the

example that I have cited frequently: When I lock my door with three keys and
iron bars, place several revolvers on the table, let myself be guarded by two large
guard dogs, the police, and detectives and then claim that I am not afraid, it
becomes difficult to argue against that. It will not be possible to identify what we
call fear and its manifestations. As Individual Psychologists, we pay no attention
to the absence of symptoms in this case but look to actions, which here pertain to
the preparations made, and conclude: Since this person arranges his life like a
coward, he is a coward. The same holds for the case above. Frequently, a woman
who suddenly becomes widowed has seemed earlier to be perfectly healthy.
Suddenly, the situation changes. This is crucial for us who see a person always
in connection with a given situation and consider that to be the touchstone. The
crux of this situation depends, as we know, on the lifestyle of the person in
question. Thus our further examination takes us back to when her lifestyle was
originally formed, in earliest childhood. With enough experience, we are able to
recognize in a short time the parallel between the prototype and the behavior of
the person in a given situation.
Drawing on my experience, I should now like to discuss several examples
of widow neuroses. The first case is that of a very beautiful woman. She was 30
years old when she lost her husband with whom she had lived in a good
marriage. With the death of her husband, she began to suffer the most severe
grief, cried constantly, and no longer wanted to live; she fled to her parents who
lived in a small town. She placed herself under the care of her family and no
longer had any interest in doing anything. My conversations with her revealed
the following: She was very pampered, first by her family and then by her
husband. She always acted "normal". I soon lost sight of her. Because hers was
not my first case of this kind, I was prepared to face it, which made my work
easier. I recognized the lifestyle of a pampered child, as well as certain
psychological manifestations that pointed to her inability to deal with her
problem of being alone. It should now become clear why I named this chapter
"The Burning of Widows and Widow Neurosis:" because Indian widows who
allowed themselves to be immolated after losing their husbands fell into the
same situation as this woman in her state of depression. She no longer felt that
she could deal with her new situation. I have seen patients who were so
pampered that they threaten suicide, take morphine, etc. when their wishes are
not immediately fulfilled. Such people place satisfying their need for affection
above all other considerations in life. Imagine this woman who had been
pampered from earliest times having to start all over again as a widow, and not
so young any more. This is a simple problem. We can understand that especially
people who have been pampered and have little courage tremble at that point.

1 Originally published as "Witwenverbrennung und Witwenneurose, in the
Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. III, p. 356, 1928. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
Another case: an older woman (in her early forties) had a daughter who
gave her some trouble. When her husband died, she became disgruntled. She
dressed herself like a very old woman. This already was an impressive sight that
showed she wanted to make herself old and to retrench. This idea runs parallel
with waiting for death, to die, and not do anything anymore. This woman never
could get over praising this man to the skies, as if to attach herself to him in
order not to have to think of anything else. Once she told me that a man had
flirted with her in a train and then began to speak to her. She told me that with a
joyful expression, of course, only to revert immediately to grieving and to
praising her deceased husband. In this case, a strong "yes" came to the fore, but
always followed by a "but." This "yes--but!" probably is the best and shortest
definition of neurosis.
A third case: A pampered woman, who was described by herself and others
as cheerful, would not allow anything to stop her from asserting herself without
losing decorum. She had a grown daughter who associated only with old women,
led a quiet, domestic life, and often admonished her mother for being
inconsiderate. In company, the mother tried to play the starring role with her
guests, but became terribly excited before a party and was unable to sleep the
night before. She was very ambitious and tended to be sociable, but obviously
only at such times when she was not upset, particularly after the death of her
husband, when she frequently felt tired, complained of pains and physical
problems, and became irritated. For the past four months, this woman, always in
good humor even during treatment, became indisposed. She locked herself into
her room, fussed with her hot water bottle, and thought of herself as disabled and
sick. She had a noticeable tendency to appear old, talked about age, sometimes
with humor, but aiming to present herself as an old woman. When she was
younger, she participated in several sports; now at most she played cards. She
had the following dream: She is with a party of people dressed for an outing,
which she had not taken since the death of her husband. (After a short period of
treatment, this woman felt well, and already had undertaken several activities
which she had not engaged in for years. Many symptoms disappeared and she
even had made a youthful looking dress for herself.) In her dream, she is waiting
for her daughter who does not come. She then starts to look for her, encounters
several difficulties on the way, and finally finds her somewhere. The daughter
tells her that she does not feel like coming along, preferring to take a walk in the

Prater3. The interpretation of that dream results from having recognized her goal.
The constantly admonishing daughter offers resistance and prefers to take the
"old fashioned" course. The dream leaves a mood of: My daughter and probably
everyone else point me away from youth. The daughter always complains that
her mother does not take sufficient care of herself.
You have probably often heard of patients who sometimes wake up in the
morning and don't know where their arm or foot is. In the literature this is mostly
associated with a poor sleeping posture that causes paresthesia (the hand falling
asleep). This patient tells me that her father also experienced this phenomenon.
Some authorities associate this with tetany. I can report on similar occurrences.
For example, people wake up with pains in their arms or legs. These are people
whose posture while sleeping is as if they were on guard. This patient, who like
her father was quick-tempered, slept with both hands balled into fists.
I can report another example that shows how conclusions can be drawn by
comparing two cases. After the death of her husband, a woman fell into a state of
deep depression. She was a vigorous forty-year-old woman, wealthy, with four
children, who had had a very happy marriage until she noted one day that her
husband caressed the maid. Since then, she was very hard on him and never
forgave him. After her husband's death, however, she bitterly remonstrated
against herself, as if she had some responsibility for his death. Only, the more
she remonstrated against her behavior toward her husband, the more clearly she
pointed to the act of unfaithfulness. She did that not as a way of accusing her
husband, but as a way of accusing herself. Here again we see in the case of a
pampered woman--and all the above cases concern pampered children--who was
so proud of her marriage, that after the death of her husband she became fearful
of not being able to live alone, in particular since she also could not regard her
marriage as having been successful. In addition, one must consider the presence
of children. For that reason, her illness becomes an inducement for her children
to become more involved with their mother and to show a greater interest in her.
There is no way that one can avoid the thought that this type of neurotic "widow
immolation" is an attempt to prove oneself as old, incompetent, and unfit for life,
and to flee responsibility. In that context, I always have to think of the
expression "retrenching." When we ask for the reason that this retrenching is
beneficial, we can find two advantages. The first is what has just been
mentioned, the elimination of a romantic life, or of any new exploring of life.
The second is the increased pressure on the children to become more involved
with the mother. In all cases, this tragic transformation occurs in people who
were extremely pampered and who, until the death of the husband, had never
shown any significant neurotic symptoms, although there were gland secretions,

etc. without any psychological disturbances. In such cases we always find
women in this condition who want to play a starring role, but no longer feel
strong enough to carry it off. Therefore, they detour toward the useless, the
neurotic, side of life with a "yes--but" response.
3 Translator's note: An amusement park on the outskirts of Vienna.
One of the many questions that arise here is whether similar phenomena
also occur in widowers. I can give an affirmative answer to that question. In such
cases I have observed, however, that it usually involves men who had been
under the pressure of a strong woman and who tried to guard against a second
marriage. Here also, the neurosis runs a course of melancholia with depression,
loss of weight, loss of sleep, and self-reproach.
Chapter XII
Reason, Intelligence, and FeebleMindedness1
[1928]
To be sure, we can disagree on terminology and we can introduce other
names, but what I should like to emphasize is a fundamental difference that I
have increasingly noted between two abilities, reason and [mere] intelligence.
The issue has, of course, been approached from various sides before, but our
viewpoint may perhaps offer a deeper insight.
Social Interest, Identification, Empathy
We must understand by reason a generally valid category which is
altogether related to social interest. It seems necessary that we clarify this
conception of reason more and more, and formulate it more precisely. Our
conception of social interest or feeling differs from that of other authors. When
we say it is a feeling, we are certainly justified in doing so. But it is more than
this; it is a form of life (Lebensform). It is a quite different form of life from
what we find in persons whom we call antisocial. This is not to be understood as
a superficial life form, as if it were merely the expression of a mechanically
acquired form of life. It is much more. I am not in the position to define it quite
unequivocally, but I have found in an English author a phrase which expresses
clearly what could contribute to our explanation: "To see with the eyes of
another, to hear with the ears of another, to feel with the heart of another." For
the time being this seems to me an admissible definition of what we call social
feeling. We see at first glance that this gift coincides in part with another which
we call identification or empathy (Lipps). This identification always occurs
according to the degree of social interest.
The term "identification" has different meanings. With Individual
Psychology it has one meaning, with Freud another. When a child aims to

become like his father, wants to see with the eyes of the father, etc.,
"understands" fully and has a useful goal before his eyes, we call this
identification. Freud mistakely comprehends this concept as usurping the role of
another in order to arrive at a "personal" advantage.
Identification is absolutely necessary in order to arrive at a social life.
Sympathy is merely a partial expression of identification which, in turn, is one
aspect of social interest. We can understand only if we identify, and so reason
appears as a social ability. We identify with a picture by regarding it. We
identify also with all other inanimate objects, e.g., in playing pool or bowling,
the player follows the ball with his eyes and makes the movement which he
hopes the ball will make. In the theatre, every spectator empathizes and
participates. This is identification in our sense--not to usurp the role of the
father. Empathy plays an enormous role in dreams, also in the group mind.
Herder, Novalis, and Jean Paul were acquainted with the process of empathy,
described it, and considered it important. Later Wundt, Volkelt, and especially
Lipps stressed empathy as a fundamental fact of our experience. Lipps, Dilthey,
Müller-Freienfels, and others described the relationship of empathy and
understanding. Individual Psychology may claim as its contribution to have
pointed out that empathy and understanding are facts of social feeling, of being
in harmony with the universe.
1 Originally published as “Kurze Bemerkungen über Vernunft, Intelligenz
und Schwachsinn,” in the Int. Z. Indiv. Psychol., Volume 5, pages 267-272,
1928. Editied for readability by Laurie J. Stein, 2004.
Reason, Common Sense
The ability to identify must be trained. This can be done only if a person
grows up in connection with others and feels himself a part of the whole. He
must sense that not only the comforts of life belong to him, but also its
discomforts. He must feel at home on this earth with all its advantages and
disadvantages. This feeling at home is directly a part of social interest. His life
on this poor earth crust takes its course "as if he were at home." Thus there arises
for him a quite specific form of life in which he does not regard adversities as an
injustice inflicted upon him. Fellowship is added to social interest. We shall also
find in this life form all other forces which serve to overcome the adversities of
life. Thus, he is a part of the whole who proves himself in cooperation with the
community and by being useful to it. All this taken together is a way of acting
and behaving which we designate as “reasonable.” Reasonable is what one
understands by “common sense.” Incidentally, common sense is not
unchangeable, but the meaning of all forms of expression, the content of all
behavior which we find advances the community. With this view we also come

closer to the understanding of what we call reason. Thus we arrive at Kant's
conclusion: Reason has general validity. This would mean at the same time that
we comprehend under reason all actions, behaviors, and forms of expression
which depend on a goal of superiority that includes the common welfare. This
goal would have to be present.
Intelligence is the broader concept. Reason is that intelligence which
contains social interest, which accordingly is limited to the side of the generally
useful. In psychotherapy we are occupied mainly with individuals who have a
goal of personal superiority and in this way transgress the borders which in the
course of the cultural development of mankind have come to signify common
sense.
In common sense we shall continuously find new meanings. I do not know
if Socrates was the first who regarded a coat full of holes no longer as a sign of
humility, but of vanity. However, assuming he was the first, he did thereby
enrich our common sense. He showed that a thing can be its own opposite and
that we can comprehend the meaning of an expressive movement only from its
context. I wanted to show by this example that common sense can change. It is
not something fixed; it is the sum of all recognized psychological movements
which are in accord with reason, are generally recognized, and are connected
with the continuance of the culture.
Private Intelligence
We now want to consider intelligence as we find it in neurotics. The
neurotic acts completely correctly. He acts so correctly that, as in compulsion
neurosis, he notices and states the difference between his personal intelligence
and common sense. Whatever he does is “intelligent.” But this fact of “personal
intelligence” must be further elaborated. A criminal says: “I killed him because
he was a Jew.” This man has the notion that as a Christian he possesses a certain
superiority and therefore may dispose freely of those of another creed, e.g., a
despised Jew. His goal is to take possession of the property of this Jew. He acts
according to this goal. “Intelligence” will smooth his way, bringing him closer to
his goal, as we see clearly in problem children. Since his goal, which is to rob, is
fixed, he uses arguments which help him reach this goal. This facilitation
actually sets in.
Another robber-murderer expresses himself similarly. “This young man had
beautiful suits and I had none. That is why I killed him.” This is quite intelligent
thinking and acting. Since he is not confident that he is able to acquire suits in
the usual manner, on the generally useful side of life, he can in fact attain
beautiful suits only by robbing. To do this, he must kill the other person.
Thus, we find in all criminals the attempt through some “intelligent”

arguments to come closer to their goal. With cases of suicide, we can make
similar observations. After long training, these individuals dismiss any interest in
life; they are driven by the idea of arousing attention with their suicide and, like
the murderer, of feeling the elation of superiority. (“I have done something not
everybody could do. Formerly nobody paid any attention to me, but now . . .” )
Being master over life and death brings them near to God, as it does the
murderer who controls the life of others. They will always find arguments which
are completely “intelligent”; since they want to kill themselves, they argue,
nothing is of interest to them. They will always find arguments by which they
reach their goal, deceive themselves, poison themselves. These arguments are
"intelligent" in respect to the goal of personal superiority on the useless side of
life. This private intelligence is sharply differentiated from what we must call
reason, common sense. We find “intelligence” in both cases, but we call reason
only the kind of intelligence which is connected with social interest.
If we regard the alcoholic we find, except in the case of feeblemindedness,
that he also argues intelligently: Life brings worries, but there are means by
which we can overcome difficulties. Thus, his action is intelligent in regard to
the goal, which is to overcome difficulties in an easy, personal manner, not to
solve them in the sense of the community. Anyone who agreed with this goal
would act like the alcoholic. The same holds true in perversions. For reasons we
know from Individual Psychology, when a male homosexual excludes half of
humanity he will attempt to pursue the goal which he has set for himself with
logic and intelligence. He will judge intelligently; he will cite the considerations
by which he justifies himself. In the question of love he has a goal on the useless
side; but in striving for this goal he will judge and act absolutely correctly. The
basic idea is that we must make a sharp distinction between reason, which has
general validity and therefore corresponds to the common welfare, and the
isolated intelligence of the neurotic (“all or nothing,” wanting to have the
successful result at the beginning, etc.), in short, the intelligence of the failures
with whom we are always occupied.
FeebleMindedness
In this manner, we should arrive at a significant differentiation between the
feebleminded and normally thinking persons. In the feebleminded, the above
"intelligent" arguments directed toward a goal of superiority appear to be
lacking, so that the thinking shows a certain disregard for logic.
Feeblemindedness is not [only] a lower form of intelligence, but a different form
of thinking. Pure feeblemindedness is cold toward the demands of reason and
abides by them at best through force [But in addition,] the shaping of a life style
is lacking, which is never so in the reasonable and intelligent person. The

feebleminded person has no life style; his forms of life are wholly removed from
the understanding of any connection. Also, we miss the respect for common
sense, which [even] in the cases of private intelligence still plays a part, namely,
in the form of excuses, justifications, comparisons, etc. The feebleminded
individual does not arrive at the formation of a life plan. In his case, when we
place him in a new situation we cannot guess what he will do, aside from
mechanical movements, because he lacks planned procedure. The really
feebleminded person cannot identify. He is characterized by coldness and lack of
respect for reason. He is not subject to the laws of common sense nor does he
have the intelligence which expresses itself in a goal of personal superiority. In
pseudo feeblemindedness, on the other hand, an ideal goal can be found with
which another can identify. The styled, self-consistent aspect of a life style is
found, although on the useless side, in paranoia. A decidedly intelligent although
not reasonable chain of thought is found in melancholia; the patient experiences
in a fiction the elevation of his self-esteem. I have been able to observe that
catatonics play the role of a doll, a dead person, a hero, etc. But we cannot
empathize with the sequence of thought of a feebleminded person; at best we can
guess at it from without. 
Concluding Statements
We call virtuous, wise, reasonable, and valuable only that which takes place
on the side of general usefulness. Our judgment is also guided in this manner
and every person in his full senses distinguishes approximately according to the
same classification principle. Even one who moves on the useless side of life,
such as a problem child, neurotic, criminal, suicide, alcoholic, pervert, etc., will
be aware of the difference, will be able to distinguish between good and bad, and
will attempt to defend his own work against [reproaches from] reason and from
virtue. But he will continue on his useless path as long as he has not separated
himself from his ideal goal of personal superiority, which is useless for the
community. He will separate himself from it only when he has comprehended
the principle of reason with his private intelligence; i.e., when he has recognized
the erroneous prototype from his childhood, his increased inferiority feeling, his
striving for personal superiority, and the significance of social interest for the
development of courage, reason, and feeling of worth. Thus we shall find in all
problem persons, in so far as we can exclude feeblemindedness, that all partial
movements are “intelligent,” but that their goal of personal power striving has
miscarried. They will strike us as abnormal because they contradict reason,
“which joins us all,” and common sense. But they will always be congruently
integrated in a system on the useless side of life. Therefore they will also be
lacking the degree of a developed social interest and the courage which are

required for the useful solution of the problems of life.
Here are some examples:
1. A child who feels displaced from his pampered situation by a younger
sibling will usually pursue a goal to regain the center of attention and will, in a
belligerent attitude, disturb the order of the house. According to his goal he acts
intelligently, but according to the demand of the community, unreasonably.
2. An anxiety neurotic who from childhood on has used his anxiety as a
means to draw another into his service, to “prescribe to him the laws of his
action,” acts intelligently, but not in accordance with common sense.
3. A murderer who slays someone for the sake of his possessions, i.e., who
lacks the courage to attain money in a useful manner, acts intelligently in
accordance with his goal of enriching himself in an easy way, but cowardly and
unreasonably because the better way can never be excluded.
4. A suicide who considers himself too weak to overcome his personal
difficulties and therefore (in revenge) rejects everything with one fell swoop in
order to escape the feeling of his inferiority, acts intelligently according to his
goal of coping with the difficulties of life through a trick, but cowardly,
unreasonably, and harmfully to the community.
5. A pervert who excludes the form which furthers the community and pays
homage enthusiastically to his narrowed world, has by this trick escaped the
complications of normal love life by safeguarding himself from it in intelligent
fashion, but in doing so does not show common sense, courage, or social
interest.
6. Alcoholics, morphine addicts, etc. have brought their detouring before
the difficulties of life into an intelligent system, but only by eliminating courage
and reason which they render ineffective through stupor.
7. In all forms of pure psychosis (schizophrenia, melancholia,
manicdepressive insanity, paranoia) we find on closer examination an intelligent
system, but the exclusion of reason.
Individual Psychology is also in a position to understand feeblemindedness
in the sense that its structure discloses neither intelligence nor reason to any
notable extent.
Chapter XIII
Neurotic Role Play1 2
[1928]
The following case should demonstrate the extensive reach of Individual
Psychology and its immediate impact. After one of my lectures in Germany on
issues of upbringing, I received a letter from a stranger who turned to me “in his
need and asked for advice.” The letter closed with a plea to give him my opinion

the next day.
In his letter he described his suffering, as noted below, and provided
information on a number of points, in particular childhood memories which I
had mentioned in my lecture as particularly valuable when seen in light of
Individual Psychology.
The information was as follows:
“I suffer from terrible fear that constricts my throat whenever I dare to undertake
a new task.”
Between the lines I read: poorly prepared for the problems in life, strong sense
of inferiority, too dependent on the opinions of others.
“Psychologically, I suffer from depression accompanied by physical
weakness. With my mind dulled, I have only one wish and that is to go to bed
and to crawl under the covers.”
He can be easily cowed, and suffers from enormous tension that confuses
him (as if he had to tackle an important project), thereby acting like a fearful
child who wants to hide from the world.
“I tend to lie to others, but then, at the last moment keep myself from doing so.”
I find again: He tries by subterfuge to influence the opinion of others to his
own advantage, but fears that when found out he will lose their good will. “My
fear of poverty and scorn is immense. I am always trying to avoid both.”
1 Originally published as “Neurotisches Rollenspiel” in the Internationale
Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. VI, p. 427-432, 1928. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
This overblowing of a normally justified striving points to having
experienced both poverty and scorn early in his life. It has become a main
guideline for his life, which by underscoring disturbs the harmony of his being.
Again, too great a dependence on the opinion of others.
“I have a great yearning to commit suicide if I could only be certain that I would
not be found.”
The neurotic “yes-but” is heard as a comforting note. However, with an
overriding thought--self-deception--it fills the soul of the patient like an
intoxicant with constant grief and resentment. Can the unity of his personality
already be seen? His style of life? From among the deepest lines of movement
we can see the one that is formed out of an exaggerated sense of inferiority. This
line is intertwined with all of his conscious--and until now--unconscious actions,
impulses, and thoughts. Does his unconscious contain a suicidal impulse that his
conscious self opposes? Is that the point--the unconscious versus the conscious-
on which the psychoanalysis that opposes Individual Psychology is right?

However, the man lives! His conscious self is always victorious! It is stronger
than his unconscious self.
What if we examine not the individual parts--”unfortunately only the
intellectual link is missing”--but consider the context, not the apparent
ambivalence, but the unity of the personality! There is no question--to a certain
degree, the patient is discouraged. With his depression and in his timidity, his
death wish is a burden. However, he has carried it for almost 50 years. He is a
successful farmer, well built, and well nourished. He is stronger than himself. He
has conquered “himself.” He is a victor. “What I could have accomplished were
it not for this burden!” This mood reflects more than he actually is, the claim, the
entitlement for highest achievement.
“How often have I thought of suicide, but what kept me from doing it was
the fear of suffering, the contempt of others, the possibility that I would have to
continue living with self-inflicted suffering.”
We can see by the large number of significant counterarguments that his life is
quite safe. Therefore, he can point with pride to:
“I don't have the slightest fear of death which, barring better opportunities,
seems the simplest solution to my problems in life.”
The suicidal impulse as the simplest solution! Effortless! Since its outset,
Individual Psychology has used the same phrases. Not a death impulse, but an
expression of discouragement. If you don't know any better, you might regard an
expression of discouragement as superficial and the death impulse as the deeper
meaning.
“To the extent that I know myself, I have always faced life's decisions and
never tried to escape them even though I bitterly felt my psychological and
physical weakness in the face of my tasks. I always progressed even though it
was always difficult for me.”
The victor! In a struggle with problems that he himself created; problems
that he discovered in fear, with plaintive resentment, always fearing poverty and
denigration, plagued by death wishes. Thus in every life situation, he presents a
picture of lament, but cleverly knows how to tie himself to success. He stares as
if hypnotized at his sufferings as he does at his victories. A trick, a gimmick that
allows him to feel larger than he is.3
There certainly is an unconscious knowledge, a knowledge that is expressed
physically and becomes an automatic reaction. When a rich person enters a store,
he probably does not think how wealthy he is, but he acts rich. In the same vein,
there are (pardon the expression) “unfeeling” feelings over which we have no
control, but which are interlaced with forms of expression. When in a crowd, I
avoid stepping on someone's foot, it is an expression of social interest. However,

I am not aware of a social interest in doing so. I know and am aware only that I
feel a part of the unity; that part which is necessary for action. The same applies
to our patient. In order to experience his worth, he shows himself and us his
suffering. He can't get enough of that. He always is on the way--and looks for it-
-toward attaining a goal of superiority. This is also the case when he writes:
“I was always a friend of peace. Even as a very small child I was always the one
recognized as the peacemaker in the family.”
He is the victorious third person who this time crowns himself the angel of
peace.
A strong feeling of inferiority that seeks to compensate itself through fear
and depression: the actual success that lies behind the price that he pays in the
form of a neurosis is the feeling of having been victorious in having overcome.
He obviously had suffered extreme poverty and denial and endeavors to avoid a
repetition of that squalor phase in his life. His primary action: unmotivated, but
the goal-directed use of grief and dejection that he demonstrates to himself and
to others. Is a comparison with a beggar justified?
3 This certainly is a subterfuge. I also know that not everyone will
recognize it. However, that someone should assume after I have uncovered
neurotic subterfuges that I would be a friend of artifices, is more than I would
have thought possible for any of my readers to believe had it not been for
assurances given to me that there is such a person.
“My family consisted of father, mother, one stepbrother from my mother's first
marriage, a four year older sister, and me.”
Individual Psychology has described the ambition of the youngest widely. I
have occasionally been chided for citing the Bible story of Joseph to explain that
type of person. “Inasmuch as Benjamin was the youngest.” However, he was by
17 years the youngest and, therefore, played no role in the development of the
one who was the youngest up to that time.
“My earliest memory is that I was left alone one evening and was very
afraid when a street singer went begging up and down our street.”
The true meaning of earliest childhood memories probably was clarified at
first by Individual Psychology: To be a piece of the prototype of the individual
and to fit fully the present style of life. In this case: too weak to be alone, and the
deep impression made by a beggar.
“A second recollection: When my sister and I played with my doll and she broke
it, I cried uncontrollably.”
Here is the exaggerated significance of the loss (poverty), an emotion that
results in grief and crying. The aggression against the other person dissolves into
complaints. This type is frequently found among patients who later suffer from

depression.
“Another memory: When my mother once wanted to leave the house to go
to work, I cried so bitterly that she gave up her job so that she could stay at home
with me.”
In this and obviously a hundred other cases he recognized the power a person
has in a state of depression.
“When I was a child, I loved to collect empty boxes, cards, small pictures, and
pennies; I had a large collection.”
This demonstrates more clearly the attitude of a beggar. “In my childhood, I had
fallen seriously three times.”
This expresses his impression of the dangers in life, less through the facts
themselves, which this patient shares with most children, than in having held on
to these memories.
“Whenever I heard a hymn or sad music, I screamed and cried something
awful. They could not take me to church since there I also cried so hard. When
asked why I cry so, I always answered that I had to think of my grandfather, who
had been dead, however, for thirty years before I was born.”
Exploitation of a fitting situation in order to make an impression by crying.
At the same time, drawing on remote “causes” that are given more weight by the
fact of death. However, that he thinks of death and nothing else shows his goal:
To move into the forefront by arousing grief when as in church (analogous to
agoraphobia), he is paid no attention.
“When I was taken to a kindergarten, I ran away crying and returned home.
I was so distraught that a doctor was called who forbade further kindergarten
attendance.”
This is a usual incident that occurs with pampered children who often want
to eliminate every new situation. One can also see here clearly, if one wants to
do so, the psychological structure of truancy, running away, vagrancy, the
psychogenic fugue, etc. The movement is “away from any situation that I don't
like.” This also applies to transference.
The boy shows again that he is aware of the power of demonstrated weakness
without “comprehending” it. That also is the beggar's action line.
“As a child, my speech was nearly unintelligible. Only my mother was able
to understand me. This made for a lot of fun in my family and among their
guests and I was often asked to recite short poems. When everyone laughed
himself silly, I took my hat in hand and collected small contributions.”
Here again, the exploitation of weakness for the purpose of selfenhancement,
and the clearly expressed demeanor of a beggar.
“When I look back into my childhood, I keep remembering scenes where I

cried, and where for the amusement of my family I would catch my tears at the
side of my mouth.”
Prompted by my lecture that dealt also with the importance of childhood
memories for understanding man, he looked back into his life and discovered a
part of the connection: how he strove to regain an occasionally won advantage,
then mechanized that striving to an automatic reaction, thereby eliminating the
ability to comprehend it. Comprehending always means: comprehending the
context, the uniform direction of the so-called conscious and unconscious. The
patient is now beginning to comprehend.
*
My discussion with the man was brief. I rejected treatment, which I would
have been able to carry out only in Vienna. I learned that the patient grew up in
abject poverty, and that he was extremely pampered by his mother. Neighbors
who were better off took pity on him whenever they saw his pallid face and
beseeching eyes.
I received a second letter in which he showed me that he had comprehended
sufficiently.
“I actually was the dominating person in my family and, like Joseph in the
Bible, grew far beyond them. I also provided them with a sufficient livelihood. I
can understand clearly that my grieving and my crying during my childhood and
also later in life had brought me relief and advantages and that it gave me a hold
over my family, my wife, and others with whom I came in contact. I have
actually been the domineering person in my circle, perhaps also because I stayed
only with those people on whom I had this effect. I obviously stayed with that
method which came easier to me than direct action. My intentions to commit
suicide now also appear to me a means to put me into a grieving mood and to
force my will on others. I always looked for people to lean on and sought to have
them work on my behalf.
I concede that other children also had suffered downfalls, but were not
making a big fuss about it for the rest of their lives. Obviously, I had drawn the
conclusion that the world owes me a lot for having suffered so much.
I also understand that during my whole life, I actually played the role of a
beggar who aimed at the weaknesses of others through his suffering. I now
understand Lessing (Gotthold Ephraim) better when he lets his Dervish say:
“The genuine beggar is the one and only true king.”
For that reason I was never distraught when others laughed at me for my
poor speech, when they gave me money, and when only my mother was able to
understand me.4 My role actually was that of a little king, but I never approached
my tasks happily or courageously because I did not trust myself to have enough

strength. My problem was how to make a king out of a beggar.
I now believe that I could have led my life more courageously, and I shall
try to do so. I am convinced, as you are, that my real successes are not due to my
technique as a beggar, but to my trained abilities. I will, therefore, lead my life
more courageously than heretofore. I acted like the businessman who thinks that
his success lies in his old fashioned methods and not in his own competency. He,
therefore, never thinks of making a change.
Since I don't know how to thank you enough, I would like to try a little
surprise. I am enclosing a newspaper article that I had written during the war
years. The title is “A Beggars' Organization.”
The man visited me one year later. He had lost all of his neurotic symptoms
without assuming new ones.
4 Children's speech always corresponds to that of the person closest to
them: Precocious with few words, etc. I noted mutism, aside from mentally
retarded children, in those who were particularly pampered and where speaking
became unnecessary. Perhaps the following observation of Frau Dr. Blanche
Weill provides additional insight. The fiveyear old son of a deaf-mute couple
could hear and speak. When he hurt himself he cried, tears ran down his cheeks,
but he made no sound. It would have been useless with his parents.
Chapter XIV
Psychology and Medicine1 2
[1928]
Honored guests! On my way here, as I reviewed in my mind the material
that I will present to you today, I was literally startled at the magnitude of what
can be said on the subject “Psychology and Medicine.” My shock was reduced
only when I heard the announcement of the next presentations and of the course
“Introduction to the Methods of Psychotherapy,” since that will spare me from
what I would otherwise have to say. Therefore, I am left with nothing more than
to highlight a number of problems and to somehow relate to you the extent to
which the vision of an Individual Psychologist, a practitioner, a theoretician, a
psychologist, and a physician is honed for these matters. I would also do well to
tell you how I envision the physician as a psychologist in the present or the
future. I shall provide no artistic description since that would be more the work
of a poet, but will emphasize only certain points that I have been able to verify
during my life and in my practice. There can be no doubt that as a result of
enormous current efforts in psychology a broad field has opened for the
physician. If the standing of the physician today has attained a higher social and
economic ranking, it is in the final analysis thanks to his better psychological

insight into the life of the individual and the public at large. In fact, I do not
believe that in the future a medical practice could be built without a knowledge
of human nature. It would not be possible for a physician to receive recognition
if training in psychology does not augment his professional education. When we
ask ourselves what have been the ways to introduce the student of medicine to
this important field-important not only for him so that he can maintain and build
up a practice, but to a far greater extent for the patient--I must respond: As far I
can see, until today, the education in this area until today has been very minimal.
True, there is no dearth of advice, recollections, warnings of all kinds.
Furthermore, good teachers do not skimp on good teaching. However, as far as I
can see, not too much importance is allotted to teaching how the young
physician should act with his patient, the human being. One has to be clear that
understanding the psychology in certain cases can be of immense importance. I
said earlier that psychology had opened a broad field for the physician; I should
also say that the confidence of the public in the physician is built on his
understanding of psychology, and it will be to his disadvantage to neglect this
area. At the same time, I do not deny that regarding our current cultural standing
and the deficit in human knowledge, there are some physicians who will
occasionally find support even when using psychology incorrectly. It also
appears to me that every expression of pessimism, negativism and so forth will
harm both physician and patient. Of course, we must ask ourselves what caused
this pessimism. I would not be satisfied with the comment that in general the
Vienna school exudes the odor of nihilism and pessimism; instead I believe more
strongly that there are physicians who in general are pessimists. Based on my
own experience, I can conclude that active optimism, which plays a role in my
life, has also been to my advantage. You need only think of the fearful looks
with which sick patients hang on your every word and you will then understand
that encouragement has great significance. I may say in all modesty that
psychotherapy in this regard has made extraordinary contributions. It is true that
a layman can often achieve improvements that border on the miraculous in the
suffering of a patient. We cannot simply explain this away as hysteria. First, we
must ask why the physician is not also able to bring about such feats. As far as
we were able to examine this phenomenon, the explanation was that these
laymen at a minimum brought with them an indestructible optimism that was
transferred to the patient. Perhaps I should emphasize that a feeling of
camaraderie in the relationship between the physician and his patient seems to be
extremely important, not only because it is in agreement with the basic tenets of
Individual Psychology, but also from the standpoint of common sense, that of
the patient, who does not wish to feel like an object. We cannot appear as

magicians, sorcerers or such but only as fellow human beings, friends, so that
even when we censure, if we must when having to prescribe treatment, we must
not allow the patient to feel subjugated. This applies in particular to neurotic
patients with whom we always find this unbridled, frenzied craving for prestige
and superiority, and where it is inappropriate to intimidate the patient, to
overwhelm him, or to appear as almighty, even if those who are sick appear
suggestible. Some people are probably very suggestible, which should not be
taken as having a calming effect on the inner life of the patient; to the contrary, it
is here that the patient is thrown into a ferment while trying to regain superiority.
We can save ourselves from this trap when we tell the patient to work on his
symptoms, which is a way of indicating the direction that in accordance with
your conviction you wish the patient to follow. I keep my emotions at bay even
in difficult situations because I have always maintained that I must put my
feelings behind me; particularly with neurotic patients we have to remember that
it is not a matter of advancing our reputation, but of meeting the patient with a
friendly demeanor. The second principle is to be pleasantly uncompromising.
That means that it does not help you to make compromises. This strategy
depends on calmly developing your position. This applies in particular to
psychotherapy where all essential aspects of the medical practice are focused
most sharply, and where it actually comes to testing if the physician conducts
himself correctly. Thus, we come again to the position once held by Virchow3
that one day physicians will have to be the leaders of nations. We Individual
Psychologists know that even if this ideal were never to be realized, we have
gained a guiding goal. “I can heal you,” I tell my patients, “only with the truth
that I have struggled to attain myself.” It is best to speak with a neurotic patient
as with a friend whom you wish not to burden any further, from whom you are
not asking promises, but whose burden you want to ease. This applies in
particular to those suffering from depression. I say to such a patient something
like: “Do only whatever pleases you.” With some certainty, the answer follows:
“That's just it, nothing pleases me!” “Then,” I continue, “do that which is not
unpleasant for you.” As you can see, we apply an indirect method, that of a
discussion. We slowly lift the veil that covers the connections, but the patient
himself has to lead the process. He must not shift the entire burden onto the
physician.
1 Lecture held on October 20, 1927 under the auspices of the Akademische
Verein für medizinische Psychology. Originally published as “Psychologie und
Medizin” in Wien. med. Wschr., Vol 78., pages 679-700, 1928. Reprinted in
Alfred Adler: Psychotherapie und Erziehung, Ausgewählte Aufsätze, Band I:

1919-1929, p. 204-214. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003.
I now come to the second part of my exposition that reaches more into the
scientific area, it is the question: To what degree does physical suffering
influence psychological development? On that point, as you know, Individual
Psychology has particularly strong support. How the child deals with his inferior
organs is one of the principal questions asked by Individual Psychology. Also,
how the influence of the body directs psychological development. In this
connection we encounter a factor that has put its stamp on our entire science: it
is the circumstance that from one insufficient organ we can draw no binding
conclusions. We can guess, we can understand, but we will never be able to say
that a specific psychological result must necessarily ensue. When a child, for
example, suffers from an inferior gastro-intestinal tract, a defective sensory
organ, or a damaged endocrine system, we shall never be able to determine with
certainty, even if we understand the symptoms, the consequences that will
develop. I believe that this is understood only when we know that in this
correlation it is not a matter of the laws of nature, as far as the influence on the
development of the psyche is concerned, but a matter of a creative, constructive
accomplishment of the inner life. That means that it is not a reaction, a reflex, or
the sum of reflexes, but an artistic achievement. In that sense we can say that
every expression of the inner life, every style of life that we encounter, is a
unique artistic achievement that carries its own individual stamp. These
accomplishments are not in accordance with the law of cause and effect; they do
not follow the principles of causality, but are the result of a striving, an attitude
toward the questions that concern every individual. When we think how a child
experiences his body, how he feels it, then we can already see that we are in that
vast region of flaws and shortcomings that take place within the inner life: the
consequences cannot be ascertained because there is no effect present. This
process takes place as part of a striving for a goal that is generally a goal for
superiority, for perfection. It should be pointed out that the effect of certain
poisons or the specific changes in the secretion of glands are in the domain of
sickness and not in that of the neurotic. It would be the same mistake the other
way around, if we were to treat progressive paralysis as a neurosis. If we could
eliminate the agent causing this illness with antidotes then it is, naturally, not to
be compared with what we see in neurosis, where a mistaken perception of one's
own ego leads to indecision, to a standstill. As similar as these manifestations
might seem, there is yet an immense psychological difference. There is now only
one significant question left unanswered: Why do we so frequently find a
deficiency in the structure of organs, so constantly recurring in the hereditary

structure of some people? Until we demonstrated this structural deficiency, the
predominant belief, either spoken or unspoken, was that organic changes,
particularly in the endocrine system, must lead to this development. That
perception overlooked a viewpoint that seems to me of greatest importance.
When children with inherited inferior organs are placed into an almost normal
situation not appropriate for them, and the attempt is made to teach them by
normal educational means unsuitable to them, we cannot then say that only the
inferior organs, the deficient glands, are responsible for ensuing failures.
Therapy has shown us that for such children, or adults, special methods designed
for them must be applied. It is not right that initial extraordinary differences
receive a uniform method of treatment. We have no justification to ignore that
for many of these children the application of a suitable educational method will
avoid certain mistakes. As you can see, we are facing numerous unsolved
dilemmas that probably will engage us in the near future.
3 For a discussion of Virchow by Heinz L. Ansbacher, see “Adler und
Virchow. Der Name ‘Individualpsychologie’ im neuen Licht.” (Adler and
Virchow. The term Individual Psychology in a new light). In Zeitschrift f.
Individ. psych. 2, Pp. 87-93, 1977.
Since our area of psychotherapeutic medical skills has been introduced into
the field of education and we are treating problem children, criminals, etc. with
our methods, it becomes self-evident that we are justified in relating one type of
failed life to another. What has made our task enormously easier is, first of all,
that we can count on the unity of the style of life and not make the mistake of
believing that it is possible for contradicting psychological impulses to exist
within one individual. Secondly, we are able to draw conclusions from one
mistake and apply them to others. For example, based on our experience in
education, when we look at a case, such as the following, we can draw
conclusions applicable to neuroses and psychoses. The case in question concerns
a twelve-year old boy, the second child, who caused all kinds of trouble for his
father, a teacher. He was considered a problem child who was on the verge of
being institutionalized. For various reasons, this would be particularly difficult
for a teacher. It is not uncommon that children of educators turn out to be
failures. This child became ill with tuberculosis in the hip joint. He had to be
kept in bed for years with a cast, and had to be cared for in every way. When he
recovered and was able to move again, he was the most well-behaved child in
the family. I am convinced that had this turned out differently, which happens
when a well-behaved child becomes a problem after recovering from, for
example, encephalitis, scarlet fever, or whooping cough, it would be difficult for
a physician to dismiss the idea that the illness created the problem child.

However, here you have the opposite. I don't believe that anyone can claim
virtue resulting from a toxin or illness.
I would now like to touch on another area that comes much closer to my
work, which is to what extent psychological events can influence the body.
These are old questions to which one hardly dares add anything new. Yet, if it
were possible to advance a few steps while being aware that all psychic impulses
occur in one's body, we might increase our insight into the connection between
body and soul. For instance, we are aware that certain emotions influence the
body very acutely and in a chronic form. Individual Psychology always has
pointed out that certain types of headaches and migraines, as well as trigeminal
neuralgia and cases that are attributed today to epilepsy, are influenced by rage.
Obviously, this is apparent only to a physician schooled in psychology who is
interested in illuminating these connections. If someone contests this, then his
interest is so narrow that he will not recognize the related concomitant
conditions. I encounter no single case of migraine in which I could imagine a
situation where a fit of rage would be justified. No degree of headache can
excuse an extreme outburst. This also applies to other illnesses where organic
changes were present from the outset. Keep in mind the simple fact that the
veins on the forehead of some people when in a rage swell differently from those
in other people who assume a totally different expression. This should be enough
to arrive at the same conclusion to which we Individual Psychologists have come
that deeper lying vessels, for example those in the brain, are also affected. I
should emphasize that we Individual Psychologists are in full agreement with
pathologists and that we follow their basic findings. Clearly, we cannot
determine with certainty the source of a particular suffering but, like any other
discipline, must satisfy ourselves with plausible assumptions. It seems like a
very reasonable assumption that in cases of trigeminal neuralgia, there exists
some form of asymmetry in the passages through which the trigeminal nerve
passes, as well as an asymmetry of arteries and veins; all these causes, organ
inferiorities, lead to changes in pressure and to fits of anger as well as possible
constant irritation and pain. There is no contradiction in saying that the patient
who felt quite well suddenly succumbs to a headache in conjunction with these
manifestations. I exclude, of course, again those cases where there are gross
anatomical defects. There is no doubt that there are people whose gastro-
intestinal tracts are affected and who vomit when in rage. We can also not
dismiss out of hand that emotions somehow influence the endocrine glands
leading to ill effects. I have learned that a Russian and an American researcher
are about to establish these connections and that they believe they have found
some kinds of toxins. This situation becomes clearer when we consider fear. In

some way, fear plays a special role in neurosis. It is, after all, the most
significant expression of the feeling of inferiority. It is an attempt by a weak-
willed person to gain a goal of superiority. It is an intelligent function and is
used variously in the context of events by different people. In my opinion
nothing is gained by invoking the sympathetic or the para-sympathetic nervous
system. These are merely connecting paths. There is an innate organ deficiency
when the Erectores pili (sic), the sweat glands, the heart, the digestive tract, the
bladder, the sexual organs, etc. are particularly affected in fear. Perhaps the
lastnamed type is much more commonly found than we realize. Perhaps the
connection between fear and sexual organs is so widely spread that some
authorities, who believe that sexual organs are affected by fear, would rather die
than consider this connection merely a variant. It is certain that grief leads to loss
of weight, even if we do not yet know how this comes about, since a reduction in
the intake of food certainly by itself cannot be the only cause. Here again it
seems reasonable to me to consider incursions that influence the body in a
manner that causes loss of weight. I do not wish to expand on this point too far,
but would rather draw your attention to one circumstance which should explain
how in some people, thought not in others physical alterations take place. The
belief that this might concern only certain types of people was touched on
earlier. One other possibility that needs to be mentioned is training. Whoever has
concerned himself with the phenomena of psychological training will never find
it difficult to arrive at certain conclusions. For example, certain facts have been
overlooked, such as the ability of a person to train his moods. We need only to
note the thoughts and dreams of a person suffering from depression. This will
give us a good opportunity to become aware of someone constantly training
himself for grief and disgruntlement. If someone pays attention only to somatic
factors, the wonderfully artful construction of this training will elude him. When
we consider a dream in which something gets lost it, becomes clear that this
dream can evoke a mood and establish it so that the next day's actions are
influenced by it. All our well-known failures (neurosis, suicide, criminality, etc.)
were probably being trained long before they occurred. This kind of training can
be verified and can explain the goal toward which the patient had long been
striving, and how he intends to reach that goal. Perhaps I may explain this
training, in conclusion, by describing an obsessive-compulsive neurosis.
I recall a 45-year-old man who had a good life and who attained some
recognition, but who complained that whenever he climbed to the first, second,
or third floor in a building, he had the urge to jump. This agonizing idea had
pursued him since puberty. By itself, this frequently occurring, obsessive
impulse would not be so striking. However, having accepted one of the technical

principles of Individual Psychology that in order to understand a symptom we
must first ask: What is the end result? The response clearly is that this person is
handicapped in his striving. That is, he carries a burden. He also suffers from
being aware of this impulse. Secondly, if we wish to understand his symptom,
we must discard its content and look solely at his actions. We must now
acknowledge that only the person who feels himself at the top can have an
impulse of falling. It is the same as dreams of falling that can also become
concrete only when the dreamer presumes to be at the top. We have already
come this far with only a superficial observation. However, we do not yet know
what he thinks in this context and how that becomes a burden to him. That he is
not a courageous person can be presumed from the content of this experience.
Clearly, he is fearful of his impulse. We can also assume that he does not have
much confidence in himself and that he was pampered as a child. There also is
evidence of that: He was the youngest. Now he says that all his life he has been
afraid of everything. It becomes clear what that means for the life he led, but we
can see the training. He searched everywhere for opportunities that were
dangerous to him. It is clear that this type of person is careful and strives to
reinforce that characteristic. However, we want to see the core of his style of
life. We want to get to know the prototype of this pampered child. Gaining an
insight into earliest childhood recollections helps us. We were able to establish
that these memories contain a residue of the prototype of his lifestyle. It does not
matter whether or not these are genuine memories. One other recollection of our
patient was as follows: When I was six years old and had to go to school I
became terribly afraid, even more so since there was a boy who wanted to beat
me up. However, at the last moment, I threw myself on him and dragged him to
the ground. It helps us to know that the lifestyle of an individual is already fixed
at the age of four or five years and that it can be changed only under certain
influences. Therefore, we can compare this prototype with what we have in front
of us. It points to a person who overcame his fear and yet always is gazing at it,
but still goes through life feeling that he is able to overcome. This also agrees
with the obsessive neurosis from which he now suffers; he never jumped. He
always overcame. This is the source of his comfort. Just as he did in his
childhood, he can deal with threatening dangers. Since he does not always have
such dangers ready at hand, he makes them up and acts like those children who
get so lost in playing that they see in another child an Indian whom they want to
fight so that they can be under the illusion of heroes carrying a wooden saber
and wearing a paper helmet. We find here the same illusion, even if merely part
of it is revealed to us. He does not open to us the practical part. He cannot reveal
that he is a victor, else the burden falls away and he no longer can play the game

of seeming to be burdened. This case also allows us to draw conclusions with
regard to the so-called conscious and unconscious. Individual Psychology
maintains that there is no difference between them in terms of goal-direction.
Only the neurotic gives such an emphasis to the contrast between the conscious
and unconscious. Our patient's life in some sense presents such a contrast:
victor-vanquished.
I would like to close now, but not without demonstrating that in this simple
case we see the training to posture as a victor. This man has come a long way,
but he attained even more. He has lived his life in fear of suicide, and not only
that: Everything that he has achieved thus far does not express what he could
have achieved had he not been burdened. This is unique for neuroses; it is not as
revealing as un other types where the striving for prestige is so obvious.
However, we will always see the striving for prestige as a significant factor for
an understanding of the inner life. I wanted to point this out in connection with
the influences of the physical and psychic conditions that result from training.
Chapter XV
The Psychology of Power1
[1928]
To be big! To be powerful! This is and has always been the longing of
those who are little or feel they are little. Every child longs for higher goals;
everyone who is weak, for superiority; everyone of faint hope, for pinnacles of
perfection. This goes for the individual as well as for groups, peoples, states,
nations. Whatever men are striving for originates from their urgent attempts to
overcome the impression of deficiency, insecurity, weakness.
But in order to go anywhere, men need a guiding image of the future. The
fictitious guiding ideal of perfection is not tangible enough to fulfill its purpose.
The groping spirit shapes the guiding image concretely in order to walk securely.
Whether one sees his perfection in being a coachman, a physician, a Don Juan, a
fellowman or a tyrant, he always sees in it the highest fulfillment and
confirmation of his nature. Whether his guiding ideal will bring him this
fulfillment under given circumstances, depends on his preparation, his training,
his choice of method, his optimistic activity on the one hand, and its congruence
with the external possibilities on the other hand. The former factors we can
advance through education, the latter we must recognize and see for what they
are. All these factors overlap each other and interact.
We can contribute much toward the attainment of an approximately correct
way of life when we have at our disposal an accurate exploration of the external
circumstances. Many of the evils which distress man could be more easily borne
and fought against if we did not only deplore them, but regarded eliminating

them as the expression of a movement toward development and progress. We all
suffer from the fact that we stand at a crossroad of development which must be
overcome through the creative power of mankind.
THE FALSE IDEAL OF PERSONAL POWER
The Individual Psychologist can maintain with certainty that general and
personal suffering are always connected with the fact that today we have
constructed our guiding ideal still too little in accordance with social interest and
too much in accordance with personal power. The large army of problem
children, neurotics, insane, alcoholics, drug addicts, criminals, and suicides in
the last analysis all present the same picture: struggle for personal power, or
despair of being able to attain it on the generally useful side. Today superiority
over others is still being aspired to as the perfect form. Our guiding ideal is
concretized as power over others, and this problem is too much in the foreground
for everybody, overshadows all other problems, and directs all movements of
our psychological life into its path.
1 Originally published as “Psychologie der Macht” in In Franz Kobler (ed.)
Gewalt und Gewltlosigeit: Handbuch des aktiven Pazifismus, pages 41-46,
Zurich: Rotapfel-Verlag, 
1928. Translated into English and published in the J. Indiv. Psychol., Vol. 22,
pages 
166-172, 1966. Edited for readability by Laurie J. Stein, 2004.
The poison of the craving for power creeps into parental love and seeks in
the name of authority and filial duty to cling to the semblance of superiority and
infallibility. Then it becomes the task of the children to grow beyond their
parental educators, to cope with them. It is the same with the teacher. Even love
is full of these tricks, and demands of the partner too much devotion. The
husband's desire for power, appealing to "natural destiny," demands the
submission of the wife. Unhappily, the result is the destruction of all
spontaneous relationships and the paralyzing of valuable forces. The dominance
of man over woman deprived him of the highest sexual pleasures and must in a
more highly developed civilization lead women to rebellion against their
feminine role. This would at the same time bring the existence of the human race
in question because uncivilized peoples would gain an advantage.
The waves of the power-striving of society break into the confines of the
nursery. The parents’ desire to dominate, servant arrangements in the house,
privileges accorded the infant, irresistibly direct the mind of the child toward the
achievement of power and predominance, and allow only this position to appear
tempting. Not until somewhat later do social feelings enter his soul, usually to
fall under the domination of the already developed desire for power. The

pleasant games of children disclose to the judge of human nature a self-
consistent system of satisfying the craving for power. We find then during more
careful analysis that all character traits are elaborated through the striving for our
own superiority.
When the child enters school or life, he brings with him from his family this
mechanism which is so harmful to the social sense (Gemeinsinn). The ideal of
our own superiority depends on the social sense of others.
The result of individual and social psychological inquiry is therefore: The
striving for personal power is a disastrous delusion and poisons man's living
together. Whoever desires the human community must renounce the striving for
power over others.
To prevail through violence appears to many as an obvious thought. And
we admit: the simplest way to attain everything that is good and promises
happiness, or even merely what is in the line of a continuous evolution seems to
be by means of power. But where in the life of men or in the history of mankind
has such an attempt ever succeeded? As far as we can see, even the use of mild
violence awakens opposition everywhere, even where the welfare of the
subjugated is obviously intended. The patriarchal system and enlightened
absolutism are such deterring traces. No people could tolerate even their God
without contradiction. Lead an individual or a people into the power sphere of
another, and immediately a resistance will arise, openly and secretly, and it will
not disappear until all shackles have fallen.
The victorious struggle of the proletariat against the coercion of capitalism
clearly shows this course of development. But the growing power of the
organization of labor may, if used carelessly, release a lesser or greater
resistance in insecure persons. Wherever it is a question of power, no matter how
excellent its intentions and goals, it will come up against the will to power of the
individual and arouse opposition.
It would be a gross deception to admit power intoxication only for the
individual psyche. The masses are also guided by this goal and the effect is the
more devastating as in the mass psyche the feeling of personal responsibility is
essentially reduced.
How did this harm come into the world? The striving for personal power is
one of the concretizations of the striving for perfection! And it is one of the most
tempting, especially in a civilization which is pressed from all sides. It is an
understandable error, borrowed from unbridled events of nature where the
perfection of the individual is gained by brutal victory over the weaker.

THE IDEAL OF SOCIAL INTEREST
Modern psychology has shown us that the traits of craving for power,
ambition, and striving for power over others, with their numerous ugly
concomitants, are not innate and unalterable. Rather they are inoculated into the
child at an early age; the child receives them involuntarily from an atmosphere
saturated by the titillation of power. In our blood is still the desire for the
intoxication with power, and our souls are playthings of the craving for power.
One thing can save us: the mistrust of any form of predominance. Our
strength lies in conviction, in organizing strength, in a world view, not in the
violence of armament and not in emergency laws. With such means other strong
forces before us have fought in vain for their existence. For us the way and
tactics emerge from our highest goal: the nursing and strengthening of social
feelings.
Even among the animals there are enough tendencies which ameliorate this
wild struggle--social instincts, gregarious drives--obviously for the protection of
the species, to prevent its extermination. For man, the coercion toward
development points much more strongly to the path of social interest, because in
the face of nature and the facts of life he, much more than all other living
creatures, is forced toward mutual obligation. Without the most highly
developed division of labor, he is doomed to go under or to lose the fruits of
evolution.
We may fight against the working of social feelings in us, but we cannot
smother them. Thus, the human soul may madly dismiss that which has been
pronounced holy; in suicide vital force defiantly annuls the vital instinct. But
logic and vital instinct are realities like the community. Thus, such failures are
sins against nature, against the holy spirit of the community. It is not at all easy
to suppress one's social sense. The criminal needs the intoxication of the senses,
before or after the deed, to quiet his social interest. Wayward youths form gangs
so that they may share the feeling of responsibility with others and thus mitigate
it. Raskolnikov must first lie in bed a month and meditate whether he is a
Napoleon or a louse. And then when he ascends the stairs to murder an old
worthless usurer, he feels his heart palpitating. Through this excitement of his
blood, social interest speaks. War is not the continuation of politics with other
means, but the greatest mass crime against man's belonging together. What sum
of lies and artificial arousal of low passions, what thousand-fold violence was
necessary to suppress the indignant outcry of the voice of humanity!

The typical, aggressive ideal of our time is still the isolated hero for whom
fellow men are objects. It is this psychological structure which has made the
World War palatable to people, lets them shudder in admiration before the
unstable greatness of a victorious military leader.
We need the conscious preparation and advancement of a mighty social
interest and the complete demolition of greed and power in the individual and in
peoples. What we all lack and for which we struggle relentlessly are new
methods to raise the social sense, the new word. In the meantime this progress
appears to make its way predominantly through the extermination of the socially
unfit. We [humans] are much milder than the facts of life in nature, than this
cosmos which calls to him who has a longing for power and violence in the
greatest variations: I don't like him, he must be removed! He who like the
psychologist witnesses this hard logic of human living together, longs to make
this infinitely dark voice audible to all, to warn them of the abyss into which
individuals, whole families, and peoples fall, to disappear forever. But--we need
the new method, the new word, to make this dreadful voice audible.
Chapter XVI
Individual Psychology and the Theory of Neurosis1 2
[1929]
Our conscious thoughts are probably initiated in response to a problem with
which we are concentrating. We can also say: we are able to switch off
unnecessary or disturbing details that we find burdensome in solving burning
issues. Clearly, we are richly blessed with difficulties of all sorts. Commensurate
with that is the great range of our conscious thinking. If someone were to be
fully adjusted in every way to the demands of life--which applies to humans
probably less so than to any other living being--then life could proceed
unconsciously toward perfection like a mechanical process. Since this is happily
not the case, we are constantly facing problems that appear like tests. Our
responses show the extent of our preparation and reflect our competence,
courage, dexterity, intelligence, character, and morals.
Despite the many difficulties in life, they would be simple to solve if we
were properly prepared. Then, our responses would also be “correct.” Therefore,
the questions for Individual Psychology are: 1. What are the problems in life?
With all their manifoldness, is there not one indispensable precondition? 2. What
happens when the individual is lacking in preparation for that essential
precondition?
For the first question there is a surprising solution. There are no other
questions in our life than those that concern our attitude on social issues.
Whether someone is engaged in productive labor, makes a discovery,

accomplishes a scientific task,--whatever is useful, good, or worthwhile is only
so if it serves the common good. The way one person relates to another as a
comrade, friend, or colleague, as well as those closely associated character traits:
virtues, openness, truthfulness, interest in others, in country, and in humanity--
all these attitudes reflect the extent of that person’s readiness to connect, his
preparedness for life, and the community. Our senses, the eyes, the ears, and the
sense of touch, work toward connectiveness. The sense that is often missing is
the willingness to establish a social contact, the readiness to accept.
Communication, all expressions, those that are right and those wrong, “healthy”
and neurotic, reflect the extent to which we are ready to establish relationships.
The mind searches for universal validity; all moral doctrines seek rules for the
good of the community; aesthetic feelings and judgments are expressed with a
view toward the future of mankind. All seek everlasting value and hang on the
dream of a more beautiful, healthier world. Political and religious positions are
taken with a view toward the health of the community, or a part of it. Love and
marriage are in their most natural and highest forms of development social ties
of the sexes established for the purpose of mutual gratification and the
preservation of mankind. In the relations between the sexes, social interest
appears as a resolving and harmoniously beneficial factor for the community.
Incest and sexual perversions are rejected.
1 Lecture held in the Verein für Innere Medizin und Kinderheilkunde
(Society for Internal Medicine and Paediatrics) in Berlin on December 17, 1928.
Originally published as “Die Individualpsychologie in der Neurosenlehre” in the
Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. VII, pages 81-88,
1929.
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. Editing assistance by Kurt A.
Adler, M.D., Ph.D.
The physical weakness of the individual in the face of nature, the
limitations of life on this earth, actually require a sense of community to
maintain life, and to force the development of a civilization and an organized
division of labor. This sense of community is heightened by concerns for the
pregnant wife, the slowly developing infant, and the long period of dependency
of the child. It probably is the weakness and inferiority of mankind in general,
man's knowledge of death and threatening dangers, which produce social interest
as an unavoidable complement and to provide relief.
I cannot fail at this point to address what I believe to be a pointless
argument, which is whether social interest is innate. Many authorities have the
same difficulty with regard to the question of innate psychological

characteristics in general. It seems clear to me that nothing can develop in the
inner life for which there are no predispositions, possibilities, and tendencies.
The development of character traits, peculiarities, and capabilities probably
depends in the first place on their care, practice, and the methods employed.
On the first day, already, children begin to prepare their psychological
responses within their limited sphere. Their relationship with the mother, the
older and younger siblings, the father, outsiders; how they relate to the tasks of
their lives, advantages and obstacles, all these provide them with practice that
eventually turns into a mechanization of their style of life. They will behave the
same way in more or less similar life situations, whether these are agreeable or
disagreeable. I must exclude from this observation the mentally retarded child
and children suffering from brain damage because their mental training does not
relate to actual situations. Otherwise, however, the environment with its
teachings and examples provides even greater direction by influencing the child
in ways that are difficult to grasp. If we also have to consider in such cases
innate possibilities as well the milieu, then our field will become even more
complicated because in training there are many possibilities for naive mistakes.
It is for this last reason that a defective development of a child cannot be
predicted. Psychological problems cannot be solved mathematically or from a
causal point of view.
The possibilities for mistakes in the creation of a style of life are evidently
caused by significant conflicts and stresses that eventually become overt
symptoms when problems arise or are perceived. At this point the following
assertion can be made: if there were only such problems in life that could be
solved, more or less, with a certain measure of social interest, and if that
measure of social interest, established early on, were then to germinate in the
automatic style of life, then the defective style of life lacking in social interest
would always crash before the pressing problems that arise which require just
that missing measure of social interest. Then that person would lack the means
of coping with his problems.
In light of the above, the question of innate psychological characteristics, or
plus or minus variations in drive characteristics, or of instincts, in fact of
heredity altogether, becomes moot. If we can manage to develop the child into a
decent human being--which is a certainty given the educational experience of
Individual Psychology--then it would be simple for us to make hereditary
tendencies serve the common good, if they really play a role in the inner life.
Nietzsche describes this as sublimating them, to make them useful. Similarly,
Fourier explained it in his system of phalansterianism.3 In the language of both it
means to fill the individual with social interest.

The advocates of heredity and the drive and instinct psychologists make it
much too easy on themselves. Wherever defects are discovered, they search for
hereditary or drive failures. Neither discovers in their research that missing
social interest plays the key role. They think that they are investigating the root
of the problem. However, they fail to see that when confronted by social
problems in the absence of a human interest, the outcome appears as “wrong,”
“unhealthy,” “immoral,” “abnormal.” Having overlooked the primary factor,
they can only explain this outcome in terms of drives, heredity, physiognomy,
etc. It is as if a flood is blamed solely on the melted ice masses, the power of the
stream, its new flow, and not on the weakened levees.
At this point the new points of view, which Individual Psychology tried to
enlarge in the development of neuropsychology, should become apparent.
Modesty can arise from trying to please for personal reasons, to be conspicuous,
as well as from a tendency toward social action. In the same way, eroticism can
spring from an egotistical tendency as well as from fondness. Friendship can be
feigned in order to dominate others; fear and helplessness can be practiced to
gain the support of others. Whoever thinks he has delved deeply and has
captured the “drive cluster” is still merely working on the surface.
3 Editor’s note: A community organized on the plan of Fourier. Fourier
believed that the cause of conflict and suffering was the perversion of natural
human goodness by faulty social organization. He advocated a solution of small
planned communes, and he called then phalansteries. He devised a blueprint
precisely indicating the size, layout, and industrial organization of each
community or "phalanx." Organized as both producers' and consumers'
cooperatives, the communities would escalate economically and fulfill all man's
passions. The result was to create a situation where "Attractive Industry" would
contribute to the rise of social harmony and unimaginable bliss. Set on arable
land, the "Central House" of each Phlanx (the phalanstère) had three key
structures: an administrative centre, flanked by a wing which comprised both
working and recreational areas (a ballroom was indispensable): a residential
centre: and, at the back of the building, a parade ground to celebrate the harvest,
to honour the hardest workers and ridicule the less motivated. The work of the
community was to be a mixture of rural and industrial pursuits in conformity
with Fourier's vision of unity and his antagonism towards the divisions between
town and country which were emerging under capitalism.
Whenever there is a psychological failure, its deepest roots lie in the
inability to cooperate, work, be a team player, and love someone. Problems in
upbringing, neuroses, neuropsychoses, suicide, crime, addictions, sexual
perversion, prostitution, all show us how the stream of life crested its banks

because of weak levees.
The aim of Individual Psychologyis to strengthen the levees. This is
probably not an altogether new way. It is probably the same path that aspiring
mankind tried to follow in religion, education, and politics. Perhaps we have
only better recognized the connections because we saw enormously enlarged in
neuroses what else life had to offer. Also, the therapy of Individual Psychology
demands reinforcing the levees, taming the elementary forces by elevating them
for the common good, while others see levees as mostly useless, or wish to tear
them down publicly or in secret perhaps in the mistaken belief that mills will
then run more efficiently.
We were able to discern that whatever was wobbly during construction
would eventually collapse. This applies to the person who strives within the
framework of the community, but who lacks the feeling for community.
Whatever happened during such a collapse is probably worth examining, not for
the sake of appearances, but to establish why social interest was not adequate.
Thus, in anxiety symptoms we see the feeling of weakness and insecurity, as in a
state of panic that does not admit an interest in others. In obsessions or
compulsions, we find feeble attempts to attain mastery through useless
accomplishments (those that lack community values), because confidence in
useful accomplishments is too weak. Depression manifests itself in terrible
attacks against another, which in self-inflicted wounds is akin to suicide. Mania
produces passionate, convulsive self-confidence, the cry for self-affirmation. In
schizophrenia, the exclusion of the other is driven to its greatest heights. Society,
work, love, the three great factors in life are bitterly excluded and with that every
reason for communal life: communication, understanding, morality, and
purposeful striving is lost. Time and again we found in these illnesses the
expression of disengagement from the community, and also expressions of
discouragement for any conscious striving.
What causes these dynamics can never be found in the past. The neurosis
always breaks out in the face of an upcoming social question that relates to
community, work, or love. The symptoms of the neurosis always spring from
tension with which the patient cannot cope. The most important forms of that
tension when concretely described are: fear, rage, and sadness. The
overconfidence found in mania, as I indicated, lies in the frantic attempt to
overcome fear. To some extent we have also overcome the problem of
explaining the various ways that neurosis manifests itself. The tension that seizes
the vegetative system causes people to react differently: with their digestive
system, their circulatory system, the bladder, or sexual organs. Their devastated
psychological attitude causes the discouraged neurotic to seek support by

rejecting social tasks, and to some extent, even to justify such a reaction by, for
example, dominance over another in agoraphobia, focusing on irrelevant and
errant thoughts and feelings, with phobias to avoid tasks, and with perversions.
With regard to the emotional arousing of sympathetic and para-sympathetic
systems, we are evidently confronting the last unanswered question. We know
that it happens, but we shall never know how. Even if it were to be proven that
emotions affect endocrine glands (suprarenal gland, thyroid, sexual glands, etc.),
we shall never know for sure beyond that they are more susceptible, possibly
because of their inferiority, or for an inferiority in the pathways of the vegetative
system that lead to these organs.
However, most identifiable indications of neurotic symptoms are found in
the early style of life. One of the earliest findings of Individual Psychology
established that nervous dysfunctions, i.e. functional neuroses, frequently occur
in inherited inferior organs and organ systems. Frequently, we demonstrated that
the image of the neurosis was formed in the inferior function of the originally
weak organ. Thus, we arrived at the conclusion that could be justified only later
(see Adler, Studie über Minderwertigkeit von Organen4 [Study of the Inferiority
of Organs], 1907), that inferior organs, including endocrine glands, cause a
disposition for neurosis. A number of subsequent findings, also those of
Kretschmer, point in the same direction. However, we established something
more important: Having inferior organs inhibits the development of an interest in
others, social interest, in that it burdens the child, frequently very heavily and
over a long period of time, with sickness, suffering, debilitation, and limited
involement. We want to deemphasize, however, the significance of inheritance
in these findings because it would be easy to assume that a left-handed person,
for example, suffers from burdens inflicted on him through heredity and
consequently is at risk with regard to social interest. However, with appropriate
methods, we can avoid the risks associated with that burden. The same applies to
our current medical skills in treating all other inferior organs. Furthermore, I
would like to stress that a relatively normal child, if not properly nourished, will
suffer the same burden as a child who suffers from inferior intestines. This again
points to the basic principle of Individual Psychology that neither an organ nor
the milieu alone causes dysfunctions, but that the decisive factors are stress from
both plus the erroneous psychological consequences.
Once we had reached this stage, the next step followed. We had to find the
psychological burden from which neurotics suffered in their childhood as well as
in other situations that inhibited social interest in their development. We found
these in two other types of persons in various ways. They are the “pampered”
and the “hated” children. Neither is able to establish contact with the

community. Later, in their fourth or fifth year, by which time a child’s style of
life became fixed, there was no longer any room for social interest. Only after
this point has been clearly understood can a new training approach open the way
for social interest.
4 See The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler, Volume 2.
In pursuing this course further, we also came to disavow traumas and even
sexual traumas, which according to other theories, are the basis of neuroses. All
personal experiences have been assimilated early on by the fixed style of life.
Wherever we found strong emotional experiences in connection with a neurosis,
we never found those experiences to be the causes; instead, we saw that they
were a part of the already established harmful lifestyle. For that reason we were
also able to limit the extent to which the unconscious plays a part in neuroses.
All reawakened impressions, moods, attitudes--always also evident in the
conscious-were seen as fragments in the construction of the style of life. They
always are a part of the increased sense of inferiority that arose from organ
insufficiency, pampering, and oppression. The apparent contradiction between
the conscious and unconscious, the apparent ambivalence of feelings, tendencies
and character trends no longer existed as soon as the unity of the style of life was
understood.
In conscious as well as “unconscious” expressions, the experiences,
attitudes and statements that have been dredged out of the darkest corners of
memory reflect the same style of life, and what is most significant, the same
social interest that was seriously diminished by the neurosis. This pattern is what
has been emphasized earlier as the deficient characteristic for solving the
problems of life, which are always social in nature. This deficient characteristic
is manifested in increased stress which again harkens back to the physical and
psychological “stress symptom.” These symptoms continue to act, directly
resulting in barriers, which cause the patient, in line with his style of life, to
hesitate (stutter, become fearful, panicky, have phobias, etc.), or to freeze
(erythrophobia, agoraphobia, etc.), or become evasive, pursuing fruitless
activities (sexual perversion, psychosis, suicide, crime, etc.). Also apparent is
discouragement and an appeal for easing the given condition. Not enough
attention is being paid in all cases of neurosis to the role played by the
“individual feeling his way into the illness” which he expresses by a hesitating
attitude. Similarly, insufficient attention is given to the various degrees to which
the individual lacks common sense and prefers to cater to his own reasoning.
(Particularly clearly seen in psychoses.)
I wish to touch briefly on what has been almost universally credited to
Individual Psychology: its strong emphasis on the “apperception of finality.” It

means that every individual starting from a feeling of weakness and inferiority,
however that might manifest itself in his physical development, strives after an
“ideal final goal”, that is, a striving to overcome all problems in life. If this is to
be satisfying and if it is to lead to self-esteem, it can be done only by being
useful in the context of a developed social interest where the individual feels
valuable (that can only mean valuable for society). For that reason, we find in
the neurosis the heightened feeling of inferiority stemming from earliest
childhood, with the patient constantly seeking relief (social, professional,
sexual). That person’s area of activity will significantly constrict, and often this
yearning for relief will be expressed in a death wish. However, even on the
worthless, asocial, side of life that person is driven by his heightened sense of
inferiority to seek as a goal personal mastery, or only an apparent mastery,
usually at the expense of someone else. The moods and emotions that serve this
end most effectively, such as fear, anger, sadness, guilt, in their dynamics reflect
frantic attempts to ascend from “below” to “above,” from a deepened sense of
inferiority to dominance over another, the antagonist. Consequently, in every
psychological expression, we can find next to a degree of social interest the
striving for mastery. We can be satisfied with our examination only when we
have seen in the neurotic symptom this dual dynamic in exactly the same way
and in equal measure as in any other human expressions.
The sanctuary of the “unconscious” should be severely shaken by this
observation. It must seem like a tortuous path to transfer the “instinctive” into
that realm, and to banish it from the “conscious” and then contrast the
“conscious” with the “complexes” of the “unconscious.” Individual Psychology
does not accept this contrast, since it sees all forms of consciousness in one
context. For that reason, the idea of “ambivalence” breaks down as soon as we
recognize that the ways of expressing social interest and the striving for mastery
run in parallel lines in two or more forms. At best, an apparent contrast or
contradiction (when there is difficulty in making decisions, doubt, or frustrated
desires) may find expression in indecisiveness. Social interest appropriates so
much of all physical activities on the first day after birth that an examination of
impulses in isolation would be in vain. Whatever appears as unusual, infirm, or
abnormal is caused by a lack of social interest. However, social interest and the
imminent striving for an ideal final form are the deepest motivating forces of a
person’s inner life.
For this reason, the important preparatory works of Freud still have value.
However, what he found in the unconscious, is not the motivating force but a
later, misguided striving for power assimilated because of the flawed,
deeperlying style of life. If we approache from our point of view the more

measured interpretations of the Oedipus complex, the theories of repression, the
transformation of drives, the censor, the sexual components, or traumatic
experience, then it is not difficult to find that the “unconscious” premises of
these authorities in the allegorical conception of their viewpoint are always the
same: a heightened sense of inferiority, the striving for personal superiority, and
a lack of social interest.
Reference to past events also cannot justify finding “a malicious drive in
people.” All believable results of research present “savages” as social beings
well aware of the strength of communal living.
Touching briefly on the contribution of Individual Psychology to the
understanding of dreams, we can summarize it as follows: In creating feelings,
the dream has the task of weakening or annulling the influence of common
sense. For that reason, it has to be “incomprehensible.” In a tendentious manner,
it has to assert the style of life of the dreamer for an impending task, which can
be carried out only by “deceiving feelings” and not by rational deliberation.
Chapter XVII
A Consultation1 2
[1929]
Fritz B., twelve years old, had been brought by his mother to our
educational consulting office. His case was introduced by Dr. L. who provided
us with an introductory report. The report,3 the remarks, and the explanation by
the consultants as well as the consultation itself are presented here as recorded
by the stenographer:
“Fritz, twelve years old, is brought to the clinic because he suffers from
enuresis...”
This child is aggressive and probably was pampered early in life.
Subsequently some incident caused the pampering to cease and the child is
unhappy. He begins to attack his mother and demands that she should busy
herself with him at night. Here we must search for signs of pampering: usual
sloppiness, probably jealous of a younger or older sibling, someone who has
eating problems, wants to be at the center of things, draw others to him, etc.
“....frequently during the day...”
When we hear that a child wets himself during the day that means a
considerable struggle; it is not enough that he bothers others at night, he does it
during the day as well. We must also establish whether there might be a mental
defect. Rarely is the cause an organic failing.
“... rarely at night.”
He struggles hard during the day, but probably feels better at night and is

calm. We would not be surprised to learn that his struggle is conscious and that
defiance is part of his character. Defiance is a somewhat conscious struggle.
1 Originally published as “Eine Beratung: stenographische Aufnahme” in
the Int. Z. Indiv. Psychol., Vol. 7., pages 207-214, 1929. 
2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. Editing assistance by Kurt A.
Adler, M.D., Ph.D. 
3 Translator’s note: The report has been italicized, as in the original.
“When his mother is with him, or when he is at school, he never wets himself.”
This is sign that there are psychological motives. When his mother is
present, he has no need to draw her to him. He probably also does not feel bad in
school. He most likely is not a bad student, or else he does not want to be thrown
out of school.
“The mother is divorced,...”
The break-up of a marriage has a bad effect on children. Couples who fight
pay little attention to the children and often express their anger at them. It is
apparent that among problem children, criminals, neurotics, sexual perverts,
alcoholics, etc. there are often children from unhappy marriages. We attempt to
find out whether such a child was not overburdened. Being burdened always is a
factor contributing to problems.
“....he lives with his grandparents.”
One must remember that grandparents frequently pamper children.
However, not always: if the mother pampers the child, the grandmother
reproaches the mother; if the mother does not pamper her child, then the
grandmother does.
“The child used to sleep in the same room with his parents.”
This is a sign that this child was once pampered, either at his own initiative
in order to get closer to the mother, or because the parents always wanted the
child near them.
“Now he sleeps by himself.”
This is not an unimportant circumstance to us and plays a part in enuresis. If the
child were to sleep in his mother's bed, he would not wet the bed.
“The child is very closely attached to the mother...”
This confirms that the child is very close to his mother. He tries to win the
mother for himself and to use her as a crutch.
“and is enormously pampered, especially by the grandmother.”
As we can see, we were not very mistaken in our assumption.
“Four years ago, he was in the hospital for seven months with osteomyelitis in
the hip.”

This is an illness during which pampering increases significantly. This is a
common occurrence following which children have considerable difficulty
adjusting to not being pampered. A child can never be so pampered again as
when he was confined in the hospital with osteomyelitis.
“At that time, amputation of the leg was being considered. The leg has now been
healed, but the boy suffers from ankylosis.
Which seems like another physical defect, a circumstance that contributes
significantly to the child's feeling of inferiority. As is, pampered children already
have a feeling of inferiority; they have no confidence in themselves. The fact
that he has ankylosis reinforces his feeling of inferiority, and he tries even more
so to lean on others.
“Because of this illness, he did not attend school from age seven to ten.”
Evidently, he spent his time with his mother.
“At age ten, he entered the third grade in a remedial school and will now enter
the fourth grade.”
Remedial school classes again reinforce the feeling of inferiority, if the
child is not an imbecile, an idiot, or feebleminded. He then would not become
aware of his condition, if he were among children who were held back in school.
For example, one speaks of “slow classes.”4 A normal child would feel
disparaged if he were so unlucky as to attend a remedial class. Fritz has many
reasons to feel inferior and diminished.
“He makes good progress in school.”
We are not surprised, since he is normal, that he is making good progress in
school. It is no triumph to be the seeing person among the blind.
“He has some problems with arithmetic.”
Once he catches on, he probably will do as well in arithmetic as the others.
“He always interrupts in school when someone else is asked a question.”
4 Translator’s note: the German expression is one of derision, a “class of
dummies.”
From this we gather that he is an intelligent child. This pampered child
wants to stand out. His bed-wetting is a means toward that end. He does quite
well in school and should not be too dissatisfied, but he also wants to stand out
which is the reason he interrupts others.
“When he plays, he must be the first.”
His style of life is not one that would be found among the mentally
deficient. We can say that he does not belong in a remedial class. We know that
because of his illness he is not well prepared for regular classes, and because of a
lack of preparedness he cannot compete in such classes. There should be special

preparatory help for such children.
“He has a brother who is four and a half years older than he and who was very
spoiled by his father.”
We can assume from this that he has no younger siblings. He probably lives
with the idea that the older brother is more advanced than he. The older brother
is given preferential treatment by the father and does not attend a remedial
school.
“The older brother is very handsome. He once had to repeat first grade in
school, but now learns very well, is serious and mature.”
When we hear of two brothers where the older has developed well and
cannot be overtaken, the younger brother most of the time is a problem. If the
younger advances well and comes close to the older and threatens the older's
status, the older brother becomes a problem. That experience has been confirmed
in this case. The older brother probably does not fail to point out to the younger
brother that he is in remedial school.
“The younger brother likes to play the buffoon.”
A frequent manifestation in children with a strong feeling of inferiority is
their desire to stand out. In the case of this child we see three coordinated
manifestations: enuresis, interrupting, and playing the fool. All of these are
expressions of an ambitious weakling. Anyone who has confidence in himself
would not act that way.
“He also often cries out at night.”
Again, he is seeking a connection. The fact that he cries out and plays the
fool is evidence of his intelligence. He does everything correctly; he acts as we
would--if I may say so--under the same circumstances, which call for courage,
but also circumstances that we would misunderstand.
“He has no eating problems.”
This is an indication that his family made no major mistakes in his training
about food. Eating was not overemphasized. Here, the boy made a mistake. He
should actually have made trouble when eating. We should not be surprised
when we are unable to observe certain things in the make-up of a person's style
of life, but which, given our greater experience, we would anticipate.
“He washes and dresses himself.”
Here again, the right things were done.
“The parents as well as the grandparents on the father's side are blood
relatives.”
Actually, that would not be significant since the same manifestations are
seen in other children. These problems cannot be traced back to heredity. I
should like to comment here that I have always found depression among married

people who are blood relatives. These are people who seek a form of security in
the selection of their life's companions and find them among people whom they
had known since childhood. It also is evidence of a lack of social interest; their
family is the entire community. It should not be denied that children whose
parents are blood relatives could manifest organic inferiority (ear and eye
defects). However, as far as I can determine thus far, this occurs only in cases
where the same deficiencies occur in both partners. However, we frequently see
very healthy children where the same organ deficiencies are not present in both
parents. We are against blood-related marriages only because social interest
requires the widest mixing of blood. People who make such great distinctions
between persons from their own family and those from others lack in social
interest.
“The child had smallpox and whooping cough.”
Parents greatly pamper children who suffer from such conditions. We have
noted that a number of childhood diseases seem to call naturally for pampering,
for example, scarlet fever, whooping cough, encephalitis, etc. In such cases
problems can be traced back to those illnesses. We can also observe cases where
a problem child improved following a serious illness; however, it would be
audacious to claim that scarlet fever could have a favorable influence on
someone.
“He started to walk when he was 16 months old...”
If the mother is correct on that point, rickets might have been present. It is clear
that the mother gave this child much greater care than was needed. .
“...and learned to speak correctly only at age three.”
This is evidence that he had no need to speak. Should he have had such a
need, he would have spoken earlier. All of his wishes were fulfilled and
everything was done for him so that the had no need to speak. This is also the
case with the inability to speak. Such children are usually very pampered and
have no need to speak. The mothers of such children often proclaim with pride
that they always know what their children desire. Such children wish to be
understood without having to speak and to have someone always occupied with
them. When such a child does not speak, and the pampering person always
carries out whatever he requests, then we can understand how this condition of
not speaking occurs. We also know that children can form and regulate all their
functions in accordance with their environment.
I once heard of a child whose parents were mute. This child was quite
normal and able to hear and speak. Whenever this child hurt himself, he cried
soundlessly. The tears ran down his cheeks and he made a sad face but he did
not cry out. He knew that it would be useless. The functions develop in

consonance with the environment; they cannot develop in any other way. It is
possible to relate the so-called drive psychology to this observation. The drives
develop only in accord with the environment. This boy was spared the need to
speak with the result that he could not develop his ability to speak in time.
“ Even now he speaks nasally. Four years ago his tonsils and adenoids
were removed. Another adenoidectomy is planned for the near future. He has
mongoloid features.”
We are somewhat taken aback by the fact that he has mongoloid features.
There are suspicions that he might be mentally retarded. However, I do not wish
for that to be an indication that he is mongoloid. Until now, no mongoloid child
has been observed that was not mentally retarded. There are people who look
somewhat mongoloid without being retarded.
“ He has a broad nasal base, ears that stick out, and a projecting lower lip.
There are no neurological findings. His intelligence is normal. His right leg is
held stiffly. The child likes gymnastics and although it was initially forbidden for
him to exercise, he kept up with the others as far as his leg would allow.”
I have often found that children with defects in their legs or arms are very
eager to engage in physical exercises and at times become excellent gymnasts.
Here we encounter another confirmation of a basic principle of Individual
Psychology, which is that the best achievements may come about because of a
particular interest that relates to a deficient organ.
In the short time allotted to us, we are unable to carry out everything that
we should or could do. If someone would make himself available to consult with
the mother and the child, our work would be more effective. With the boy, we
must try to make him more independent and bolder. He should be given help
with learning so that he can leave the remedial school and enter regular classes.
He should be given a new goal that will allow him to become useful and to
recognize that the more successful he is, the less value his negative
characteristics will have. Wetting himself is the last refuge that he chose. We
want to show him a better way.
We must also win over the mother. If we propose something to the child
and the mother works against us, the child will get into difficulties. I now would
like to show the mother the true nature of her child and persuade her (to accept
our viewpoint).
(The mother is asked to come into the office.)
Adler (to the mother): We would like to talk about your Fritz. Would you say
that he is one of the best students in his class?
Mother: I couldn't say that exactly.
A.: He is one of the best students in the remedial school?

Mother: He is quite good, except for arithmetic. Other children are ahead of
him. The teacher says that when he reads slowly, he is quite good. He hurries too
much...
A.: What does he want to be?
Mother: A carpenter.
A.: What is his father?
Mother (with pride): A dental technician. His grandfather has a furniture
store. My father says that Fritz should learn that trade so he understands
furniture.
A.: He means by that for him to become a carpenter. Does he have friends?
Mother: Many, all are younger children. A.: Does he like to be with other
children?
Mother: He wants to play only with younger children.
A.: Does he go to a day-care center?
Mother: He used to go to “Friends of Children.” There the children once got
into a fight and the teacher pulled them by the ears and threw them against the
wall.
A.: Is he truthful?
Mother: At times he tells stories, but he does not lie.
A.: Can he handle money?
Mother: Yes, he can handle money.
A.: Can one depend on him?
Mother: Yes, he is very dependable. He can also be very useful in the store.
He knows what he is doing. He answers the phone and runs errands. He is only
very childish.
A.: How does he feel in school?
Mother: He likes school quite well. He used to attend a private school. We
thought it would be easier for him. However, no one paid much attention to him
and left him alone. A neurologist, a friend of ours, found him to be normal and
advised us to send him to remedial school.
A.: How are the children in remedial school?
Mother: The children are awful, but he does not care. These are terrible children
who are far behind. If I could be sure that he could make it on his own...
A.: You have doubted that?
Mother: The teacher consoled me by saying that he will make a good
merchant. He is interested in everything, interjects himself into many things and
gives the impression of being very independent. Only those childish things about
him!
A.: Does he wet often? Mother: Yes. I also spoke to his teacher and asked

how he does in school. She complained only that he has a loud voice and that he
should change that. He also wets himself in school. She says that it must have
something to do with a weak bladder. Lately, this has become worse.
A.: Did he fall back in school?
Mother: He makes progress. He was once unable to do his assignments by
himself; now he does them by himself.
A.: Was he not reproached? For his work in arithmetic?
Mother: In arithmetic other children are ahead of him.
A.: It would be good if he also wanted to do well in arithmetic. Would you
like to send the child to our day-care center? III. Oberzellergasse 8. Can he get
there by himself?
Mother: He can get there by himself. He also rides (by streetcar) to school by
himself.
A.: He will be taught at that center that he can succeed in everything and that he
can attend regular school.
Mother: At the “Friends of Children” he also did good work. He once built
a nice theater. He has something in him that no other child has, as the teacher
claims. He is very conscientious.
A.: It would be more advantageous for the boy to attend regular school. How is
the other boy?
Mother: Oh, he is a wonderful boy.
A.: How does he get along with the younger one?
Mother: They like each other very much. It is all different now. I live with
my parents and the older one is with the other grandmother. The children see
each other less often.
A.: Does he make fun of the younger boy?
Mother: He cares very much for him. He is afraid for him. A.: He acts like his
father, which is often the case with successful older siblings.
Mother: The older one was always more developed.
A.: The older seems to be much loved.
Mother: The younger even more so. The older one is a proud person.
A.: Was the younger one not teased and made fun of because he attends remedial
school?
Mother: He is not teased because of the school, but the children make fun of him
and tease him because of his leg. It is terrible.
A.: That will pass. Also the wetting. I recommend that you encourage the
child and not criticize and chide him. He should be encouraged to do everything
by himself.
Mother: My family criticizes and chides him very much.

A.: Tell them that I send them my best regards. They should hold back on
criticizing, nagging, and chiding. We are going to recommend a new method and
improve him.
Mother: (Expresses her appreciation and leaves.)
A.: (To the audience) The fact that he is always attacked at home is very
important. I don't know whether you have seen the tapir at the Schönbrunn Zoo?
This tapir characteristically turns away and urinates whenever someone teases or
makes him angry. This is very embarrassing and sometimes he wets some
innocent person.
(The child enters the office)
A. (To the child): How are you doing in school?
Fritz: Fine.
 
A.: You are a very able boy. You could be a very good student. I think you
are very fearful. You think you can't do anything. You think you can't do this
silly arithmetic! You can do that easily. I will help you to become good at
arithmetic! ... We can then arrange for you to attend a more advanced school. I
would like to help you with that as well. We'll do that skillfully and it will be fun
for you. Suddenly, everything will go well. I would like you to come into our
center where you can play and do your homework. It's fun there.... I also was
poor in arithmetic and then someone showed me how it's done. Then I moved to
the head of the class in arithmetic. What would your teacher say if you were to
become the best?
Fritz: She would be very happy.
A.: Would you like to make her happy?
Fritz: Yes!
A.: Come back soon and don't get upset when some fellow says something
stupid to you. They say those things out of ignorance. Also when someone
criticizes you at home don't get angry right away and wet yourself. You must
help me! Can I count on you? (He bids the child farewell.)
Chapter XVIII
Sleeplessness1
[1929]
Sleeplessness may be the consequence of an organic illness, as for instance,
patients are sometimes sleepless in the early stage of typhoid fever; it may occur
in disorders of the glands and in some cases of nephritis; and it plays a big part
in the beginning of some cases of insanity. But insomnia can be explained
psychologically if we can exclude an organic reason. When we look into the

whole personality, we will find that this sleeplessness fits in perfectly. If you
want to find out how it fits in with the whole personality, we can ask the person
who suffers from sleeplessness: “What could you do if you could sleep?” Then
he will tell what he is afraid to do: e.g. if he could sleep, he could work better
and take his examination. He is so afraid of his problem that he is tense; this
mental tension will not let him relax and thus, he cannot sleep. Sleep is not a
passive state, and it is not true that we are passive when we sleep. So far as our
understanding goes, sleep is an activity; we have to do it and have to make
ourselves sleep. We are trained in the very beginning to accomplish that and,
therefore, it happens easily. There are always some reasons if we fail to
accomplish it; and especially emotions and tensions are able to disturb sleep. If a
person is afraid of something, he may not sleep. Some patients, especially
women, cannot sleep because they think of their housekeeping, whether it is in
the best order. We can see that, because what do they do when they do not sleep?
They think of housekeeping, of the party tomorrow, whether they will be
criticized, or whether everything will be as it should be. In this way they cannot
sleep. And once they cannot sleep, due to the tension, they discover in many
cases that it has its advantages,
A man who had been suffering from a compulsive neurosis insisted that he
could not sleep since his early childhood. The most he slept was a few hours.
This is probably not true, as many people are wrong in their belief that they have
not slept. Some admit that they do not know whether they have slept or not, but
many patients are satisfied if they impress themselves and others that they have
not slept. Therefore, they always seek an argument and alibi. They can claim
attention because they themselves are impressed with their inability to sleep.
Some people sleep and still hear and see everything. They are easily awakened
and therefore notice everything that goes on--the striking of the clock, the
passing by of a person or whatever it may be. They really are not refreshed in the
morning and therefore, this way of spending the night is only a variety of
sleeplessness. People can find an excuse in many ways as if they have not slept.
1 Originally published in the I. P. Bulletin, Vol. III, 3rd-4th Quarter, pages 60-
64, 1944. Edited for readablity by Laurie J. Stein, 2004.
We will find that every person who does not sleep has a certain purpose
which is supported by not sleeping. This boy (referring to a presented case)
fights with his family. He does not earn money, because in this way he hurts
them as they need his income. Then he cannot sleep. They know what it means
and begin to tremble; this is his purpose. We can see, therefore, how he uses his
sleeplessness.
We will always find another person involved. The sleeplessness is an

effective way of hitting at this other person, who usually is nearby. Married men
and women hit at each other.
Sometimes sleeplessness is a tool of competition--at least it can be used for
this purpose. “I know I do my job well and everybody is satisfied with my work;
but what could I not accomplish if I had more sleep.” Therefore, we find
sleeplessness among very ambitious persons.
I was proud when I discovered that sleeplessness was a symptom of
ambition. Then I found out that this was known two thousand years ago.
Reading Horace, I found the following words: “Ah, these people, too, cannot
sleep at night. They are the people who try so hard to make reality agree with
their own plans, and do not want to adjust their plans to reality.” Horace knew
the meaning of sleeplessness, and probably everybody knew it at this time, later
forgetting it. It has been rediscovered, as probably much other knowledge has
been forgotten and must be discovered again. Horace knew about the people
whom he mentioned before: “They do not suffer from sleeplessness alone, but
also from headache.” That is very true and you find these two often together.
The result of such a high ambition is sleepless nights and headaches. We can
understand that. If somebody must use the night for conscious thinking, if he is
not satisfied to use only the day for this purpose, then we can assume that he is a
very ambitious person. It is only a variation of the type who studies all through
the night; that is also a sign of ambition, only in this case it is not difficult to
understand the connection.
But we can probe whether our assumption is right by asking the patient in a
subtle manner: “What are you thinking about when you do not sleep during the
night?” Then we will get another proof. The patient thinks either of his business
or his duties, and repeats what happened the day before. As he may go over his
account books in the evening, so he does during the night to see whether he
acted in the right way. Many persons behave in this manner. Their ambition does
not let them forget the slightest mistake they may have made the day before.
The illness in which sleeplessness plays the most important role is
melancholia. If a melancholic person is not sly enough to hide what he is
thinking during the night, then we can easily see the consequence in his temper
and mood in the morning. He was collecting, like a bee, all the bad things he
could think of. This inclination is very important to remember for the treatment.
We must show the patient that he tries continuously to pick out bad things. In
that way, he arouses feelings and emotions which constitute melancholia.
Melancholic depression really means to look for bad possibilities and not for
anything which is promising and hopeful. This looking for uncomforting
thoughts occurs also during the night and so we understand why the melancholic

patient does not sleep. In an ambitious way, he collects. He could not continue
this collecting if he were to fall asleep. Therefore with the emotion which he
creates, he disturbs his sleep.
This activity during the night can be used in the treatment of melancholia
and sleeplessness. When such a person meets a friend, he complains about his
sleeplessness and maintains that he is lost because without sleep, he cannot go
on any longer. If we tell him it is not important that he cannot sleep, that we do
not sleep longer, and others we know don't sleep much more either, then the
patient becomes angry and feels misunderstood, even insulted. He wants our
sympathy and kindness--that alone makes an impression on him.
It is possible, however, to tell such a person to use the time in which he
cannot sleep for the treatment. He can be told to collect all the thoughts which he
has during the night, to remember them, and to tell them the next day at the
consultation. In that way, the patient can make use of his sleeplessness by
helping the therapy. It will be a new experience for him to flee his sleeplessness
in a constructive way. Sometimes he cannot maintain his sleeplessness if it can
be used for a good cause. He can remain sleepless only if he regards it as a
disturbance. In either case, if he remembers his thoughts or if he now falls
asleep, he may be able to recognize the purpose of sleep or sleeplessness. He
may even understand that his sleeplessness has not played the role which he
believed it did.
I never give a patient a prescription against sleeplessness; but I have seen
many patients who come to me with medicines they received from others. And it
is difficult to stop them from taking it. To have a medicine is merely the same
power, the same thing, as not to sleep. It means, “I am sleepless and can only
sleep taking drugs.” He could sleep if he would take sugar water and believe in
it. Sometimes it is possible to prove that. But I never try to fool a patient.
It is very interesting to observe how many people disturb their sleep by
using certain rules. One of the best methods to disturb the sleep is to count to a
thousand and then back. It takes two hours, and in these two hours the person
has not slept. Yet he believes it is a means against sleeplessness, while it actually
creates it. When he is not satisfied after these two hours to find himself still
sleepless, then he says: “Even such a powerful means could not help in my case;
I must be terribly sick.” To go from one doctor to the other is also a very good
method to increase sleeplessness and get attention on the side. Some people
insist that they cannot sleep until one o'clock or without playing cards until two
o'clock. All of these rules are excuses that add to the significance of
sleeplessness.
Many persons spend their lives concerned with the disturbance of their

sleep. It is like claiming a privilege. A person who cannot sleep must be
considered in a different way. Everybody can see that he would accomplish so
much more if he could only sleep. Therefore, he has a certain privilege and
cannot be measured with the same gauge as others. We doubt whether he really
would accomplish more. In therapy, we make him understand that it is not
entirely true that he would accomplish more if he could sleep. Amount of sleep
and accomplishment are not related and cannot be measured by each other. But
many connect the two. They insist that they can sleep only if they do not drink
black coffee, or if they drink liquor. With this assumption, they regulate sleep as
they need it. They arrange their sleeplessness when they are not sure of success,
if they need an alibi for an expected failure. In that way they combine two things
which have nothing to do with each other. Sleeplessness occurs only in a
situation in which a person is confronted with a problem for which he is not
prepared.
Chapter XIX
The Individual Criminal and His Cure1
[1930g]
Some points are not necessary to emphasize to a society for prison reform,
but one point I must really stress. Coming within the province of my own
science, it concerns the means of understanding an individual and knowing why
he has developed in the way he has and not in some other way. To understand all
his actions and expressions we must find the great motive which streams through
his whole being, dominating all his symptoms and expressions. We are not
infallible, nor blessed with absolute truth. The normal mind and normal
individual do not exist. We all vary and only if we are fortunate and do not
suffer from great mistakes, do we feel normal and behave rightly.
Even if we are not pleased by this view, we must still see life in this way.
This is the only standpoint from which we can make the right approach to any
person. Otherwise, he would resent our actions. He would not speak with us; he
would not open his soul.
Now, from this point of view, we can understand that all the failures in life
are really failures in building up a style of life. If we look, for instance, at a
problem child, a neurotic or insane person, a criminal, a suicide, a sexual pervert
or a drunkard, you will find in one point they are all equal. We can choose
different names for it, but the greatest common denominator in all these failures
is a lack of social interest.
This lack of social interest means much more than not being interested in
other people. It means also that his scheme of apperception differs from what we
expect in regard to our fellowmen. He looks differently, listens differently,

concludes differently; he has different methods of receiving and answering.
Therefore, we call him abnormal.
This, then, is the task of psychology. Psychology is really concerned with
finding out why so many persons have peculiar attitudes which do not
correspond with what we expect--cooperation, social interest.
We know when an individual fails and takes another way from the one we
want for him. We know also that he develops this bent very early in his
childhood. Perhaps the first four or five years is sufficient time for establishing a
way of living. In this period, the child trains himself. He trains himself every
day, every hour, until he is a fixed unit, until he acts as an entity, has his own
eyes, his owns ears, his own heart, and what I especially emphasize, his own
degree of ability to cooperate. In this way, he continues in the world; and when
he meets problems, if he is wrongly trained, his answers will be wrong.
1 Originally published as an address to the National Committee on Prisons
and Prison Labor. Reprinted in the Indiv. Psychol. Pamphl., Vol 5., pages 46-59,
1932. Edited for readablity by Laurie J. Stein, 2004.
This is another point which must be underlined: all the problems of life
demand cooperation, demand social adjustment. This need begins very early, in
the first days of life. A child must learn to cooperate with his mother. This is the
first social problem. We can gauge his development in cooperation by observing
how he behaves when a younger child comes into the family, how he behaves in
regard to change of his environment--when he enters school and confronts the
problems of friendship; when he must train for an occupation in life, in school or
after school; and when he meets the problems of love and marriage. All these
occasions call for an interest in others. If he has not learned this interest, if he
has not trained himself in it, if he represents the variant, “unable to develop
interest in others,” then what shall we see? We shall see that he does not behave
rightly. We know why he does not behave rightly--he is not trained rightly. He
has not found the right method. From this point of view we can understand and
recognize the great movement for prison reform. We will not regard criminals
merely as guilty sinners; we can find the reasons why they have not developed in
a better way.
Different men in different schools talk about crime. Certain schools
emphasize heredity. I believe that, if we want to accomplish anything, this point
of view should disappear entirely from the world. If inherited tendencies were
the real reason for crimes, nothing could be done. If something can be done, then
heredity is not the reason. In that case, we must find a method to overcome the
difficulties of inheritance. In regard to mental ability, nobody knows what is
really inherited because on the first day the child appears in the world, exertions

are always influenced by his mother. Whatever his abilities, strength, or
characteristics, his mother’s influence has been so great that we have no means
of determining what might be inherited. Heredity can never be considered an
explanation.
Other schools emphasize endocrine glands or organic defects. I was among
the first who described the great importance of defects in the endocrine glands
and other organic defects. However, stressing these factors as causative is a
mistake. The difficulty and the burden for such children comes only if we do not
afford the right treatment and training for them. If we find the right method in
medicine or education, they can play a normal role in life.
What is important is that such children be trained in social interest. They
must learn the ability to cooperate and a true estimate of life, of the way in
which an individual must face the world. Among failures and criminals we often
find persons who have been suffering from birth and persons who have some
signs of degeneration, but we also find the same among outstanding and
worthwhile individuals. The constant factor that we find among failures is a lack
of training in cooperation.
Such a person, confronted by social problems, is not prepared for them. He
feels inferior. No human being can stand the feeling of inferiority for a long
time. He is always striving in his mind, looking for a goal of completion, of
security and he is doing it for the purpose of overcoming difficulties and
obtaining a feeling of superiority.
Children should be trained from birth in one way and this is “towards the
useful side of life.” Life demands and expects social interest and cooperation. If
they have to overcome the feeling of inferiority, they may escape towards the
useless side. On the useless side, we meet all the failures and criminals. To
strengthen the tendency toward the useful side, training in social interest is
necessary. Only an education in social interest and cooperation can overcome
defects in the individual.
We find two types very often among criminals: pampered children and
neglected children. Pampered children have a mistaken estimate of life--they
desire to receive, never to give. They find very soon that life does not pay.
“What is life for?” they ask. Now with such an attitude, they cannot develop
interest in mankind. Their tendency to help, to strive for the welfare of others is
not trained or developed. It is very easy, therefore, for them to act as persons act
who are not interested in others. When crimes are committed, we see very
clearly that those who commit them are not interested in other people. Only a
person who is interested in others can overcome difficulties and resist
committing crimes.

Not only pampered children, but also neglected children are untrained in
social interest. Neglected children do not know that such things exist. It is a great
reflection on our culture that among these neglected children we find so many
orphans, so many illegitimate children, so many unwanted children or children
who have not been as popular and loved as others. Often, among these we find
ugly children, and can understand why among criminals we so often meet the
ugly individual. An ugly child may experience lack of appreciation, may feel
unwelcome. As a result, he does not see the world as a nice place; he works
against it. The method is not found to reconcile him and he becomes a criminal.
We also find handsome criminals. These are the pampered children. We can
really distinguish very quickly--sometimes in a single moment--the great part
their physical appearance has had in building up their character. We would get
very far if we could understand such a criminal, because then we could go
further and do what is most necessary in prison reform—rehabilitate that
criminal.
All daily activities can be useful, provided that we have an understanding of
the individual criminal. We know that they must be educated. We know that we
must teach them social interest. This is a definite art and can best be
accomplished by persons who are themselves socially interested and
cooperative. You will recall particular criminals whose very looks show a lack
of social interest, who listen in a different way, who speak a different language,
whose expressions are not in accordance with what we expect.
Let us picture briefly the psychic structure of a criminal, and discuss why
he is a criminal and does not commit suicide, or become a sexual pervert--
though these may often go together. As far as my experience goes--and it is
probably true--a person who is socially not adjusted becomes a criminal when he
confronts some problem which he cannot solve, although he has failed in that
special activity, but is striving very hard to be superior. We always find some
such situation when his criminal career begins to be apparent. We know the roots
of the criminal attitude are very deep, going back to the first four or five years.
We can find the situation which was dangerous for him, which made him sick,
which made him a criminal. And we can understand the reason we find in every
similar case that he could not solve this situation, because the situation
demanded social interest and he had none.
For instance, he was unemployed, or he was incited by a bad companion, or
he met a girl who wanted presents and a “good time.” These are situations which
he could not face rightly. He could not say, “I want to solve this problem in a
useful way.”
The psychic structure of a criminal involves more than this, but these points

are most immediately connected with his lack of cooperation. He is not
interested in others. He does not make friends easily. The criminal makes friends
mostly among his own kind because he looks for others like himself. This means
that he decreases his sphere of activity and excludes other types. He wants to
have it easier. He can be a good comrade to his equals, but never towards others.
We also find--this is a very important point and should be known all over
the world--that the criminal is always a coward. Some people believe a criminal
can be a hero. Children especially are often lured to believe this; some films or
works of fiction picture the criminal as a hero. Everyone who has to do with
criminals knows that they are cowards. They are sometimes afraid of ghosts,
nearly always superstitious; they tremble in the dark and so on. We cannot be
deceived, because we have seen them escaping from the problems of life; we
have seen that they are deserters. We can never believe that the person who is
not able, does not feel able to solve as criminals say, the “terrible conditions of
life,” could be a hero, a really courageous person. We can understand also
theoretically why he cannot be courageous because courage is one part of social
interest. Only socially interested persons can be courageous, because they feel a
part of the whole; they know, they belong to this world; they know that not only
the advantages but also the disadvantages of life belong to them, are their own.
They feel at home. Therefore, they are courageous. This means courageous in
usefully meeting the normal problems of life.
A more difficult point to explain is that the criminal has a peculiar method
of apperception. He perceives all events in his own way. What does it pay? What
shall I receive? Am I ahead? And so on. These are the most important points in
the mind of a criminal. His highest goal is to conquer. Whom does he conquer?
Always weaker persons. If he is a pickpocket, the person he robs is not attentive.
If he is a burglar, he uses the dark, and isolation. If he is a murderer, he draws a
weapon at a time when the other person cannot defend himself. We will see in
all his actions the same cowardice which I have mentioned. And I am sure that if
children knew--but they generally do not know--that the criminal is always a
coward and merely a poor imitation of a hero, then they would not like the
thought of crime so much. I am also sure that the criminals, themselves, would
not like it so much.
Among children, or in the beginning of the assimilation of culture in the old
philosophies, things are generally distinguished in contradiction to or as the
antithesis of other things. The same is true of criminals. “My boy is useless,” a
woman will say. This is the last stage. “Because my boy is sick and a loafer, I
have to kill him.” There is a certain primitive intelligence to this. She means he
is not useful to her. He is in a bad way. What she does not see is that she is

erecting an antithesis--healthy, industrious and living; as against loafing and
needing to be poisoned. Or a murderer says, “This man has nice trousers and I
have no trousers; therefore, I must kill him.” Really, after he has excluded all the
useful aspects of the case, he acts intelligently. Nothing more is left for him. An
intoxicating process goes on in the mind of every criminal. He excites himself by
thinking of the goal in which he is a conqueror; in which, because he is weak, he
must conquer and where he enjoys money, girls, whatever he desires in an easy
way. Through this process, he excludes all objections and all other ways of
action.
When we study the individual criminal, we find how he plans, constructs
his crime, and resists the objections of social interest. Because he pursues me,
because he has been a friend of a man who killed my brother-in-law, therefore, I
must kill him, and so on. Because of interference in my business, as we hear
very often in America. These are the reasons. Always in pursuit of their highest
goal, which is a conquest, they are intoxicated.
One very important point is the continual battle against the police and the
laws. Every criminal feels superior; every criminal believes he is able to
overcome the police because he has really experienced this fact. We rarely find a
criminal who has not committed undiscovered crimes.
Now, imagine what it means in the mind of a criminal when he is
discovered and jailed. There is always the impression: “I have not been clever
enough. If I had been more clever, I would not have been discovered.” Even if
we electrocute him, he has this idea: “I was not clever enough.” He does not
think of other considerations. He thinks only, “A little bit more clever and I
would have conquered.” It is not very different from Napoleon when he was
sitting at Helena. He always said, “If I had been cleverer, if I had gone first to
Spain and later to Russia, I would have conquered the whole world.” Now this
“if”, you see, is always in the way, so that the criminal cannot understand.
I must also mention that we Individual Psychologists have learned and have
trained ourselves never to challenge a problem child, never to fight him. It is
useless. For the most part they are stronger, and are the conquerors. They like
very much to be challenged in order to show their strength. If we look around,
we find that criminals are always challenged. “You cannot escape me, in five
days I will have you. I will clean you up.” This is what happens both inside and
outside the prison. When they are prisoners, they are challenged too much.
Sometimes the discipline of prisons is such a challenge to them that they go out
full of revenge. Then they are not able to change. They feel the whole world is
against them, so there is no use in cooperating, contributing, creating, and being
socially interested. They are in a trap, and experience the same conditions. When

they leave prison, are on probation, or have a job, their experience is the same.
We understand that it is not possible for persons who are not psychologists or
philosophers to understand the terrible incoherence of their point of view.
Therefore, they are increasingly fixed in their style of life, their mistakes, and
their lack of social interest. No one attempts to train them in the only way to
save them. Therefore, we have so many repeated crimes.
Most criminals have always been standing in the shadow. From their
earliest childhood, they have generally experienced the austerity of life. Even
when they have been pampered, they live in what seems to him enemy country.
They want only one person and therefore, feel that the world is full of hostility.
When these pampered children come to school, they are not prepared; they are
reproached, criticized and punished through their whole life. This is not the right
situation. They come from families where there is often little social interest.
They come from broken marriages. They come from families where the father,
for instance, has not been interested, or where another child has been preferred
and thrown into more prominence as the favorite of the family. Such things we
will usually find; we will find reasons why they could not develop social
interest. We cannot demand more from them. We see that they have been
defeated, and have failed, in the most important part of their life.
Fortunately, at the same time we see that social interest must and can be
trained. In this way, we can diminish the great wave of crime which has invaded
our whole civilization. I have spoken about the cure. But how can we prevent it?
The first thought would be, “Perhaps we could teach all the parents.” This is not
possible. There is another way, however, to prevent crime. The teachers can be
trained as instruments for treatment and for the development of social interest;
they could be trained not only to teach geography, or drawing and so forth, but
also to teach and train in social interest.
The teachers must be told how to do this. I believe it would be a very
important step toward preventing not only crimes, but also all other failures of
life, if we could make the schools instruments for training in social interest and
progress.
Proposal
In order to determine the most successful method of dealing with the
criminal and in order that each of the schools should have an equal chance to
show what they can accomplish, Individual Psychology proposes the
establishment of several clinics in which the methods of the psychoanalysts, the
gland specialists, the brain-pathologists, the behaviorists, and so forth should be
tried and compared.
Discussion

Dr. William J. Ellis, 
Commissioner of New Jersey Department of Institutions and Agencies.
The Prison Survey Commission, of which Dwight W. Morrow, Ambassador
to Mexico, was Chairman in 1917, after thoroughly surveying the penal and
correctional institutions of New Jersey, with the assistance of Dean Kirchwey
and Professor Harry E. Barnes, proposed the establishment and development of a
scientific examination and classification of all offenders.
For the past twelve years, New Jersey has been utilizing the scientific
diagnostic facilities of the expert medical staff of its several correctional
institutions and their mental specialists, psychiatrists and psychologists to make
complete individual examinations, determinations and schedules of treatment
and training for all offenders committed to these institutions.
Such a plan of procedure is fundamental to the intelligent development of
correctional treatment and training, and indicates the special physical and mental
abnormalities which are so characteristic of offenders. Such clinics also make it
possible to secure the fundamental information required in order to develop a
program of medical care, to transfer to special psychopathic units any defectives
or defective delinquents, and create other devices for segregating the abnormal
offenders from those who are adapted to the correctional environment.
One of the major results of the New Jersey classification plan has been the
separation into relatively homogeneous groups of the various types of offenders.
Dr. Edgar A. Doll of the Vineland Training School, formerly Director of
Classification in the Department of Institutions and Agencies, has pointed out in
an address published by the National Committee on Prisons and Prison Labor,
the principal groups that are recognized as a result of intensive, scientific,
individual psychological and psychiatric medical study, as follows:
The prisoners are not all alike even though they may look alike to the
uninitiated. People differ inside prison just as they do outside. Scientific studies
of men in the New Jersey State Prison, tempered by the judgment of good
common sense, have made clear that at least four important groups of prisoners
exist. These are:
1. THE BETTER CLASS--Prisoners who are likely to benefit by training;
those who have made mistakes in life but have no grudge against society, are
intelligent to a greater or lesser degree, have a good personality, and are
amenable to discipline, willing and industrious.
2. THE ANTISOCIAL OR CRIMINAL GROUP--Prisoners who are
determined to “get even with society.” Those with long criminal records, who
have bad associates, vicious habits, are lazy, drug addicts, or chronic alcoholics.
This group may include a large percentage of prisoners of a high level of

intelligence.
3. DEFECTIVE DELINQUENT--Prisoners with various forms of mental
abnormality, such as defective personality, constitutional defects, epilepsy,
borderline insanity, etc. This group is sensitive, jealous, discontented, unstable,
restless and temperamentally maladjusted, but the intelligence level of such a
group may be relatively high when compared with other groups of prisoners.
4. SUBNORMAL PRISONERS--The simple feebleminded, and those of
borderline intelligence whose offenses are rather the result of their low
intelligence and suggestibility than of unfavorable attitudes toward society, and
whose low mentality makes it probable that they can never adjust themselves to
the conditions of normal society, or may do so only after long periods of
training.
Each of these groups of offenders requires a distinctly different kind of
treatment. It costs the State a great deal of money to punish criminals and to
keep them from committing further crimes by putting them in prison. The only
productive return on this expenditure comes from the reformation of criminals,
and this reformation cannot be accomplished as long as the reformable and the
unreformable get the same treatment. The habitual offender, the defective
delinquent, and the feebleminded criminals are poor risks in society. and should
not be returned to the community to prey upon it still further. On the other hand
the reformable prisoner of the better class, who is usually self-respecting, who
has made a mistake or slipped, or committed a crime without premeditation,
cannot be reclaimed by the community as long as he is treated like the other
three classes. The better type of prisoner may easily become an habitual offender
or perhaps even a delinquent, unless during imprisonment real effort is made to
restore him to the community in good health, with a good attitude, and with a
decent chance to redeem his error.
Dr. Adler's proposal that clinics be established in connection with penal and
correctional institutions is one which merits support, and in fact has already
proved advantageous in the several states where such proposals have been
undertaken. The classification program of the New York State Department of
Corrections at Sing Sing, Bedford and other New York Institutions, the work so
well developed under Commissioner Bates as Commissioner of Corrections in
Massachusetts and now projected into the federal institutions of which he is the
Superintendent, the work in the New Jersey penal and correctional institutions as
a result of the program suggested by Ambassador Morrow and Dean Kirchwey,
and similar results that are being obtained in a number of other states, argue for
the effectiveness of the individual study analysis and treatment of offenders.
However, this is not enough. If society is to reap the benefits of scientific

study and treatment of offenders, we need a wider understanding and a more
general popular support of adequately staffed medical, psychiatric and
psychological clinics in the courts, and particularly in the public school systems
throughout the land.
Our country cannot content itself with spending millions of dollars on the
apprehension of criminals, and more millions for custodial treatment or
specialized training or treatment in special public institutions. It would be a good
investment of public and private funds as well, to increase vastly the number of
specialists available to the public schools through public school clinics, and to
the juvenile courts through court clinics, such as that of Dr. William A. Healey,
of the Judge Baker Foundation, of Boston; Dr. James Plant, of the Essex County
Juvenile Court of Newark, New Jersey, and many others. This is a sane, rational,
and economic approach to the problem of understanding the offender and
preventing crime.
Dr. Frederic J. Farnell,
Chairman, State Public Welfare Commission--Rhode Island.
We cannot help agreeing with Dr. Adler in his major premise that the only
true reformation of the criminal is by his treatment as an individual. Any system
of penology which treats the criminal merely as a name or a number, without
consideration for the individual's emotional and mental characteristics, is
doomed to failure.
I cannot help wondering if any State has ever given this theory a real trial.
In fact, I think the majority of people today still regard prisons solely as a place
of punishment and revenge; but if we take this view of the matter, then our
prisons of a hundred years ago were far superior. At least their rules were more
rigid and it was more of a punishment to live in them than it is today in our
modern prisons. True, where punishment is indiscriminate, we turn out
individuals chastened perhaps, sullen, revengeful, broken-spirited or despairing
or in any of the variety of moods that different individuals will adopt according
to their make-up.
On the other hand, if restoration to useful citizenship is the primary purpose
of our prisons, and revenge, atonement or expiation for sins against society are
secondary, then the steps society has already taken to adapt penal methods to
that theory have been wavering, uncertain, and not leading in a straight path to
the goal.
Society seems half afraid to let go of the old, machine-like methods which
break as many men as they make, while at the same time recognizing a
semblance of truth in the theory that each prisoner should be treated as an
individual with his own bundle of habits, virtues and vices. We have attempted

to straddle the issue; here and there we have made half-hearted gestures toward
reformation. Occasionally, psychiatric service has been called upon; but in no
case that I know of has an earnest, scientific attempt been made to classify the
criminal and then treat him accordingly.
Dr. Adler has said some things that I cannot agree with. He says many
personal defects are found among criminals; many criminals are ugly, crippled,
or deformed. That may be true, but to deduce from this fact, this generality that
ugliness and deformity are a cause of crime seems to me to be pretty farfetched.
I would be interested to know if the number of such types is greater in prisons
than it is in any group of individuals living in the community. This idea smacks
too much of the Lombroso theory of a “criminal type.” We find many good-
looking, vigorous young men in prison, in fact, quite a good deal more than we
do deformed or crippled. I will grant you this; where the deformity assumes such
a form that it is difficult for the individual to compete on equal terms with his
fellow men, then, it might be the indirect cause of an antisocial life, or rather, an
unsocial life, resulting in the alms house type rather than the real criminal.
I wonder, too, if there is an inborn social feeling in most of us, as Dr. Adler
says, or if the reverse is true. I have heard it said that there are only three crimes
which the average man would not commit under certain circumstances and
without the objective anxiety of discovery, arrest and disgrace. These are:
Cannibalism, patricide and incest. The rest of the criminal code is easily within
the scope of almost every man’s mind, given the time, the temptation and the
certainty of escape from discovery. In other words, there is but little difference
between men in prison and men outside. Intoxication does not stifle the so-called
inborn social feelings of a man, but it does release the artificial restraints and
mental inhibitions which hold the average man within bounds; with these
removed, the anxiety of discovery and disgrace does not bother him. More
interesting than the mere fact of intoxication being a cause of crime is the cause
of the intoxication. From what is the individual trying to escape, what is the
mental conflict, the unhappiness, the uncertainty that he is trying to run away
from? Find this, and you have the root of the trouble.
Neither am I as optimistic as Dr. Adler when he says “show the criminal
that his way of living is mistaken, that his courage is not courage.” Wonderful, if
we could only do that. But what of the defectives, what of the neurotics who do
not know themselves the reason of the mental conflict that brings them into
difficulties, what of the prisoner of normal mental and emotional faculties who
has lived his whole life in an atmosphere of false values, who has so deeply
ingrained into his being these vicious habits, that not a whole lifetime of talking
and explaining will ever blast them out? What of the accidental criminal, who

breaks under environmental pressure and receives his punishment before he
enters the prison?
The defectives cannot be made normal, the habitual criminal is in most
cases unapproachable, and the accidental criminal is really no criminal at all, in
the sense that he constitutes no potential menace. This leaves but one class, the
neurotic, and it is here that the psychiatrist can do much good, by discovering the
cause of the neurosis and removing it.
It is this very fact, this slim chance of successful treatment in some cases
and the good chance in others, which makes it imperative that the prisoner be
considered as an individual and classified as such. But the work should not stop
with classification; it should continue with treatment where treatment is
indicated. Mere classification means nothing; naming flowers does not grow
them, and to pin a label “neurotic” on a criminal does not help him to get better.
I doubt if there is any State prepared to give treatment by psychiatrists to all who
need it; the only other answer is trained psychiatric workers under the direction
of the prison psychiatrist.
Dr. Adler spoke truly when he said that a great step in prevention would be
to educate parents and teachers for a better understanding of human beings. I
hope to see the day when the school without the services of a psychiatrist will be
as rare as the school without a dental clinic is today. It is too late to reform the
parents of the children of today; we must start with the parents of tomorrow who
are the children in our schools today.
However, we must be careful not to exaggerate the possibilities of
psychiatry. Not all criminals are abnormal, and psychiatry should limit its
treatment to the patients frenzied by their instincts, swayed and controlled by a
mental conflict that gets them into trouble. For the so-called normal criminal, I
can see no other solution than their restraint by anxiety over painful
consequences which are the result of criminal justice. The number of these
individuals would be comparatively small after deducting the defective, the
neurotic and the accidental.
One thing is certain: Our present common treatment of a heterogeneous
group is wrong. It is lazy, unscientific and slipshod; almost anything else would
be an improvement.
I do think we are making a serious mistake, however, if we expect
Individual Psychology to be a panacea. It can reclaim and restore many
criminals to usefulness, but it cannot work miracles; it can prevent the making of
criminals in our prisons, for it is a fact that criminals are made there as well as in
the community. I can prevent this by eliminating the ruthless, arbitrary infliction
of the same type of treatment on the sheep and the goat.

I read that in New Jersey, Dr. Doll has distinguished the various types as
follows:
1. The better class, including the accidental criminal. 
2. The antisocial, vicious type of professional criminal. 
3. Defective delinquents, those with a mental abnormality. 
4. The subnormal or feebleminded. 
To these four were added two more: the insane and the indigent, neither of
which, in my mind, are criminals at all. The first is sick; the second merely unfit
to compete.
However, the classification is a good one. I have also made a classification: 
1. The accidental criminal, the otherwise upright citizen who suddenly goes
amuck because of environmental circumstances. (He may evade responsibility
through a plea of insanity.) We seem to forget that if the individual is guilty, no
matter what his mental condition may be, society will be obliged to take some
action to control him and protect itself. If we concede this to be true, it would
seem infinitely better that we cease requiring our judges to prophesy when the
individual is going to be fit for release by fixing an absolute maximum and to so
amend the law that if the court has determined the individual to be guilty, he be
committed rather than sentenced. The date of his release should then be
determined not by the passage of time, not by the rolling around of the date of
the calendar, but because significant changes in the man's attitude toward society
have been manifested and definite arrangements have been made for his return to
freedom under competent supervision and in a capacity in which he may be
expected to successfully function. If such a procedure could be legalized, it
would afford an opportunity to try out the methods of the specialists as
suggested by Dr. Adler. It seems to me that this should be done because in the
formulation of a system for the treatment of the criminal, we cannot afford to
overlook any avenue of approach and treatment.
NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON PRISONS AND PRISON LABOR
Incorporated under the Laws of the State of New York Endorsed by the National
Information Bureau
Discussion by 
DR. WILLIAM J. ELLIS, Commissioner, Department of Institutions and
Agencies, State of New Jersey
DR. FREDERIC J. FARNELL, Chairman,
Public Welfare Commission, State of Rhode Island
DR. WALTER N. THAYER, Superintendent of Prisons, State of Maryland 
NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON PRISONS AND PRISON LABOR 
250 West 57th Street. New York

Chapter XX
Individual Psychology1
[1930]
The point of departure for this line of research is in a work entitled “Die
Aggressionstrieb im Leben und in der Neurose,” published in 1906 in a
collective volume, Heilen und Bilden (1). Even at that time I was engaged in a
lively controversy with the Freudian school, and in opposition to them, I devoted
my attention in that paper to the relation of the child and the adult to the
demands of the external world. I tried to present the multifarious forms of attack
and defense, of modification of the self and of the environment, effected by the
human mind, and launched on the momentous task of repudiating the sexual
etiology of mental phenomena. In a vague way I saw even then that the
impulsive life of man suffers variations and contortions, curtailments and
exaggerations, relative to the kind and degree of its aggressive power. In
accordance with the present outlook of Individual Psychology, I should rather
say: relative to the way the power of cooperation has developed in childhood.
The Freudian school, which at that time was purely sexual psychology, has
accepted this primitive-impulse theory without any reservations, as some of its
adherents readily admit.
I myself was too deeply interested in the problem of what determined the
various forms of attack upon the outer world. From my own observations and
supported by those of older authors, also perhaps guided by the concept of a
locus minoris resistentiae, I arrived at the notion that inferior organs might be
responsible for the feeling of psychic inferiority, and in the year 1907 recorded
my studies concerning this subject in a volume entitled Studie über
Minderwertigkeit der Organe und die seelische Kompensation (2). The purpose
of the work was to show that children born with hereditary organic weaknesses
exhibit not only a physical necessity to compensate for the defect, and tend to
overcompensate, but also that the entire nervous system may take part in this
compensation; especially the mind may suffer a striking exaggeration in the
direction of the defective function (breathing, eating, seeing, hearing, talking,
moving, feeling, or even thinking), so that this overemphasized function may
become the focus of life, insofar as a “successful compensation” occurs. This
compensatory increase, which has originated and continued the development of
a human race blessed with inferior organs, may in favorable cases also affect the
endocrine glands, and is regularly reflected in the condition of the sexual glands,
their inferiority and their compensation--which seems to suggest some
connection between individual traits and physical heredity. The link between
organic inferiority and psychic effects, which to this day cannot be explained in

any other way, but merely assumed, was evident to me in the mind's experience
of the inferior organ, by which the former is plunged into a constant feeling of
inferiority. Thus, I could introduce the body and its degree of health as a factor
in mental development.
1 Originally published in Psychologies of 1930, chapter 21, pages 395-405,
Clark University Press, Worcester, Massachusetts, 1930. English Translation by
Susanne Langer. Reprinted in G. Lindzey & C. S. Hall (Ed.) Theories of
Personality: Primary Source and Research. New York: Wiley, pages 97-104,
1965. Reprinted in S.R. Maddi (Ed.) Perspectives on Personality: A
Comparative Approach. Boston: Little, Brown, pages 249-259, 1971. Edited for
readability by Laurie J. Stein, 2004.
Experts will certainly not fail to see that the whole of our psychiatry has
tended in this direction, both in part before that time and quite definitely
thereafter. The works of Kretschmer, Jaensch, and many others rest upon the
same basis. But they are content to regard the psychic minus quantities as
congenital epiphenomenona of the physical organic inferiority, without taking
account the immediate experience of physical disability which is the key to
failures of performance, as soon as the demands of the outer world and the
creative power of the child lead him into “wrong” alleys and force a one-sided
interest upon him. What I treated there as failure appeared to me later as a
premature curtailment of the cooperative faculty, the social impulse, and a
greatly heightened interest for the self.
This work also furnished a test for organic inferiority. As proofs of
inferiority, I mention insufficient development of physical form, reflexes, and
functions, or retardation of the latter. Defective development of the nerves in
connection with the organ and of the brain-centers involved was also considered.
But I insisted upon as a decisive factor compensation which under favorable
circumstances occurs in any one of these parts. A valuable by-product of this
study, and one which has not yet been sufficiently appreciated, was the
discovery of the significance of the birthmark as an indication that embryonic
development at that point or in that segment had not been quite successful.
Schmidt, Eppinger, and others have found this insight correct in many respects. I
feel confident that in the study of cancer, too, as I suggested in this connection,
the segmental naevus will someday furnish a clue to the etiology of carcinoma.
In trying to bridge the chasm between physical and mental developments
with a theory that vindicated in some measure the doctrine of heredity, I
remarked that the stresses engendered by the relation between the congenitally
inferior organ and the demands of the external world, though greater than those
related to approximately normal organs, were none the less mitigated by the

variability of the world's demands. Therefore, we have to regard them as merely
relative. I repudiated the notion of the hereditary character of psychological
traits, in that I referred their origin to the various intensities of organic functions
in each individual. Afterward, I added that in cases of abnormal development,
children lack guidance, so their activity (aggression) may develop in
unaccountable ways. The inferior organs offer a temptation, but by no means a
necessity for neuroses or other mental miscarriages. Herewith, I established the
problem of the educating such children with the aim of prevention. Thus, the
family history, with all its plus and minus factors, became an index to the serious
difficulties which might be expected and combated in early childhood. As I said
at that time, a hostile attitude toward the world might be the result of excessive
stresses which must express themselves somehow in specific characteristics.
In this way, I was confronted with the problem of character. We have seen
many nebulous speculations on this subject. Character has almost universally
been regarded as a congenital entity. My conviction that the doctrine of
congenital mental traits was erroneous helped me considerably. I came to realize
that characters were guiding threads, ready attitudes for the solution of the
problems of life. The idea of an “arrangement” of all psychical activities became
more and more convincing. Therewith I reached the ground which to this day
has been the foundation of Individual Psychology, the belief that all psychical
phenomena originate in the particular creative force of the individual, and are
expressions of his personality.
But what is this driving force behind the personality? And why do we find
mostly individuals whose psychological growth was not successful? Might it be
that, after all, certain congenitally defective impulses, i.e., congenital
weaknesses, decided the fate of our mental development, as almost all
psychiatrists supposed? Is it due to divine origin that an individual, that the
human race may progress at all?
First, I had realized that children born with defective organs or afflicted by
injuries early in life go wrong in the misery of their existence, constantly
deprecate themselves, and usually behave differently all their lives from what
might be expected of normal people. Then, I took another step, and discovered
that children may be artificially placed in the same straits as if their organs were
defective. If we make their work in very early life so hard that even their
relatively normal organs are not equal to it, then they are in the same distress as
those with a defective physique, and from the same unbearable condition of
stress they will give wrong answers as soon as life puts their preparation to any
test. Thus, I found two further categories of children who are apt to develop an
abnormal sense of inferiority: pampered children and hated children.

From this period of my complete defection from Freud's point of view, and
absolute independence of thought, date such works as Die seelische Wirrel der
Trigeminusneuralgie (3). Here I attempted to show how, besides cases of
organic origin, there were also certain ones in which excessive partial increase of
blood-pressure, caused by emotions such as rage, may under the influence of
severe inferiority feelings give rise to physical changes. This was followed by a
study, decisive for the development of Individual Psychology, entitled Das
Problem der Distanz, wherein I demonstrated that every individual, by reason of
his degree of inferiority feeling, hesitates before the solution of one of the three
great problems of life, stops or circumvents, and preserves his attitude in a state
of exaggerated tension through psychological symptoms. The three great
problems of life, to which everyone must somehow answer by his attitude, I
named: (a) society, (b) vocation, (e) love. Next came a work on Das
Unbewusste, wherein I tried to prove that upon deeper inspection there appears
no contrast between the conscious and the unconscious, that both cooperate for a
higher purpose, that our thoughts and feelings become conscious as soon as we
are faced with a difficulty, and unconscious as soon as our personality-value
requires it. At the same time, I tried to explain the fact what other authors had
used for their explanations under the name of conflict, sense of guilt, or
ambivalence was symptomatic of a hesitant attitude, for the purpose of evading
the solution of one of the problems of life. Ambivalence and polarity of
emotional or moral traits present themselves as an attempt at a multiple solution
or rejection of a problem.
This and some other works dating from the time of the self-emancipation of
Individual Psychology have been published in a volume titled Praxis und
Theorie der Individualpsychologie (6). This was also the time when our great
Stanley Hall turned away from Freud and joined the supporters of Individual
Psychology, together with many other American scholars who popularized the
“inferiority and superiority complexes” throughout their country.
I have never failed to point out that the whole human race is blessed with
deficient organs, deficient for coping with nature; that consequently the whole
race is compelled to seek the way to bring it into some sort of harmony with the
exigencies of life; and that we make mistakes along the way, very much like
those we observe in pampered or neglected children. I have quoted one example
especially, where the errors of our civilization may influence the development of
an individual, and that is the underestimation of women in our society. From the
sense of female inferiority, which men and women alike possess, both sexes
have derived an exaggerated desire for masculinity, a superiority complex which
is often extremely harmful, a will to conquer all difficulties of life in the

masculine fashion, which I have called the masculine protest.
Now I began to see clearly in every psychical phenomenon the striving for
superiority. It runs parallel to physical growth. It is an intrinsic necessity of life
itself. It lies at the root of all solutions of life's problems, and is manifested in the
way we meet these problems. All our functions follow its direction; rightly or
wrongly they strive for conquest, mastery, success. The impetus from minus to
plus is never-ending. The urge from “below” to “above” never ceases. Whatever
premises all our philosophers and psychologists dream of--self preservation,
pleasure principle, equalization--all these are but vague representations, attempts
to express the great upward drive. The history of the human race points in the
same direction. Willing, thinking, talking, seeking after rest, after pleasure,
learning, understanding, work and love, reveal the essence of this eternal
melody. Whether we think or act more wisely or less, we always move along the
lines of that upward tendency. In our right and wrong conceptions of life and its
problems, in the successful or the unsuccessful solution of any question, this
striving for perfection is uninterruptedly at work. Even where foolishness,
imbecility, or inexperience, seem to belie any striving to conquer some defect, or
tend to depreciate it, the will to conquer operates. From this network which is
part of the relationship of “man-cosmos,” no one may hope to escape. For even
if anyone wanted to escape, he would still find himself in the general system,
striving “upward” from “below.” This not only establishes the structure of our
reason, but also reveals the fundamental fact of life.
The origin of humanity and the beginning of infant life rub it in with every
psychic act: “Achieve! Arise! Conquer!” This longing for the abrogation of
every imperfection never leaves us. In the search for relief, in Faustian wrestling
against the forces of nature, rings the basic chord: “I relinquish thee not, thou
bless me withal.” The ever unsatisfied longing for solution of the problems of
life reflects this hunger for perfection of some sort.
This, now, appeared to me as the fundamental law of all spiritual
expression: the total melody is to be found repeatedly in every one of its parts, as
a common theme in every individual craving for power, for victory over the
difficulties of life.
Therewith I recognized a further premise which agreed with older
philosophies, but conflicted with modern psychology: the unity of the
personality. Not merely a premise, this be demonstrated to a certain extent. As
Kant has said, we can never understand a person if we do not presuppose his
unity. Individual Psychology can now add to that: this unity, which we must
presuppose, is the work of the individual and must continue in the way it
originally found toward victory.

These considerations led me to the conviction that in the first four or five
years of life, a goal is set for the need and drive of psychical development, a goal
toward which all its currents flow. Such a goal has not only the function of
determining a direction, of promising security, power, and perfection, but also
should awaken feelings which promise them. Thus, the individual mitigates his
sense of weakness in the anticipation of achieving his goal.
Here again we see the meaninglessness of congenital psychic traits. Not that
we could deny them. We have no possible way of getting at them. Whoever
draws conclusions from the results makes matters too simple. He overlooks the
thousand influences after birth, and fails to see the power in the necessity of
acquiring a goal.
The establishing of a goal compels the unity of the personality because it
draws the stream of all spiritual activity into its definite direction. Itself a
product of the common, fundamental sense of inferiority--a sense derived from
genuine weakness, not from any comparison with others--the goal of victory in
turn forces the direction of all powers and possibilities toward itself. Thus, we
can see every phase of psychical activity within one frame, as though it were the
end of some earlier phase and the beginning of a succeeding one. This was a
further contribution of Individual Psychology to modern psychology in general:
it insisted on the indispensability of finalism for the understanding of all
psychological phenomena No longer could causes, powers, instincts, impulses,
and the like serve as explanatory principles, but the final goal alone.
Experiences, traumata, or sexual-development mechanisms do not yield an
explanation, but the perspective in which these have been regarded, the
individual way of seeing them, subordinates all life to the ultimate goal
This final aim, abstract in its purpose of assuring superiority, fictitious in its
objective of conquering all the difficulties of life, must now appear in concrete
form in order to meet its task in actuality. Deity in its widest sense, it is
perceived by the childish imagination, and under the exigencies of hard reality,
as victory over men, over difficult enterprises, over social or natural limitations.
It appears in our attitude toward others, toward our vocation, toward the opposite
sex. Thus, we find concrete single purposes, such as: to operate as a member of
the community or to dominate it, to attain security and triumph in our chosen
career, to approach the other sex or to avoid it. We may always trace in these
special purposes what sort of meaning the individual has found in his existence,
and how he proposes to realize that meaning.
If, then, the final goal established in early childhood exerts such an
influence for better or worse upon the development of the given psychical
forces, our next question must be: What are the sources of the uniqueness we

find in final aims? Could we not introduce another causal factor here? What
causes the differences in individual attitudes, if the same aim of superiority
actuates everyone?
Speaking of this last question, our human language is incapable of
rendering all the qualities within a superiority goal and of expressing its
innumerable differences. Certainty, power, perfection, deification, superiority,
victory, etc., are but poor attempts to illumine its endless variants. Only after we
have comprehended the partial expressions which the final goal effects, are we
in any position to determine specific differences.
If there is any causal factor in the psychical mechanism, it is the common
and often excessive sense of inferiority. But this continuous mood is only
activating, a drive, and does not reveal the way to compensation and
overcompensation. Under the pressure of the first years of life, there is no
philosophical reflection. There are only impressions, feelings, and a desire to
renew the pleasurable ones and exclude the painful ones. For this purpose all
energies are mustered, until motion of some sort results. However, training or
motion of any sort forces the establishment of an end. There is no motion
without an end. And so, in this way, a final goal which promises satisfaction
becomes fixed. Perhaps, if we wanted to produce hypotheses, we might add: Just
as the body approximates an ideal form posited with the germ-plasm, so does the
mind, as a part of the total life. Certainly it is obvious that the soul (mind--das
seelische Organ) exhibits some systematic definite tendency.
Written at the time of these formulations, my book, Ueber den nervösen
Charakter (7), introduced special emphasis on finalism into psychology. Also, I
continued to trace the connection between organic inferiority and its
psychological consequences, trying to show how in such cases the goal of life is
found in the type of overcompensation and consequent errors. As one of these
errors I mentioned particularly the masculine protest developed under the
pressure of a civilization which has not yet freed itself from overestimation of
the masculine principle or from an abuse of antithetic points of view. I also
explained the imperfection of childish modes of realizing the fictitious ideal as
the chief cause for the differences in style of living--the unpredictable character
of childish expression, which moves in the uncontrollable realm of error.
By this time, the system of Individual Psychology was well enough
established to be applied to certain special problems. Zum Problem der
Homosexualität (8) described that aberration as a neurotic construct erroneously
built out of early childhood impressions, and recorded researches and findings
published at greater length in the Handbuch der normalen und pathologischen
Physiologic (9). Uncertainty in the sexual role, overestimation of the opposite

sex, fear of the latter, and a craving for easy, irresponsible successes proved to
be the contributing, but by no means compelling factors. Uncertainty in the
solution of the erotic problem and fear of failure in this direction lead to
abnormal functioning.
More and more clearly, I now understood the way in which the varieties of
failure could be explained. In all human failure, in the waywardness of children,
neurosis and neuropsychosis, crime, suicide, alcoholism, morphinism,
cocainism, sexual perversion, in fact in all nervous symptoms, we may detect the
lack of a proper degree of social feeling. In all my former work I had used the
idea of the individual's attitude toward society as the main consideration. The
demands of society, not as a stable institution, but as a living, striving, victory-
seeking mass, were always present in my thoughts. The total impact of this
striving and the power it must exert on each individual had always been one of
my main themes. Now I attained somewhat more clarity in the matter. However
we may judge people, whatever we try to understand about them, what we aim at
when we educate, heal, improve, condemn--we always base it on the same
principle: social feeling! cooperation! Anything that we estimate as valuable,
good, right, and normal, we estimate simply insofar as it is “virtue” from the
point of view of an ideal society. In a community which can preserve itself only
through cooperation, the individual becomes a part of this great whole through
socially enforced division of labor, through association with a member of the
opposite sex, and finds his task prescribed by this society. And not only his task,
but also his preparation and ability to perform it.
The unequivocally given fact of our organic inferiority necessitates social
solidarity. Women during pregnancy and confinement, and the prolonged
helplessness of childhood require the aid of others. The preparation of the child
for a complicated, but protective and therefore necessary civilization and labor
requires the cooperation of society. The need for security in our personal
existence leads automatically to a cultural modification of our impulses and
emotions and of our individual attitude toward friendship, social intercourse, and
love. The social life of man emanates inevitably from the man-cosmos relation,
and makes every person a result and a creator of society.
It is a gratuitous burden to ask science whether the social instinct is
congenital or acquired, as gratuitous as the question of congenital instincts of
any sort. We can see only the results of an evolution. And if we are to be
permitted a question at all concerning the beginnings of that evolution, it is only
this--whether anything can be evolved at all for which no possibilities are given
before birth. This possibility exists, as we may see through the results of
development, in the case of human beings. The fact that our sense-organs behave

the way they do, that through them we may acquire impressions of the outer
world, may combine these physically and mentally in ourselves, shows our
connection with the cosmos. That trait we have in common with all living
creatures. What distinguishes man from other organisms, however, is that he
must conceive his superiority goal in the social sense as part of a total
achievement. The reasons for this certainly lie in the greater need of the human
individual and in the consequent greater mobility of his body and mind, which
forces him to find a firm vantagepoint in the chaos of life, a dov pon Viu !
Because of this enforced sociability, life presents us with only these
problems which require the ability to cooperate for their solution. To hear, see,
or speak “correctly” means to lose one's self completely in another or in a
situation, to become identified with him or with it. The capacity for
identification, which makes us capable of friendship, love, pity, and vocation, is
the basis of the social sense and can be exercised only in conjunction with
others. In this intended assimilation of another person, or of a situation, lies the
whole meaning of comprehension. And in the course of this identification we are
able to conjure up all sorts of feelings and affects, such as we experience not
only in dreams but also in waking life, in neurosis and psychosis. It is always the
fixed style of life, the ultimate ideal, that dominates and selects. The style of life
is what turns our experiences into reasons for our attitude, that calls up these
feelings and determines conclusions in accordance with its own purposes. Our
identification with the ultimate ideal makes us optimistic or pessimistic, hesitant
or bold, selfish or altruistic.
The tasks presented to an individual, as well as the means of their
performance, are conceived and formulated within the framework of society.
Unless deprived of his mental capacities, no one can escape this frame. Only
within this framework is psychology possible. Even if we add for our own time
the aids of civilization and the socially determined pattern of our examples, we
still find ourselves confronted with the same inescapable conditions.
From this point of view, we may look back. As far as we can reasonably
determine, after the fourth or fifth year of life, the style of life has been
fashioned as a prototype with its particular way of approaching life, its strategy
for conquering it, its degree of ability to cooperate. These foundations of
individual development do not alter, unless perchance some harmful errors of
construction are recognized by the subject and corrected. Whoever has not
acquired the necessary degree of social sense in childhood, will not have it later
in life, except under the above-mentioned special conditions. No amount of
bitter experience can change his style of life, as long as he has not gained
understanding. The whole work of education, cure, and human progress can be

furthered only along lines of better comprehension.
Only one question remains: Which influences are harmful and which are
beneficial in determining differences in the style of life, i.e., in the capacity for
cooperation? Here we touch upon the preparation for cooperation. Of course,
deficiencies become most clearly visible when the individual's capacity to
cooperate is tested. Life does not spare us these demands. We are always on
trial, in the development of our sense-organs, our attitude toward others, our
understanding of others, our morals, our philosophy of life, our political
position, our aesthetic judgments, our attitude toward the welfare of others,
toward love and marriage, n our whole behavior. As long as we are not tested, as
long we are without any trials or problems, we may doubt our own status as a
fellow of the community. But as soon we face any problem of existence, which
always involves cooperative ability, then it will unfailingly become apparent--as
in a geographical examination--how far preparation for cooperation extends
The first social situation that confronts a child is its relation to its mother,
from the very first day. A mother uses her educational skill to first awaken the
child's interest in another person. If she understands how to train this interest in
the direction of cooperation, all the congenital and acquired capacities of the
child will converge in the direction of social sense. If she binds the child to
herself exclusively, life will bear for him the meaning that all other persons
should be excluded as much as possible. His position in the world is thereby
rendered difficult, as difficult as that of defective or neglected children. Growing
up in a hostile world, they all develop a low degree of cooperative sense. Often
in such cases, children fail to adjust to the father, brothers and sisters, or more
distant persons. If the father fails to penetrate the circle of the child's interest, or
if by reason of exaggerated rivalry the brothers and sisters are excluded, or if
because of some social shortcoming or prejudice the remoter environment is
ruled out of his sphere, then the child will encounter serious trouble in acquiring
a healthy social sense. All failures later in life are rooted in this early period of
infancy. The question of responsibility will naturally have to be waived there,
since the debtor is unable to pay what is required of him.
Individual Psychology draws many conclusions in regard to these errors
and erroneous deductions of early childhood, gathered from contemplation of
this complex relationship. They are recorded in many articles in the
Internationalen Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, in my Understanding
Human Nature (10), in lndividualpsychologie in der Schule (11), and in Science
of Living (12). These works deal with problems of waywardness, neurosis and
psychosis, drunkenness, sexual perversion, criminality, and suicide. Problems of
society, vocation, and love have been included in the scope of these studies. In

Die Technik der Individualpsychologie ( 13) I have published a detailed account
of a case of fear and compulsion neurosis.
Individual Psychology considers the essence of therapy to lie in making the
patient aware of his lack of cooperative power, and to convince him of the origin
of this lack in early childhood maladjustments. What passes during this process
is no small matter; his power of cooperation is enhanced by collaboration with
the doctor. His “inferiority complex” is revealed as erroneous. Courage and
optimism are awakened. And the proper “meaning of life” dawns upon him.
We may begin treatment at any point in the spiritual life. The following
three points have recommended themselves to me, among others: (a) to infer
some of the patient's situation from his place in the order of births, since each
successive child usually has a somewhat different position from the others; (b) to
infer from his earliest childhood recollections some dominant interest, since the
creative tendency of the imagination always produces fragments of the life ideal
(Lebensstyl); (c) to apply the individualistic interpretation to his dream-life,
through which we may discover in what particular way he conjures up emotions
and sensations contrary to common sense, in order to carry out his style of life
more successfully.
If we seem to have discovered the guiding thread of the patient's life, we
must test this discovery through a great number of expressive gestures on his
part. Only a perfect coincidence of the whole and all the parts gives us the right
to say: I understand. Then the therapist himself will feel that, if he had grown up
under the same misapprehensions, if he had harbored the same ideal, had the
same notions concerning the meaning of life, had acquired an equally low degree
of social sense, he would have acted and lived in an “almost” similar manner.

REFERENCES
1. ADLER, A. Der aggressionstrieb im Leben und in der Neurose. In Heilen
und Bilden. (3rd ed.) Munich: Bergmann, 1906. 
2. _____ Studie uber Minderesertigkeit der Organe und die seelische
Kompensation. (2nd ed.) Munich: Bergmann, 1907. Pp. vii+92. 
3. _____ Die seelische Wirzel der Trigeminusneuralgie. 
4. _____ Das Problem der Distanz. 
5. _____ Das Unbewusste. 
6. _____ Praxis und Theorie der Individualpychologie. (2nd ed.) Munich:
Bergmann, 1924. Pp. v+527. The practice and theory of individual psychology.
New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1924. 
7. _____Ueber den nervosen Charakter: Grundzuge einer vergleichenden
Individualpsychologie und Psychotherapie. Wiesbaden: Bergmann, 1912. Pp.
vii+l96. The neurotic constitution: outline of comparative individualistic
psychology and psychotherapy. (Trans. by B. Glueck & J. E. Lind.) New Yorlc:
Moffat, Yard, 1917. Pp. xxiii+456. 
8. _____Zum Problem der Homosexualitat. Munich: Reinhardt, 1917. 
9. _____Handbuch der normalen und pathologichen Physiologie. Berlin:
Springer. 
10. _____Menschenkenntnis. (2nd ed.) Leipzig: Hirzel, 1928. Pp. vii+ 230.
Understanding human nature. (Trans. by W. B. Wolfe.) New York: Greenberg,
1927. Pp. xiii+286. 
11. _____Individualpsychologie in der Schule. Leipzig: Hirzel. 
12. _____Science of living. New York: Greenberg, 1929. 
13. _____Die Technik der Individualpsychologie. 1. Die Kuntz, eine Lebens-und
Krankengeschichte zu lesen. Munich: Bergmann, 1928. Pp. iv+146. The case of
Miss R New York: Greenberg, 1929. 
14. _____Problems of neurosis. London: Kegan Paul, 1929.
Chapter XXI
Again--The Unity of the Neuroses1 2
[1930]
The casual observer, who cannot get beyond the outward forms,
movements, and characteristics of symptoms, searches for them in light of their
orientation and terminology. He appears to seek a desired certainty in
differentiating among them, as if by contrasting, naming, and by schematizing
them, he can find some form of order. Therefore, an anxiety neurosis is

contrasted with an obsessive neurosis, and both with a phobia, all of them to
manicdepressive psychosis, to melancholia, to dementia praecox, to paranoia,
etc. And again, all these manifestations of a failed lifestyle drift imperceptibly
and unconsciously into a stark contrast with other “abnormal” lifestyles such as
alcoholism, drug addiction, criminal tendencies, sexual perversions, etc. The
human tendency for security, for dominance over the disturbing uncertainty in
life, makes it seem reasonable that everyone begins from a secure starting point
for his observations by establishing a contrast, by sharply differentiating
between the “normal” and “abnormal.” By doing so, the fact that the “norm” is a
goal and never an actual achievement is overlooked. Whoever retains an
unfettered view will easily be convinced that we face variations and never
opposites.
However, even anyone who believes that he can see more deeply has not
freed himself entirely of this tendency to see things as opposites. In my Studie
über Minderwertigkeit von Organen (Study of Organ Inferiority) (1907) I
attributed a large part of neuroses and psychoses to congenital organ inferiority,
including the endocrine glands. I also took into consideration the impact of the
environment, which confronts the individual with plus and minus variations,
thereby creating difficulties, which the overburdened individual, responding
quickly, often declares as “abnormal.” As I understand him, Kretschmer, in a
starkly contrasting view from the perspective of congenital organ inferiority, had
later made it the basis for differentiating the “pyknik” and “schizoid” types
without regard for the significance of environmental factors. From our
viewpoint, we would have to say about his results that the pyknik type is more
agreeable to the demands of life than the schizoid who has fewer chances of
becoming acceptable. Furthermore, if we could provide both types of persons
with a more suitable environment, in particular during the formative period, if
we could find a suitable method of education for them, then both would no
longer be abnormal to us, not to mention being opposite types. Evidence that
these more favorable environmental conditions can be found is that many of
these types remain fully normal. Also, many behave as if they belong to the
other type and as Kretschmer explains, there are mixed cases which he relates
back to a mixture of different organ tendencies. On the other hand, we ascribe
this to alleviated or aggravated conditions in life. We have been able to establish
in every case of schizophrenia which could be examined carefully that a
vulnerable prototype responded to more difficult life problems with an
understandable, although not justifiable severing of relationships.
1 Originally published as “Nochmals--die Einheit der Neurosen” in the
Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. VIII, p.201-216, 1930. 

2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. Editing assistance by Kurt A.
Adler, M.D., Ph.D.
There is more to be said on that point. The artful construction of a style of
life, one that is not only reactive, but also to a large extent active, is not
measurable nor does it develop causally. What makes it significant is always the
concretized imaginary life goal, in the sense of superiority, which in the case of
the “abnormal” person means a greater inability to cooperate. The narrow frame
of reference in which the discouraged, the neurotic who lacks the ability to
cooperate, develops a system of relationships is the last space left him to protect
himself (striving after superior security) against anticipated failure, after
excluding all other ways toward better cooperation. As for the compulsion,
whether in the form of an obsessive-compulsive neurosis or any other psychosis
and neurosis, the monotonous forms of his expressions, iterations, obsessive
repetitions, etc., are not only to express, protect, or fix that constricted space, but
are the last remnant of life and energy of a pathetic striving for personal
superiority, formed by the compulsion to exclude a “normal,” that is, cooperative
life. The compulsion in the psychoneurosis and the solidifying of a symptom aim
at overcoming the inferiority feelings, as does every other form of expression in
the lifestyle of an individual. However, they draw their strength and their
structure as compulsion out of the obsession to exclude other forms of
movement. If we hope to find compulsion in obsessive-compulsive neurosis, or
in any other psychic, obsessive, neurotic symptom solely through the structure of
the symptom, as is usually tried in “psychopathology,” then we will not possibly
come close to understanding its connection with guilt, sadism, or even the
complex manifestation of a sexual desire or act from childhood.
We depend on analogies to interpret symptoms. Within the confines of the
frame of reference of the “abnormal” discussed above, the variety, changing
manifestations, and the adjustment to new problems and demands of the day are
eliminated from life. To a certain degree this eliminating and repetition exist in
every person. What we call “character,” contrary to the views of contemporary
characterologists who surface like herrings, is the constantly repeated guidelines
by which a person behaves because of his style of life when faced by the
problems of life. Indeed, we can only uncover the style of life when by
abstracting we exclude less suitable ways of expressing it. It is the same with
recognizing a style in painting, architecture, and music. We cannot understand
either a healthy or a sick person unless we comprehend, either consciously or
unconsciously, his usual, repeated ways of expressing himself. Also, our ability
to conceptualize, requires a compulsion to exclude. In 1912, I presented in my
book Ueber den nervösen Character (On the Nervous Character) how essential

experiencing is to us. I explained clearly the extent to which the neurotic person
in his style of life is more rigid, more confined, and how he is nailed to the cross
of his constricted, personal (not cooperative) superiority fiction. What is even
worse to me is if a psychiatrist is so blinded by his analogies that he regards
everything that does not fit them to be the effect of an organic failure and the
resulting irritations as identical with psychological obsessiveness, and then
insists that the former is causing the latter. This is only a short step from
deferring to heredity which, by necessity, would exclude as evidence everything
psychological.
A psychiatrist who presumes that neuroses and other malfunctions are
inherited leaves no other choice but suffering or searching for a more adaptive
style of life, as might be appropriate for a psychological cripple. He will also
find it easier to explain the differences in the variety of neuroses, and describe
all obvious as well as subtle symptoms and incidents as innate and the result of
heredity. Whether he likes it or not, he is prejudicing the contrast between a
healthy constitution (a person's prevailing state of health) and a sick or abnormal
constitution. When there is a contradiction, as in cases where there are no
symptoms in “families with hereditary problems,” he would protect his position
by assuming mutants, or by invoking Mendel's law. The connection between the
outbreak of symptoms and the situation that provoked them is simply
disregarded; the variety of lifestyles as well as the lifestyle itself are seen only in
terms of the resulting symptoms so that someone is born to be lazy, a thief,
alcoholic, melancholic, schizophrenic, liar, prostitute, masochist, sadist, or
homosexual. Healing is sought in the treatment of glands or with medication. On
this level of scholarship, none want to know about training or intelligent
preparation that cause those final results. Such people also disregard the unity of
the lifestyle that existed since early childhood. External differences in character,
feeling, and desiring are regarded as contrasts and ambivalences; the wonderful
harmony with the lifestyle is not recognized. The tension that precedes the
advent of symptoms that cause relief is contrasted with the earlier, apparently
healthy, condition and is described as endogenous. The question is never asked
why this happens at just that moment, when behavior seems to have changed,
when the need for cooperation appears stronger in the discouraged person, and
when he should respond with the social interest that he lacks.
Freudian psychology contains elements from various other directions, just
as does every other school of psychology. Thus, hereditarianism includes a
belief in innate components of masochism, sadism, and syphilis. In many
instances we can find similarities in Individual Psychology. The Freudian
advantages, which, noticeably are attributed only to its creator rather than to the

students who underwent psychoanalysis, lie in the unwitting premise that a
unified lifestyle exists. It is being accessed by psychoanalysis with a master key
which is the conscious use of the sexual libido. This key is a wrong, even if it is
scientifically approved--a fiction. Since the structure of the libido also depends
on the lifestyle, which is the only significant underlying factor, the intelligent
use of this key could also discover the lifestyle within the libido, or at least could
be applied unconsciously. Here is one of many examples: The Oedipus complex
could not even be conceived without the author unconsciously considering the
boy's inferiority feeling, his striving for superiority over the father, and finally
the pampering by the mother, i.e., the underlying factors which could be
summarized as the result of a failed upbringing that could lead to excluding the
father. In rare cases, this could also create conscious or unconscious thoughts of
killing the father as a concrete expression of his elimination. If we see warm and
cold as rigid opposites, then we might perceive the infinite varieties of
relationships as if in their greater disparities they appear as contradistinctions,
when actually their significance is in the degree to which the individual is able to
cooperate. This is not a sweeping critique of Freud's teachings, but a critique of a
particular aspect that we had already advanced long ago. One more point needs
to be made which could require us to diminish even an unwitting recognition of
the unity of the lifestyle, at least for now. That point is the exaggerated emphasis
given to a traumatic experience and its repression into the unconscious. The
emphasis of childhood impressions on the rest of one's life was advanced
significantly by Freud's observations. However, his narrow sexual theories
forced him to disregard impressions other than sexual which are much more
important: feelings of inferiority, insecurity, or incompetence. Since he placed
weight only on infantile sexual impressions, Freud failed to comprehend the
early childhood style of life, the prototype, which, analogous to animal species,
does not permit a change; it insists on its own view of life and, as the failures
have shown, is unable to develop an ability for cooperation. From this it follows
that not what a person has experienced, but his inability to cope with that
experience, his inability to cooperate, and his lack of common sense, turns a
traumatic experience into a major cause (overhearing parents making love, a
threat of castration, etc.), while other children with a stronger social interest, i.e.
a lesser feeling of inferiority and a healthier apperception schema, would have
the same experience without incurring any harmful impressions. For this reason,
I believe that I can rightly oppose Freud's assertion that “the neurotic suffers not
from reminiscences, but he creates them.” The neurotic raises reminiscences to
rank and dignity because when he experiences them “he already is a neurotic”
(Wexberg). I have the distinct impression that too many people have no idea of

the issues pertaining to such subjects as the “The Similarity or Differences of
Perceptions,” or “Superficiality or Profundity,” etc. Such persons at least should
ask themselves whether they think that an impression is possible without an
existing scheme of apperception, and whether the impression could have the
effect they presume it to have.
If anyone denies that connection, then it is as if he were to take a single
note out of a melody in order to establish its value and meaning. Gestalt
Psychology shows a better understanding of that connection. Just as we so often
make use of this analogy so does Gestalt psychology. However, we do not
declare ourselves satisfied with “Gestalt,” or as we prefer to call it “unity,” after
we have related every note to the melody. We are satisfied only when we have
recognized in it the original driving attitude, for example in Bach, his lifestyle.
This misunderstanding of the connection with the lifestyle also explains how
psychoanalysis had to arrive at contrasting the conscious and unconscious, and
where Individual Psychology could establish unambiguously the uniform
collaboration of both in their uniform course toward the goal of superiority.
Actually, psychoanalysis would have corrected its mistake “long ago” had
it not in its neurotic fixation ignored the mistake of insisting on the contrasting
nature of the conscious and the unconscious. Perhaps it might not have
overlooked this mistake after Individual Psychology so clearly proved the
indefensibleness of this concept, had it not been supported by outsiders of
Individual Psychology, whose many voices at best could be counted, but not
seriously evaluated. For them, such catchwords as ambivalence, drives, sadism,
unconscious, etc., not to forget bipolarity, death wish, compulsive repetitiveness,
are eagerly sought points of reference for their aimless babble. A “censor” is an
inhibiting force that comes out of one's own culture, which itself was originally
created by this “censor”. This censor, like a modern deus ex machina, can put a
new face on whatever mischief goes on in the unconscious, including repressed
or nonexistent sexual impulses, sadism, death wishes, feelings of guilt and
inherited social or asocial drives. However, the “censor” cannot prevent the
effect of these manifestations. Therefore, anyone who thinks like those inept
psychoanalysts that the conscious is a deceptive mask created so that, like a
horse-trader, it can appear merely to play its role in life, should recognize the
unity of his behavior in the conscious as well as the unconscious. He would have
to realize that it is the same hypocrites who applaud when their competition goes
into bankruptcy or whether they faint on seeing a goose bleed. Whether someone
commits plagiarism, slanders or kills another, probably depends more on
opportunity than on the censor. When that person with his own strength leads his
life with compassion and cooperation, which is simple when all the possibilities

in their embryonic form were melded through the competence of the mother and
others as well as circumstances for a social lifestyle, then he will seek solutions
for his problems from the conscious and unconscious, whichever comes closer to
the extent of his ability to cooperate. All the problems of life are social problems
and require for their solution a certain degree of trained communal feelings.
Whoever lacks these feelings, or simply simulates them by means of some form
of censor to avoid discomfort will naturally always get into psychological
tension when forced to act. Depending on his style of life, that person will then
try to save himself as a problem child, neurotic, delinquent, drug addict, sexual
pervert, etc., or with being alcoholic or suicidal, when a minimum of social
interest would suffice. Thus, the infrequently occurring Oedipus complex3
results from hundreds of styles of life that have become concrete. It represents
far more deeply lying disturbances in the psyche of the child who has feelings of
inferiority, lacks social interest, and can find no better compensation. When that
person in later life can find no better solution than the neurosis, it then becomes
further evidence for the difficulty of developing the ability for taking interest in
others after the fifth year of life. Even where instead of a greater facility for
cooperation the end result is a “feeling of guilt,” with or without acts of penance,
the limited ability to cooperate shows us exactly that here is a self-interest that
weighs so heavily that it could never come up to the level of any significant
social contribution.
Here is another example of antithetical thinking. It is now being argued that
the obsessive-compulsive neurosis is of organic origin, as was mentioned earlier.
There is one case, perhaps even more than one, where in encephalitis compulsive
thoughts were observed simultaneously with a compulsion to stare
(Zwangsblickrichtung). Without going further into this case, some draw the
conclusion that the two phenomena appearing simultaneously are evidence of
their common dependence on corpus striatum. If obsessive thinking were a
neurosis, it would then explain the selection of this neurosis. Unfortunately, we
are much more skeptical. In our cases of obsessive-compulsive neurosis there is
never any doubt as to choice. True, we take the personality of the patient into
account more than others, and we consider a case resolved and dare to speak of
healing only when we can understand the reason the patient chose this form of
erroneous acting; also, we admit that given the same circumstances we might
have adopted the same neurotic style of life. Certainly, we go further and
establish that if we could or would have been able to provide the patient with a
stronger social feeling, he could have avoided the neurosis. We say there is a
fault in his psychological structure, which under difficult life situations must
somehow make itself noticeable. It will make itself known in accordance with

the way the patient was or was not prepared for dealing with difficult situations
in his life, to be evaluated, like in a test, in terms of his preparation. Clearly, only
that psychiatrist understands the choice of neurosis, meaning the choice of
symptoms, who sees that the symptoms developed out of the style of life that he
understands correctly, and who has recognized the connection and the
penetrating force of the style of life in all its various forms of expression.
3 Only someone who has recognized the Oedipus complex as an allegory
will refrain from insinuating to a patient the idea of patricide that might evoke
such thoughts as: father should leave, I want to be alone with mother; when
father is in the hospital then I am well off. Even where such ideas: father should
die; or dreams of shooting the father, occur to a patient they are no more serious
than an exploring of possible ways to be alone with the mother. All such
manifestations are the result of a faulty upbringing and are found only in
pampered children. Naturally, in such cases, an early-awakened sexual drive
finds no other object than the mother since all other persons have been excluded.
Therefore, what is basic to the Oedipus complex and underlying it is the striving
for superiority in the pampered child.
Once the psychiatrist has recognized organ inferiorities as a variation of a
larger unity, and the demands of a society as degrees of tension in their effect on
the individual or on the masses, he will also understand that all wrong responses
are gradations of an infinite number of abnormalities. They are efforts of more or
less discouraged people to resolve their life tasks without attempting
cooperation, or without a feeling of community. He will also understand that
these are symptoms, not distinct illnesses, and that they explain how someone
thinks he can sleepwalk his way into life without losing his feeling of personal
worth.
Every case of a neurosis, psychoneurosis, suicide, alcoholism, drug
addiction, etc., of squalidness, rearing problems, sexual anomalies, murder,
tyranny, etc, shows us time and again--and we have proven this repeatedly--a
failure to implant enough communal feeling during the first four or five years of
life. Perhaps the above explanation is sufficient to see in the proper light the
following case of a person who suffered from depression for eight years.
Twenty years ago, the now 42 year-old female patient left her parents' home
after years of conflict in hopes of finding a job abroad, being independent, and
pursuing academic studies. Her studies were not directed toward a particular
profession, but more for her general education to escape her family's poor
circumstances, and to avoid having a marriage forced on her, which she saw as a
danger. The parents were poor and had little education. Our patient, the oldest of
five children, showed an early desire for learning and strongly opposed the

conservative tendencies of her family. The father in particular ruled the home
and tried by all means to break the daughter's unshakable defiance. The mother
did not stand by her daughter's side to support her striving, but was mild and
indulgent. The patient was forever in a battle with her sister, the second oldest.
This is frequently the case where one sister was born after the other, and where
each feels that the other is given preferential treatment. Furthermore, the older,
who had been the only child for some time, and who was not prepared for
cooperating with her younger sister, was subsequently hampered by her. She
consequently developed a predominant concern to guard against anyone again
being given such preferential treatment and challenging her position.
A new and difficult job in a new city fully absorbed our patient's energies.
She soon no longer gave any thought to her education. She failed to correspond
with her parents for a long time, until one day she sent a brief notice of having
become engaged to a craftsman.
The young couple was not really in love. Typical of oldest sons, the
husband was pleasant and partly resigned to the idea that they would always be
in the shadow of others. He had only one concern: no children. He had two
reasons for this antipathy. First, as is usually the case, the poor conditions under
which he and his wife lived forced him to devote himself totally to earning a
living. Second, from earliest childhood he feared being burdened with children
as were his parents. As the oldest, he had had to take care of them along with his
mother.
Since childhood our patient had become accustomed to assuming that
younger children’s lives are beset by problems. She had always guarded her
dominant position and had fought hard and with angry outbursts against any
consideration being paid to others in order to push herself into the foreground. In
her rejection of all social feelings, she naturally had no desire for children. No
child was to rob her of her power and influence over her weak husband.
The attitude of the husband toward his problems with a much stronger wife
resulted in a frigid sexual life accompanied by strong tensions, at the expense of
the vegetative nervous system, which led to a distancing, and to ejaculatio
praecox. His habit of not cooperating, adopted in childhood out of a fear of being
unduly burdened by his younger siblings, led him to resolve his sexual problems
without cooperation--by masturbating.
Our patient's attitude toward sexual problems, like that of many
domineering and overly ambitious women, was quite cool. She fended off the
weak attempts of her husband for sexual contact, which always ended in a
fiasco.
Years passed without any changes in the lives of our couple, except that

their living conditions improved. This development allowed the wife to
withdraw completely from work. She had a number of friends who were blindly
devoted to her and who allowed themselves to be dominated by her. She
frequently went to the movies, the theater, and on occasion attended a lecture.
Housework was easy for her since her husband made no demands, and came
home only after work in the evenings. She was able to control him without any
effort, which he endured with equanimity since his interest in her over time
declined even more, which for his wife, by the way, was no secret. Occasionally
she was struck by jealousy, not because of love, but because of her greed for
possession and dominance. She had accommodated herself fully to the loss of a
marital relationship.
After four years of marriage, she unexpectedly became pregnant. During
her pregnancy, she was extremely agitated. Every problem that occurred during
that period appeared out of all proportion and she tormented her husband when
he came home at night after having worked all day. He endured the constant
blame with resignation. A girl was born without trouble and the wife seemed
more agreeable and less agitated for the first several weeks. The husband already
began to believe that his wife had undergone a change in her nature. She no
longer appeared as querulous to him, but pursued him jealously more than ever
before.
The husband began to take an interest in the child. As one might guess, the
wife met this turn of events with anger and opposition. A similar experience (by
her mother) had made a deep impression on her when her younger sister was
born. Since then, her main concern and fear was to avoid ever experiencing such
a fate again. Since earliest childhood, she had been prepared to keep close
control over her followers, and to punish severely any “treachery.”
Although the wife expressed motherly instincts toward her child, she
showed no joy. Such emotion would have come from an ability to cooperate,
from an interest in others, and from the confidence and courage to meet the
challenge of her new situation. This would have made her suitable for bringing
up her child properly instead of carrying out her responsibilities painfully, or
spoiling the child thoroughly in striving for dominance by seeming irreplaceable.
Only qualities rooted in a feeling for community and an ability to identify with
another allow for an understanding of a child's situation, resulting in the mother
acting properly and at the right time. However, our patient’s motherly tasks gave
her little pleasure, as she felt letdown and robbed of her earlier feelings of
power.
She resorted to what she had always done when she was disappointed by
her family, when she did not get her way, when friends failed to listen to her,

when her parents stood in the way of her getting an education: she began a
reckless struggle for dominance, forever trying to put down her husband by
constantly harping on his lack of caring and failure in his marital duties. She
considered leaving him as she had when she left her family without a word of
farewell, but then decided that as the mainstay of her family, her husband was
indispensable.
She also was unable to choose another path that others follow in similar
cases: to triumph over her husband through marital infidelity. She was totally
unprepared for the female role she would have had to play. In fact, she
underrated it so much that her selfish striving for personal superiority would
have suffered. Although she frequently gave that alternative some thought, she
rejected the idea immediately, motivated by her belief that her virtuousness
would have prevented her from carrying out such a plan.
The husband, whose interest in his wife had long ago declined, endured her
constant complaints about his marital weakness with admirable stoicism. He
visited several physicians in order to be cured, patiently allowed them to treat
him so that after unsuccessful attempts at curing him he could finally give up all
hopes for improvement. In order to find some peace, he avoided his home as
much as possible and when he did return devoted himself exclusively to the
child.
The constant complaints from his wife were aimed repeatedly at his
ailments. Discussions about sexuality never seemed to end. As is usually the
case when there is a constant preoccupation with the same subject, in her
obsession to prove to her husband his worthlessness, her interest was drawn to
the sexual process with awakening feelings that left her constantly ungratified,
justifying further abuses. The artificial heightening of the patient's sexual libido
became real for her, and she turned it into causality and then left it to run its
seemingly independent course. She established a cause and effect, like someone
who would resolve or contest an Individual Psychological finding with his own
psychoanalytical feelings only to prove that he is right.
The equanimity of her husband drove the patient wild. She seemed to have
lost all her powers. There seemed to be no way open any longer to express her
greed for power. She could have killed him, had that action been in consonance
with her lifestyle. She also could have begun to drink or take drugs. All those
symptoms were far from her nature. What she really could do would require
neglecting her own security, even her own life, to force her will for personal
power as she had done when she left the home of her parents without any means,
or any destination, or even a farewell so as to cause the most hurt to her parents.
To put herself in danger, even to do damage to herself, was a response that was

in accord with her style given her desperate anger and fear of having her power
base destroyed.
A resolve in that direction uncovered another trait of her nature that I would
like everyone to consider who has difficulty finding his way in this chaos of
symptoms. This path can be chosen only by someone whose sphere of life tends
in the direction of staking his self-esteem irretrievably in the balance so that his
own demise would become the severest punishment for others, the antagonists
who will forever be accused and branded for the injustices they caused. The
dream of being on top, being high above everyone else, plays a fateful role
beyond reality in this fatal symptom.
She became pessimistic and began to speak of suicide. At that point her
husband began to listen. He became more cautious, tended to come home earlier
in the evenings, and was worried about her life. He became more attentive and
treated her with greater patience. Her word gained considerably in weight.
Surely, someone will now speak up and ask why the patient, regaining her
place of dominance in her home, did not curtail her anger. The answer is simple.
Since she was successful with her method, what reason would she have to
change her effective approach? The only reason would have been to become
cooperative. Is it not clear now that she had to keep repeating her symptoms?
She had to continuously threaten suicide, forced not necessarily by a stria
complex,4 but by reasoning that was devoid of social interest. I hope that no one
will ask me why she stopped threatening suicide and did not choose the act of
suicide itself. After all, she was now in possession of power, a personal
superiority on the useless side of life.
Based solely on these facts, if someone claims to explain, as does
psychoanalysis, the act or the threat of suicide by stating that suicide is the
withdrawal of the libido from the external world to the internal world, he then
has failed to recognize that this is a model for a poor definition. It says nothing
that is not already contained in the concept of suicide itself. Anyone who would
make such a claim also overlooks the context, the sense in which these facts
relate to the individual. Why would he withdraw the libido, or better, his
activity, from where it had been only to cast it to another site? Only
psychoanalysis would explain that logic. Gestalt Psychology (Köhler,
Wertheimer, among others) sees this much more sharply and deeply when it
follows Individual Psychology in asking for “Gestalt,” for the context. To be
sure, Individual Psychology goes even further and establishes, as in this case, the
“Gestalt” in which the structure is an indivisible part of the whole--the lifestyle.
Only then does it become clear that the patient’s threats to commit suicide,
which arise from her marginal social interest, irreproachably help her achieve

her goal of absolute personal dominance. Those who vainly try to understand the
choice of symptoms have not understood the need to be faultless.
Of course, our patient consulted many physicians who sometimes wrote
prescriptions and at other times prescribed baths that had only a temporary
success. This also will be clear to whoever recognized the “Gestalt” of the
patient. She could not rob her husband of all hope. As a good psychologist, she
understood quite well that she had to allow some hope to remain in order to
induce her husband to new efforts. A vacation to the countryside had short-lived
benefits. However, time and again the old manifestations reappeared.
4 Editor’s note: An apparently archaic term related to a physical anatomical
gender difference in the stria terminalis of the human brain.
What manifestations? Of course, those that fit her plan. If someone
contemplates suicide, she will naturally produce the appropriate facial
expression. It is not as if she stood in front of a mirror to practice. However, is it
possible for us to think of something without producing the appropriate feelings?
Every thought about the future is a dream in which we feel as if we already live
there, and that at least part of our emotions that pertain to this future life already
possess us. Thus, healthy optimism has the special value of lending us
nourishing feelings. Pessimism, on the other hand, leaves us in a powerless,
faltering mood. I described long ago that all moods set the vegetative system in
motion and affect our organs.
This explains the depressing, fearful expressions, the stooped posture, the
lack of appetite, loss of weight, and sleeplessness that comes from psychological
tension. The patient lost hope, had little interest in anything, and was intent on
demonstrating her feelings to her antagonist: anger and denouncements that
always emphasized the worth of herself and the lack of worth or influence of the
other person. Thus caught in the net of her own personality, the patient held the
other captive as in a trap, always fearful that he could escape if the trap were
opened. This entire marvelous apparatus is not directed by conscious thought,
because then the evident lack of social interest would become unbearable. It is
directed by the fictitious power goal formed in the unconscious. Those who
cannot understand the workings of particular parts, but understand them in their
context can interpret their meaning. The unconscious is the style of life.
Individual Psychology has made a new science out of interpreting the oldest
childhood memories and dreams. They are parts of the lifestyle: the first gives
direction to a structure, like flying buttresses; the second provides the means to
awaken delusional feelings appropriate to reinforce the lifestyle against
challenging logic and social interest.
The oldest memory of our patient is as follows: “I remember clearly and

with pleasure the home of my grandparents who preferred me over all other
children.”
A dream portrays her attitude toward treatment:
“I see that I am being followed by a guard. I fear him.”
This memory speaks well for itself. The patient remembered the dream as
she tried to argue in a friendly way that I was wrong. She claimed that she was
well disposed toward her husband and felt sorry for him because he had to
endure so much. The expression of such sentiments, which occurs in almost all
cases of depression, clearly does not ameliorate the suffering of others and
should be regarded as the last remnant of social interest. I told the patient the
Aesop fable of the lion that lay hungry in his cave when he saw a fox creeping
not far away. He called to him, hungry for a feast of fox, inviting him to inspect
his cave. The fox responded: “Oh, no, dear lion. I see many tracks leading into
your cave, but none coming out.” This is how I made it clear to her that all of her
symptoms in an unconscious artful way were directed against her husband. I
advised her that whenever her symptoms appeared to think how effectively they
would batter her husband. She responded to this with the dream related above:
She meant that I was following her as if she were under suspicion and that she
would have to guard against me. The next day she came to my clinic and in her
discussion was very reticent under the emotional effect of the dream, which
warned her generally to be careful of others.
She took sleeping pills to deal with her sleeplessness, but not before
awakening her husband who had worked hard all day with a barrage of
complaints. I advised her that she should not rate too highly this “harmless-
toher-health symptom.” She should spend her nights thinking how she could
benefit someone so as to make that person happy and to gather all ideas that
came to her during her sleepless nights, thereby making that time useful for our
treatment.
Our patients are much smarter than some fools who would not understand
the context of what I tell them and who would always accuse me of using tricks.
A fool would want me to speak to him using his simple-minded language, which
he regards as “profound”. While such a person would skirt a problem by
shunting it to some useless arena, I was pleased to find that our patient can relate
her problem in the right context and, therefore, can address it to benefit herself
toward a cure.
I must now recall one other symptom that developed in the patient over the
past two years, which might raise suspicions in the mind of a good diagnostician.
The patient made it known emphatically that she heard voices before going to
sleep. In light of that symptom, the question of a differential diagnosis with

dementia praecox comes into consideration. However, anyone who sees as I do,
a faulty lifestyle lacking an ability to cooperate in all psychiatric categories of
illnesses, and regards symptoms as the creative structure of the lifestyle, would
not be surprised by “mixed cases,” nor would he overemphasize the importance
of a single symptom in a diagnosis, or stress it exclusively for one form of
treatment. In this case, the age of the patient would argue somewhat against
dementia praecox. Furthermore, this symptom appeared only six years after the
onset of the illness, and it came at a time when a younger sister became ill with
dementia praecox and complained about scolding voices. The adoption of this
symptom by our patient would be taken, even by psychiatrists of another school,
as a sign that our patient tended to use all means to extend her suffering, and to
make it seem that there is no other chance for a cure. We Individual
Psychologists endeavor to understand this imitation from the viewpoint of her
goal for personal superiority. The following must be added: The voices that she
heard were totally harmless, rather more kindly and belonging to well known
friends who talked as if they came to visit and wish her a pleasant day.
Nevertheless, the patient was shaken in a way that would not be found among
cases of paranoid dementia. After it was made clear to her, always in the kindest
manner, how she was influenced by her sister in enlarging her stock of weapons
to ensure her dominance, the voices disappeared.
One day I tried to clarify for her that drawing her submissive husband
closer to her by day and night, and influencing her friends by describing to them
her suffering was for the purpose of domination, just as when she was a child she
always wanted a compliant entourage of friends around her. In response, she told
me the following dream scene without any apparent connection to my
explanation: “I found myself in a palace where I heard a voice that said to me:
'Hofmann’”. It was the same voice that she had heard before while awake. She
immediately perceived the palace to be in consonance with my explanation. She
said that she had never known a person by the name of Hofmann. When I asked
her whether it would have to be a person, she blushed and said: “Oh, you mean
the “Hofstaat” (retinue). This established a broader meaning for the friendly
voices of long ago. They all originated from among her followers.
I can also add in this context an appropriate comment on how innocent
remarks by such people as our patient can be seen as reinforcing their arsenals.
Shortly before her sister became ill, the patient told a physician about her
personal life. The physician concluded that the cause of the patient's illness was
her unsatisfactory sex life, and that her husband was the actual cause of her
suffering. We don't need much proof that this diagnosis was totally wrong, and
that the patient was intent on submitting every man to her yoke by whatever

means suitable. However, after that explanation by the physician, who had
nothing else to add but that she should look for another husband, the patient
showered her husband with the strongest reproaches, at a time when he
threatened to become very indifferent. However, since he felt himself to be
blameless, these reproaches spurred him on to greater efforts to please his wife.
He hardly dared to express his own opinions. One day, he naively succumbed by
telling his wife and thereby supporting the physician's opinion, that for her to get
well, she should look for another husband to which he would raise no objections.
At that point, when the situation seemed to turn in favor of her husband, she
really let loose. He was not going to escape that easily. She accused him of only
wanting a way out so that he could have his peace, and shove her onto some
other man. Her complaints and resentment grew steadily. All of which, however,
did not deter her from arousing her husband from his sleep to embrace and kiss
him so that he would stay with her. It was at that time that her sister became ill.
This sister, as well as the next sister, had been rejected by the patient in her
ambition to be the sole dominator, thus becoming her bitter enemy. When the
sister became ill, our patient reproached herself severely and assumed the blame
for the sickness, since she had failed to accept the sister. Subsequently, she
consciously developed, as some believe who do not understand the context,
unconsciously that questionable feeling of guilt that so greatly impresses
psychoanalysts, who probably would also ascribe the neurosis to penance. But,
surprise!, when the sister was released from an institution after a two-year
confinement, the condition of our patient worsened. She declared herself beyond
help and proclaimed that the sight of her sister would kill her. Is this a sign of an
increased feeling of guilt so as to escape the sight of her victim? To the contrary.
The sister became the unconquered rival. In her case, the means of gaining
dominance failed. Having been released from the institution as temporarily
healed, the sister could not be forced into the patient's retinue, just as she had
failed to do in the past.
The husband’s suffering was also eased. His occasional efforts showed the
patient that her particular complaints against him were no longer justified. Then
she discovered--much to her shock--that she had insuperable aversions to marital
relations.
She later reported to me that she lived in peace with her husband, and that
she no longer left the house to spend the night with her girl friend. Also, that she
had an active social life and that she recently debated heatedly at a public
meeting. She also on occasion had become involved in religious issues, but still
retained her antagonism toward her orthodox parents.
It would be well if the “naive” (Bergmann) analysis of this case, the

underlying principles of which still are a closed book to the “depth”
psychologists, were to be seriously examined also by Individual Psychologists.
Chapter XXII
A Case of Enuresis Diurnal1 2
Stenographic Report of a Counseling Session on Child Rearing
[1930]
The child is introduced to us for counseling in the following report:
"Emil R. is 12 years old and suffers from enuresis..."
When we hear the word enuresis, from our experience we know that it is a
movement that has the goal, even by indelicate means, of establishing contact
with the mother. This child speaks through enuresis. It is as if the child spoke
with his bladder. We can perceive all expressions as a form of language. The
language in this case means: "I am not ready yet. I still have to be watched
over!" As a rule the mother looks in on the child--two or three times a night
when she comes to him and awakens him. The child in that way assigns the
mother a painstaking task.
Enuresis is not an organic illness and we know that children who are
incontinent can control their bladder during the day. The problem is: why does
the child fail to control his bladder at night? The answer is that he is under
psychological tension which does not allow him to retain his urine flow. What is
the source of the tension? We know how stubbornly children hold on to their
enuresis because they seek a closer relationship, to be closely associated with
someone, to give someone a painstaking task.
This is the character of a pampered child. When we see a child try so hard
to intensify pampering, then we know that something made it difficult for that
child to maintain his relationship easily. We already have come far enough so
that we can say that enuresis clearly is an attack that must have resulted from an
antagonistic attitude that causes the child to fight for someone to become
involved with him. This type of person also tosses restlessly at night and cries
out (pavor nocturnus) in an effort to contact someone. Some children get up,
walk around, and by moving establish a connection; they try to get someone to
move, to make contact, and to be with them. It is a language expressed through
another organ.
The reason the child expresses himself in that manner is significant. It has 1
Originally published as “Ein Fall von enuresis diurna: stenographische
Aufnahame eiener Erziehhungsberatung” in the Int. Z. Indiv. Psychol., Vol. 8,
pages 471-478, 1930. 2 New translation by Gerald L. Liebenau, 2003. Editing
assistance by Kurt A. Adler, M.D., Ph.D.

to do
(1) with the organ inferiority of the bladder and the overriding importance
ascribed to the bladder. I was the first to point out in 1907 that sometimes in
cases of enuresis there is evidence of an inferiority of the lumbar segment. I also
pointed out that there is a connection here with spina bifida, or that a nevus is
found in that region.
(2) with the reason that the child uses the language of the bladder. This
occurs primarily with children who have been made particularly conscious that
this language has great significance. The mother in such cases has made the
greatest efforts, more so than would normally be made, to keep the child clean
during the night and thus overemphasized cleanliness. This automatically raises
in the child the idea that acting this way can become profitable. We understand
that time and again with all such children evidence of pampering is found.
The child of concern to us here is 12 years old. We must keep in mind that
he was pampered and that since the enuresis began, he has had the feeling that he
no longer gets enough love. He probably has a younger brother or sister. These
are the reasons that a pampered child starts to fight. It is also possible that he is
registering a complaint for not being pampered to the extent that he was
pampered before. An accusation is the same as an attack. Both arise out of the
same situation. Perhaps he has a stepfather or stepmother; we must somehow
find the reason that his pampering diminished. His ideal fictitious goal is to be
pampered; to find someone who would contribute to this goal. This goal must be
changed and the boy must be shown a goal that will allow him to become useful.
"...never at night, only during the day."
This is information that influences our thinking considerably. He is under
great tension during the day; at night he appears to be quite content. This can
lead to different conclusions, such as, while at night he sleeps with his mother,
during the day he wants to make himself known in an unpleasant way as if to
say: "You should concern yourself more with me."
"Often he also soils himself."
Therefore, his struggle is more intense during the day and occasionally he
makes himself more noticeable in that way. The struggle is brought close to the
point of hopelessness. Whether we should consider imbecility depends on how
we defines the term imbecile. We ask: why doesn't he do that at night?
Sometimes we encounter children who when playing too hard pay no attention to
this function. From such minor details we can see how strong our functions are
socially formed. Abnormal is when a function is outside of the social norm.
"The child is illegitimate."
We assume with such children that they grew up without love or warmth,

without the tenderness that infants usually receive. However, it is not unusual to
find illegitimate children who have been pampered. On this point we need
further clarification.
"His father died in the war and the mother married again."
Here is evidence for assuming that there is a stepfather.
"The second husband has two children, an eight-year-old boy and a sixyear-old
girl."
If we recall having spoken earlier of a complaint, then we can now see it
more clearly. He is probably justified in making a complaint and there no longer
is any question that he feels it. I am reminded of a case where a boy had lost his
mother when he was two weeks old. The father soon thereafter married again
and no one knew that the boy was not born of that woman. He also did not learn
of it. Later another child was born. After many years, the boy, who had already
grown into a man, came to me for treatment and told me that until he was 14
years, old he was under the impression that his mother was not his legitimate
mother but his stepmother--until this actually was established for him. This
shows us that in questions of legitimacy children can sense the correct situation,
even if they are treated well. They do feel a difference when other children
present enjoy greater care and tenderness.
"The child allegedly has very good relations with his siblings."
We see no struggle in this case among the siblings. I have often observed
that one child can be jealous and also like the other children. The boy can feel
left behind, but he can get along with others. Such a feeling can have various
consequences. For example, a fiveyear-old girl was an only child for five years
and then came a sister. It turns out that this child, the older, had murdered three
small girls, as if to say: "All girls must be eliminated from this world." However,
with her younger sister she behaved herself perfectly well. In carrying out her
killings, the girl went about it very cleverly so that she was caught only after the
third murder.
"The stepfather at first was very strict with him..."
The boy went through a bad phase. When the stepfather arrived, his situation
worsened. Obviously, at that point his complaint began.
"...but at the mother's request, the situation improved." We can imagine that the
boy was not always aware of this improvement.
"For the most part, the boy grew up far from home. He lived with his aunt....."
Probably while he was still an infant, he would have lived there under more
favorable conditions. Usually, life with aunts and grandmothers is quite decent.
"...and at times in an orphanage."
I can not say with certainty that he also lived well there. From earliest

times, my experiences in this matter have not been the best. In such places there
is a certain orderliness which demands that children are neither incontinent nor
soil themselves.
Here we may have an indication that this point was overemphasized with
this child. The aunt probably also placed too much importance on his bowel
movements, etc. We know that when too much is made of eating, the child will
have eating problems. Similarly, children who seek physical fitness and control
over their body will balk at being told to do anything. Children who go along
with being placed on the potty while half asleep will refuse to perform when
they wake up and become very angry. We are not yet quite clear where in the
case of this boy the mistake was made. He obviously moved from a warm to a
frigid situation.
"The child now attends the first class in junior high school."
I believe that at his age this is a little too late. The boy should have entered
that grade at age 10 or 11. We can assume with some certainty that if he has
already come this far that he is not idiotic and cannot be considered imbecilic or
feebleminded. He probably could have been a better student had he not suffered
under so much tension.
"He had to repeat the first and third grades in primary school."
This is in accordance with our perception given the tension under which he
lived and his poor preparation, particularly for a demanding teacher. He
approached hopelessness more closely. The situation at home also could not
have been helpful to him.
"He now does quite well in school...."
He probably has a considerate teacher.
"...and has friends."
He begins to have hope again, to look more hopefully at life.
"He has a habit of making faces in school as well as in the streets."
Grimacing is an expression that we can again perceive as language. He
says: "Look at me!" He plays a role, a comedian, that puts him in the center. This
is the same as wetting or soiling himself. He wants to stand out more. He has the
feeling of having been put back and he fights against that.
"He began to walk at 11 months and learned to speak late..."
There are dependent children whose speech development is governed by external
factors (a hearing defect).
"...also, he had a speech defect. He pushed his tongue between his teeth while
speaking."
This is what we call lisping. It is difficult to understand why these defects
are retained for such a long time since they are easily corrected. The child should

be shown, in a kindly manner, the proper placement of the tongue, or a wire
frame should be employed. This defect could also have contributed to the child
having assumed for himself a disagreeable role. He probably was ridiculed,
which made him depressed.
"His father allegedly had the same speech defect."
The speech defect was not inherited, except perhaps for the shape of the
tongue or the form of the jaw. Every speech defect is fostered by an organic
construction. In the case of stuttering, for example, we frequently find a change
in the bone construction of the jaw, the larynx, or a different dental structure. All
such circumstances prevent the smooth flow of speech and lead the way to a
speech defect.
"He had chicken pox and measles. He also had pneumonia. He had an
adenoidectomy at age three. The child is puny, asthenic, and makes a scared and
intimidated impression...."
We did not expect the child to make a dauntless impression. The boy
borders on a hopelessness that improved somewhat lately, possibly since he
improved his performance at school.
"... which, because of a strong protrusion of his upper jaw and his almost always
open mouth, makes him look silly."
We can see that he has an abnormal bone structure. The fact that he looks silly
probably has contributed to his unpopularity.
"Other findings are: no findings with regard to his internal organs; reflexes
are normal; closer neurological examinations were not made and in particular
no rhinological test; urinary examination was negative; X-rays showed a normal
spine and no reason to suspect spina bifida; negative Wassermann test;
"pirquet" (sic): negative; mother had a kidney infection as did his brother."
From the Individual Psychological standpoint it is interesting to note what I
had already stated in my "Studien über Minderwertigkeit von Organen" (Studies
on the Inferiority of Organs). In the case of enuresis a coexisting inferiority of
the urogenital system is often found only in the family tree (for example, an
inferiority of the kidneys), which sometimes is basic to an illness. This does not
mean that enuresis itself is the consequence of an organic illness. An embryonic
inferiority exists that paves the way. A weakness in the digestive system and the
sexual apparatus can also be observed in enuresis, the latter almost regularly.
Whether the child actually believes himself to be in such a hopeless state
can be determined when we speak with the mother. We shall establish whether
the hopelessness has improved lately and whether there are good signs such as
friends and improvement in school. Furthermore, influencing the mother to
recognize the boy's worth and show him that he is not deficient will be crucial.

She should be counseled to influence the father to treat the boy in a friendly
manner and to make him happy on occasion, for example, by taking him for a
walk on a Sunday. The boy's complaints then no longer would be valid, and he
would cease spoiling the family's Sunday fun.
The boy himself must be encouraged to believe that he can achieve
something. We must give him a goal that we know he can attain. We shall also
attempt to give him the task of establishing a friendly relationship with his
mother and father. If he can be friendlier, then he would avoid creating
unpleasant situations for others. It is has to be presumed that he will not soil
himself in front of his teacher. He soils himself only in situations in which he
expects nothing positive for himself. The primary task is: to put the parents in a
better mood; to encourage the boy; and to point him toward getting a job.
(The mother of the boy is called into the office)
Adler (to the mother): We would like to discuss your boy with you. How is he
doing in school?
Mother: He has been pulling himself together, lately. Adler: Has he ever said
what he would like to be?
Mother: He would like to become an electrician.
Adler: Does that mean that he already has ambitions? Does he know anything
about that field?
Mother: He knows something about it.
Adler: Does he like to make himself useful around the house?
Mother: Yes!
Adler: Is he happy when this is given recognition, when someone praises
him? He is eager to be praised. He wants to be treated kindly and in a friendly
manner. How does he get along with you?
Mother: He listens to me. One can depend on him.
Adler: Does he watch over the other children? Does he get along with them? Is
he jealous?
Mother: The second child does not let himself be talked into anything by him..
Adler: Second children are always more active, quicker. They move faster. How
does he sleep?
Mother: He snores loudly. He had adenoids.
 
Adler: Where does the boy sleep?
Mother: He sleeps with me, in my room. I think the boy is afraid of my
second husband. He is very fearful. Earlier, he was with strangers. The aunt was
good to him. He then went into an orphanage.

Adler: Then the change in his situation began in the orphanage. Would it
not be possible to give the father a hint to disabuse him of his fears? The boy
hungers after being loved and being treated kindly. He is a very nice boy. He
will make something of himself. If the father were to take him for a walk on a
Sunday, show him some friendship, it would be good for the boy. This boy
should never be scolded or beaten. He is on the way to developing well. How
does he lie when he sleeps?
Mother: He lies on his stomach.
Adler: He is turning away from life; tries to hide.
Mother: He also covers his head. Since he left the orphanage, he is very fearful.
Adler: Try sometimes not to chide him and not to nag him. I would say to
him: "You can do it!" I would praise him and show him that I like him. This kind
of child needs evidence that he is liked. Then this boy will do well. He does not
want to leave you?
Mother: When I tell him that I shall send him back to the orphanage, he becomes
fearful.
Adler: I would not tell him that. Does he soil himself every day?
Mother: It has improved over the past 14 days.
Adler: Is it the same in school as at home?
Mother: The boy is afraid in school because he cannot always leave for the
toilet. He does not dare tell the teacher when he has to go to the toilet.
Adler: Perhaps it would be good if the hospital were to send the teacher a note.
(Bids the mother farewell and she leaves. The child is asked to come to the
office.)
Adler (to Emil) Are you doing well in school? What do you want to become?
Emil: Mechanic.
Adler: Bravo! Are you doing well? How does it go with writing?
Emil: Not well!
Adler: Drawing?
Emil: Pretty good.
Adler: You can become a good mechanic! However, you must have
courage. You must not be afraid. Nothing will happen to you! Do you want to
learn not to be afraid? You must not stand in front of the teacher like a little boy!
You are grown up already; you are not a little kid any more. You don't have to
be afraid even if you get a bad mark! I also received bad marks, but then I tried
harder and improved. One should only not be afraid! If you are fearful, you act
like a little kid! How much longer do you have to attend school?
Emil: Two years, and then I go into apprenticeship.
Adler: How are you doing in gymnastics?

Emil: I received a "2".3
Adler: Do you have many friends?
Emil: I also have bad friends who always beat me up.
Adler: Do you get into scraps also?
Emil: Once in a while.
Adler: One should not hurt another. Scrapping is like gymnastics! Do you scrap
with your brother?
Emil: He is eight years old.
Adler: Then you are the older! Is he good?
Emil: He is also bad and fights with me.
Adler: It does not seem to be too serious. You must try to get ahead. If he
can act at eight like a grown up, you must also manage to do that! Return in one
month and tell me how you are doing, if you have more courage, and if you
behave like a grown up and not like a little boy. Try it and then tell me if you
succeeded!
(Bids farewell to the child. Emil leaves.)
Now is the time for encouraging the boy. Talking about his faults now
would not be encouraging. If he returns in one month and we see that he is
coming along, it might then be the right time to talk about it. We should expect a
great deal of help during that time from his mother and his teacher.
3 Translator’s note: Probably on a scale of 1 (best) to 5.
Chapter XXIII
Individual Psychology and Crime1
The Criminal Pattern of Life
In this paper I would like, as I always like, to exchange experiences with
my audience. The problem of crime is one which I have investigated for many
years: the viewpoint at which I have arrived, therefore, may be looked on as the
result of long-continued research. I have not been inquiring so much into
particular crimes as into the lives of individual men and women; and my task
was made easier by the general findings of Individual Psychology. By means of
Individual Psychology, we begin to understand all the various types of human
beings; and, after all, human beings are not so remarkably different from one
another. We find the same kind of failure exhibited in criminals as in neurotics,
psychotics, suicides, drunkards and sexual perverts. They all fail in their
approach to the problems of life; and in one very definite and noticeable point,
they fail in precisely the same way. Every one of them fails in social interest.
They are not concerned with their fellow-beings.
One other point is necessary to understand criminals, but in this point they

are just like the rest of us. We all wish to overcome difficulties. We strive to
reach a goal in the future, by attaining which we will feel strong, superior,
complete. Professor Dewey refers to this tendency, very rightly, as the striving
for security. Others call it the striving for self-preservation. But, whatever name
we give it, we will always find in human beings this great line of activity--the
struggle to rise from an inferior position to a superior position, from below to
above. It begins in our earliest childhood and continues to the end of our lives.
Life means to surmounting obstacles. We should not be surprised, therefore,
when we discover exactly the same tendency among criminals. All the criminal's
actions and attitudes show that he is struggling to be superior, solve problems,
and to overcome difficulties. What distinguishes him is not that he strives in this
fashion, but rather the direction his striving takes. As soon as we see that it takes
this direction because he has not understood the demands of social life and is not
concerned with his fellow-beings, we shall find his actions quite intelligible.
I want to stress this point very strongly, because there are people who think
otherwise. They regard criminals as exceptions to the human race, not like
ordinary people at all. Some scientists for example, assert that all criminals are
feebleminded. Others put great emphasis on heredity; they believe that a
criminal is born wrong and cannot help committing crimes. Still others hold that
crime is something unalterably fixed by the environment: once a criminal always
a criminal.
1 Originally published in English in the Police Journal, Vol. 17., No.6, pages 8-
11, 22-23, 1930. Edited for readability by Laurie J. Stein, 2004.
Neither environment nor heredity compel us. Children of the same family
and environment can develop in different ways. Sometimes a criminal springs
from a family of irreproachable record. Sometimes in a family of very bad
record, with frequent experiences of prisons and reformatories, we find children
of good character and behavior. It happens, too, that some criminals improve in
later life; and the psychologists of crime have often been puzzled to explain how
a burglar, after reaching the age of thirty, may settle down and become a good
citizen.
Before I go any further, I wish to exclude the idea that criminals are insane.
Psychotics commit crimes, but their crimes are of quite a different kind. We
cannot hold them responsible; their crimes are a result of a complete failure to
understand them and a wrong method of treating them. In the same way we must
exclude the feebleminded criminal, who is really no more than a tool. The true
criminals plan the crime. They paint glowing pictures of the prospects, stimulate
the fancy or ambitions of feebleminded individuals, then they hide themselves,
leaving their victims to execute the crime and run the risk of punishment. The

same thing holds, of course, when older, experienced criminals take advantage
of young people. The experienced criminal plans the crime; children are deluded
into executing it.
Now let us return to the line of activity by which every criminal--and every
other human being--is striving to gain a victory, to reach a position of finality.
Goals vary greatly. We find that the goal of a criminal is always to be superior in
a private and personal manner. What he strives for contributes nothing to others.
He is not cooperative. Society needs of its members, we all need of each other, a
common usefulness, an ability to cooperate. The goal of a criminal does not
include this usefulness to society, and this is the really significant aspect of every
criminal career.
The style of life typical of an individual is built up very early; we can
already find its main features at the age of four or five. We cannot suppose,
therefore, that it is an easy matter to change it. It is a man's own personality; it
can be changed only by understanding the mistakes he made in building it up.
We can begin to see how it happens many criminals, although they have often
been punished, humiliated, despised, and deprived of every good that our social
life can offer, still do not reform. They commit the same crime over and over
again; it is not economic difficulty that forces them into crime.
A criminal is not interested in others. He can cooperate only to a certain
degree. When this degree is exhausted, he turns to crime. The exhaustion occurs
when a problem is too difficult for him. It is interesting to consider the problems
of life which we have to face, the problems which a criminal cannot succeed in
solving. It will appear, in the end, that we have no problems in our lives but
social problems; and these problems can only be solved if we are interested in
others.
Individual Psychology has taught us to make three broad divisions in the
problems of life. First, let us take the problems of relationship to other men, the
problems of comradeship. Criminals can sometimes have friends, but only
among their own kind.
The second group of problems includes all those which are connected with
occupation. A great number of criminals, if they are questioned about these
problems, reply: “You don't know the terrible conditions of labor.” They find
work terrible; they are not inclined, as others are, to struggle with these
difficulties. A useful occupation implies an interest in other people and a
contribution to their welfare, but this is exactly what we miss in the criminal
personality.
The third group includes all the problems of love. A good and fruitful love-
life calls equally for interest in the other person and for cooperation. Criminals

want an easy way out for the problems of love.
We can see, now, where we should begin in our treatment of criminals. We
must train them to be cooperative. If I am right in my observations, criminals
look, speak, and listen in a different way from other people. They have a
different language which handicaps the development of their intelligence. When
we speak, we intend that everybody understand us. Understanding itself is a
social factor; we give words a common interpretation that we understand in the
same way that anyone else might understand. With criminals it is different; they
have a private logic, a private intelligence. We can understand how criminals, if
they see attractive things and want to obtain them in easily, conclude that they
must take them from this hostile world in which they are not at all interested.
They suffer from a wrong outlook, a wrong estimate of their own importance,
and the importance of other people.
But this is not the most noteworthy point in considering their lack of
cooperation. All criminals are cowards. They evade problems they do not feel
strong enough to solve. We can see their cowardice apart from their crimes, in
the way they face life. We can also see their cowardice in the crimes they
commit. Criminals think they are courageous, but we should not be fooled in the
same way. Crime is a coward's imitation of heroism. In striving for a fictitious
goal of personal superiority, they like to believe they are heroes, but this is again
a mistaken scheme of apperception, a failure of common sense. When they are
found out, they think: “This time I wasn't quite clever enough, but next time I
shall outwit them.” And if they do get away with it, they feel they have obtained
their goal; they feel superior, admired and appreciated by their comrades.
We must disturb this common estimate of the criminal's courage and
cleverness. Sometimes we must put the responsibility on the parents. If we trace
back to the childhood of a criminal, we will usually find that the trouble began in
his early family experiences. The environment itself did not count, but how the
child misunderstood it, and no one was there by his side to explain it to him.
It is always a difficulty for the other children if one child in the family is
especially prominent or gifted. Such a child gains most attention and the others
feel discouraged and thwarted. They do not cooperate, because they wish to
compete but do not have enough confidence.
When a child who lacks cooperation goes to school, we can notice it in his
behavior on the very first day. He cannot make friends with the other children.
He does not like the teacher, is inattentive, and does not listen to the lessons. If
he is not treated with understanding, he can suffer a new setback.
Poverty also offers opportunities for a mistaken interpretation of life. A
child from a poor family may meet social prejudice outside the home. His family

suffers many deprivations, trials, and sorrows. Perhaps he has to earn money
very early in life to help out his parents. Later, he comes across rich people who
lead an easy life and can buy everything they want; and he feels they have no
more right to indulgence than he has. It is not hard to understand why the
number of criminals is so high in the big cities, where very noticeable extremes
of poverty and luxury exist. No useful goal ever came from envy. A child in
these circumstances can easily misunderstand, thinking that the way to
superiority is to get money without working for it.
The feeling of inferiority can also be centered on an organic deficiency. I
am a little guilty, on this point, of having paved the way for theories of heredity
both in neurology and psychiatry. A child burdened with imperfect organs is
interested only in himself, if nobody develops his interest in others.
A large proportion of orphans become criminals, and it seems to me a
disgrace to our culture that we can not establish the spirit of cooperation in these
orphans. Similarly, no one was present to win the affection of many illegitimate
children and transfer it to their fellow beings. Unwanted children often take to
criminal practices, especially if they know and feel that nobody wanted them.
Also, among criminals, we often find ugly persons, which has been used as
evidence of the importance of heredity. But think what it feels like to be an ugly
child! He is at a great disadvantage. Perhaps he is a child of a race mixture that
does not have attractive results, or that meets with social prejudice. If such a
child is ugly, his whole life is overburdened; he does not possess what we all like
so much, the charm and freshness of childhood. But all these children, if they
were treated in the right way, could develop social interest.
Moreover, it is interesting to observe that we sometimes find unusually
handsome boys and men among criminals. While the first type might be
considered victims of bad hereditary traits, mixed together with physical
stigmata, deformed hands, for example, or cleft palate, what are we to say of
these handsome criminals? In reality, they have also grown up in a situation
where it was difficult to develop social interest: they were pampered children.
Criminals are divided into two types. The first type are does not know that there
is fellowfeeling in the world and has never experienced it. Such a criminal has a
hostile attitude to other people; his look is hostile and he regards everybody as
an enemy; he has never been able to find appreciation. The other type is the
pampered child; and I have frequently noticed, in the complaints of prisoners,
that they assert: “The reason for my criminal career was that my mother
pampered me too much!” Such children lose the ability to struggle; they always
want to have notice taken of them, and are always expecting something. If they
do not find an easy way to satisfaction, they blame the environment for it.

The Roots Of The Criminal Pattern
Every personality is a kind of musical creation. If we have an ear for such
things, we can hear in all its different expressions and movements a single
unifying theme. The criminal has his own structure of personality and style of
living. His crimes fit in with his general conception of life; they are part of the
answer he gives to the problems which confront him. In one respect the theme of
his personality is the same as everyone else's. We hear in it the human striving to
overcome difficulties, to reach security and significance. But the criminal's
striving for significance is limited and distorted. He lacks the ability to
cooperate; he lacks interest in other people. Wherever he finds a problem which
demands this interest in others for its solution, he throws himself into great
tension. He feels incapable of solving it, since he has never been trained to solve
such problems. The criminal's superiority exits only for himself and only in his
own imagination. To deprive others is his idea of superiority.
The themes of the criminal and the neurotic personality are very much
alike. In both the striving for importance is on the useless side of life. We can
distinguish them in other ways readily enough. Unable to solve problems
involving cooperation, and all the problems of life are of this kind, he still keeps
a certain residue of activity. In comparison, the neurotic has completely
withdrawn from activity. The criminal can join with others, but only with those
whom he knows to be on the useless side. Thieves have gangs, but who has ever
heard of a society of anxiety-neurotics? The criminal's sphere of attack is
greater, but he is more openly hostile to society. The neurotic believes that he
wishes to cooperate with others, but feels that he is not able. His attitude is: “I
should like to be on the useful side, but...I do not know how to do it.” On the
other hand, the criminal consciously refuses to cooperate. His attitude is: “Others
are not decent to me; why should I be decent to them?” Also, a criminal
consciously has a superiority complex. He thinks himself stronger, more heroic,
more important than others, but underneath we shall always find feelings of
inferiority and inadequacy, as if he could not succeed like other people. It is the
opposite with a neurotic. He knows that he feels embarrassed and inferior in
society; he knows that he feels worthless and inadequate, but he conceals from
himself the goal of supremacy which underlies his style of living. With the
criminal, as with the neurotic, we can do absolutely nothing, unless we succeed
in winning his cooperation.
Our only remedy is to find out the block to cooperation which the criminal
suffered in childhood. Here Individual Psychology has opened up the whole dark
territory for us. We understand how important the skill of the mother is at this
time. She can guide the development of all the desires and drives, the inherited

abilities and disabilities of the child. Here, we see the first possibility of
mistakes. If the mother is skillful, the situation for the child is very favorable.
She must first of all relate the child properly to herself; interest him in her own
person. If she is not able to train this interest, she will not be able to train him
later in a wider cooperation. The extenuating circumstance for all criminals is
that they have a certain degree of cooperation, but not sufficient for the demands
of our social life; on this point the first responsibility rests with the mother.
The next step is to interest the child in the father. He is also an important
part of the child's social world. But perhaps the mother does not want the child to
be interested in anyone else. Perhaps she is unhappy in her marriage; the two
parents do not agree; they are considering divorce, or they are jealous of each
other. Perhaps, therefore, the mother wishes to keep the child all to herself,
spoils him and pampers him and will not let him be independent of her. It is
quite obvious how limited the development of cooperation will be in such
circumstances.
Interest in other children is a further requirement for the development of
social interest. Sometimes if one child is the mother's favorite, the other children
are not very much inclined to include him in their friendship. When this
circumstance is misunderstood, it can serve as the starting-point of a criminal
career. If one boy in a family has outstanding gifts, the boy next to him is often a
problem-child. The second son, for example, is often more amiable and
charming, while his older brother feels deprived of his rights. It is easy for such
a child to deceive and intoxicate himself with the feeling that he is neglected. He
looks for evidence to prove that his reproach is true. His behavior becomes
worse; he is treated with more severity; he finds confirmation for his belief that
he is thwarted and put in a back place. Because he feels deprived, he begins to
steal; he is found out and punished. Now he has still more testimony that he is
not loved, and that other people are his enemies.
When parents complain of bad times and bad circumstances before their
children, they can block the development of social interest. The same thing can
happen if they often make accusations about their relatives or neighbors, always
criticizing others and showing bad feeling and prejudice. It would be no wonder
if the children grew up with a distorted view of what their fellowmen were like;
nor should we be surprised if in the end they turned against their parents, too.
Wherever social interest is blocked, only an egoistic attitude is left. The child
feels: “Why should I do anything for other people?” and, as he cannot solve the
problems of life in this frame of mind, he is bound to hesitate and look for an
evasion, an easy way out. He finds it too difficult to struggle, and he does not
feel concerned if he hurts others. It is warfare, and everything is fair in war!

Among criminals with whom I have been in contact, and in the descriptions
of crime I have read in books and newspapers, I have tried to find the structure
of the criminal personality; and I have always found that the key of Individual
Psychology can give us an understanding of the circumstances. Let me choose a
few further illustrations from an old German book by Anton von Feuerback, as I
have often found the best descriptions of criminal psychology in old books.
(1) Conrad K. murdered his father with the help of a servant. The father had
neglected the boy, treated him cruelly, and mishandled the whole family. Once
the boy struck back at him, and his father brought him before the courts. The
judge said: “You have a wicked and quarrelsome father and I can see no way
out.” Notice how the judge himself provided the boy with an excuse. The family
tried in vain to find a remedy for their troubles. Confronted with a difficult
problem, they were in despair. The father took a woman of bad reputation to live
with him, and drove his son out of the house. The boy made the acquaintance of
a day-laborer who had a passion for putting out hens' eyes. The laborer
counseled him to kill his father. He hesitated because of his mother, but the
situation went from bad to worse. After long deliberation, the son agreed and
killed his father with the laborer’s help. Here we see how the son was not able to
spread his social interest even to a father. He was still deeply related to his
mother and esteemed her highly. Before he could override the remainder of his
social interest, he needed to have extenuating circumstances suggested. It was
only when he gained support from the day-laborer, with his passion for cruelty,
that he could intoxicate himself into committing the crime.
(2) Margaret Zwanziger, called the “famous poison murderess,” was a
charity child, small and deformed in appearance. As Individual Psychologists
would say, therefore stimulated to be vain and anxious to attract attention. She
was grovelingly polite. After many adventures, which brought her nearly to
despair, she tried three times to poison women in the hope of securing their
husbands for herself. Feeling deprived, she could not think of any other way to
“get her own back.” She pretended pregnancy, and attempted suicide in order to
secure these men. In her autobiography (so many criminals delight in composing
autobiographies) she writes, in unconscious agreement with the views of
Individual Psychology, but unable to understand her statement: “Whenever I did
anything wicked, I thought “No one is ever sorry for me; why should I worry if I
make others sorry?'” Here she works up to the crime, drives herself on, and
provides extenuating circumstances. It is a remark I often hear when I propose
cooperation and interest in others: “But others don't show any interest in me!”
My answer is always: “Somebody has to begin. If the others are not cooperative,
it is not your affair. My advice is that you should begin, and not care whether the

others are cooperative.”
(3) N.L., oldest son, badly brought up, lame in one foot, took the role of
father to his younger brother. We can recognize this, too, as a goal of superiority,
until now probably on the useful side. Perhaps, however, it was pride and a
desire to show off. Later on, he drove his mother out of the house to beg, saying:
“Be off with you, you beast.” We can be sorry for this boy; he is not even
interested in his mother. If we had known him as a child, we could have seen
how he was developing toward a criminal career. Out of work for a long time, he
had no money. He contracted a sexual disease. One day, on his way home from a
futile search for work, he killed his younger brother in order to gain control of
his small income. Here we see the limits of his cooperation: no work, no money,
a sexual disease. These circumstances always confront us.
(4) A child was orphaned early and given over to a foster mother who
spoiled him beyond belief. In this way, became a pampered child. He developed
badly in later years and was very clever at business, constantly trying to impress
everybody and wanting to be in front. His foster mother encouraged him and fell
in love with him. He turned into a liar and a swindler, getting money whenever
he could. His foster parents belonged to the lesser nobility: he put on aristocratic
airs, squandered all their money and drove them out of their house. Bad training
and pampering spoiled him for honest work. He saw his task in life as lying and
cheating in order to overcome. This made everyone an enemy to be outwitted.
His foster mother preferred him to her own children and to her husband. This
treatment gave him the feeling that he had a right to everything, but his low
estimate of himself was shown in the fact that he did not feel able to succeed by
normal means.
We have pointed out already that there is no reason why any child should
suffer from this discouragement, this deep inferiority feeling that it is useless to
cooperate. No man need feel defeated before the problems of life. The criminal
has chosen the wrong means; we must show him where he has chosen them and
why. We must train him to have confidence, to be interested in others, and to
cooperate. If it were fully recognized everywhere that crime is cowardice and
not courage, I believe that the greatest self-justification would be taken away
from criminals and no child would choose to train himself for crime in the
future.
Prevention and Change
The criminal constantly prepares his thoughts and emotions for his criminal
career. He plans during the day and he dreams during the night in an attempt to
break down the last remnant of his social interest. He always looks for excuses
and justifications, for extenuating circumstances and for reasons that “force” him

to be a criminal. Piercing through the wall of social feeling is not easy; it offers
great resistance. But if he is to commit a crime, he must find a way--perhaps
through brooding over his wrongs or intoxication--to get rid of this hindrance.
This helps us understand how he continuously interprets his circumstances in a
way that will confirm his attitude; helps us understand, also, why we can achieve
nothing by arguing with him. He sees the world with his own eyes, and he is
prepared with a lifetime of argument. Unless we can discover how his attitude
developed, we cannot hope to change it. We possess one advantage however, in
which he cannot compete: it is our interest in others, which allows us to seek the
real way to help him.
When a criminal faces a difficulty, but lacks the courage to face it in a
cooperative way, he looks for an easy solution by plotting a crime. He does this
especially when he needs to make money. Like every human being, he looks for
a goal of security and superiority.
He runs away from the conditions of labor and from the associated tasks of
life. His training away from cooperation has genuinely added to his difficulties--
the majority of criminals are unskilled laborers. By developing a cheap
superiority complex, he hides his feeling of inadequacy.
We have the knowledge, and by now we have enough experience. I am
convinced that Individual Psychology shows us how we could change every
single criminal. But consider what work it would be to take each criminal and
treat him so that we changed his style of life. Unfortunately, in our culture the
majority of men would exhaust their ability to cooperate if their difficulties went
beyond a certain point, and we find that in hard times the number of criminals
always increases. I believe that to abolish crime in this way, we would have to
treat a great part of the human race, and I am not sure that it would be
practicable to have an immediate aim of making every criminal or potential
criminal a fellowman.
We can do plenty, however. If we cannot alter every criminal, we can do
something to relieve the burdens of those people who are not strong enough to
cope with them. With regard to unemployment, for example, and the lack of
occupational training and skill, we should make it possible for everyone who
wants to work to secure a job. This would be the only way to lower the demands
of our social life so that a great part of mankind would not lose the last remnant
of their ability to cooperate. Unquestionably, if we did this, the number of
criminals would decrease. Whether the time is ripe for this relief of our
economic conditions, I do not know; but we should certainly work for this
change. We should also train children better for their future occupation, so they
can face life more successfully and with a greater sphere of activity. We can also

do this in our prisons. To some extent, steps have already been taken in this
direction, and perhaps all we need to do here is increase our efforts. While I do
not believe it would be possible to give every criminal individual treatment, we
could contribute much by a mass treatment. I propose, for instance, that we have
discussions with a great number of criminals on the social problems, exactly as I
have described them in these lectures. We should question them and let them
answer; we should enlighten their minds and waken them from their lifelong
dream; we should free them from the intoxication of a private interpretation of
the world and so low an opinion of their own possibilities; we should teach them
not to limit themselves, and diminish their fear of the situations which they must
encounter. I am very sure that we could achieve great results from such mass
treatment.
We should also avoid in our social life everything which can act as an
obstacle to the criminal or to poor and destitute people. Great extremes of
poverty and luxury lead those who are badly off to become overwhelmed. We
should therefore diminish ostentation. There should never be sensational
headlines in the newspapers. It would be much better if we were more silent, did
not mention the names of criminals, or give them so much publicity. This
attitude of providing recognition needs changing. We should not believe that
either severe or mild treatment can change a criminal. He can be changed only if
he understands his own situation better. Of course we should be humane; we
should not imagine that criminals can be terrified by the thought of capital
punishment. Capital punishment sometimes only adds to the excitement of the
game, and even when criminals are electrocuted, they might think only of the
mistakes through which they were caught.
It would be very helpful if we increased our efforts to discover those who
were responsible for crimes. As far as I can see, at least forty percent of
criminals, and perhaps far more, escape detection; this fact is always at the back
of the criminal’s mistaken view. Almost every criminal has experienced
occasions when he committed crimes and was not found out. On some of these
points, we have already improved and we are going in the right direction. It is
also important that criminals should not be humiliated or provoked either in the
prison itself or after they leave prison. An increase in the number of probation
officers would be useful, if the right type of man is chosen; these officers should
be enlightened on the problems of society and the importance of cooperation.
We could accomplish a great deal by these methods. We would still not be
able, however, to decrease the number of crimes as much as we wish.
Fortunately we have another means, and it is very practicable and successful. If
we could train our children to cooperate sufficiently, if we could develop social

interest in them, the number of criminals would diminish considerably, and the
effects of crime would decrease in the near future. These children could not later
be incited or allured. Whatever troubles or difficulties they met in life, their
interest in others would not be wholly destroyed. Their ability to cooperate and
to satisfactorily solve the problems of life would be much higher than in our own
generation.
The only question that remains is how to choose the best point of attack,
what method will develop children so they can stand the tasks and problems of
later life. One practical way promises a real solution. We can make teachers the
instruments of social progress by training them to correct mistakes made in the
family, to develop and spread social interest of the children toward others. This
is an entirely natural development of the school. Because the family is not able
to bring up the children for all the tasks of later life, mankind has established
schools as the prolonged arm of the family. Why should we not use the schools
in this way? Why should we not use the schools to make mankind more sociable,
more cooperative, and more interested in human welfare?
This is not merely an idea. Out of this proposal Individual Psychology has
made a method. We have established Advisory Councils in the schools where
teachers can discuss with an expert the problems of the children in their class,
where they are taught how to influence, understand and help the children. Rather
than burden the teacher, the Council lightens his task. This is not a burden for
the teachers; this is a lightening of his task. He can learn how to help a child in
half an hour instead of being bothered by him for a year. This interesting
collaboration increases the importance, prominence and value of the teacher. I
have been doing this work for more than fifteen years. The children improve, the
teachers are happy, and the parents are pleased with the results.
Our activity must be based upon the following ideas which I will
summarize. All the advantages we enjoy in our present culture have been made
possible by the efforts of people who have contributed. If individuals have not
been cooperative, have not been interested in others, have made no contribution
to the whole, their whole life has been futile, they have disappeared and left no
trace behind them. Only the work of those people who have contributed
survives. Their spirit continues. If we make this the basis for teaching children,
they will grow to have a natural liking for cooperative work. They will not
weaken in the face of difficulties, but be strong enough to face the worst of
them, and solve them for the common good.
Chapter XXIV
The Meaning of Life1 2
[1931]

Individual Psychology has paid attention to this subject for a long time. It is
not the first time that I say something about it. Previously3 I have tried with
others, to solve this eternal question which appears impossible. Also, today I
cannot present everything we know so far or offer a final solution. However, we
Individual Psychologists have made a great step forward in regard to this
question. We will not stop applying this insight we have gained from our
experiences. Earlier, it was already important to me to show that Individual
Psychology as a holistic approach tries to determine the why, the direction, and
the meaning of an action from the given, unalterable conditions of our existence
on earth.
For all Individual Psychologists it has become self-evident that we want to
understand the meaning of life, we cannot overlook the fundamental aspects of
the human condition. We have summarized these aspects in three groups,4 based
on how man relates to life’s possibilities, which calls for a determined
functioning of the mind, a determined attitude which repeats itself as if under
compulsion. No doubt many variations can be found in the different solutions.
What happens if we attempt an incorrect solution, or if maybe whole generations
attempt wrong solutions? Does this mistake remain unpunished, can we
transgress against logical tasks without experiencing miserable, unpleasant
consequences? The trial and error development of mankind has resulted in
definite answers to these questions.
To mention a few, we talk about problems of gaining security in life, of
hygiene and health, how to deal with climate, etc. These questions arise and
show what is important for our further exploration: that there are correct and
incorrect solutions, that a possibly completely correct solution exists, which
mankind can never reach, because the task is an eternal problem, for which we
can only strive to find a solution. If we extend this view, we conclude that a
gruesome logic rules, namely, that all those are threatened in their personal
existence who do not find a correct solution to the fundamental tasks of life. To
these belong, for instance, the question of labor, division of work, organization
of work, ownership, etc.
1 Lecture given in Berlin, June 7, 1930. Originally published as “Der Sinn
des Lebens” in the Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie, Vol. IX,
1931, pages 161-171, 
1931. 
2 Translation by Sophia J. de Vries, 1994. Edited for readability by Laurie J.
Stein, 2004. 
3 “Kritische Erwägungen über den Dinn des Lebens,” P. 92 Jahrgang III,

Internationale Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie.
4 Editor’s note: Because Adler usually lectured without notes, the loose structure
of his presentation can be difficult to read. Here, to elaborate on the meaning of
life, he begins by referring to three main tasks. First, he addresses the task of
labor, then takes many “side roads” to a number of other issues. Much later, he
will explain and develop the importance of our reactions to the other two
“problems” of life.
Here we deal with a sociopsychological problem with a clearly
psychological, scientific observation. To solve the relationship between man and
earth correctly, we must find an improved solution for the problem of labor, not
only because a single person could never produce all he needs for his existence,
but also because a unanimous spirit of understanding the necessities must
pervade everyone. In another aspect of life we come to the same conclusion.
Man cannot and has never lived in isolation; it has always been an absolute
hypothesis that man created group living.
One of the most important and convincing examples is that what we find
valuable in the human mind has never been the product of a single person; what
we look for and expect in the development of a child, in the progress of the
individual, are accomplishments, possibilities, which are closely related to the
society of man and common experiences (common sense). This personal
evolution begins very early. Even in the function of our senses, we are not
restricted to observing only the physiological process and stating merely that a
person can see. We try to find in his look the interest that connects him with
people, with the world. If someone does not show this, we talk about a lifeless
look, though we cannot find a deficiency in the physiology of the organ or the
act of looking. We know that the way we expect looking to be must be animated.
Animation means to be interested in the environment, the world. If a child or
adult does not have interest in the world around him, we can easily understand
that his way of looking impresses us very differently from what we expect as
“normal”. It will be an empty look, a turned away look like highly disturbed
people have who have lost interest in the environment. “Abnormal” refers to a
person who does not look others in the eye, and we conclude that his interest in
others is insufficient. We can discover in a person's look his well-meaning or his
ill-feeling. If we stay with the general experience of how a delinquent looks, we
find a clear expression of no interest in others. So far, we have talked about only
one of our senses. The conclusions are the same for other senses. For instance
hearing. We state that people who cannot “listen” and concentrate have not
reached the level of interest in others which we expect. If we keep the
importance of these two senses in mind when we consider how the total outside

world can only be “correctly” perceived as far as interest in others exists,
depending on how well the individual has developed his senses in connection
with the outside world, we can understand how much this influences the
development of his perception, how much it affects his actions, how he interprets
the meaning of life. In this, he may succeed partly or not at all. Thus, we can
determine at an early stage in human development if a child has joined in life or
not. There are a million variables. Our training in Individual Psychology helps us
understand the uniqueness of each individual, not the category or typology.
Uniqueness cannot be expressed in terminology, but only in an artistic
description.
I can take this one step further, and point out how speech, one of the
greatest accomplishments in life, is not achieved by an individual, but emerges
from the cooperation of all. Speech would be unthinkable without interest in
others. Speech is a connection between two or more people to communicate
what they mean. This work of art we owe to all, and it develops only where
interest in others exists. This need for spoken contact is most strongly expressed
within the family, where we have continuous mutual involvement. In cases when
children and adults have poor language development, in an “abnormal” situation,
such as with a speech defect or stuttering, we observe that the important creative
attention to speech contact with others is absent, that a person does not show a
“giving” attitude, that he does not “give himself.” Consequently, he does not feel
at home with people and lacks interest in mankind. Thus, we see clearly the
strong connections between hearing and speaking. Further, we can often
conclude the lack of one psychical capacity from the lack of another, and
understand how a child's development is curbed if the original interest for
making contact does not exist, also due to inferior organs.
I am now talking about the functioning of organs with a specific inferiority.
Of course, the same is true for other senses. We expect that every “normal”
person acts in such a way that he will not conflict with the “wellunderstood”
tasks of all, in order that the attention of the community will not become directed
against him. I will not talk about the higher forms of the soul's development.
Philosophy has made much clear, for instance, that intelligence has general
validity.
Understanding means a well-developed, deep interest in others; the capacity
to interpret everything in the way one expects others to interpret. Until now,
common sense has been under-evaluated out of misunderstanding, especially by
those not well endowed with it. It is not a mood of the moment or an idea we
discover somewhere; it is an ideal of over-all understanding resulting from the
experiences of all mankind. Common sense is also subject to change, because it

is connected with all necessities of our lives, but for the greatest part common
sense answers most of our problems. We do not find much common sense in
general opinions. We know these are subject to change. In former times, people
believed in witchcraft. We could not very well call this common sense. In the
same way, we consider many contemporary, “generally accepted” viewpoints in
conflict with common sense.
Here, I want to point out that we do not progress in our understanding by
analyzing facts or adding up given elements. What helps us understand the
meaning of life is guessing. The human mind has to use guessing. We should not
consider guessing as something outside scientific thinking. In science, progress
occurs through guessing. On a more sophisticated level, we can also call it
intuition. But intuition is not different from the guessing everyone uses
everyday.
Furthermore, morals and ethics belong to man's inner life and provide
values. Science has to free itself first of every affect; we know that from time
immemorial “love thy neighbor as thyself” has been accepted by man. It has
always been anchored in his inner life because life's reality made it necessary for
him to withdraw it from his doubting intellect. What we Individual Psychologists
want to do, though many doubt this, is to create a scientific concept of the
meaning of life outside the borders of morality. We want to convince
scientifically what we have recognized as true and correct. Doing this, it is not
possible to avoid a psychology of values completely because talking about the
meaning of life is already a statement of value. I might just challenge the
highbrow attitude we often find in theorizing groups and say: if science has any
meaning, it occurs only if a breakthrough to truth has been presented. In the
same way, we are engaged in a scientific approach to solve this most important
problem, to discover truth.
Aesthetics also requires interest in others. What we experience as beautiful
or ugly correlates closely with the image of health. Even the idea of mankind's
future permeates this concept. What would be the value of health if it did not
connect with posterity? Thus, we see how the concept of ideal beauty and ideal
health are subject to change. In my youth, a man was considered healthy if he
weighed 100 K.G. (248 lbs.). This has changed, however, only because what is
healthy has been improved so much that it influences aesthetic concepts. In our
judgment of what is aesthetic, we look into the future. By declaring something
beautiful, we express that we would like to declare it beautiful forever.
Let us now consider the importance of the meaning of life. For many
people, even the topic seems superfluous if someone else thinks about it. Some
doubt we have anything to say on the subject. If we knew more about it, much

would have changed spiritually and materially. We would be able to avoid the
mistakes resulting from so many people knowing so little about it; we could find
solutions. I would like us to think diligently about this rewarding task. There
must be a bridge to help us understand the meaning of life. At this point, I want
to insert something to avoid contradictions. If a person denies life, if he says, “I
do not want to belong to mankind,” if he means this seriously, then the meaning
of life for him is unthinkable. We can find it only where life is accepted; thus,
the acceptance of life is unconditionally necessary. We must also consider that
besides man's social existence and the necessity of co-working, a third problem
shows up in the meaning of life. That is, we exist in two genders. I do not have
to explain here the biological necessity of man's development in two sexes. It is
clear that thus the possibility of greater variation, different from the much lower
species of life. At this point, we can see again how living in a society has
become so important, when we consider that the division in two sexes leads to
promotion of an unlimited blood mixture. This means development of the
organic state of the individual in such a way that he is in harmony with others.
This has been necessary to follow through on an everlasting striving. Again, this
could only have occurred correctly in this way if incest were forbidden,
regardless of whether it was an advantage or a disadvantage for the individual:
prohibition of incest indicates the pressure of wanting to be a community has
been carried out. We may assume that in all mankind a fairly similar blood
mixture exists, except in some lost tribes on their way to extinction.
Now I must lightly touch the problem of progeny. It certainly is necessary
for man to be as numerous as the sand, because our species would have perished
if it had not found the right way, if organically or by its conduct it had not been
in harmony with external realities or had not been able to meet the demands of
nature. Here we gain some insight about the origin of doing things. A gruesome
extermination process hits those who find wrong solutions, who have not
become adjusted to the meaning of life. We can observe from the results if
someone has responded correctly to the meaning of life. We should introduce
scientific research to establish such facts in advance, because it has such an
extraordinarily important value for the rearing of mankind. Furthermore, I would
like to show that this train of thought is justified, and may lead us to
clarifications which show the common denominator of all failures, namely, that
they all result from underdeveloped social interest, of insufficient development
of Gemeinschaftsgefühl.5
I will sum up the failures in sequence. First, disturbed children have no
interest in others and think only of themselves. That is why Individual
Psychology seek to develop social interest in children. No other method can help

them. Next, neurotics suffering from anxiety neurosis, compulsion, etc.; and
psychologically disturbed people who become insane without organic reasons all
miss social interest. At the moment we succeed in awakening such interest, we
talk about improvement. Both of these groups lack what we call
Gemeinschaftsgefühl. Finally, people become criminals only if they have lost
interest in others. We find the same in people who commit suicide, because
nobody who has a strong interest in mankind would be able to commit suicide.
Often we find in letters of people who commit suicide: “Life holds no interest
for me.” We cannot deny that hardships, disappointments, lost love, and
economic pressures all play an important role. This proves that man people can
maintain their social interest up to a certain point, where they become so deeply
troubled that their interest in others stops. The same is true for alcoholics, drug
abusers, etc., who try to withdraw from their obligations quickly with a trick of
selfindulgence. Exclusion of a social problem is also found in sexual deviants
and prostitutes. In all these failures, one item is always missing: interest in the
wellbeing of all. That is an important discovery of Individual Psychology. It has
made the capacity for cooperation the key to understanding people. However,
nobody should believe that he has already understood the uniqueness, the
individual quality of a case, when he says, “If a person shows a fault, he does not
have the right social interest.” We must identify step by step with an individual
in order to understand him. How can someone identify with a person in a
specific situation if he does not feel this interest for all? In this process of
identification shown by physicians and educators, we also find interest in the
wellbeing of all as a necessary foundation.
5 Translator’s note: Adler uses this word which means not only social interest,
but also feelings of embeddedness, of belonging.
Now, we may inquire if interest in all mankind really represents the
meaning of life. We observe in the development of the small child only
relationships and finding his position in the world, in contrast to other points of
view which show the isolated individual and try to put us off with the
superstition of heredity. In the simplest form of a child in his mother's care, we
can observe how much the mother's skill influences the child to cooperate. What
we see reflects how well the mother understands how to promote the child's
development. This also means how far the mother's social interest for her child
reaches. From there on, she has to bring the child closer to other people. The
child experiences fellow men. We can observe his experience of meeting others
and the use he makes of it. Undoubtedly, children enter the world with different
building material. We can say little about this. It also would not mean very much
compared to the possibilities of education. We know we can train people, or

determine if they do not seem fit for a particular task. For instance, we can train
left-handed people's right inferior hand so that they can accomplish the same
with it as naturally righthanded people.6 It does not matter if at birth differences
could be found. At this point, we see how much in the development of the child
really depends on the mother's ability. Thus education, the nowadays generally
defamed education, is put back on the throne. What we observe is a product of
education. This does not mean we have to go by the book, or that one person is a
measuring stick for education. It also does not mean that the child responds
correctly when the mother does the right thing. But it is the result of influence by
the mother who understands how to make the child into a fellow man or not. The
job has been done merely partially if the child has interest only in the mother and
tries to make contact with her by looking, hearing, and speaking. Social interest
must be developed further. In our culture, it is necessary to extend the interest to
the father. Here we see one aspect of mistakes and understand why we often find
failures in the families with disturbed family life, why a child does not develop
there into a fellow man. We also recognize the highly important cure of all
failures: to succeed in developing social interest so far that interest in others does
not get lost. Then we eliminate many of the burdens which oppress man's
development. External circumstances are also a measuring stick. If a child does
live in a quiet atmosphere, if irritability or hostility exists, we can expect to see
children grow up with no intention of doing anything for others. All these
different aspects become important when I discuss the meaning of life.
What do we find when we enter life? What can we count on and what can
we use so we can continue to build? We find what others have added. This
contribution by others has been produced by social interest. We should not make
the mistake of asking people if they are interested in others when they sell us a
pair of shoes. Their opinion does not count. Only what a person does or achieves
is important. Most often he does not know this. If he does not work, it may be
because he lacks courage to expect that his work will succeed and contribute
something.
6 Translator’s note: In Adler's days, left-handed children in European schools
were trained to be righthanded.
We must understand that courage is a social function, because only the
person who considers himself as part of the whole can have courage. We find
courage when a person feels at home, when he does not consider merely the
acceptable part of life as belonging to him, but also the unacceptable things; who
accepts the difficulties in our culture as a task on which he has to work to
improve the situation for all.

We owe our conviction to research on mistakes. We ask ourselves: how
will I come out? I have to be in the center of life; if not, then everything else
looks hostile and everybody is my enemy. Why should I love my neighbor if he
deserves my greatest hate as my opponent?! These are the attitudes a person has
who cannot be with others, who develops stage fright. From these attitudes result
sick, nervous tensions, anxiety, paranoia, and all symptoms we generally find in
people who have been spoiled and wish to be pampered through their whole life.
So they start to lament: why can I not always have everything I want?
When we look at the achievements of others who have added something, to
whose work we owe our culture, who have not only enjoyed the advantages, but
who have contributed, their spirit is immortal. Their essence and significance
live with us. They cannot disappear. We build on them. But those who do not
contribute are not guilty. They just cannot bring up what is demanded; they have
not got it. If we consider the matter from this angle, the conclusion is: those who
have contributed are immortal, they have been in the stream of history, they have
accomplished something for mankind, probably without giving it much thought.
Our insight is even stronger when we ask: what has happened to those who
have only taken, who have not contributed to the wellbeing of mankind?
Disappeared, exterminated! This answers the question about the meaning of life.
If we accept life, the meaning of it is to contribute, whereas the logic of life says
to the others: Go! You don't belong here, we cannot use you, life can use only
those who are interested in contributing. We can deepen our insight by
understanding at what point life begins to talk this way. Another small
observation can help us. What are the problems in our lives?
Three main categories of questions have to be answered to show us where
this meaning of life can be found. The first question pertains to the social side of
life: the relationship between you and me. The second question is the
relationship of the individual to work: how can I be useful, how can I contribute
to the wellbeing of all? The third question is the question of love. To be
interested in a person of the other sex who is physically attractive, to have more
interest in that person than in oneself, to strive to make life easier and more
pleasant for the other is inseparably connected with progeny.
Everyone who lives today and still questions the meaning of life does so
only because forebears have contributed to this discussion. We can easily see
that many related issues of friendship, interest in people, political point of view,
the problems of profession, school, kindergarten, leisure, etc., problems of love
and preparing for love, have arisen from the foundation of social interest and by
their solution will serve this concept. If we are confronted by one of these
questions and don't have an answer, what happens? Poorly prepared people

suffer from psychological tensions which express themselves physically, or
attempt to exclude the problems, to seek a seemingly easier road without
contributing, or in a psychological preoccupation (phobias, compulsion,
neurosis, psychosis) with fear of defeat; all wrong directions which disappear the
moment the person gives himself and his strength to work, to society, and does
not ask, “What do I get from this, how do I look?”
All these problems test the functioning and quality of our social interest.
Too many people cannot solve these difficulties and look like someone with a
bill to pay and no money. The questions in our three categories are the danger
points, showing clearly that the meaning of life is social interest
(Gemeinschaftsgefühl), functioning in a way which achieves something, creating
something for the good of all. The productive performance survives, that is why
the meaning of life cannot be found anywhere except in the creative, useful
achievement of the individual.
Those who have demonstrated belonging to the community understand
common sense. That is why in all failures find whims, self-deception, and
intoxication through vague feelings corresponding to the mistaken lifestyle and
private logic. Sharpness, tricks, and cunning, which these people have developed
instead of the courage of fellow men, send them in a direction against the
welfare of all. Oversensitivity and exaggerated impatience expose how poorly
they are embedded in life and raise their readiness for affects.
Feeling valuable results from a successful contribution to others and is the
only direction in which the average inferiority feelings of people experience a
successful compensation. To be valuable means to have contributed. Thus,
human happiness can be found only in applied social interest. Happiness is the
joy of fellow men; joy is the happiness of fellow men or even adversaries. In this
way, characterology approaches a definite solution. Individual Psychology has
taught that character traits are guiding lines in the structure of the lifestyle. They
show us the relationship between the unique individual and social problems. Of
course, the possibilities of the development of character traits are inherited.
Social involvement has to be conquered and results from the creative strength of
the child. Good, bad, lazy, industrious, sadistic, masochistic, manly, feminine,
all these character traits show us which social quality of the individual directs his
position in social problems; the whole is reflected in its parts.
Chapter XXV
Trick and Neurosis1
[1931]
The topic I shall discuss here requires a philosophical explanation by way
of introduction. With our limited understanding, we can never do more than

draw lines of connections and relationships between things; we know very little
of the reality behind our impressions. In fact, we often use something we might
call “trickiness” or a device, if we think of the term “trick” not as something
reprehensible, or conflicting with the spirit of community and fellowship, but as
something upon which human nature has come to be absolutely dependent. That
is, we must enter the province of guesswork if we hope to make any progress. I
can prove this fact with illustrations drawn from art.
To anticipate criticism, I wish to make clear that “trickiness” is universal
and general, and we must first determine whether the use of a particular “trick”
or device is compatible or incompatible with the aims of the communal spirit. It
is my purpose to show that our entire lives are marked by a certain “tricky”
quality, which becomes apparent as soon as we consider our relationship to the
natural forces that compel us to adapt ourselves successfully to our environment.
The course of evolution demonstrates that there is something which does
not operate by the rules and formulas of logic, but rather works through a
process of adaptation effected by guesswork. All inventions are based upon a
trick. Now anyone who thought he saw in the title of this article a condemnation
in the offing can set his mind at rest; there is nothing depreciatory in the term
“trick.” I might call attention to Hegel, who says, “The human mind is crafty.”
This is true not only as it applies to art, to discoveries and inventions, to every
instance of progress in science; it is equally true in narrower applications. For
example, the ability to catch and hold the evanescent word through the craft of
book-printing was not bestowed by nature. We cannot suppose that some
powerful agency implanted in the evolution of the human race a natural talent
which led a priori to the art of printing. If anyone grants such an assumption, he
only expresses a pious wish that cannot be verified with facts. Similarly, we can
show that all achievements have led to progress, not through logic, but by a
device or trick, through the discovery of a stratagem for evading the difficulty in
order to solve it.
We could mention many provinces in which tricks are common. In
literature, for example, trickery is at its height, as in the trick of representing a
man who never lived, but from whom we can learn, who arouses our emotions,
and so on. All these phenomena provide us continually with evidence that tricks
play a considerable part in life.
1 Originally published as “Trick und Neurose” in the Int. Z. Indiv. Psychol.,
Vol. 9, pages 
417-423, 1931. Translated into English and published in the Int. J. Indiv.
Psychol., Vol. 
2, No. 2, pages 3-10, 1936. Edited for readability by Laurie J. Stein, 2004.

When we think of the development of a child, we will have difficulty
supposing that his development proceeded according to conscious laws of logic,
through equation of cause with effect. Even the smallest child possesses the
quality of trickiness, the ability to find a stratagem to solve his difficulties. So it
seems certain that this quality (described variously as instinct, reflex, the
unconscious, intuition, etc.) is inherent in the development of human life; and
that the ability to guess (a power that cannot be further explained) is not
supervised and regulated by reason until later on--the exact time cannot be
determined. The power of reason develops only with experience, but the talent
for tricks has, to some degree, an organic foundation.
A young child does not think and reflect when subjected to a test in the
course of an experiment, when he is pricked, tickled, left by himself, and the
like. It is not the understanding that produces the result, but the cunning of the
child's personality. Our inquiries must begin at this point if we are to understand
the nature of trickiness, the use and development of device.
With regard to poetry, for instance, metaphor is useful: if a poet views an
object in an exaggerated form and clothes it in metaphorical garb, he succeeds in
producing an effect. I might also refer to the interpretation of dreams in
Individual Psychology: deceiving himself, the dreamer employs a trick to fortify
his position which seems threatened from without; he strengthens his incentive
toward a certain kind of behavior by awakening appropriate feelings and
emotions. He will do quite the same thing that he would ordinarily do without
the dream, but with the dream a stronger impulse is added, like a motorist who
feeds more gas to speed up his car--same destination, same direction, only more
energy.
Tricks are interesting in many other connections. For instance, take the case
of the professional conjurer. Children never tire of the tricks in his magic games.
Magicians in many different fields arouse our interest--in photography, radio,
motion pictures, etc. Through a trick, they produce the illusion of reality. Then
consider the way a locksmith can open a door with a picklock; not everybody
can do that. But if we ask a locksmith how he does it, he scratches his head and
answers, “Why, I guess you just have to have the knack of it.” He cannot explain
it; we have to find out the trick for ourselves.
Mathematics abound in tricks. The mathematicians do not hesitate to reveal
artful dodges like this: x2 + px = q. In that form the equation cannot be solved;
no mind could ever puzzle it out. But it can be solved by this trick: x2 + px +
(p2/2) = (q + p2/2).
The same sort of thing occurs in life. Years ago I began to reflect on the
nature of jokes. In jokes, a trick steers us away from common sense and presents

a “private logic.” Take the anecdote of the man who wanted to attend the
synagogue on a high Jewish holiday, but had brought no admission-card. He
announced to the temple official at the entrance, “I only want to look for Mr.
Miller,” and received the indignant answer: “You swindler, you! You want to
pray!” Here we see the sharp distinction between private logic and common
sense, and we see the quality of the trick that renounces the spirit of community
and goes its own private way. We must understand reason as being connected
with common sense, the sense that can be shared.
Now I have arrived at my subject proper: the part that tricks play in psychic
aberrations. In discussing this problem, I shall continually speak of “private
logic” at work whenever a person tries, unfairly, to turn to his own advantage the
social contributions of another. But here, too, we shall have to add a
qualification: the injury inflicted is not deliberately intentional. This assertion
extends to the criminal, despite the stress laid by the legal codes upon the
element of premeditation in crime. Because the criminal's style of life does not
distinguish between good and evil, he represents a mode of living that goes its
private ways to attain its ends by means which seem easier to him than those that
have social value.
But we will begin with other types of aberration which do not involve an
intent to injure. Here we face a style of life that refuses to be changed as long as
the person concerned fails to realize that he is in the snare of a trick. To clarify
this point I shall describe a few cases, divested of their factual circumstances.
For instance, take a difficult child who wishes to make himself the center of
attention without earning this position by his contributions; he is not yet
convinced that he can win attention and recognition by contributing his share,
and is deluded into believing that he can meet the requirements of life only by
being pampered. The quintessence of this child's behavior is his use of a trick, to
achieve his purpose by evading reason. Every person must decide in favor of one
or the other: either the tricks of his individual style, or the spirit of community.
We are citing extreme cases here, but we must not forget that between the
extremes lie thousands of variations; and we must be prepared to find divergent
forms of the same phenomenon.
By way of a brief general diagnosis, we can say that in “bad” children we
recognize a type that hopes through naughtiness to become the center of
attention. Such a child does not act according to abstract laws of cause and
effect, but by direct intuition; he stumbles upon the trick of getting what he
wants through naughtiness and continues to use it as long as it works. As another
example, a dominated by a severe, nagging mother, who wants to avoid similar
oppressive situations, hits upon a trick and says, “I'll cut out women altogether.”

So we are led to the idea that even what we call a “principle” is in reality a trick.
Now let us glance at a case within the province of neurosis. A man who has
a splendid record of achievement, who was an only child, pampered and
burdened with expectations that have been fulfilled, is now a successful business
man, well-educated, esteemed by his friends. But he takes a partner into his firm,
a man of great force and energy, who begins to outstrip him. Our young man's
purpose in life, his highest ideal, is to be the first in everything. A morbid spirit
of ambition drives him which is not generally apparent as long as he is on the
upgrade. Now because of his new business relationship, he is faces an obstacle.
At first he falls into a state of mental tension; he stops short, hesitating to
proceed in his usual way for fear the outcome might be against him. This process
is not conscious, but intuitional. He senses it in his physical condition and in his
daily experiences. His agitation increases. As a result of the strain of not finding
a way to maintain his high position and of his fear of falling from it, he begins to
suffer from insomnia and a continual feeling of tiredness. Suddenly, the man
realizes that people are treating him with unusual delicacy and tactfulness; they
are concerned about him and make allowances for his nervous strain. This gives
him some relief, assures him a certain importance, and helps him bear up more
easily under the tension; and like a clever, cagey lawyer who defers the verdict,
he postpones the decision regarding his own potentialities and importance.
Although he feels insecure, he is actually secure de facto; for even if he gives up
the race, his own attention, and that of his associates, will remain focused on his
nervous condition and not on the essential question of his ability and capacities.
By the trick of “nervousness,” he will have maintained his importance and
position when he felt unable to retain it otherwise.
The puzzle of psychoneurosis has always been: What is really happening
here? In attempting an answer, many people have grasped at the idea of an
advantage to be gained through illness (“flight into illness”), a theory originated
by the ingenious Greisinger, which is accepted today by many psychologists, but
which can be shown to be untenable.
The nervous symptom is not produced by a desire for an advantage
attainable through illness, but arises from the tension and shock produced when
the potentially neurotic patient confronts a new problem to which he does not
feel equal. This does not yet constitute a neurosis. A neurosis begins a step
farther on, when the affected individual uses this tension and the resultant
symptoms as a trick, not deliberately, it must be understood, but as an element in
his general lifeprocess, in order to evade a difficulty while creating the illusion
of being able to overcome it. He lacks the impulse to eliminate the nervous
symptom.

To question whether such a person feels happy, a sense of advantage gained
through illness, is naive. He would be gladly give up his neurotic symptom; we
must give the patient that much credit. But his work is cut out for him: in order
to maintain his prestige and self-esteem, he must evade the decision regarding
his ability, for fear worthless will be revealed, and no human being can endure
that. This means that he must not strengthen any impulse to rid himself of his
symptoms even though he suffers from them. They help him postpone the test he
fears. He lacks this impulse to eliminate his symptoms because he sets out on a
course which is incompatible with common sense and community feeling. He is
on the way to eluding his problem, not solving it. The manner in which he does
this, the results of the strain that we observe in him are the evidence of his
personal style of life, revealed in his effort to postpone a decision.
The many divergent forms of neurosis reveal the innumerable styles of life.
But a neurosis is produced only when a person stabilizes the tension and
excitement that arise from a situation in order to give the appearance of getting
through it more successfully. The neurosis is the holding on to the shock-effects,
the symptoms.
Now let us consider a case of compulsion neurosis. A married woman, who
has always been a little morose and irritable, lives in moderate circumstances.
She has a good husband, but a child who causes her considerable difficulty. The
family finances being more limited than they once were, she is depressed
because she has to do the housework. As the oldest child in the family, she was
forced by her mother to stay at home and look after the other children. From
early childhood on she had literally cursed her fate, using strong language; now
she has a whole dictionary full of profanity at her disposal. After her husband's
financial failure, this woman is forced to live in a very poor district, and her time
is taken up, as it had been in her childhood, with housekeeping and the care of
her child. Suddenly, she becomes obsessed with the idea that she is going to cut
off someone's head. She is terrified, and goes to a psychiatrist.
Anyone who has followed my narrative can see how this symptom was
produced. Ever since she was a child the woman had been accustomed,
whenever a difficult situation arose, to follow up the painful excitement with a
stream of profanity dictated by a striving for a seeming superiority. She learned
this as a child; now, whenever such a situation arises, she overflows with
invective. But this, in itself, is not a neurosis. If it were, we would have to
consider every Viennese cabman an obsessional neurotic. The neurosis is
produced when the woman affirms, “I'm at the end of my tether; these thoughts
are a torment, and someone must help me”--when she cries over herself. Here
the neurosis begins. To wish someone death, suffering, defilement is the mildest

sort of an attack. The neurosis did not begin until, through her obsession, the
woman elevated herself to a rank of importance and dignity; when she began to
turn it to her advantage, to utilize it for the betterment of her situation; when she
allowed herself to give way to these grisly thoughts whenever anything
happened that did not please her, and came to expect others to grant her a special
indulgence for the exertion of pelting them with abuse.
We cannot overlook that she actually obtained these indulgences. She let
her housework slide, put her child into a children's home, and insisted on
circulating in good society, on dressing better, and so on. She achieved all this,
but she preserved her advantageous position only so long as she continued to
elevate a very common, vulgar practice, the use of profanity, to a place of
importance as long as she turned her swearing to good advantage. Thus she
employed a trick, the obsession, though she really was not conscious of using it
as a device.
Now another case, this time one in which sexuality is turned into a trick.
We must realize that all instances of sexual perversion involve a trick: a
stratagem to evade normal sexual life and snap one's fingers at common sense
and community feeling.
An extremely pampered young man, had been under the constant
surveillance of his father. The father was kind, but a little too critical; yet the son
had great respect for him. However, the father could not help reproaching the
young man for incompetency. The son was not on good terms with his mother.
Moreover, he had an older sister who had turned out splendidly, and her success
seemed a handicap to him. With his character formed in this pattern of too much
respect for his father and too great a fear of women, the boy reached an age
when the sexual impulse called for satisfaction. Since his father had robbed him
of all self-confidence, he naturally could not rely on himself in love, especially
since his mother and his sister had exerted an injurious influence on him from
the female side. We can guess what form of sexuality adopted. In the urgency of
his desire, and with his fear of life, he was thrown on his own resources, and had
to be content with self-gratification. This mistaken way of attempting to solve
the problem of love has a thousand variations. Individuals who make such
mistaken attempts approach the problem as if love were a task for only one
person, when it is really a task for two.
The boy arrived at puberty, yet showed no signs of interest in girls. Many
boys face this predicament, and their only possible means of sexual satisfaction
is auto-eroticism. But masturbation is not neurotic; it is a simple act with no
implication of neurosis. The neurosis does not begin until the individual learns
the trick of making a strength out of a weakness and stabilizes the process with a

definite end in view. Later on, we find the young man in this very situation.
Feeling insecure, he must elude his sense of inferiority and assert his
selfimportance. So he practices masturbation in such a way as to attract attention
to himself. He spends whole nights in coffee-houses, in the company of women,
but indulging only in auto-eroticism, until people finally realize what he is
doing. Feeling they must attempt to reform him, his family and associates now
have to grant him a place of importance. He has forced them to it by the trick of
turning to his advantage the conduct compelled by his style of life.
His stock rises. Now his father has nothing more important to worry about
than his son. The boy relieves himself of all the pressure formerly brought to
bear upon him. His mother and sister treat him nicely. These are the external
influences generally brought into play when a family attempts to overcome a
trick of this sort in one of its members. But does this do any good? No. The boy
rightly fears that if he changes himself, if he gives up his symptoms, he will no
longer be able to enforce this pampering and solicitousness. As long as he sticks
to his old ways, he can feel certain that the others will follow him; and there is
little danger of anyone's hitting upon the idea of giving him up and letting him
ruin himself if he so chooses. He is afraid that he could accomplish nothing,
could not amount to anything, through the normal social channels of contribution
and cooperation. The only way to change him is to give him new courage to try
the useful social channels; he will be able to see through his old delusions and
errors once he is made to see through the trick that he has employed.
Finally, I have arrived at the last point of my discussion. All these matters
lie close to the root of the human psyche. We need diplomacy and politics in this
connection. The best diplomat is the one who uses a trick to his best advantage.
The quality of trickiness, the use of device, plays an extremely important role in
our lives. In neurosis the trick is always at some odds with common sense and is
employed according to the particular life style of the individual. Since the person
employing the trick has eyes only for his own weakness and his distressing
symptom and fails to see the larger context of his trouble, he cannot be expected
to rid himself of his symptom by himself. We must help him see things in their
true relationship and understand that he is using a trick, making an excuse,
seeking relief from a situation he fears, maintaining a prestige and position he
believes he can secure in no other way.
Now we can readily see how analysis through the methods of Individual
Psychology achieves its result. It shows the individual his trick and convinces
him that he has employed this trick without knowing it. It shows him that he has
been utilizing symptoms in an attempt to maintain his high position and avoid a
“defeat.” It makes him realize that, in his feeling of insecurity, the earliest

impressions of his childhood have led him to the use of the trick. And it shows
him that his insecurity is not real; that childhood impressions are not an adequate
foundation on which to build a whole life. It throws light upon his lifestyle and
makes him see how, in his desire for relief, he has attempted to play tricks on
life.
With that accomplished, the task of the Individual Psychologist is well
under way, even though he may not immediately succeed in convincing the
patient, who may then confidently be left to his own thoughts and reflection. If
he asks, “What is going to become of me?” we can answer: “Go on using your
trick, if you honestly think that it marks the limit of your powers. At best, you
will deceive yourself; at worst, deceive others; but in no case will it be a neurosis
any longer. For neurosis is the use of psychical impulses and symptoms for the
purpose of exploiting others by means of a trick, but without understanding that
the symptoms are being so used. But now you understand.”
No therapist can say, with truth, “The patient understood everything, but he
still has his symptoms.” If a therapist says this, he has not done enough. He has
not seen through the whole trick, or brought the patient to see through it. The
point is always to illuminate the field of vision until we ourselves see the
connections clearly enough to convince the patient and make him see them, too.
A trick is used whenever a person commits suicide to elude the pressing
duties of life; when an individual becomes a sexual pervert to avoid the
difficulty of fulfilling the normal social requirement of communal life; whenever
a problem child attempts to secure advantages through unsocial behavior; or
when a criminal so underestimates the importance of others that he does not
hesitate to take the shorter route of acquiring something that belongs to someone
else.
We must not forget that tricks play a prominent part in the evolution of
mankind. The element of trickiness, the use of device, explains what others have
called intuition or the faculty of guessing. Returning to our point of departure,
we can easily show that the trick of guessing is indispensable to evolution and
progress. Because we can never be certain what lies behind the sensations and
impressions we receive, we merely “guess” at the metaphysical, the meaning of
it all.
Chapter XXVI
The Structure of Neurosis1
[1931]
The structure of neurosis is one of the most difficult problems in
psychology. We often observe fear in people without considering it a
manifestation of neurosis. We also frequently find a certain rigidity of thinking

in people who are not neurotic, for instance in individuals who lay great stress
on rules and formulas. But we cannot take this as a characteristic of neurosis.
The same applies to other neurotic symptoms. The symptom of fatigue occurs in
the neurasthenic as well as in so-called normal people. The symptoms found in
functional neurosis may also be found outside of a neurosis. Every human being
under certain psychic tensions will react according to his individual make-up. In
one suffering from fear, we may notice various reactions such as heart
palpitation, breathing difficulties, etc. Normal people may have these symptoms.
For them, a feeling of insecurity may bring on contractions of the throat. Under
the stress of fear, other individuals will react with stomach symptoms, or
intestinal disorders, or bladder irregularities. For many individuals, fear
manifests itself through the sexual organ. In one special type, fear creates sexual
excitement. Individuals of this type consider such a reaction normal, and even go
so far as to construct theories about it. Let us remember then, that no neurosis
contains any phenomenon outside the range of “normal,” human psychic life and
its manifestations.
In order to bring out the full significance of what follows, I shall touch
briefly here on the fundamental views of Individual Psychology, especially those
related to its concept of mind and soul. In considering this subject, we clearly
move to a transphenomenal level. By refusing to do this, Watson and his school,
ignore the existence and meaning of the soul. Other schools take a purely
mechanistic viewpoint on these matters, thus eliminating the mind and psychic
life. In the true sense, this is impossible since the very word “psychology” means
science of the soul. Many call themselves psychologists who in fact are
physiologists and, according to the structure of their scientific training, eliminate
the concept of the soul or think of it in a mechanistic way. The psychologist,
however, takes it for granted that a basic conception of psychic life includes the
various manifestations of the personality. While he arranges these manifestations
in definite order and direction, he needs speculative insight to understand the
context of data which may lead beyond the province of experience. But even
here, in the sphere outside immediate or tangible experience, no evidence
precludes the assumption of psychic life or disproves the existence of it. Let us
assume, therefore, that the soul is a part of life.
1 Originally published in English in Lancet, Vol. 220, pages 136-137, 1931.
Reprinted in the International Journal for Individual Psychology, Vol. 1, No. 1,
pages 3-12, 1935. Edited for readability by Laurie J. Stein, 2004.
The most important characteristic of life is motion. That does not mean that
living things cannot be in a state of immobility, but that the capacity for motion
is present as long as life exists, and that all psychic life can be interpreted in

terms of movement. Hence, all phenomena which pertain to the psychic life can
be seen in space-time relationships. We observe these movements and see them
as if in a congealed statue’s form in repose, so to speak. Once we see psychic
expression as movement, we approach an understanding of the problem; for the
chief characteristic of a movement is that it must have direction and therefore, a
goal. Moreover, this direction toward which every psychic movement proceeds
could not exist if the entire psychic life did not have a goal, which is in the case
of every individual, determinable and capable of formulation, even though the
individual himself cannot formulate it. In relation to this, we may note that we
have in our consciousness many impressions which are not clearly defined
concepts and which, under certain circumstances, we can formulate. In this
connection, some erroneously conclude that if we clothe the non-understood in
words, we have moved it from the realm of the unconscious to the conscious,
which is certainly not the case.
I have said that every movement has a goal. “Drives” and “natural
tendencies,” such as sexual drives, for instance, have no direction. These abstract
concepts cannot, therefore, be well utilized in the understanding of psychic
occurrences. The direction we seem to observe in these drives is merely the
direction imparted to them by the movement of the individual-as-a-unity toward
his goal. The movement toward a goal shows a unified pattern. This goal makes
the whole psychic life a unity. The result is that the aspiration toward this goal is
inherent in every part of the psychic movement; therefore, the goal becomes a
part of the unity. We must conclude, then, that we understand a part of the
psychic life only when we conceive it as a part of a unity, proceeding along the
same course toward the same goal with other characteristics of the individual. In
the practical application of Individual Psychology, this viewpoint is of the
greatest importance. Hence, it is essential to the understanding of psychic life to
explain how the goal originates.
We find striving toward a goal or objective everywhere in life. Everything
grows “as if” it were striving to overcome all imperfections and achieve
perfection. This urge toward perfection we call the “goal of overcoming,” that is,
the striving to overcome. Language is inadequate to express the full range of
interpretation of what “overcoming” means. The interpretation varies with each
individual because the goal of each individual differs. If we say that such a
striving is for “power” or “force,” or a “running away from reality,” we have
made typical generalizations which do not give a clear insight into a particular,
individual case. But we have gained one point. We have illuminated the field
under consideration, and must then narrow down the meaning so that we can
perceive the particular direction of movement of the individual in question. For

this we need experience, alertness, and a closely critical, objective, unbiased
examination of each individual case.
The phenomena to which we allude imply the existence of a minus and plus
situation simultaneously in the same individual, that is, an inferiority feeling and
at the same time a striving to overcome this inferiority. The inferiority feeling
can show itself in a thousand ways, for instance, as a striving for superiority. The
question then arises as to how the fictitious goal or guiding fiction is established.
We concede that every child is born with potentialities different from those
of any other child. Our objection to the teachings of the “hereditarians” and
every other tendency to overstress the significance of constitutional disposition
is that what matters is not what we are born with, but what we make of that
equipment. Still we must ask ourselves: “Who uses it?” As to the influence of
the environment, who can say that the same environmental influences are
apprehended, worked over, digested, and responded to by any two individuals in
the same way? To understand this fact we must assume the existence of still
another force: the creative power of the individual. We have been impelled to
attribute to a child creative power, which translates into movement toward the
overcoming of an obstacle all the influences upon him and all his potentialities.
The child feels this as an impulse that gives his striving a certain direction. All
phenomena in the psychic life of a child tend toward overcoming his inferior
position; consequently, the views of those who believe in the “causative”
influence of “heredity” on the one hand, or “environment” on the other, as
complete explanations of his personality, are made untenable by the assumption
of this creative power of the child. The drive in the child lacks direction as long
as it has not been incorporated into the movement toward the goal which he
creates in response to his environment. This response is not simply a passive
reaction, but a manifestation of creative activity on the part of an individual. It is
futile to attempt to establish psychology on the basis of drives alone, without
taking into consideration the creative power of the child which directs the drive,
gives it form, and supplies it with a meaningful goal.
However, certain factors affect the child, leading him to mold his life in a
certain direction. These factors are not primarily causative agents, but rather
enticing, stimulating phenomena. The attitude toward these factors varies widely
in different individuals. No mathematical rule could teach us how to make the
proper use of anything we possess. However, what unprejudiced research can
observe is not the disposition or constitution that individuals possess, but the
“use” they make of what they possess. As I have indicated, these factors appear
as enticing or stimulating opportunities to the individual. It would be erroneous
to assume that they act as causes, for with deepened understanding, we see that

different individuals make different use is made of the same stimuli. Therefore,
we are justified in assuming merely that on a statistical basis they will probably
evoke in an individual certain typical uses of them. So much we may understand.
Any assertion beyond that we may regard as a bit unscientific. In other words,
the creative factor comes into play here, which we have to train ourselves to
understand better.
As a result of our experience, we know that a child with inferior organs will
feel inadequate for the tasks of life and that he will feel the minus situation more
intensely than the average child. This is significant because our experience
confirms that when a child feels especially insecure in a minus situation, the
results are very striking and show a greater striving toward a plus situation.
These observations apply to children born with inferior sense organs, brain
structure, or endocrine glands. The organic weakness does not necessarily
function as a “minus” situation, but the child experiences the weakness of his
organic equipment for average social tasks, and feels impelled to reorganize it
accordingly.
Rooted in an experience of organ inferiority, the striving to overcome the
sense of inadequacy takes many forms. Some individuals seek to eliminate
problems; some act to avoid them. By the avoidance of problems, some feel
relieved and thus more secure. Others wrestle and struggle with their problem-
for instance, left-handedness--and accommodate themselves more courageously
to outside influences. The outcome depends on the creative power of the
individual which expands outwardly according to no rule except this: that the
determining goal is always “success.” What constitutes success for him depends
upon the individual's own interpretation of his position. During the first three or
four years of life, the child forms his life pattern. He has then shaped his
concrete goal, determining the way in which he overcomes his problems. From
then on, we can perceive in his attitude the result of this process of creative goal
formation. These goals have a million variations. They differ from each other,
metaphorically speaking, in color, shape, rhythm, and intensity.
A second group of individuals show a life pattern very similar to that of
children affected by organ inferiority: those who have been pampered in
childhood. The more deeply I have delved into the problem of neurosis and
searched the cases presented, the more clearly I have come to see that in every
individual with a neurosis some degree of pampering can be traced. Dependence
on another person for the solution of a problem or the carrying out of a task has a
determining influence on an individual. But we must not think too loosely of
pampering. When we speak of a pampered child, we do not simply mean a child
who is loved and caressed, but rather a child whose parents always hover over

him, assume all responsibilities for him, take away from him the burden of
fulfilling any of the tasks and functions he could fulfill. Under such
circumstances, the child develops like a parasite and emerges as one of
innumerable varieties of individuals, ranging from those disinclined to accept
any suggestion or influence from others to those who always seek assistance.
Thousands of differences in type and kind exist between these extremes. I would
like to prevent an easy mistake, however, by emphasizing that the pampered
style of life should not be understood as merely resulting from the attitude of
parents or grandparents, but as the creation of the child himself. He may produce
this creation even where there is no pampering by other persons. The demanding
attitude of the child induces pampering.
A third group consists of children who are neglected, illegitimate,
undesired, or ugly. The feeling of being neglected is, of course, relative. External
circumstances can contribute to it and later in life, every pampered child will
automatically find himself in situations which make him feel neglected.
The basic, underlying structure uniting all these types begins with a feeling
of insecurity. This feeling of insecurity and inadequacy is characteristic of all
failures. From the way they attempt to solve them, we may judge how well
individuals in the three categories are prepared to meet problems, which are
always of a social nature. All problems involve other people. For the purpose of
clarification, we may classify them as problems of social, occupational, or love
relationships. Their solution depends, consequently, upon how well an individual
is prepared to make contact with his fellow human beings. All failures--problem
children, criminals, suicides, neurotics, psychotics, drunkards, sexual perverts,
etc.--are products of inadequate preparation in social feeling. They are all
noncooperative, solitary beings who run counter to the rest of the world; beings
who are more or less asocial if not antisocial. This viewpoint tends to make
Individual Psychology a psychology of evaluations. What does this signify? The
very farreaching implication is that only the individual prepared for social
cooperation can solve the social problems which life imposes. The “law of
movement” of the individual must include a degree of striving for cooperation.
Where it is lacking, we meet with “failures.” I have already shown that this
inclination for cooperation and social achievement has not been properly
developed in children who feel insecure. These insecure ones build a lifestyle
which shows a lack of social interest, because an insecure individual is always
more concerned with himself than with others. He cannot get away from himself.
We cannot stress too much that the neurotic lacks interest in others, social
interest. We must not be confused by some neurotics who seem to be benevolent
and wish to reform the whole world. This wish can be merely a response to a

keenly felt minus situation. Where the minus situation is strong, the striving to
overcome will also be strong. We can also perceive this in the organs of the
human body, for where the obstacle to be overcome is great, the tension is also
great. The neurotic places the goal of his overcoming too high. Just as in the case
of a normal individual, it is related to the feeling of personal value. The feeling
of personal worth can be derived only from achievement, from the ability to
“overcome.” A lack of social feeling prevails in the law-of-movement of the
neurotic and decreases his ability to “overcome.” This lack is not as great in the
neurotic as it is in the criminal. The criminal is more actively aware of his fellow
creatures, but opposes them at the same time. The neurotic does not oppose them
openly, but focuses his efforts on testing and utilizing, or exploiting, the social
feeling of others. This is characteristic of all neurotics, so that in the structure of
a neurosis we find the utilization of the social feeling of others and
simultaneously the arresting of an individual's cooperative participation by a
“but.” This “but” epitomizes all neurotic symptoms. It offers an alibi to the
neurotic. The neurotic lives according to the formula “yes, but.” All the
symptoms hindering the neurotic from going forward to achievement are
covered by this formula. His estimate of his value, therefore, depends upon how
much another person contributes to it, not upon his ability to overcome, or own
achievements. Even in considering functional neurosis, we maintain the same
viewpoint. In such cases we have to deal with an arrangement of emotions, such
as anxiety, insecurity, hyper-sensitivity, rage, impatience, greediness, etc. These
emotions all arise from living outside the scope of cooperation. The tension in
which the neurotic lives makes it easy to work himself up into a state of
heightened emotion. This tension makes itself felt at the point of “least
resistance,” and the characteristic effects show up in such places as I have
mentioned before, for instance, the stomach, bladder, intestines, heart, etc.
So we come to see that functional neurosis can be understood only when we
recognize the individual as a unity. The neurotic is an individual placed in a test
situation, attempting to solve his problems in the interest of his own personal
ambition rather than in the interest of the common welfare. This holds true of all
neuroses. They grow out of the psychic tension of an individual who is not
socially well-prepared, when he is confronted with a task which demands for its
solution more social feeling than he is capable of.
The true nature of the so-called organic factors in neurosis becomes clearer
when the individual finds himself in a test situation. Here the individual's
interpretation of his own qualities plays a role. We do not believe that a neurotic
is incapable of solving those problems before which he breaks down, but we
recognize that he has not yet acquired the amount of social feeling necessary for

him to make an approximately correct solution of them. He does not possess
sufficient “contact ability,” that is, capacity for making contact with others.
There then develops in him that psychic tension which can be found in everyone
who feels insecure. This tension affects the entire body and psychic life and
differs with each individual. It affects those who are greatly concerned with
rules, formulas, and ideas intellectually. We can observe this most clearly in
compulsion neurosis and paranoia. With others, as in anxiety neuroses and
phobias, the emotional sphere of psychic life is set into motion.
I also want to stress the environmental factor. Although organic and
environmental factors play a part in every neurotic symptom, the true impact of
the environment can be understood only when we perceive the whole individual
in the expression of his lifestyle. The therapist must put himself in the
individual's place in order to see that for this particular person a certain situation
seems too difficult.
Recently, a patient came to me who had previously been treated with
success up to a certain point by another Individual Psychologist. Before his
previous treatment, it had been possible for him to be sexually stimulated only
when animals were present. It would be interesting to discuss why he chose
animals, but I cannot go into that part of his lifestyle here. Anyway, due to a
strong inferiority feeling, he had excluded the normal phase of a love
relationship. This exclusion is characteristic of all sexual perversion. When he
came to me, he was planning to get married. He said, “I want to marry, but the
problem now arises of confessing to my future wife what has gone on before. If I
do this, I am sure that she will refuse me.” This refusal is exactly what he was
aiming at. He wanted another excuse for evading the solution of the love
problem. I said to him, “You should not confess to everybody all the
disagreeable events in your life for which you are not really to blame. It is unfair
and not in good taste to speak of certain things. It is only the last remnant of your
fearfulness which makes you think of talking about it to your fiancée. You must
expect that other people are apt to misunderstand what you wish to tell.” He
perceived this and understood the purpose of his determination to confess to his
fiancée. I hope that his increased understanding has enabled him to rid himself of
his fear of the love problem.
If we understand the law-of-movement of neurotics, we will find that in
each patient the mental phase (compulsion neurosis), the emotional phase
(anxiety neurosis), or the motor phase (hysteria) is predominant, although the
other psychic processes, too, are always dynamically present. In the treatment of
such cases, however, the whole psychic process must be clearly and definitely
determined. There are no pure cases. There are only mixed cases in which we

can see that at one time one aspect, at another time another aspect of the whole
psychic process comes to the foreground. People who do not sufficiently
understand this predominance of one aspect of life over the other frequently talk
about the “unconscious.” The unconscious, however, is nothing other than that
which we have been unable to formulate in clear concepts. These concepts are
not hiding away in some unconscious or subconscious recesses of our minds, but
are those parts of our consciousness whose significance we have not yet fully
understood.
If we focus our attention on the goal, direction, and form of an individual's
“movement,” which alone give us true understanding of him, we find among
neurotics several different types of “movements.” First, the distance complex
shows an attempt to establish distance as a safeguard. For some neurotics, then,
the most striking characteristic is that they keep themselves at a significant
distance from the solution of the problem that confronts them. They may create
this distance by means of hysteria, fainting, indecision, a tendency to doubt, etc.,
but all these symptoms mean nothing more than an attempt to stand still in a
world that is moving. If an individual cannot decide whether he should do this or
do that, one thing is certain: he does not move. We can also see this keeping
oneself at a distance very clearly in anxiety neuroses. Functional neuroses are
also capable of hindering a person from solving social problems. Thus, an
individual may be compelled to urinate just when he is about to go to a party.
Also, the compulsion neuroses are well designed to effect this “distance,”
consequently causing a standstill, whenever the neurotic feels himself forced to
do something.
The second form of movement manifests itself in a hesitating attitude: the
neurotic advances, but hesitatingly. An example of this is stuttering. Any
problem may be met with a “stuttering approach.” This hesitation may lead to
postponing a solution of problems by means of insomnia. The patient with this
symptom is so tired that he can solve his task only very hesitatingly. Fatigue is
one of the chief symptoms of neurasthenia. In agoraphobia, the neurotic
obviously hesitates to solve his problem without the assistance of another
person.
The third form of movement characteristic of all neurotic symptoms is the
detour around the solution of a problem and the refuge in a battlefield of lesser
importance. This becomes especially clear in a compulsion neurosis. The patient
sets up a counter-compulsion in opposition to the compulsion of social demands.
In doing this, he merely postpones the solution of his problems. As for example,
in the washing compulsion.
The fourth form of movement, the most complicated striking. I might call

the “narrowed path of approach.” The person does not give himself up fully to
the solution of a problem, but attempts part of it and eliminates other parts,
generally those which are most pertinent. This is the case in perversions.
Another phase of this same form of movement sometimes leads to great cultural
achievements.
Each individual approaches the goal of “overcoming” differently.
Proceeding toward a general diagnosis, we may recognize traits of unconcealed
despotism aiming to make the other person a slave to the patient, as in anxiety
neurosis. Such individuals have learned in their childhood to force others to
come to their rescue by frightening them. Another group uses the “alibi” as the
chief form of movement toward the goal of “overcoming.” Their ambitious
tendency becomes obvious when we see them insisting upon their point of view.
For instance, they will say: “If only I could sleep, I would be the first or among
the first.” But they content themselves with having this alibi. Of course, not
everyone presents that alibi in such an easily understandable form; therefore, we
have to take into account the whole of a patient's attitude toward his problems. In
a third group, individuals create fictitious values within themselves. Such
neurotics, for instance, pride themselves on how much they have attained in spite
of their neurosis.
I want to stress one more thing: in psychic processes the single spheres are
not as separated as some schools of psychology assume. In no area do we find
only the emotional or the mental side, only action or volition. The psychic
process comprises the whole of an individual. When we observe a part of it, we
should feel forced to search for the rest of it. So, if an individual tells us his first
childhood recollections, we may gather from them the mental, emotional, and
attitudinal aspects, but only after that can we understand the unity of his
personality. By virtue of our experience we can, with all due precaution,
ascertain the dynamic value of mental, emotional, and attitudinal aspects as
movements directed toward, or determined by a goal, that for the individual, has
the meaning of securing for him what he regards as his position in life. In this
way, we can understand these goal-directed movements as the individual's
efforts to secure for himself what he interprets, or misinterprets, as success, or as
his way of overcoming a minus situation in order to attain a plus situation.
Thus, we come to the following conception of the structure of neurosis: all
neurotic symptoms are safeguards of individuals who do not feel adequately
equipped or prepared for the problems of life, but instead carry within
themselves merely a passive appreciation of social feeling and interest. This
appreciation becomes apparent when they take into account and exploit the
social feeling of others. As soon as we learn to recognize the meaning of this

attitude, we become convinced that in any neurosis, we deal with the pampered
individual, or with the individual who has not become a cooperative fellow-
being because in his earliest childhood he was trained to utilize the services of
others for the solution of his own problems.
Index
A
abnormality · 57, 118, 121 
above · 4, 19, 24, 36, 37, 60, 61, 62, 67, 90, 94, 127, 131, 136, 141, 144, 146,
159 abuse · 130, 182 
accusation · 150
accuse · 146 
achievement · 7, 14, 26, 27, 34, 41, 71, 79, 85, 131, 135, 177, 180, 190 activity ·
1, 2, 3, 6, 8, 15, 22, 44, 50, 51, 84, 94, 107, 109, 114, 125, 128, 144, 159,
160, 163, 167, 169, 188
active · 44, 47, 78, 136, 148, 155
adapt · 119, 178
adaptation · 28, 178 
addiction 
addict · 139 
adjustment · 12, 112, 136 
affect · 92, 125, 145, 173, 188 
affection · 2, 3, 7, 9, 17, 32, 56, 58, 61, 162 
aggression · 73, 125 
agoraphobia · 29, 30, 31, 50, 74, 92, 93, 193 
alcohol 
alcoholism · 130, 135, 141 
alibi · 107, 110, 191, 193 
ambition · 10, 15, 26, 46, 47, 73, 86, 108, 147, 180, 191 
ambitious · 22, 23, 61, 99, 108, 109, 142, 193 
ambivalence · 22, 39, 71, 93, 94, 127, 139 
analogy · 15, 139 
anger · 49, 81, 94, 97, 142, 144, 145 
antithesis · 22, 115 
antithetical · 140 
Anton, Gabriel · 164 
anxiety · 8, 29, 43, 49, 50, 68, 91, 120, 121, 135, 163, 174, 176, 191, 192, 193 
anxious · 4, 7, 12, 30, 165 
apperception · 93, 111, 114, 138, 161 
arrangement · 21, 22, 24, 36, 41, 126, 191 

arrogance · 50 
art · 6, 14, 17, 21, 39, 41, 53, 113, 126, 172, 178 
as if · 14, 24, 34, 41, 46, 54, 60, 61, 62, 64, 65, 70, 72, 90, 108, 126, 135, 136, 
138, 145, 146, 147, 149, 150, 151, 163, 170, 183, 187 
assertion · 90, 138, 180, 189 
association · 130 
assumption · 14, 81, 97, 108, 110, 178, 187, 188 
assumptions · 14, 81 
attention · 1, 2, 5, 8, 10, 13, 17, 23, 27, 30, 45, 50, 52, 53, 60, 66, 68, 74, 82, 93, 
97, 103, 107, 109, 124, 150, 161, 165, 170, 172, 178, 180, 181, 183, 192 attitude
· 9, 12, 13, 14, 16, 21, 23, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 36, 38, 40, 68, 73, 79, 
88, 92, 113, 114, 118, 122, 126, 129, 130, 131, 132, 139, 142, 145, 149, 162, 
163, 164, 166, 168, 170, 172, 173, 188, 189, 190, 193, 194 
avoiding · 24, 29 
avoidance · 36, 189 
awareness · 35

B
beauty · 6, 7, 173 
becoming · 35, 135, 147 
being · 2, 5, 10, 12, 13, 16, 18, 22, 23, 24, 26, 27, 29, 30, 34, 36, 37, 39, 40, 42,
46, 47, 49, 50, 51, 53, 58, 61, 62, 64, 65, 71, 77, 80, 81, 82, 84, 85, 88, 90,
93, 
98, 101, 103, 111, 112, 116, 119, 120, 136, 137, 139, 140, 141, 142, 144, 145, 
150, 152, 155, 160, 167, 169, 174, 176, 180, 181, 182, 184, 186, 190, 194 belief
· 80, 82, 91, 107, 126, 137, 143, 164, 166 
belonging · 50, 87, 147, 174, 176, 177 
below · 70, 94, 127, 159 
blind · 9, 98 
body · 10, 15, 16, 27, 54, 79, 81, 125, 129, 131, 152, 190, 191

C
case · 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 9, 14, 18, 23, 24, 25, 27, 29, 30, 32, 36, 38, 39, 40, 41,
54, 58, 
60, 61, 62, 66, 67, 70, 72, 73, 80, 81, 83, 88, 96, 99, 101, 105, 108, 109, 112, 
114, 115, 120, 131, 132, 134, 136, 140, 141, 143, 144, 146, 148, 149, 151, 152, 
153, 154, 174, 179, 180, 182, 184, 187, 190, 193 
cases · 5, 7, 8, 18, 27, 29, 30, 33, 35, 37, 39, 47, 49, 50, 55, 56, 57, 60, 62, 63,
66, 67, 73, 77, 81, 89, 93, 100, 107, 121, 125, 126, 129, 132, 136, 137, 138, 140,
143, 145, 146, 150, 172, 180, 189, 191, 192 
castration · 138 
causality · 40, 79, 143 
change · 2, 3, 6, 9, 28, 30, 32, 33, 40, 50, 66, 76, 104, 112, 116, 132, 138, 142, 
144, 153, 155, 160, 166, 167, 168, 172, 173, 183 
character · 1, 2, 3, 4, 15, 26, 27, 39, 45, 46, 50, 56, 85, 88, 89, 93, 96, 113, 125, 
126, 130, 136, 137, 149, 160, 177, 183 
character traits · 15, 45, 85, 88, 89, 177 
characteristics · 13, 16, 17, 22, 39, 49, 52, 55, 58, 89, 90, 102, 112, 119, 126,
135, 187 
child · 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31,
33, 
35, 36, 39, 49, 50, 51, 54, 55, 56, 58, 61, 64, 68, 70, 72, 73, 74, 79, 80, 83, 84, 
85, 86, 89, 90, 92, 93, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 104, 105, 106, 111, 112, 
113, 116, 124, 125, 130, 132, 133, 140, 142, 143, 147, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153, 
154, 156, 157, 161, 162, 164, 165, 166, 168, 171, 172, 175, 177, 179, 180, 182, 
188, 189, 190 
children · 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 27, 28, 29, 31, 33, 34, 41, 43,
45, 47, 50, 52, 54, 56, 58, 62, 74, 75, 76, 80, 83, 85, 89, 93, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101,
102, 103, 104, 105, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 121, 124, 125, 126, 130, 132, 138,
140, 141, 145, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153, 155, 160, 161, 162, 164, 166, 167, 168,
169, 172, 174, 175, 180, 182, 189, 190 
choice · 84, 137, 140, 144 
clean · 115, 150 
cleanliness · 150 
collective · 124 
common sense · 18, 33, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 78, 93, 95, 117, 133, 138, 161, 171, 
172, 177, 179, 181, 182, 184 

community · 28, 34, 42, 44, 65, 67, 68, 69, 85, 86, 88, 89, 90, 91, 93, 100, 118, 
120, 121, 129, 130, 132, 143, 172, 174, 177, 178, 180, 181, 182 communal · 91,
94, 139, 141, 178, 184 
communal life · 91, 184 
community feeling · 181, 182 
comparison · 14, 38, 73, 128, 163 
compensation · 15, 39, 55, 124, 125, 129, 140, 177 
compensatory · 125 
competition · 108, 139 
completion · 26, 57, 113 
complex · 31, 132, 136, 140, 144, 192 
compulsion · 53, 66, 132, 136, 137, 140, 170, 174, 177, 182, 191, 192, 193
compulsive · 13, 82, 107, 136, 139, 140 
concentrate · 1, 2, 29, 171 
concentration · 2, 50 
concept · 3, 22, 33, 36, 40, 64, 65, 124, 139, 144, 173, 177, 186 
conception · 7, 26, 64, 94, 163, 186, 194 
conflict · 15, 34, 35, 39, 90, 120, 121, 127, 141, 172 
conscious · 12, 14, 16, 22, 23, 36, 37, 40, 41, 57, 71, 75, 83, 87, 88, 91, 93, 94,
96, 
108, 127, 138, 139, 145, 150, 179, 181, 182, 187 
consciousness · 10, 33, 40, 59, 94, 187, 192 
constitution · 133, 137, 188 
contact · 16, 17, 44, 50, 57, 75, 88, 93, 142, 149, 164, 172, 175, 190, 191 contact
ability · 191 
contempt · 71 
contribution · 65, 94, 128, 140, 161, 169, 175, 177, 183 
cooperate · 41, 91, 112, 127, 131, 132, 136, 138, 139, 142, 146, 160, 162, 163, 
166, 167, 168, 175 
cooperation · 41, 50, 65, 111, 112, 113, 114, 124, 130, 132, 133, 136, 137, 138,
139, 141, 142, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 172, 174, 190, 191
cosmos · 34, 87, 128, 130, 131 
counter-compulsion · 193 
courage · 7, 10, 14, 22, 23, 24, 27, 28, 31, 34, 35, 39, 42, 50, 51, 61, 68, 69, 88, 
100, 114, 120, 142, 157, 161, 166, 176, 177, 183 
courageous · 10, 39, 50, 83, 114, 161 
coward · 50, 60, 114, 161 
cowardice · 14, 53, 114, 161, 166 
craving · 46, 78, 85, 86, 128, 130 

craving for power · 85, 86, 128 
creative · 5, 14, 22, 79, 84, 125, 126, 133, 146, 172, 177, 188, 189 creative
power · 14, 84, 125, 188, 189 
crime · 45, 87, 91, 93, 112, 115, 116, 118, 119, 120, 130, 159, 160, 164, 165,
166, 
167, 168, 180 
criminal · 2, 8, 13, 42, 66, 68, 87, 111, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 119, 120, 121,
122, 135, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 180, 184, 190
criminality · 82, 132 
critical · 17, 30, 183, 188 
critique · 138 
cruel 
cruelty · 165 
cry · 52, 74, 91, 101 
crying · 52, 73, 74, 75 
culture · 50, 66, 113, 115, 139, 162, 167, 169, 175, 176 
cure · 41, 116, 132, 146, 175 
curse · 7
D de Vries · 170
deaf · 76
deafness · 11
death · 51, 60, 61, 62, 66, 71, 72, 74, 89, 94, 139, 182 defeat · 12, 42, 53,
177, 184 
defense · 124 
defiance · 96, 141 
deficiency · 59, 80, 82, 84, 162, 171 
delinquency · 2
delinquent · 2, 56, 118, 139, 171 
delusion · 11, 21, 23, 24, 85 
delusions · 183 
dependence · 71, 140 
dependency · 89 
depression · 29, 30, 31, 61, 62, 63, 70, 71, 73, 79, 82, 100, 109, 141, 146 
depressed · 23, 30, 53, 153, 182 
depth · 40, 148 
desire to dominate · 30, 85 
despair · 47, 85, 165 
destruction · 85 
detour · 63, 193 

development · 3, 4, 5, 10, 13, 17, 18, 20, 21, 26, 27, 29, 31, 33, 34, 36, 39, 45,
50, 
54, 55, 56, 58, 59, 65, 68, 73, 79, 84, 86, 89, 90, 92, 93, 112, 116, 117, 125, 
126, 127, 128, 129, 131, 132, 142, 153, 161, 163, 164, 168, 170, 171, 172, 173, 
174, 175, 177, 179 
dexterity · 88 
diagnosis · 146, 147, 180, 193 
dialectic · 37 
difficulty · 14, 16, 27, 30, 33, 55, 59, 89, 94, 98, 112, 127, 140, 144, 160, 161, 
166, 178, 179, 181, 182, 184 
difficulties · 1, 7, 8, 9, 15, 16, 26, 27, 28, 42, 50, 52, 53, 57, 58, 59, 62, 67, 69,
88, 102, 112, 113, 120, 126, 127, 128, 129, 135, 159, 161, 163, 167, 168, 169,
176, 177, 179, 186 
discipline · 81, 115, 117 
discouraged · 57, 71, 92, 136, 137, 141, 162 
discouragement · 22, 72, 91, 93, 166 
disease · 11, 18, 165 
disposition · 92, 188 
distance · 1, 16, 192 
division of labor · 86, 89, 130 
dog · 24 
dogs · 60 
dogma · 33 
dominance · 12, 13, 15, 85, 92, 94, 135, 142, 143, 144, 147, 148 
dominant · 3, 46, 133, 142 
Don Juan · 84 
doubt · 13, 28, 37, 38, 40, 58, 77, 81, 94, 109, 121, 132, 140, 170, 173, 192 
doubting · 173 
dream · 21, 22, 23, 24, 39, 61, 82, 89, 95, 127, 133, 144, 145, 147, 167, 179 
dream theory · 21 
dreams · 2, 21, 22, 38, 49, 58, 65, 82, 94, 131, 140, 145, 166, 179 dreams · 2, 21,
22, 38, 49, 58, 65, 82, 94, 131, 140, 145, 166, 179 drive · 5, 14, 30, 38, 40, 90,
91, 94, 101, 127, 128, 129, 140, 188 
drives · 50, 86, 90, 94, 101, 139, 163, 165, 180, 187, 188 
drug 
drug addiction · 135, 141 
drugs · 109, 143 
Drug · 85, 118, 135, 139, 141, 174

E
early memories 
earliest memory · 73 
eating · 96, 100, 124, 152 
economy 
economic · 12, 77, 119, 160, 167, 174 
educability · 12 
education · 6, 13, 14, 16, 28, 33, 35, 43, 44, 45, 47, 50, 54, 55, 57, 59, 77, 80, 84,
91, 112, 113, 132, 136, 141, 143, 175 
educator · 33, 34, 35 
educators · 34, 44, 55, 80, 85, 175 
ego · 80 
emotion · 14, 73, 109, 142, 191 
emotional · 29, 33, 92, 93, 119, 120, 127, 146, 191, 192, 193 
empathy · 64, 65 
empathize · 67 
encourage · 105, 154 
encouragement · 6, 78 
endocrine · 27, 79, 81, 92, 112, 125, 135, 189 
enemy · 28, 41, 116, 147, 162, 166, 176 
enemies · 164 
energy · 40, 136, 179, 180 
energetic · 44 
enuresis · 96, 97, 99, 149, 150, 154 
environment · 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 26, 29, 51, 52, 89, 101, 112, 117,
124, 132, 135, 160, 161, 163, 171, 178, 188, 191 
envy · 9, 162 
epileptic 
epilepsy · 81, 118 
Eppinger, Hans · 125 
equal · 10, 16, 19, 59, 94, 111, 116, 120, 126, 181 
equality · 10 
equilibrium · 12 
error · 6, 7, 13, 17, 86, 118, 130, 170 
escape · 14, 23, 24, 27, 29, 53, 69, 72, 113, 115, 120, 128, 131, 141, 145, 147,
148, 168 

ethics · 172 
evil · 10, 11, 14, 180 
evolution · 16, 85, 86, 131, 171, 178, 184 
examination · 19, 41, 49, 53, 56, 60, 69, 94, 107, 117, 132, 154, 188
examinations · 53, 117, 154 
exclusion · 69, 91, 192 
excuse · 23, 53, 67, 81, 108, 109, 165, 166, 184, 192 
excuses · 67, 109, 166 
expectation · 12 
expecting · 26, 163 
experience · 2, 5, 8, 12, 14, 27, 31, 34, 45, 54, 55, 60, 65, 72, 78, 80, 83, 90, 94,
99, 100, 109, 113, 116, 125, 131, 138, 142, 149, 167, 171, 173, 175, 177, 179,
187, 188, 189, 193 
expressive movement · 66

F
failure · 4, 6, 17, 23, 27, 42, 91, 110, 119, 125, 130, 136, 137, 141, 143,
159, 160, 161, 182 
failures · 18, 23, 54, 55, 67, 80, 82, 86, 90, 111, 112, 113, 116, 125, 132, 138,
174, 175, 177, 190 
fainting · 192 
family · 1, 9, 23, 29, 31, 52, 53, 57, 60, 72, 73, 74, 75, 80, 85, 100, 105, 108,
112,
116, 126, 141, 143, 154, 160, 161, 162, 164, 165, 168, 172, 175, 182, 183
family constellation · 9 
fantasy · 36 
fate · 9, 55, 126, 142, 182 
father · 2, 3, 8, 10, 11, 23, 24, 53, 62, 64, 65, 73, 80, 89, 99, 100, 102, 105, 116,
132, 138, 140, 141, 151, 153, 154, 155, 164, 165, 175, 183 
fatigue · 186 
fear · 7, 13, 24, 27, 31, 34, 39, 40, 41, 42, 60, 70, 71, 72, 81, 83, 91, 94, 130,
132,
142, 144, 145, 167, 177, 181, 183, 186, 192 
fear of falling · 181 
feeblemindedness · 67, 68, 69 
feeling · 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 23, 24, 27, 30, 31, 34, 35, 36, 37, 39, 40, 41,
49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 56, 64, 65, 66, 68, 69, 72, 78, 81, 83, 86, 87, 91, 93, 98,
99, 112, 113, 120, 124, 126, 130, 137, 138, 140, 141, 143, 148, 150, 151, 153,
162, 164, 166, 167, 171, 181, 184, 186, 188, 190, 191, 194 
feeling at home · 65 
feeling of community · 141 
feeling of inferiority · 12, 13, 15, 16, 24, 28, 40, 50, 51, 52, 53, 72, 81, 94, 98,
99, 112, 113, 125, 138, 162 
feeling of superiority · 30, 113 
feeling of worth · 68 
fellatio · 58 
fellow man · 16, 175 
female · 47, 127, 141, 143, 183 
feminine · 58, 85, 177 
fiction · 14, 67, 114, 137, 138 
fictitious · 36, 84, 129, 130, 145, 150, 161, 188, 193 

fictitious goal · 150, 161, 188 
finalism · 128, 129 
firstborn · 9 
forget · 7, 14, 108, 122, 139, 180, 184 
forgetting · 108 
form · 22, 26, 40, 42, 44, 54, 58, 64, 65, 67, 69, 73, 81, 85, 86, 87, 100, 101, 120,
125, 129, 135, 136, 139, 140, 146, 149, 153, 175, 179, 183, 187, 188, 192, 193 
freedom · 51, 122 
Freud · 64, 94, 126, 127, 138 
Freytag, Gustav · 8 
friendship · 2, 31, 56, 57, 112, 130, 131, 155, 164, 176 
frigidity · 50, 56 
fugue · 74 
future · 4, 5, 7, 37, 45, 77, 80, 84, 89, 101, 145, 159, 166, 167, 168, 173, 192

G
game · 3, 41, 83, 168 
games · 2, 12, 41, 85, 179 
genius · 5, 11 
glance · 64, 180 
glands · 27, 55, 80, 81, 92, 107, 112, 125, 135, 137, 189 
goal · 1, 2, 3, 12, 13, 14, 15, 18, 21, 22, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28, 33, 36, 40, 41, 47, 49,
50, 51, 52, 56, 62, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 72, 73, 74, 79, 80, 81, 83, 86, 93, 102,
113, 114, 115, 119, 128, 129, 131, 135, 136, 139, 144, 145, 147, 149, 150, 154,
159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 165, 167, 187, 188, 189, 190, 192, 193, 194 
God · 29, 30, 53, 66, 85 
Goethe · 8 
greed · 87, 142, 143 
grief · 60, 71, 73, 74, 82 
group · 1, 8, 65, 118, 120, 121, 161, 171, 189, 190, 193 
guessing · 172, 184 
guidance · 11, 45, 125 
guiding fiction · 188 
guiding line · 177 
guiding principle · 24, 33 
guilt · 31, 53, 94, 127, 136, 139, 148 
guilt complex · 31

H
habit · 28, 142, 153 happy · 7, 50, 62, 106, 146, 154, 155, 169, 181
happiness · 28, 85, 177
hate · 9, 176 
hated child · 9, 28, 51, 126 
headache · 29, 81, 108 
headaches · 81, 108 
heart · 15, 59, 64, 82, 87, 112, 186, 191 
Herder, Johann Gottfried · 65 
heredity · 4, 5, 90, 92, 100, 112, 125, 137, 159, 160, 162, 175, 188 
hero · 67, 87, 114 
heroism · 161 
hesitiation 
hesitating attitude · 57, 93, 193 
homosexuality 
homosexual · 58, 67, 137 
hostility · 116, 175 
hostile · 12, 28, 34, 52, 126, 132, 161, 162, 163, 176 
human · 3, 4, 5, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18, 22, 26, 34, 36, 37, 42, 50, 55, 56, 77, 85,
86, 87, 90, 94, 112, 121, 124, 125, 126, 127, 129, 130, 131, 132, 134, 135, 144,
159, 160, 163, 167, 168, 170, 171, 172, 177, 178, 179, 181, 183, 186, 190 
human nature · 16, 17, 77, 85, 134, 178 
human welfare · 168 
humane · 168 
humility · 66 
hunger · 128 
hypothesis · 171 
hysteria · 78, 192

I
idea · 8, 9, 13, 27, 33, 36, 40, 41, 61, 66, 67, 81, 82, 94, 99, 115, 120, 126,
130, 138, 140, 141, 143, 150, 160, 163, 168, 172, 173, 180, 181, 182, 183 
ideal · 16, 19, 26, 33, 34, 35, 36, 58, 67, 68, 79, 84, 85, 87, 93, 94, 129, 130, 131,
133, 150, 172, 173, 180 
ideal final form · 94 
identification · 64, 131, 174 
illness · 31, 41, 51, 62, 80, 81, 93, 98, 99, 100, 107, 108, 146, 147, 149, 154, 181
image · 23, 46, 84, 92, 173 
imagination · 14, 129, 133, 163 
imaginary · 136 
imitation · 114, 146, 161 
impatience · 15, 177, 191 
imperfection · 128, 130 
imperfect · 51, 52, 162 
impotence · 23, 38, 40, 50, 56 
inborn · 50, 120 
incest · 120, 173 
indecision · 80, 192 
independence · 28, 34, 40, 51, 126 
independent · 12, 31, 47, 51, 102, 103, 141, 143, 164 
Individual Psychology · 1, 6, 9, 14, 20, 21, 23, 26, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 42,
43, 44, 45, 46, 48, 49, 51, 64, 65, 67, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 78, 79, 81, 82, 88, 90,
91, 92, 93, 94, 102, 116, 121, 124, 126, 127, 128, 130, 132, 137, 139, 144, 145,
159, 161, 163, 164, 165, 167, 168, 170, 171, 174, 177, 179, 184, 186, 187, 190 
infantile · 138 
inferiority · 9, 12, 13, 15, 17, 23, 27, 31, 34, 42, 50, 51, 52, 54, 68, 69, 70, 71,
89, 92, 93, 94, 98, 100, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 133, 135, 136, 138,
140, 150, 154, 163, 166, 172, 177, 183, 188, 192 
inferiority complex · 15, 133 
inferiority feeling · 13, 23, 42, 68, 126, 136, 138, 166, 177, 188, 192 
infidelity · 143 
insane · 85, 111, 122, 160, 174 
insecurity · 13, 14, 15, 37, 84, 91, 138, 184, 186, 190, 191 
insight · 11, 18, 19, 21, 22, 37, 38, 49, 64, 76, 77, 81, 83, 125, 170, 174, 176,
186, 187 

insomnia · 107, 181, 193 
instinct · 86, 90, 131, 179 
intelligence · 19, 64, 65, 66, 67, 69, 88, 99, 101, 115, 118, 161, 172 intelligent ·
18, 19, 41, 44, 66, 67, 68, 69, 81, 99, 117, 137, 138 
intention · 175 
intentions · 75, 86 
interest · 26, 30, 34, 42, 43, 44, 47, 49, 50, 51, 52, 56, 60, 62, 64, 65, 66, 68, 72,
81, 87, 88, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 100, 102, 112, 113, 116, 125, 132, 133, 140, 142,
143, 145, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 168, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177,
179, 183, 190, 191, 194 
intestinal disorder · 186 
intuition · 172, 179, 180, 184 
irritability · 175 
irritable · 1, 30, 182 
isolation · 94, 114, 171

J
James, William · 119
jealousy · 142
jealous · 96, 118, 151, 155, 164 Jewish · 179
Jew · 66, 179
joke · 13, 18, 19 jokes · 19, 179
Jones · 40 
joy · 16, 142, 177 justice · 121
K Kant. Emanuel · 40, 65, 128 Kretschmer · 4, 92, 125, 135

L
language · 8, 39, 90, 113, 129, 146, 149, 150, 153, 161, 172, 182 
law · 12, 30, 46, 79, 115, 122, 128, 137, 190, 192 
law of movement · 190 
laws · 47, 67, 68, 79, 86, 115, 179, 180 
laziness · 24 
lazy · 18, 118, 121, 137, 177 
leadership · 44 
leader · 87 
learning · 102, 127, 141 
left-handedness · 189 
libido · 138, 143, 144 
life plan · 52, 67 
life problems · 19, 56, 136 
life style (see also style of life) · 67, 184 
life tasks · 22, 141 
Lipps, Theodor · 64, 65 
logic · 19, 22, 23, 24, 34, 37, 57, 59, 67, 86, 87, 144, 145, 171, 176, 178, 179,
180 Lombroso, Cesare · 120 
love · 1, 2, 3, 7, 9, 17, 23, 24, 28, 30, 31, 50, 51, 53, 67, 69, 85, 91, 112, 127,
130, 
131, 132, 138, 141, 142, 150, 151, 161, 166, 173, 174, 176, 177, 183, 190, 192
lying · 37, 81, 94, 140, 166

M
maladjustment · 42 
male · 47, 67 
manicdepressive · 69, 135
mania · 91 
mankind · 27, 36, 42, 65, 84, 85, 89, 91, 113, 167, 168, 170, 172, 173, 174, 175, 
176, 184 
marriage · 17, 24, 31, 51, 60, 62, 63, 73, 89, 97, 112, 132, 141, 142, 164 marry ·
192 
masculine protest · 127, 130 
masculinity · 127 
masculine · 17, 24, 55, 58, 127, 130 
masochism · 137 
mastery · 91, 94, 127 
masturbation · 183 
mathematics · 8 
mature · 34, 99 
maturity · 13 
melancholia · 63, 67, 69, 108, 109, 135 
memory · 1, 2, 29, 39, 73, 93, 145 
Mendel, Kurt · 137 
mental health · 44 
metaphor · 179 
migraine · 81 
mind · 16, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 42, 46, 49, 52, 56, 65, 70, 77, 81, 85, 89, 111, 113, 
114, 115, 120, 122, 124, 129, 131, 146, 150, 164, 170, 171, 172, 178, 179, 186
misbehavior · 47 
mistrust · 86 
modesty · 78 
mood · 21, 23, 24, 31, 39, 62, 71, 75, 82, 108, 129, 145, 154, 172 
morality · 91, 173 
morphine · 61, 69 
mother · 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 11, 29, 30, 41, 47, 49, 50, 58, 61, 62, 73, 74, 75, 76, 89, 
96, 97, 98, 101, 102, 112, 132, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 149, 150, 151, 
154, 156, 158, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 175, 180, 182, 183 
motives · 97 

movement · 17, 22, 39, 40, 41, 43, 44, 45, 65, 71, 74, 84, 112, 136, 149, 187,
188, 
190, 192, 193 
Müller · 65 
murder · 87, 141, 151 
murderer · 66, 68, 114, 115 
music · 11, 40, 74, 136 
musical · 3, 11, 40, 163 
musician · 3, 11, 56

N
nagging · 7, 105, 180 national · 33 
natural consequences · 9 need · 5, 7, 9, 13, 16, 21, 23, 38, 47, 52, 56, 58, 59, 61,
70, 78, 82, 84, 87, 97, 101,
108, 110, 112, 119, 121, 128, 130, 131, 137, 144, 147, 151, 160, 166, 167,
172, 
183, 188 
negativism · 78 
neglect · 18, 78 
neglected child · 1, 113, 127, 132 
neuralgia · 81 
neurasthenia · 193 
neurosis · 18, 19, 21, 22, 42, 49, 53, 60, 61, 63, 66, 73, 80, 81, 83, 91, 92, 93,
107, 
121, 130, 131, 132, 134, 135, 136, 140, 141, 148, 174, 177, 180, 181, 182, 183, 
184, 186, 189, 191, 192, 193, 194 
neuroses · 18, 60, 80, 83, 91, 92, 93, 125, 135, 137, 191, 192 
neurotic · 8, 18, 19, 22, 23, 24, 27, 29, 30, 32, 42, 49, 50, 57, 60, 62, 66, 67, 68,
71, 72, 76, 78, 80, 83, 88, 92, 94, 111, 121, 130, 133, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140,
163, 181, 182, 183, 186, 190, 191, 193, 194 
Nietzsche, Friedrich · 90 
normal · 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 15, 18, 19, 23, 26, 27, 28, 51, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 69,
80, 
92, 98, 101, 103, 111, 112, 114, 118, 120, 121, 125, 126, 130, 135, 136, 154, 
166, 171, 172, 182, 183, 184, 186, 190, 192

O
obedience · 14, 37 
objective · 3, 5, 15, 120, 129, 187 
obstacle · 41, 167, 181, 188, 190 
occupation · 27, 29, 51, 53, 57, 112, 161, 167 
Oedipus complex · 94, 138, 140 
only child · 30, 58, 141, 151, 180 
opinion · 3, 24, 70, 71, 81, 147, 167, 175 
Oppenheim (Hermannn and David) · 43 
opponent · 176 
optimism · 78, 133, 145 
optimistic · 50, 51, 84, 120, 131 
organ · 8, 12, 16, 24, 54, 55, 56, 79, 81, 92, 93, 100, 102, 125, 135, 141, 149,
150,
171, 186, 189 
organ inferiority · 54, 135, 150, 189 
orientation · 135 
overcoming · 8, 31, 40, 41, 49, 58, 113, 136, 187, 188, 190, 193, 194
oversensitivity 
overcompensation · 15, 129

P
pain · 81 palpitation · 186 
pampering · 93, 96, 98, 100, 101, 138, 149, 150, 166, 183, 189
pampered · 18, 39, 41, 60, 61, 62, 68, 74, 75, 76, 83, 92, 96, 97, 98, 99, 101,
113, 116, 126, 127, 140, 149, 150, 151, 162, 166, 176, 180, 182, 189, 190, 
194 
pampered style of life · 190 
paralysis · 80 
paranoia · 67, 69, 135, 176, 191 
paranoid · 147 
parent 
parents · 2, 6, 9, 13, 30, 31, 47, 60, 76, 85, 97, 100, 101, 104, 116, 121, 138, 
141, 143, 148, 154, 161, 162, 164, 166, 169, 189 
passivity 
passive · 107, 188, 194 
patient · 17, 19, 23, 24, 29, 30, 32, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 50, 53, 55, 62, 67, 71, 72,
74, 75, 77, 81, 83, 91, 93, 94, 108, 109, 133, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146,
147, 148, 181, 184, 191, 192, 193 
patricide · 120, 140 
pattern · 1, 2, 4, 9, 93, 131, 183, 187, 189 
peace · 12, 72, 143, 147, 148 
perception · 40, 80, 152, 171 
perfection · 80, 84, 86, 88, 127, 128, 129, 187 
personal superiority · 65, 66, 67, 68, 94, 136, 143, 144, 147, 161 
personality · 3, 4, 7, 10, 14, 29, 32, 35, 56, 57, 71, 107, 117, 118, 126, 127, 128,
140, 145, 160, 161, 163, 164, 179, 186, 188, 193 
perspective · 19, 52, 55, 129, 135 
perverse · 58 
perversion · 90, 91, 93, 130, 132, 182, 192 
pessimism · 16, 78 
phenomenological · 36, 39 
philosophy · 37, 132 
phobia · 135 
phobias · 92, 93, 177, 191 
physician · 17, 26, 31, 32, 38, 44, 77, 81, 84, 147 
physique · 4, 126 

pity · 52, 75, 131 
play · 3, 7, 29, 33, 47, 58, 61, 63, 67, 83, 90, 99, 103, 106, 112, 139, 143, 174,
179, 180, 183, 184, 189, 191 
pleasure · 2, 13, 37, 41, 127, 143, 145 
poet · 8, 77, 179 
poetry · 179 
polarity · 22, 127 
politics · 87, 91, 183 
possession · 40, 66, 142, 144 
poverty · 71, 72, 73, 75, 162, 167 
power · 4, 9, 12, 14, 15, 16, 26, 29, 49, 68, 73, 74, 84, 85, 86, 87, 90, 94, 109,
124, 128, 129, 130, 133, 142, 143, 144, 145, 179, 187, 188 
practical · 21, 45, 83, 168, 187 
praise · 156 
pregnancy · 130, 142, 165 
pregnant · 11, 50, 89, 142 
prejudice · 7, 56, 132, 162, 164 
preparation · 2, 10, 21, 42, 57, 84, 87, 88, 126, 130, 132, 137, 140, 152, 190
prestige · 9, 41, 78, 83, 181, 184 
pride · 16, 41, 71, 101, 102, 165, 193 
primitive · 4, 115, 124 
private intelligence · 66, 67, 68, 161 
private logic · 161, 177, 179, 180 
problem · 1, 4, 8, 10, 12, 19, 21, 22, 24, 26, 27, 33, 35, 36, 42, 43, 47, 51, 54, 55,
58, 59, 61, 66, 68, 76, 80, 84, 88, 90, 91, 97, 99, 100, 107, 110, 111, 112, 114,
115, 119, 124, 126, 127, 130, 132, 139, 142, 146, 149, 159, 160, 163, 164, 165,
171, 173, 174, 180, 181, 183, 184, 187, 189, 190, 192, 193 
problem child · 8, 35, 42, 43, 51, 66, 68, 80, 85, 97, 100, 111, 115, 139, 184, 
190 
profession · 7, 23, 141, 177 
prohibition · 173 
proof · 10, 40, 42, 55, 108, 147 
prophesy · 3, 11, 122 
prostitute · 42, 59, 137 
prostitution · 24, 91 
protection · 50, 86 
prototype · 60, 68, 73, 83, 131, 136, 138 
psyche · 38, 42, 49, 54, 79, 86, 140, 183 
psychic · 14, 16, 81, 83, 113, 114, 124, 125, 128, 136, 180, 186, 187, 188, 191,

192, 193 
psychology · 37, 38, 39, 49, 54, 55, 56, 77, 81, 86, 90, 101, 111, 124, 128, 129,
131, 133, 137, 139, 165, 173, 186, 188, 190, 193 
psychological · 1, 6, 10, 27, 36, 37, 38, 39, 41, 49, 52, 56, 61, 63, 66, 72, 74, 
77, 79, 80, 81, 85, 87, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 97, 117, 119, 125, 126, 128, 
129, 137, 139, 140, 145, 149, 171, 177 
psychosis · 60, 69, 93, 131, 132, 135, 136, 177 
psychotic · 42 
punishment · 6, 119, 120, 144, 160, 168 
purpose · 3, 14, 17, 23, 24, 26, 33, 36, 40, 41, 49, 52, 74, 84, 89, 108, 109, 113,
119, 124, 127, 129, 147, 178, 180, 184, 190, 192 
purposeful · 91

R
race · 4, 46, 85, 125, 126, 127, 159, 162, 167, 178, 181 
rage · 81, 91, 126, 191 
rational · 40, 95, 119 
readiness · 88, 177 
reality · 5, 8, 13, 22, 23, 26, 35, 36, 40, 108, 129, 144, 162, 173, 178, 179, 180,
187 
reason · 3, 4, 5, 8, 13, 26, 27, 31, 38, 42, 43, 57, 62, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 76,
89, 
91, 93, 94, 95, 99, 107, 112, 114, 120, 126, 128, 132, 138, 140, 144, 149, 150, 
154, 162, 166, 179, 180 
reasoning · 11, 93, 144 
rebellion · 85 
recollection · 73, 83 
reflex · 79, 179 
reflexes · 40, 79, 125, 154 
rejection · 127, 142 
religion · 33, 91 
religious · 33, 89, 148 
repression · 94, 138 
repressed · 139 
resentment · 71, 72, 147 
resistance · 16, 62, 86, 166, 191 
responsibility · 18, 38, 62, 86, 87, 122, 132, 161, 164 
responsible · 3, 51, 80, 124, 160, 168 
restlessness · 46 
revenge · 31, 69, 116, 119 
ridicule · 90 
rigid · 22, 119, 137, 138 
rigidity · 186 
role · 22, 33, 41, 47, 59, 61, 63, 64, 65, 67, 73, 75, 76, 78, 81, 85, 90, 93, 108, 
109, 112, 130, 139, 143, 144, 153, 165, 174, 184, 191 
rule · 3, 4, 19, 28, 29, 49, 51, 149, 188, 189 
rules · 30, 89, 109, 119, 171, 178, 186, 191

S
sadism · 136, 137, 139 
sadistic · 177 
safeguarding · 22, 36, 69 safeguarding tendency · 22 safeguards · 194 
schema · 138 
scheme · 2, 42, 111, 138, 161 Schiller, Friedrich · 8 
schizoid · 135 
schizophrenia · 69, 91, 136 
Schmidt, Rudolf · 125 
school · 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 10, 13, 14, 28, 38, 39, 43, 44, 45, 47, 51, 53, 78, 83, 85, 97,
98, 99, 102, 103, 104, 105, 112, 116, 119, 121, 124, 137, 146, 152, 153, 154,
156, 157, 162, 168, 175, 177, 186, 193 
Schopenhauer, Arthur · 40 
science · 8, 21, 26, 37, 38, 39, 45, 79, 111, 131, 145, 172, 173, 178, 186 
second child · 6, 23, 53, 80, 155 
security · 12, 14, 23, 28, 49, 52, 100, 113, 128, 129, 130, 135, 136, 143, 163,
167, 170 
selectivity · 24 
self · 10, 15, 17, 19, 21, 23, 24, 26, 27, 31, 33, 34, 35, 39, 40, 51, 53, 56, 63, 67,
71, 74, 80, 85, 91, 93, 118, 124, 125, 127, 131, 140, 144, 159, 166, 170, 174,
177, 181, 183 
self-confidence · 10, 23, 27, 31, 34, 39, 51, 91, 183 
self-determination · 40 
selfenhancement · 19, 74 
self-esteem · 10, 17, 35, 67, 93, 144, 181 
self-justification · 34, 166 
self-preservation · 159 
self-reproach · 63 
self-worth · 34 
semblance · 85, 119 
sensation · 14 
sense organ · 8, 189 
sensitive · 118 
sex · 27, 31, 34, 55, 57, 58, 129, 130, 147, 176 
sexual · 24, 31, 50, 51, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 82, 85, 89, 91, 92, 93, 94, 97, 111,
113, 124, 125, 129, 130, 132, 135, 136, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 154, 159,

165, 174, 182, 183, 184, 186, 187, 190, 192 
sexuality · 49, 50, 56, 143, 182, 183 
shame · 6, 10 
shock · 77, 148, 181, 182 
sickness · 7, 42, 80, 92, 147 
significance · 19, 38, 39, 44, 45, 68, 73, 78, 92, 109, 125, 135, 138, 150, 163,
176, 186, 188, 192 
significant · 22, 43, 44, 46, 47, 54, 57, 63, 67, 71, 80, 81, 83, 89, 93, 100, 122,
136, 138, 140, 149, 160, 189, 192 
simplicity · 56 
simplification · 22 
skin · 8 
sleep · 22, 29, 58, 61, 63, 97, 107, 108, 109, 146, 147, 155, 193 
sleep · 2, 62, 108, 146 
sleepsleeplessness · 41, 107, 108, 109, 110, 145, 146 
social · 1, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 22, 23, 26, 31, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37,
41, 42, 43, 44, 46, 47, 50, 51, 52, 59, 64, 65, 66, 68, 69, 72, 77, 84, 85, 86, 87,
88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 100, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 120, 121, 125, 129,
130, 131, 132, 133, 137, 138, 139, 140, 142, 144, 145, 146, 148, 150, 159, 160,
161, 162, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 180, 183, 184, 189,
190, 191, 192, 193, 194 
social interest · 19, 22, 23, 41, 42, 64, 65, 66, 68, 69, 72, 84, 86, 87, 89, 90, 91,
92, 93, 94, 100, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 137, 138, 139, 144, 145, 146, 159,
162, 164, 165, 166, 168, 174, 175, 177, 190 
society · 9, 15, 22, 23, 29, 34, 35, 42, 52, 59, 85, 93, 111, 117, 118, 119, 122,
127, 130, 131, 132, 141, 160, 163, 168, 171, 173, 177, 182 
Socrates · 65 
soul · 13, 15, 49, 71, 81, 85, 86, 111, 129, 172, 186 
spectator · 65 
speech · 74, 76, 153, 172 
stage fright · 176 
status · 99, 132 
stealing · 2 
Stern, William · 37 
stomach · 9, 156, 186, 191 
stress · 92, 93, 111, 126, 146, 159, 180, 186, 190, 191, 193 
striving · 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19, 22, 23, 26, 29, 34, 35, 39, 40, 43, 46, 47, 49,
50, 53, 57, 67, 68, 71, 75, 79, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 91, 93, 94, 113, 114, 127, 130,
136, 138, 140, 141, 142, 143, 159, 160, 161, 163, 173, 182, 187, 188, 189, 190

striving for security · 159 
striving for significance · 163 
striving to overcome · 93, 163, 187, 188, 189, 190 
stupid · 106 
stuttering · 153, 172, 193 
style of life · 1, 3, 4, 9, 18, 21, 22, 23, 27, 28, 35, 38, 39, 40, 41, 49, 50, 51, 52,
56, 71, 73, 79, 80, 83, 89, 92, 93, 94, 95, 99, 100, 111, 116, 131, 132, 133, 136,
137, 138, 139, 140, 145, 160, 167, 180, 181, 183 
subjective · 29 
submission · 37, 85 
success · 34, 43, 46, 72, 73, 76, 110, 127, 145, 183, 189, 191, 194 
suffering · 18, 30, 50, 70, 71, 72, 75, 78, 79, 81, 84, 89, 90, 92, 107, 112, 137,
146, 147, 148, 174, 182, 186 
suggestibility · 118 
suggestion · 37, 189 
suicide · 29, 35, 42, 61, 66, 68, 71, 75, 82, 83, 86, 91, 93, 111, 113, 130, 132,
141, 144, 145, 165, 174, 184 
suicides · 51, 85, 159, 190 
superiority · 13, 14, 17, 21, 22, 23, 26, 29, 41, 42, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 65, 66, 67,
68, 72, 78, 80, 81, 84, 85, 127, 129, 131, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 162, 163, 165,
167, 182, 188 
superior · 29, 51, 52, 53, 114, 115, 119, 136, 159, 160, 161 
superiority complex · 127, 163, 167 
superstition · 5, 9, 34, 175 
suspicion · 146 
syle · 1, 3, 4, 9, 18, 21, 22, 23, 27, 28, 35, 38, 39, 40, 41, 49, 50, 51, 52, 56, 67,
71, 73, 79, 80, 83, 89, 92, 93, 94, 95, 99, 100, 111, 116, 130, 131, 132, 133, 136,
137, 138, 139, 140, 144, 145, 160, 163, 167, 180, 181, 183, 184, 190, 192 
sympathy · 31, 58, 109 
sympathetic · 82, 92 
symptom · 26, 29, 38, 57, 82, 93, 94, 108, 136, 144, 146, 181, 182, 184, 186,
191, 193 
symptoms · 22, 29, 30, 32, 38, 40, 49, 60, 62, 63, 76, 78, 79, 90, 91, 92, 93, 111,
126, 130, 135, 136, 137, 140, 141, 143, 144, 146, 176, 181, 182, 183, 184, 186,
191, 192, 193, 194

T
tactfulness · 181 
teacher · 4, 7, 38, 44, 45, 53, 80, 85, 102, 103, 104, 106, 152, 154, 156, 157, 158,
162, 168 
teachers · 1, 2, 44, 45, 77, 116, 121, 168 
teeth · 5, 153 
temper · 108 
tenderness · 14, 151 
tension · 5, 9, 29, 52, 70, 91, 107, 126, 137, 139, 141, 145, 149, 150, 152, 163, 
181, 190, 191 
the question · 27, 37, 57, 67, 79, 88, 89, 90, 131, 146, 171, 176 
theoretical · 45 
thinking · 11, 22, 37, 50, 53, 66, 67, 88, 108, 115, 124, 127, 140, 146, 150, 162, 
172, 186 
thought · 10, 13, 15, 17, 21, 35, 40, 41, 59, 61, 62, 67, 71, 72, 82, 85, 103, 115, 
116, 126, 141, 143, 145, 165, 168, 174, 176, 178 
thyroid · 92 
time · 1, 5, 9, 13, 14, 15, 17, 23, 24, 30, 31, 35, 38, 39, 40, 45, 46, 47, 50, 51, 52,
53, 55, 57, 58, 60, 64, 65, 72, 73, 74, 78, 85, 87, 92, 93, 98, 99, 101, 102, 108, 
109, 111, 113, 114, 116, 119, 120, 122, 124, 125, 126, 127, 129, 130, 131, 141, 
142, 143, 145, 146, 147, 150, 153, 157, 161, 163, 165, 166, 167, 170, 173, 179, 
182, 187, 188, 190, 192 
timidity · 71 
training · 4, 5, 8, 11, 22, 34, 41, 56, 58, 66, 77, 82, 83, 84, 89, 93, 100, 112, 113, 
116, 117, 118, 119, 129, 137, 166, 167, 168, 171, 186 
trait · 3, 131, 144 
traits · 6, 86, 125, 126, 127, 128, 162, 177, 193 
transference · 74 
trap · 78, 116, 145 
traumatic · 94, 138 
treatment · 5, 17, 32, 43, 50, 61, 75, 78, 80, 99, 108, 109, 112, 116, 117, 118,
119, 
121, 122, 133, 137, 141, 145, 146, 151, 161, 166, 167, 168, 191, 192 truancy · 2,
74 
truth · 3, 34, 37, 38, 53, 79, 111, 120, 173, 184 
truth · 88 

typology · 172 
tyrant · 84

U
ugliness · 120 
uncertainty · 120, 135 
unconscious · 14, 22, 23, 36, 71, 72, 75, 83, 93, 94, 127, 138, 139, 145, 146, 165,
179, 187, 192 
understanding · 3, 15, 21, 22, 23, 24, 34, 35, 52, 57, 65, 67, 75, 77, 83, 91, 94, 
107, 111, 113, 119, 121, 127, 128, 132, 136, 139, 143, 160, 162, 164, 171, 172, 
174, 176, 178, 179, 184, 187, 188, 192 
unfaithful 
unfaithfulness · 62 
unhappy · 28, 50, 96, 97, 164 
unhappiness · 120 
unique · 55, 57, 79, 83, 177 
uniqueness · 129, 172, 174 
unity · 35, 39, 71, 72, 80, 90, 93, 128, 137, 138, 139, 141, 187, 191, 193 universe
· 65

V
vain · 86, 94, 165 
value · 14, 17, 34, 47, 48, 56, 57, 89, 94, 102, 127, 138, 145, 169, 173, 174, 180,
190, 193 
values · 19, 91, 120, 173, 193 
vanity · 16, 66 
virtue · 42, 68, 81, 130, 193

W
Wagner, Richard · 3 war · 76, 151, 164 washing compulsion · 193 
weakness · 15, 24, 36, 37, 51, 70, 72, 74, 84, 89, 91, 93, 128, 143, 154, 183, 184,
189 
weapon · 114 
Weber, Frederick · 54 
weeping · 6, 52 
Wexberg, Erwin · 138 
Wild · 86, 143 
will to power · 86 
wish · 7, 9, 16, 24, 26, 28, 46, 47, 56, 70, 71, 78, 82, 91, 93, 101, 139, 147, 159,
160, 162, 168, 176, 178, 182, 190, 192 
withdrawal · 144 
woman · 10, 30, 31, 50, 52, 60, 61, 62, 63, 85, 115, 151, 165, 182 work · 2, 5, 6,
8, 14, 18, 19, 27, 28, 36, 44, 45, 46, 53, 54, 58, 61, 68, 73, 75, 77,
81, 88, 90, 91, 102, 104, 107, 108, 118, 121, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 130,
132, 
142, 161, 165, 166, 167, 169, 171, 172, 176, 177, 180, 181, 191 world · 8, 12,
15, 16, 26, 27, 28, 51, 69, 70, 75, 86, 89, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 
124, 125, 131, 132, 144, 151, 161, 162, 164, 166, 167, 171, 175, 190, 192
worthlessness · 143

Y
yes-but · 71
younger · 1, 61, 68, 89, 96, 99, 102, 103, 104, 105, 112, 141, 142, 146, 150, 151,
165 
youngest · 23, 39, 73, 83 
youngest child · 23
Appendix: Basic Principles of Classical Adlerian Psychology
Henry T. Stein, Ph.D.1
Alfred Adler (1870-1937) developed the first holistic theory of personality,
psychopathology, and psychotherapy that was intimately connected to
humanistic philosophy of living. His lectures and books for the general public
are characterized by a crystal clear common sense. His clinical books and
journal articles reveal an uncommon understanding of mental disorder, a deep
insight into the art of healing, and a great inspiration for encouraging optimal
human development. Adler's essential principles are as follows.
Unity of the Individual
Thinking, feeling, emotion, and behavior can only be understood as
subordinated to the individual's style of life, or consistent pattern of dealing with
life. The individual is not internally divided or the battleground of conflicting
forces. Each aspect of the personality points in the same direction.
Goal Orientation
There is one central personality dynamic derived from the growth and
forward movement of life itself. It is a future-oriented striving toward a goal of
significance, superiority, or success. In mental health, it is a realistic goal of
socially useful significance or superiority over general difficulties; in mental
disorder, it is an unrealistic goal of exaggerated significance or superiority over
others. The early childhood feeling of inferiority, for which one aims to
compensate, leads to the creation of a fictional final goal which subjectively
seems to promise future security and success. The depth of the inferiority feeling
usually determines the height of the goal which then becomes the "final cause"
of behavior patterns.
Self-Determination and Uniqueness
The goal may be influenced by hereditary and cultural factors, but it
ultimately springs from the creative power of the individual, and is consequently
unique. Usually, individuals are not fully aware of their goal. Through the
analysis of birth order, repeated coping patterns, and earliest memories, the

psychotherapist infers the goal as a working hypothesis.
1 This brief overview was first published in 1997 on the Classical Adlerian
Psychology web site at http://go.ourworld.nu/hstein/principl.htm. A more
comprehensive exposition of principles, “Classical Adlerian Theory and
Practice,” may be found in Volume 1 of The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred
Adler, or on the web at http://go.ourworld.nu/hstein/theoprac.htm.
Social Context
As an indivisible whole, a system, the human being is also a part of larger
wholes or systems--the family, the community, all of humanity, our planet, the
cosmos. In these contexts, we meet the three important life tasks: occupation,
love and sex, and our relationship with other people--all social challenges. Our
way of responding to our first social system, the family constellation, may
become the prototype of our world view and attitude toward life.
The Feeling of Community
Each human being has the capacity for learning to live in harmony with
society. This is an innate potential for social connectedness which has to be
consciously developed. Social interest and feeling imply "social improvement,"
quite different from conformity, leaving room for social innovation even through
cultural resistance or rebellion. The feeling of genuine security is rooted in a
deep sense of belonging and embeddedness within the stream of social
evolution.
Mental Health
A feeling of human connectedness, and a willingness to develop oneself
fully and contribute to the welfare of others, are the main criteria of mental
health. When these qualities are underdeveloped, feelings of inferiority may
haunt an individual, or an attitude of superiority may antagonize others.
Consequently, the unconscious fictional goal will be self-centered and
emotionally or materially exploitive of other people. When the feeling of
connectedness and the willingness to contribute are stronger, a feeling of
equality emerges, and the individual's goal will be self-transcending and
beneficial to others.
Treatment
Adlerian individual psychotherapy, brief therapy, couple therapy, and
family therapy follow parallel paths. Clients are encouraged to overcome their
feelings of insecurity, develop deeper feelings of connectedness, and to redirect
their striving for significance into more socially beneficial directions. Through a
respectful Socratic dialogue, they are challenged to correct mistaken
assumptions, attitudes, behaviors and feelings about themselves and the world.
Constant encouragement stimulates clients to attempt what was previously felt as

impossible. The growth of confidence, pride, and gratification leads to a greater
desire and ability to cooperate. The objective of therapy is to replace
exaggerated 
self-protection, 
selfenhancement, 
and 
selfindulgence 
with
courageous social contribution.

