

CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
PART I: THE PROBLEM
CHAPTER ONE: Adonises with a Pimple
CHAPTER TWO: Aptitude or Achievement?
CHAPTER THREE: From Testocratic Merit to Democratic Merit
PART II: THE SOLUTION/S
CHAPTER FOUR: Taking Down Fences at University Park Campus School
CHAPTER FIVE: No Longer Lonely at the Top: The Posse Foundation
CHAPTER SIX: Democratic Merit in the Classroom: Eric Mazur and Uri
Treisman
CHAPTER SEVEN: Six Ways of Looking at Democratic Merit
CHAPTER EIGHT: Democratic Merit in a Twenty-First-Century World
CONCLUSION
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
NOTES
INDEX

INTRODUCTION
SUSPENDED ON STEAM tunneling up from the government-issue heating
grates, the last of the fall foliage dances just beyond the windowpane. In
the crisp autumn air, the leaves ricochet off the grimy glass before
coming to rest on the banks of the buildings’ curved cement ledge, just
outside the science classroom. These dancing leaves are barely visible to
the sixteen-and seventeen-year-old teenagers unpacking their book bags
atop rows of smooth, black Formica countertop, crowded with petri
dishes, glass beakers, and gas blowtorches. It’s a Monday morning in
November, the time of year when high school seniors around the country
carefully calculate their college admissions odds. A solemn stillness
reigns as nine boys and one girl wait for the Advanced Placement
physics teacher to begin the double-period lesson that is the toughest
course in this public school. Of the seven high school seniors and three
juniors, only one—a policeman’s son—does not have parents who
graduated from college. Nevertheless all ten students are preoccupied
with the same thing: getting into college.
“Who remembers what the force on a turning object is called?” The
teacher surveys the room as he toys with a piece of chalk.
A hand from the front row shoots up. “Torque!” cries the son of a
computer engineer. Wisps of his tousled, orange hair outline his pale
face, suddenly ruddy with his excitement.
The teacher nods. The boy beams. He quickly swivels in his chair to
note the reactions of his classmates. Annoyed by their tired, first-class-of-
the-day expressions, he glances back toward the teacher for approval,
but the teacher has already returned to the blackboard. Undeterred, the
boy blurts out, “Oh, I’m so smart.”
The class seems amused but mostly inattentive. A few students
suppress yawns. The others busy themselves trying to find the right page
in the textbook. A deep cough from the back of the room breaks the
silence. The proprietor of the cough, the policeman’s son, wears an
ironic smile. He has rocked his chair back to rest against the countertop
right below the gas blowtorch. Jutting out his chest he bellows, “You

shouldn’t say that about yourself!”
“I can,” the first boy says with a sneer. A smug grin spreads over his
face. “I can,” he repeats, “when I got a 1600. Bitch.” (Today a perfect
score would be a 2400.)
A loud thump echoes through the classroom as the front legs of the
second boy’s chair hit the floor. His eyes narrow. The smile on his face
dissolves in a brew of contempt and hurt.
The orange-haired boy’s sly excuse has worked. He was proud to know
the answer to the teacher’s question; but his real agenda was to
broadcast his perfect SAT scores. Except for the scraping of the chalk on
the blackboard, the room is quiet.
But unable to contain his enthusiasm, the braggart with the orange
locks interrupts the class several more times, proclaiming his flawless
SAT scores again and again. Awe morphs into disgust among his
classmates, yet no one else speaks out. The policeman’s boy squirms. He
sits hunched with his elbows cocked on his desk, his stubby fingers
cupping his chin.
Finally, after the fourth unanswered SAT-score announcement, the
policeman’s boy sits straight up, his face still glowering from the earlier
insult. “That’s enough,” he snarls. “Shut up already about your scores.”
Another student, a tall, long-limbed boy, enters the fray. His parents
both graduated from an Ivy League college, and his dad is a science
professor. This leggy fellow chewing on a pencil has said nothing all
class, but he now pitches forward in his chair as he calmly assumes the
role of defense attorney for the braggart. “If I got a 1600,” the college
professor’s boy says, “I’d be talking about it too.”
The policeman’s son grimaces. His lip curls as he reluctantly
acknowledges the shifting classroom alliance. It is now two against one.
He plants his hands on the desktop. “Maybe so,” he mumbles and briefly
contemplates the thought that the SAT creates a special exception for
crude boasting.
“But it doesn’t mean you have to be a jerk,” he finally shoots back.
For the immodest boy who has hit the SAT jackpot, there is no
difference between accomplishment and arrogance. In the terminology
of the SATs, a 1600 (or a 2400, depending on what year the test was
taken) is an achievement worthy of mentioning—several times. Indeed it
is such an accomplishment that it cries out for mention not just by the

boy with the perfect scores but by his peer advocate as well.
Both the boastful boy and his tall, lanky supporter know the game. The
rules, so the thinking goes, are objective, neutral, and, above all, fair.
And that boy won. Using the SAT test as a yardstick, college admissions
officers select who they think are the best-prepared students, meaning
those likely to get the highest first-year grades. Presumably the SAT not
only measures college preparedness; it also provides an incentive system
for high school students to work hard and take a rigorous curriculum.
The tenets of high-stakes admissions testing—the testocracy—have
become so widely shared that they form the building blocks of a secular
religion among college-bound elites: if you test well, you deserve to
enter a top college. In some ways you have earned the right not just to
succeed but to preen. And, such students might think, you owe nothing
to anyone, not to the community whose tax dollars supported your AP
physics lab with a teacher/student ratio of one to ten, and not to your
classmates, whose own egos and futures are also on the line.
The testocracy, a twenty-first-century cult of standardized, quantifiable
merit, values perfect scores but ignores character. Indeed, the boy with
the winning scores, derisive grin, and bad manners could be a poster
child for the closely fought college admissions competition. The
testocracy teaches the cocky boy to internalize success and to take
personal credit for the trappings of privilege, including the educational
resources and networks of his college-educated parents. He has learned
that individual achievement trumps collective commitment. Those who
reach the finish line faster will reap their rewards here on earth. And
one of those rewards is the right to brag.
The boy still squirming with resentment in the back row knows the
difference between being proud and being a jerk. He has the instincts of
character. One should not boast, preen, or complain. Yet, he knows that,
to the academic world, his character counts less than his SAT scores. He
knows that the SAT opens doors to the best schools and by extension to
long-term success. This boy is from a working-class family. The son of
the policeman and the school secretary, he is hoping to be the first in his
family to attend college. But in order to give himself and his children-to-
be a better life than his parents could provide for him, he needs financial
aid. He plays hockey, but because he barely got 1300 on his SATs, his
athletic skill was not enough to win a much-needed scholarship. Thus far

he is losing in the college admissions contest. His test scores and his self-
esteem both take a beating. Reduced to protesting from the back row, he
struggles to compete while staying grounded. His parents cannot afford
SAT prep classes. He will simply retake the test, hoping that his scores
improve.
THIS IS THE challenge I propose in this book: to reconsider the status quo.
We can and must adjust our understanding of testocratic merit to better
reflect what we want to value in a democratic society. Testocratic merit
makes the assumption that test scores are the best evidence of
applicants’ worth, without paying much attention to the environments in
which one finds those individuals. It thereby ignores several built-in
biases that privilege those who are already quite advantaged. However,
if our society truly values education as a means of preparing citizens to
participate in the decisions that affect their lives as individuals and the
society they create as a collective, as well as to enable individuals to
improve their lots and their society, then we need to reexamine exactly
how we define “merit.”
Harvard economist Amartya Sen defines “merit” as an incentive system
that rewards the actions a society values.1 Defining merit through
students’ grades and test scores is evidence that our society values
individual competition above all else. As the policeman’s son reminds us,
our obsession with testing is often depressing but it need not be
permanent. In fact, the historical journey that led to this current culture,
which I trace in chapter 2, demonstrates how our national understanding
of “merit” can change and has changed over time. We are at a turning
point in history. It is now time for another culture shift: from honoring
testocratic merit to honoring democratic merit.
We can alter how we think about merit, from something a child is born
with to something that she (and/or we) can help cultivate. We can shift
from prioritizing individualized testing to group collaboration among all
stakeholders, including students, parents, teachers, and administrators.
Unfortunately, it’s not going to be easy, as the entire undergirding of our
educational system rests upon notions of individual achievement and the
promotion of competition. Yet we must shift from promoting testocratic
merit, which has produced dubious results, to developing democratic
merit, because the latter is the foundation upon which our national

values truly ought to rest.
I am not trying to destroy the concept of merit here. I am trying to
redefine what it means to be meritorious beyond a student’s
performance on standardized tests or in isolated academic situations. If
we are going to have a “meritocracy”—which really just means “rule by
merit”—then we need a better conception of what now constitutes merit
in our society versus what it should be.
THE TERM MERITOCRACY was coined by British sociologist Michael Young as
a spoof. In his 1958 satire, The Rise of Meritocracy, 1870–2033, Young
gave an imaginary account of a smug elite: instead of ancestry, ability
had determined their social position. Rule by this select few would
appear both benign and bountiful because of a talent-based formula for
assigning status. The best would rise to the top using this simple
equation: intelligence (or aptitude) + effort = merit. In Young’s
hypothetical meritocracy, test scores (or other suitable substitutes for
innate talent or aptitude) would matter the most; because those who had
risen in the status hierarchy would have attained their status through
talent and effort, they would also be immune to criticism. Those at the
top of this status hierarchy would be able to justify their continued rule
because they had earned it.
To Young, such a testocracy would not be a shining vision but rather a
nightmare. And more than forty years after the publication of his book,
Young is “sadly disappointed” at how the word he coined has “gone into
general circulation, especially in the United States.”2 He intended to
warn society about what might happen if, in assigning social status, we
continued to place gaining formal educational qualifications over all
other considerations. In Young’s fictional world, anyone unable to jump
through educational hoops, including many—like the policeman’s son—
from the working class, would be barred from a new, exclusive social
class as discriminatory as older ones based on inheritance.
And that is exactly what has happened. Through their admissions
criteria, our colleges and universities have adopted Young’s nightmarish
meritocracy. Just as Young anticipated, merit as defined by test-based
admissions has harnessed “schools and universities to the task of sieving
people” according to a “narrow band of values.”3 Those values, as it

turns out, are the production and reproduction of privilege but without
obligation or shame. The rise of the testocratic meritocracy has enabled
those already at the top of the heap to continue to preside without a
sense of moral or political accountability. The privileged have come to
believe that their “advancement comes from their own merits,” and thus
they are entitled to their power.
But this is not the only possible definition of merit. The term merit
originally meant “earned by service.”4 Giving good service, such as
working for the benefit of community rather than simply for personal
advantage, is what made someone worthy of entitlements, such as
admission to top-ranked colleges and plum internships and job
opportunities. Democratic merit revives this notion by providing
educational access to those who serve the goals and contribute to the
conditions of a thriving democracy. It does what our current meritocracy
fails to do: it creates an incentive system that emphasizes not just the
possession of individual talent and related personal success but also the
ability to collaborate and the commitment to building a better society
for more people. Our nation has always prided itself on overthrowing
tyranny. We now have a new one in our midst: the tyranny of our
current understanding of meritocracy.

PART I
THE PROBLEM

CHAPTER ONE
Adonises with a Pimple
MANY BOOKS HAVE been written on the failings of the American education
system. The recommendations to fix these problems are quite varied and
include the development of a national curriculum, giving teachers fair
wages, ensuring that teachers are involved in the decisions of central
administration, and encouraging extensive family involvement in
students’ lives. And these are just the suggestions found in one author’s
book.1
The idea I’d like to advocate in this book, however, is simple but
powerful: we need to change our understanding of merit. Currently,
merit is measured by an individual’s test scores and grades. The higher
the test scores and the better the grades, the more entitlements are
granted to an individual by teachers, parents, administrators, other
students, and even the general public. But this need not be the case.
Instead, I’ve found that what is urgent for our world—and thus what we
should consider most closely in education—is a student’s capacity to
collaborate and to think creatively. Here I intend to explore the current
meritocracy in America and how it developed along with the rise of the
SAT and other supposedly objective metrics used to evaluate a student’s
candidacy for college.
In the next section of this book, I will propose a new framework, one
focused on advancing democratic rather than testocratic merit. This
section draws upon a number of case studies—most in the field of
education, but not always—to demonstrate how teamwork and the
fortification of strong collaborative relationships can achieve the ends
that will serve our society best in the long run.
IN 2012, UNIVERSITIES, businesses, advocacy organizations, and communities
of color held their breath as they waited for the Supreme Court to decide
Fisher v. University of Texas at Austin. The case had been brought by
white University of Texas applicant Abigail Fisher, who argued that the
university’s race-conscious admissions program was unconstitutional

because it had denied her admission on account of her race. As the
public awaited a decision, many feared that the case would threaten the
future of race-conscious admissions policies, despite the fact that ten
years had passed since the Supreme Court had decisively upheld the
constitutionality of affirmative action in Grutter v. Bollinger.
So when the Supreme Court finally released its opinion in the Fisher
case, on June 24, 2013, proponents of affirmative action breathed a sigh
of relief. The majority opinion (which will be covered in greater depth in
the next chapter), authored by Justice Anthony Kennedy, was
anticlimactic, even reassuring. Issues of diversity were still on the table;
the opinion had not dismantled affirmative action altogether, as most
had feared.2 Justice Clarence Thomas agreed with the majority, albeit on
different grounds. He wrote separately to argue that affirmative action
and any consideration of race in admission should always be
unconstitutional.3 In fact, Thomas argued, all attempts by a university to
achieve diversity among its students were exactly the kind of racial
discrimination that had maintained segregation, because it meant the
university was considering race in the first place.4
According to Thomas, then, any naming of race was tantamount to
racial bigotry. He described race-conscious admissions as a type of
“discrimination [that] has a pervasive shifting effect” because the
“University admits minorities who otherwise would have attended less
selective colleges where they would have been more evenly matched.”5
Thomas went on to write, “As a result of the mismatching, many blacks
and Hispanics who likely would have excelled at less elite schools are
placed in a position where underperformance is all but inevitable
because they are less academically prepared.”6
Justice Thomas’s argument—what we might call the “mismatch
effect”—is a stark reminder that our universities have drifted away from
their public mission to create active citizens in a democratic society.
They have shifted their attention, instead, to that single moment in a
student’s college (or law school) experience: the moment of admission.
If, as Justice Thomas argues, students must only be admitted to places
that “evenly match” them, what responsibilities are left to higher
education? In Justice Thomas’s formulation, universities perform little
more than sorting functions, cherry-picking students who have come up

the escalator of excellence and arrive at their doorsteps presumably pre-
packaged and pre-equipped with everything they need for success.
This drift from a mission-driven to an admission-driven higher
education system should give all of us pause. I, for one, have had
formative, nurturing educational experiences that made me a better,
more inquisitive, more accomplished student than I was at the moment
of admission. It should also give Justice Thomas pause, because Thomas
himself was the beneficiary of mentorship and thoughtful guidance
during his college years at Holy Cross. Justice Thomas has acknowledged
the important role his mentors played in creating an environment of
challenge and support that allowed him to reach his educational goals.
As such he is a poster child, reminding us that the duty of our
universities is to give students an educational experience in which merit
is cultivated, not merely scored.
In arguing that students should arrive at college “evenly matched” to
the school’s standards for excellence, Clarence Thomas seems to have
forgotten that when he arrived as a sophomore transfer along with
nineteen other freshmen at Holy Cross in the summer of 1968, Father
John Brooks, a dean, student advocate, and mentor at the college, had
personally written up files on each of them, highlighting what set them
apart from other young men. Father Brooks had identified each of the
men’s strengths: some had challenging family backgrounds that they had
already shown signs of overcoming; others had exhibited a willingness to
push beyond expectations and give back to their communities in big and
small ways.7 Father Brooks believed that the black students may not
have been fully prepared for Holy Cross, but more importantly—more
urgently—he felt that Holy Cross was woefully unprepared for them.8
One evening in the autumn of 1968, Clarence Thomas came knocking
on Father Brooks’s door. He had come by to discuss some classes, but the
conversation turned quickly to many larger questions, including
Thomas’s feelings of alienation as he adjusted to college and his
anxieties that his grades would not secure him a spot at an Ivy League
law school.9 Brooks listened with an open heart and then assured
Thomas that he could find within himself the ability to succeed, not only
at Holy Cross but in the future as well. Father Brooks promised Thomas
that he would always hold him to high standards, but that if Thomas

were to find something too difficult, Brooks’s door was open for them to
talk and find a way.10
During Thomas’s years at Holy Cross, he found himself knocking on
Father Brooks’s door quite frequently to talk with his mentor about
coursework, campus life, and current affairs.11 After graduation, Thomas
did attain his goal of attending an Ivy League law school, and at Yale
Law he dreamt about using his legal career to “right the wrongs of
segregation.”12 During one of his law school summers, thanks to a
fellowship that I helped him obtain, Thomas interned at a civil rights
law firm in his home state of Georgia, and began a legal career that
ultimately brought him to a seat on the Supreme Court.13
There is, in other words, both a direct and an indirect conflict between
Clarence Thomas’s own lived experience and his criticisms of college
admissions and affirmative action. This conflict is not just limited to
Justice Thomas; Thomas’s current view of the way college and graduate
school admissions in America should work is a widespread cultural
tradition. Admissions to post-secondary education in Canada provide a
stark contrast to the American system. In Malcolm Gladwell’s New Yorker
article “Getting In,” he tells his own story of how, as a Canadian
teenager, he applied to universities in his country. He recalls filling out
an application one evening after dinner where he spent “probably. . . ten
minutes” ranking his preferred universities. He vaguely remembers
filling out a supplemental list of interests and activities, and sent that in.
His high school sent in his grades; there was no need for an SAT score or
to ask anyone to write letters of recommendation. “Why would I? It
wasn’t as if I were applying to a private club,” he recounts.
Admitted to his first-ranked school, Gladwell, in the article, said he
considered it an odd question as to whether he considered himself a
better or more successful person for having been accepted there, as
opposed to his second or third choice.
In Ontario, there wasn’t a strict hierarchy of colleges. . . . But since
all colleges were part of the same public system and tuition
everywhere was the same (about a thousand dollars a year, in those
days), and a B average in high school pretty much guaranteed you a
spot in college, there wasn’t a sense that anything great was at stake

in the choice of which college we attended. The issue was whether we
attended college, and—most important—how seriously we took the
experience once we got there. I thought everyone felt this way. You
can imagine my confusion, then, when I first met someone who had
gone to Harvard.14
To illustrate the difference in approach represented by the United
States and Canada, Gladwell uses the analogy of a modeling agency
versus the Marine Corps. The Marine Corps, Gladwell writes, “doesn’t
have an enormous admissions office grading applicants along four
separate dimensions of toughness and intelligence. It’s confident that the
experience of undergoing Marine Corps basic training will turn you into
a formidable soldier.”15 Modeling agencies, on the other hand, sign on
recruits because they are already beautiful.16 Applying these ideas to
university selection processes, Gladwell argues that the “extraordinary
emphasis the Ivy League places on admissions policies. . . makes it seem
more like a modeling agency than like the Marine Corps.”17
Professors Robert Paul Wolff and Tobias Barrington Wolff pose a
similar argument in a law review article published a few months before
Gladwell’s New Yorker piece. In it, they paint a picture of the tiny
imaginary island republic of “Invertia.”18 The father-son author duo then
take the reader on hypothetical visits to two of Invertia’s preeminent
national institutions: a world-class hospital and a top-flight university. In
the hospital’s emergency room, the visitor sees two patients: one
suffering from an apparent heart attack and one complaining of a small
pimple on his nose. Unexpectedly, the emergency room staff leaves the
heart attack victim to die, turning its attention to the second man, a tall,
tanned figure whom the Wolffs call “a veritable Adonis” (referring to the
legendary Greek god of beauty). The Invertian minister of health, who
goes to the hospital with the Wolffs, has this to say in defense of the
doctors’ choice of treatment:
Every so often, we see a patient who is obviously bursting with good
health and natural physical gifts—fit, vigorous, strikingly attractive.
When such a patient comes along, needing only the very slightest
medical adjustment to emerge in perfect condition, a patient with
whom our chance of success is virtually one hundred percent, we are

prepared to waive the normal procedures and speed the admission
process. . . . Invertian society needs an elite core of superbly healthy
men and women whose every last imperfection or blemish has been
meticulously removed by the most modern techniques of medical
science.
Admissions procedures at the university, however, are quite the
opposite. There, the Wolffs describe the university admissions office’s
summary rejection of a straight-A scholar-athlete who, in her free time,
performs as a concert pianist and volunteers with inner-city and disabled
youth. An underachieving, semi-literate young man is chosen in her
place as a member of the incoming class. The university representative
explains its decisions:
[The] young woman is already so well developed intellectually that
she does not need what an elite university can offer. . . . To spend the
scarce educational resources of our top university on her would be
wasteful and inefficient. . . . Educationally speaking, if I may put it
this way, [the young man] was in extremis when he walked in. . . .
At this very moment, our team of professors is working with him,
starting the painful, difficult process of developing his intellect,
challenging his mind, helping him work through the shame and self-
doubt of semi-literacy. . . . Imagine the thrill we all feel when one of
those young people, whose mind had all but ceased to exhibit
curiosity and creativity, begins to read, to write, to think, to argue,
to question a world that has, until then, been closed to him.
The authors use the fantasy nation of Invertia to show two stark
alternatives: a world in which resources are used to improve even
further those in near-perfect health versus one in which even the
lowliest of citizens are given the tools to cultivate their intelligence in
order both to have the opportunity to excel and to contribute to their
society. I find it extremely disturbing that our universities resemble more
closely the hospitals that take in classes full of Adonises to treat them for
a pimple on the nose than they do mission-driven universities that are
engaged in educating and nurturing all of their students.
You might think I am exaggerating. I wish I was. It is a shock to
discover that the doctors of Invertia, preoccupied with Adonises, are

everywhere. When I went to the Yale campus to see my son graduate I
picked up a copy of the student newspaper, which had published a
profile of the graduating class. I scanned it with interest (looking for
mention of my son, of course!) when I came across a chart called “By the
Numbers.” The undergraduate class of 2009 was described this way:
BY THE NUMBERS UNDERGRADUATE CLASS OF 2009
1,321
Students in the original freshman class
157
Students in the original freshman class with alumni parents
750
Median SAT Verbal score
740
Median SAT Mathematics score
9.7
Percent of applicants admitted
113
Number of international students
I tried to figure out what was bothering me so much. Eventually it
struck me: every single one of these statistics that the paper was
celebrating reflected student achievements or demographic facts, all of
which were established before the students even got to New Haven! It
was as if the entire Yale College experience had been nothing but a
confirmation of high school scores, as if it were a finishing school run by
a modeling agency. Where was a list of the students’ accomplishments as
a result of their college experience? Where was evidence of the college’s
own self-described mission of educating future leaders and citizens of a
democracy?
Yale and other elite institutions such as Harvard and Princeton are
private institutions. Yet despite their generous endowments and steep
tuition rates, they are still subsidized by state taxpayers. Many are
situated on land that the public donated. Their faculty receives public
subsidies through research grants, and their students receive a
disproportionate amount of federally financed scholarship funds. This
subsidy occurs despite the fact that the majority of their enrolled
students are wealthy. Colleges such as the “Big Three”—Yale, Harvard,
and Princeton (but not limited to these three by any means—offer

enormous opportunity to a few, while largely avoiding their obligation
to the many by taking an increasingly scarce public reservoir of riches
and making it available primarily to those who can pay. The result?
Predictable. Anyone who wants to play the game has to shift their
attention from the mission declared by our country’s elite institutions of
educating future leaders and citizens of a democracy to the goal of
gaining admission to their storied halls.
In his recently published book, Crazy U: One Dad’s Crash Course in
Getting His Kid into College, journalist Andrew Ferguson astutely describes
the frenzy that accompanies the college admissions process today. As he
comically recounts his experience helping his son apply—and get in—to
college, Ferguson laments:
What had once been a fairly brief and straightforward process, in
which the children of the middle and upper classes found a suitable
college, filled out an application, got in, and then went happily
away, returning home only now and then to celebrate holidays and
borrow money, has evolved into a multiyear rite of passage, often
beginning before puberty.19
This rite of passage, Ferguson says, carries with it a probability of
ultimate success that is “much worse than a crapshoot.”20 Frankly, I’m
not familiar with the game of craps, but these odds don’t sound very
good. We could also compare getting into college to entering the lottery
(something all Americans can relate to)—except it is not random, like
state-sponsored lotteries. Instead, the odds of winning in this lottery are
stacked in favor of the Adonises of our world, the children of the
wealthy.
In a 2014 Boston Globe article, Beth Teitell describes one seventeen-
year-old high school senior whose extracurricular activities, designed to
make him attractive to the college of his choice, were padded to the
point of absurdity. The student had “studied electrical engineering at
Skidmore College, argued in mock trials at Columbia University,
developed apps at MIT, and screened patients for tuberculosis in
Thailand.”21 Teitell rightly identifies that “with college tuition an
enormous financial stress for many families, adding pricey summer
programs to the tab is something that’s out of reach for most people,

who see resume-building activities as yet another example of wealthy
families trying to buy their children advantages.”22 And nowhere is the
gap between what the haves and the have-nots can do for their children
to help them get into college more visible than in the test-preparation
courses that presumably ensure that most notable attainment of the
American Adonis: a high SAT score. The SAT, as the preeminent
standardized test for college admission in the United States, best reflects
our national obsession with the moment of college admission, rather
than with the post-graduation missions of those who attend our colleges
and universities. This despite the fact that SAT scores are accurate
reflectors of wealth and little else.
Are your no. 2 pencils sharpened?

CHAPTER TWO
Aptitude or Achievement?
A special lottery is to be held to select the student who will live in the only
deluxe room in a dormitory. There are 100 seniors, 150 juniors, and 200
sophomores who applied. Each senior’s name is placed in the lottery 3 times;
each junior’s name, 2 times; and each sophomore’s name, 1 time. What is the
probability that a senior’s name will be chosen?1
DOES THIS KIND of question look familiar? For most of you, it probably
does: it represents just one of the nearly two hundred questions that
presently make up the SAT.2 (The answer, by the way, is 3/8, or 37.5
percent, for those among us who prefer percentages to fractions.) For
nearly a century, universities across the country have used SAT scores
and other quantifiable metrics to make decisions about admitting one
candidate versus another—decisions that can have far-reaching impact
on both the admitted and declined candidates’ educational, social,
professional, and financial futures. On the basis of what? we might ask.
Originally the acronym SAT stood for Scholastic Aptitude Test, on the
strength of the argument that a high schooler’s success on the test
correlated with his or her success in the increasingly rigorous
environment of college. As evidence of this correlation dwindled, the
name was changed first to the Scholastic Assessment Test (keeping the
handy, well-known acronym) and later to the SAT Reasoning Test. Call it
what you will, the SAT still promises something it can’t deliver: a way to
measure merit. Yet the increasing reliance on standardized test scores as
a status placement in society has created something alien to the very
values of our democratic society yet seemingly with a life of its own: a
testocracy.
Allow me to be clear: I’m not talking about all tests. I’m a professor; I

believe in methods of evaluation. But I know, too, that certain methods
are fairer and more valuable than others. I believe in achievement tests:
diagnostic tests that are used to give feedback, either to the teacher or to
the student, about what individuals have actually mastered or what
they’re learning. What I don’t believe in are aptitude tests, testing that—
by whatever new clever code name it goes by—is used to predict future
performance. Unfortunately, that is not how the SAT functions. Even the
test makers do not claim it’s a measure of smartness; all they claim is
that success on the test correlates with first-year college grades, or if it’s
the LSAT (Law School Admission Test), that it correlates with first-year
law school grades.
As I’ll explain later, such a correlation is slight at best. In any case, it’s
certainly not a barometer of merit. Merit is much too big a concept to
simply refer to how you’re going to do in your first year of college or
law school. Because if all we cared about is how well you do in your first
year of college, we would have college programs last only one year,
right? Why would you have to be there and pay tuition for three more
years? We do and we must care about more than freshman-year grades—
we care about whether students learn something in college, whether
they grow into themselves on the way to becoming better citizens and
making their distinctive contributions to society. What we really care
about are all the things that the testocracy can’t measure.
How then did we get to a place where American higher education
appears more concerned with applicants’ test scores and alumni financial
contributions than with the education of current students and the
contributions of alumni to our society as a whole? A review of America’s
curious history of—and relationship with—an obsessive culture of
testing may help answer these questions.
“MANLY, CHRISTIAN CHARACTER.” That was the ideal that Endicott Peabody, a
member of the New England Brahmin class, hoped to cultivate in the
boys who attended his private boarding school, Groton.3 Peabody
founded Groton in 1884 with the purpose of building character and
embedding the value of “noblesse oblige” into the social fabric of late-
nineteenth-century America.4 Groton students, like young men from
seven other boarding schools in the northeastern United States, were to

embody character, manliness, and athleticism.5 The “Big Three” colleges
—Harvard, Yale, and Princeton—validated these ideals by admitting
nearly all boarding-school applicants and conferring honorary degrees
upon Peabody.
Admission into the “Big Three” was fairly easy if the applicant
possessed a “manly, Christian character.” He had to pass subject-based
entrance exams devised by the colleges, but the tests weren’t particularly
hard, and he could take them over and over again to pass. Even if a
student didn’t pass the required exams, he could be admitted with
“conditions.” Once enrolled at Harvard, Yale, or Princeton, he would
focus primarily on his social life, clubs, sports, social organizations, and
campus activities, while often ignoring his academic work.
Admissions began to change, however, when Charles William Eliot
became president of Harvard in 1869. Annoyed with “the stupid sons of
the rich,” Eliot sought to draw into the university’s fold capable students
from all segments of society. To ensure that smart students could attend
Harvard regardless of their means, Eliot, in 1898, abolished the archaic
Greek admission exams that were popular up until that time. He also
replaced Harvard’s admissions exams with exams created by the College
Entrance Examination Board because it tripled the number of locations
where applicants could be tested. The result of Eliot’s changes was the
admission of more public school students, including Catholics and Jews.
A. Lawrence Lowell, Eliot’s successor, attempted to reverse the trend of
admitting those without WASP status and values. The “Jewish problem”
in particular alarmed Lowell. The number of Jews at Harvard had
increased steadily, from 10 percent in 1909, to 15 percent in 1915, to
21.5 percent in 1922. In addition to their growth in numbers, Jews
generally outperformed non-Jewish students academically. Lowell
worried that Harvard might suffer the same fate as Columbia, which
experienced “WASP flight” as more Jewish students started to enroll. In
response, Lowell limited freshman enrollment to one thousand and
altered the admissions criteria to include an emphasis on “character,”
legacy, and athleticism rather than solely on academic achievement.
Additionally, the application process now required interviews and
photos, as well as letters of recommendation. Initially a method to limit
Jewish enrollment, the notion of a “well-rounded” applicant was born in
the first half of the 1920s.

But altering admissions criteria to benefit socially desirable students
was not enough for Harvard. With an increasingly complex university
admissions process, a new and uniform system was needed to separate
the wheat from the chaff. The SAT became the solution that the ruling
elite had been desperately seeking for all this time to perpetuate itself: a
testocracy, disguised as a meritocracy.
THE ORIGINS OF the SAT can be traced to the turn of the twentieth century,
when the College Board, the nonprofit organization that owns the rights
to the modern-day SAT, administered the nation’s first college entrance
examinations, in 1901.6 Unlike today’s SAT, these exams were entirely
composed of essays that required students to engage with subjects as far-
ranging from each other as Latin, world history, and physics.7 The birth
of these exams came at about the same time as another social scientific
phenomenon: intelligence testing.
In 1905, French psychologist Alfred Binet developed the world’s first
IQ test, which aimed to produce a set of predictable results from which
one could “derive a rating of. . . ‘mental age’ ” and “identify slow
learners [who] could be given special help in school.”8 Binet’s theories
were eventually adapted by the United States military during World War
I, when Harvard professor and IQ-test advocate Robert Yerkes convinced
Army brass to allow him to evaluate nearly two million soldiers to
identify top talent who could be promoted to the rank of officer.9 The
results were striking: according to Yerkes, “The native-born scored
higher than the foreign-born, less recent immigrants scored higher than
more recent immigrants, and whites scored higher than Negroes.”10 In
1923, Carl C. Brigham, a Princeton psychology professor and leading
figure in the growing anti-immigration movement of the time, authored
a treatise titled A Study of American Intelligence, in which he relied
heavily upon Yerkes’s findings to conclude that “American intelligence is
declining, and will proceed with an accelerating rate as the racial
admixture becomes more and more extensive.”11
This belief, which Brigham helped to perpetuate, was lampooned by F.
Scott Fitzgerald, a Princeton graduate, in his novel The Great Gatsby,
published two years later, in 1925.

“Civilization’s going to pieces,” broke out Tom violently. “I’ve gotten
to be a terrible pessimist about things. Have you read ‘The Rise of
the Colored Empires’ by this man Goddard?”
“Why, no,” I answered, rather surprised by his tone.
“Well, it’s a fine book, and everybody ought to read it. The idea is
if we don’t look out the white race will be—will be utterly
submerged. It’s all scientific stuff; it’s been proved. . . .
“This fellow has worked out the whole thing. It’s up to us, who are
the dominant race, to watch out or these other races will have
control of things. . . .
“This idea is that we’re Nordics. I am, and you are, and you are,
and—” After an infinitesimal hesitation he included Daisy with a
slight nod, and she winked at me again. “—And we’ve produced all
the things that go to make civilization—oh, science and art, and all
that. Do you see?”
There was something pathetic in his concentration, as if his
complacency, more acute than of old, was not enough to him any
more.12
The College Board selected Professor Brigham to spearhead the design
of a new, nationwide college entrance exam,13 and on June 23, 1926,
Brigham oversaw the very first administration of what was then called
the Scholastic Aptitude Test.14
News of the SAT’s success eventually made its way up to Cambridge,
Massachusetts, where James Bryant Conant presided as president of
Harvard University (from 1933 to 1953). Unlike many of his peers at the
time, Conant openly embraced the Jeffersonian ideal of a “natural
aristocracy of talents and virtue”15—a forerunner of the twentieth-
century idea of the meritocracy. In 1934, Conant assigned two of his
assistant freshman deans, Henry Chauncey and Wilbur J. Bender, the
task of identifying high-performing middle-class and ethnic-immigrant
students for the possible receipt of need-blind scholarships to the
university.16 The two men offered up Brigham’s SAT as the optimal
screen through which eligible candidates could be filtered. Conant
accepted their recommendation, mandating that applicants take the test
in order to be considered for scholarships.17

A battle that had begun with idealistic rhetoric succumbed to a Trojan
horse: the SAT and a budding testocracy confirmed the existing order as
inevitable, because the tests demonstrated that the elite possessed
unassailable merit. Harvard’s adoption of the SAT subsequently set a
new gold standard in the world of education.18 Chauncey went on to
found the Educational Testing Service, in 1947, which has inherited the
College Board’s role as administrator of the SAT (and has developed a
host of popular graduate-level entrance exams in its own right).19 By the
1950s, the College Board had grown to around three hundred members,
and more than half a million students sat for the exam every year during
that period.20 Test-preparation companies, such as Kaplan and the
Princeton Review, thrived as a result of the SAT’s rise, and “much of the
curriculum in American elementary and secondary education [was]
reverse-engineered to raise SAT scores” to ensure admission to top
universities.21
This leaves us in a particular quandary today, best described by Lucy
Calkins, founding director of the Reading and Writing Project at
Columbia University’s Teachers College. Referring to the most recently
appointed president of the College Board, she asks, “The issue is: Are we
in a place to let Dave Coleman control the entire K–12 curriculum?”22
THIS IS NOT TO say that the testocracy has continued to gain ground
unabated. Close to eight hundred colleges have decreased or eliminated
reliance on high-stakes tests as the way to rank and sort students. In the
current environment, however, moving away from merit by the numbers
takes guts. The testing and ranking diehards, intent on maintaining their
gate-keeping role, hold back and even penalize administrators who take
such measures. The presidents of both Reed College and Sarah Lawrence
College report experiencing forms of retribution for refusing to cooperate
with the “ranking roulette.”23
At the center of this conflict is the wildly popular US News & World
Report’s annual college-rankings issue—the bible of university prestige.
In the book Crazy U, Andrew Ferguson describes meeting Bob Morse, the
director of data research for US News and the lead figure behind the
publication’s college rankings. Morse, a small man who works in an

unassuming office, is described by Ferguson as “the most powerful man
in America.”24 And for good reason: students and parents often rely
upon the rankings—reportedly produced only by Morse and a handful of
other writers and editors25—as a proxy for university quality. These
rankings rely heavily on SAT scores for their calculations. Without such
data available from, for example, Sarah Lawrence, which stopped using
SAT scores in its admissions process in 2005, Morse calculated Sarah
Lawrence’s ranking by assuming an average SAT score roughly 200
points below the average score of its peer group. How does US News
justify simply making up a number? Michele Tolela Myers, the president
of Sarah Lawrence at the time the school stopped using the SAT,
reported that the reasoning behind the lowered ranking was explained to
her this way: “[Director Morse] made it clear to me that he believes that
schools that do not use SAT scores in their admission process are
admitting less capable students and therefore should lose points on their
selectivity index.”26
This is the testocracy in action, an aristocracy determined by testing
that wants to maintain its position even if it has to resort to fabrication.
What is it they are so desperate to protect? The answer initially seems to
be that the SAT can predict how well students will do in college and thus
how well-prepared they are to enter a particular school. There is a
relationship between a student’s SAT score and his first-year college
grades. The problem is it’s a very modest relationship. It is a positive
relationship, meaning it is more than zero. But it is not what most
people would assume when they hear the term correlation.
In 2004, economist Jesse Rothstein published an independent study
that found only a meager 2.7 percent of grade variance in the first year
of college can be effectively predicted by the SAT.27 The LSAT has a
similarly weak correlation to actual achievement in law school. Jane
Balin, Michelle Fine, and I did a study at the University of Pennsylvania
Law School, where we looked at the first-year law school grades of 981
students over several years and then looked at their LSAT scores. It
turned out that there was a modest relationship between their test scores
and their grades. The LSAT predicted 14 percent of the variance between
the first-year grades. And it did a little better the second year: 15
percent. Which means that 85 percent of the time it was wrong. I

remember being at a meeting with a person who at the time worked for
the Law School Admission Council, which constructs the LSAT. When I
brought these numbers up to her she actually seemed surprised they
were that high. “Well,” she said, “nationwide the test is nine percent
better than random.” Nine percent better than random. That’s what
we’re talking about.
So, if the SAT does not correlate with the grades a student will get in
college, how can a student’s performance in college be predicted?
William C. Hiss and Valerie W. Franks, both formerly of the Bates
College admissions department, released a report in 2014 that studied
thirty-three colleges and universities that required neither the SAT nor
its very popular competitor the ACT for admission.28 Now, which
students did or did not choose to submit their standardized-test scores is
in itself interesting—overwhelmingly those students who did not submit
a score were women, minority students, or those who would be the first
in their family to go to college, which should tell us a lot about the SAT
right there.
In reviewing the performance of more than eighty-eight thousand
students, Hiss and Franks found that students who perform well in
college were the ones who had gotten strong grades in high school, even
if they had weak SAT scores. They also found that students with weaker
high school grades did less well in college—even if they had stronger
SAT scores.29 Summing up their findings they wrote, “Many of us who
have spent our careers as secondary and university faculty and
administrators find compelling the argument that ‘what students do over
four years in high school is more important than what they do on a
Saturday morning.’”30
So, if the SAT does not measure aptitude—and if it doesn’t even
pretend to measure achievement—then what does it measure? I have
argued for years that the SAT is actually more reliable as a “wealth test”
than a test of potential, and the most recent results bear this out. Below
are figures released in 201331 by the College Board that correlate SAT
scores with the family income of the test taker.32
FAMILY
INCOME
AVERAGE SAT SCORE (OUT OF 2400) FOR 2013
COLLEGE-BOUND SENIORS

$0,000–
$20,000
1326
$20,000–
$40,000
1402
$40,000–
$60,000
1461
$60,000–
$80,000
1497
$80,000–
$100,000
1535
$100,000–
$120,000
1569
$120,000–
$140,000
1581
$140,000–
$160,000
1604
$160,000–
$200,000
1625
More than
$200,000
1714
Now that is a correlation! This is what I refer to as the “Volvo effect.”
In Crazy U, Ferguson talks about how the parents of his son’s friends and
classmates were spending $30,000 to $35,000 to prepare their children
for college. That isn’t the amount they had to pay for a premier boarding
school mind you—that was the amount they paid to hire someone to
tutor their child on the SAT and to help them write their “statement of
interest” essays on their college applications. When these students get in

to a particular college we say that this process reflects the fairness of the
meritocracy, but really it only reflects the fact that the elite dominate
the entry to higher education. These students aren’t smarter than the
other students. Or to put it another way: they may be smart, but they are
not necessarily those most likely to contribute to our society; they simply
come from families that have more money to pay people to prepare
them for the SAT, to test-prep them for their high school grades, and to
pay for viola lessons so they can stand out more in the admissions
process.
The SAT’s most reliable value is its proxy for wealth. It is normed to
white, upper-middle-class performance, as numerous studies have shown
when the test is viewed through the lenses of race and class.33 The
figures below, from 2013, show this in stark relief.34
TEST-TAKER
ETHNICITY
AVERAGE SAT SCORE (OUT OF 2400) FOR
2013 COLLEGE-BOUND SENIORS
Black or African
American
1278
Mexican or Mexican
American
1354
Puerto Rican
1354
Other Hispanic,
Latino, or Latin
American
1355
American Indian,
Alaska Native
1427
Other
1501
White
1576
Asian, Asian
American, Pacific
1645

Islander
Is this a case of merit belonging to one race and not to another? Or is it
the case that if you have grown up in a particular environment, such as
one where your parents lack the funds to prepare you for these
standardized tests or lack an advanced level of education themselves,
you will not do as well on the SAT? There are other reasons why
students of various ethnicities may underperform on the SAT. One of
these is a phenomenon called “stereotype threat,” a term coined by
Claude Steele of Stanford University (now provost of the University of
California at Berkeley) to describe the anxiety a person may experience
when he or she has the potential to confirm a negative stereotype about
his or her social group. Many first-and second-generation immigrants of
color test well, for example, because they retain a national identity free
of America’s racial caste system and enjoy material and cultural
advantages, including professional or well-educated parents. They do not
internalize the stigma of race and are thus less affected by the anxiety of
confirming assumptions of intellectual inferiority that depresses test
scores of highly motivated students who are African American, Mexican
American, or of Puerto Rican heritage.
I know this threat is real. One summer not too long ago, I was engaged
in a long-term writing project and recruited an absolutely brilliant young
man who is Latino. Enrique (not his real name) has a photographic
memory. I mean, he blew my mind. I have never seen anybody who
could tell you, “Oh, well that’s on page 384. It’s in the middle of the
page. I think it’s the first paragraph, not the second one.” But Enrique
could not do well on the LSAT, though he practiced taking it close to
thirty times. Enrique grew up in a low-income community, so arguably
that had something to do with the verbal references that he might have
missed. But a lot more of it had to do with stereotype threat: he was too
tense. Postscript to this story: Enrique was subsequently selected to be a
Rhodes scholar. So what, really, are we talking about here?
If we can agree that the SAT, LSAT, and other standardized tests most
reliably measure a student’s household income, ethnicity, and level of
parental education, then we can see that reliance on such test scores
narrows the student body to those who come from particular
households. Then we must decide how to ensure that we open the

admissions doors to a greater diversity of students—not just the ones
from privileged backgrounds. I want to make it clear that I am not
talking about affirmative action here. The loud debate over affirmative
action is a distraction that obscures the real problem, because right now
affirmative action simply mirrors the values of the current view of
meritocracy. Students at elite colleges, for example, who are the
beneficiaries of affirmative action tend to be either the children of
immigrants or the children of upper-middle-class parents of color who
have been sent to fine prep schools just like the upper-middle-class white
students. The result? Our nation’s colleges, universities, and graduate
schools use affirmative-action-based practices to admit students who test
well, and then they pride themselves on their cosmetic diversity. Thus,
affirmative action has evolved in many (but not all) colleges to merely
mimic elite-sponsored admissions practices that transform wealth into
merit, encourage over-reliance on pseudoscientific measures of
excellence, and convert admission into an entitlement without social
obligation.
No, the question, as I said in the previous chapter, is this: How do we
move from admission to mission? Further: How do we move past that
moment of admission, which may only confirm one’s present status, to
granting an opportunity for a diverse and worthy group of individuals to
learn how to work together collectively and/or creatively to help solve
the deep challenges confronting our communities, our economy, and our
educational experiences in a democratic society? Of course, some of this
has to do with how we define success. A study of Harvard alumni over
three decades, which culminated in the 1990s, defined “success” by
income, community involvement, and professional satisfaction.35
Researchers found a high correlation between those criteria and two
criteria that might not ordinarily be associated with Harvard freshmen:
low SAT scores and a blue-collar background. This is echoed by college
admissions officers at elite universities today, who report—when asked
what predicts life success—that, above a minimum level of competence,
“initiative” or “hunger” are the best predictors. Marlyn McGrath Lewis,
director of admissions for Harvard, says, “We have particular interest in
students from a modest background. Coupled with high achievement and
a high ambition level and energy, a background that’s modest can really
be a help. We know that’s the best investment we can make: a kid who’s

hungry.”36 That’s certainly the message of Derek Bok and William
Bowen’s The Shape of the River, that those who are motivated to take
advantage of an opportunity, when given the opportunity, can and often
do succeed, often in ways that are different than their more privileged
peers. The African American students in the Bok-Bowen study, for
example, became leaders within their communities at much higher rates
than their more affluent and better-scoring white counterparts.
When I speak here of diversity, I’m not talking strictly along color or
gender lines either. When the GI Bill was first proposed, toward the end
of World War II, some university officials did their best to get it
defeated. They were appalled by the prospect of what they saw as a mob
of unprepared, unsuitable men trying to be their students. To their
surprise, the veterans—many of them poor, most the first in their
families to attend college—proved to be among the best students of their
generation. By broadening access to college for those who had served
their country, the GI Bill helped fuel the post–World War II economic
boom while leveling the playing field for many Americans. The bill
epitomized our country’s dual commitments: to open opportunity across
the economic spectrum and to invest in people who will give back to
society.
We see the problem of restricted access today in the new elite class,
which passes on its privileges in the same way that the old elite from
twentieth-century America passed on its privileges. But there is an even
more worrisome aspect of the new elite. The old elite felt that it had
inherited its privileges; in order to defend the social oligarchy over
which it reigned, the old elite felt the need to give back through public
service or a financial commitment to the greater good. The old elite
recognized that it had been privileged by the accident of birth, so the
message to those who were out of luck was that you were unfortunate
but it was through no defect of your own.
The new elite, on the other hand, feels that it has earned its privileges
based on intrinsic, individual merit. The message, therefore, to those
who are not part of this elite is “You are stupid. You simply don’t matter.
I deserve all the advantages I’m granted.” This attitude manifests in the
jobs that college grads now take. For example, the student-run Harvard
Crimson ran an article in 2007 about that year’s graduating class
smirking that “only” 43 percent of female graduates entered finance and

consulting compared to 58 percent of male graduates.37 The article,
entitled “ ’07 Men Make More,” explained—with apparent disdain—that
women choose jobs in lower-paying fields such as education and public
service.38
Despite the economic downturn of recent years, the striking number of
Harvard graduates entering finance and consulting has persisted. The
class of 2013 senior survey showed that more than 30 percent of the
2013 class had jobs in those fields.39 After consulting and finance, the
technology/engineering industry captured 13 percent of Harvard
graduates that year. The Crimson again emphasized—with what seems to
me to be the appearance of similar disdain—the preference of women to
pursue less-lucrative work in education, media, and health care rather
than in finance, consulting, and technology.40
The top career choices of many male Harvard students—whether it is
2007 or 2013—are severely lacking in any element of service. This is the
damage that we are doing through our testocracy. We are credentializing
a new elite by legitimizing people with an inflated sense of their own
merit and little unwillingness to open up to new ways of problem
solving. They exude an arrogance that says there’s only one way to
answer a question—because the SAT only gives credit for the one right
answer.
The world, by contrast, provides us with more than one correct answer
to most questions. In the face of mounting criticism, the College Board
has recently proposed changes to the SAT, including reducing the use of
obscure vocabulary words, narrowing the areas from which the math
questions will be drawn, and making the essay section optional. But
individuals such as Bard College president Leon Botstein find these
proposed changes are too little, too late because they don’t address the
test’s real problem. In an eloquent rebuttal, Botstein writes:
The essential mechanism of the SAT, the multiple choice question, is
a bizarre relic of long outdated twentieth century social scientific
assumptions and strategies. As every adult recognizes, knowing
something or how to do something in real life is never defined by
being able to choose a “right” answer from a set of possible answers
(some of them intentionally misleading). . . . No scientist, engineer,
writer, psychologist, artist, or physician—and certainly no scholar,

and therefore no serious university faculty member—pursues his or
her vocation by getting right answers from a set of prescribed
alternatives that trivialize complexity and ambiguity.41
Meaningful participation in a democratic society depends upon citizens
who are willing to develop and utilize these three skills: collaborative
problem solving, independent thinking, and creative leadership. But
these skills bear no relationship to success in the testocracy. Aptitude
tests do not predict leadership, emotional intelligence, or the capacity to
work with others to contribute to society. All that a test like the SAT
promises is a (very, very slight) correlation with first-year college
grades.
But once you’re past the first year or two of higher education, success
isn’t about being the best test taker in the room any longer. It’s about
being able to work with other people who have different strengths than
you and who are also prepared to back you up when you make a mistake
or when you feel vulnerable. Our colleges and universities have to take
pride not in compiling an individualistic group of very-high-scoring
students but in nurturing a diverse group of thinkers and facilitating how
they solve complex problems creatively—because complex problems
seem to be all the world has in store for us these days.

CHAPTER THREE
From Testocratic Merit to Democratic Merit
THE 
CURRENT 
MERITOCRACY—rule by testocratic merit—uses easily
measurable criteria to award status to individuals. This efficiency is part
of the testocracy’s appeal. In the opinion of Bard College president Leon
Botstein, this seeming objectivity is what has kept testocratic merit, as
represented by success on the SAT, around so long:
The real responsibility for our sorry state of affairs regarding college
entrance examinations rests with our colleges and universities
themselves. The elite institutions have willingly supported an
alliance with the College Board to make their own lives easier, and
we Americans seem to have accepted this owing to our misplaced
love affair with standardized testing and rankings as the proper
means to ensure educational excellence.1
As we shift our concept of merit from being a testable, rankable
commodity for the few to a measure that might be reached by talented
people of all social classes we have to ask ourselves: How shall we find
the means to recognize and foster democratic merit? To answer this
question we must first consider what the word “democratic” means and
how a democracy truly functions. In a seminal 1997 article, David
Labaree argued that the educational enterprise in America is instructed
by three primary goals.2 The first goal, “democratic equality,” reflects
society’s interest both in creating an informed and engaged citizenry and
in promoting relative equality. The second goal, “social efficiency,”
emphasizes the necessity in a market-based economy of having
productive and innovative laborers. The third goal, “social mobility,”
treats education as a commodity whose sole purpose is to advance
individual standing in the hierarchy of societal order. The first two goals
further the public interest, while the third goal unquestionably
characterizes education as a “private good,” the virtues of which are
“selective and differential rather than collective and equal.”
Of course the third goal is what we have now, which is why, as

Labaree points out, the acquisition of meaningless academic credentials
(instead of socially valuable skills and knowledge) has become our
paramount concern. He concludes that this problem can be fixed only by
promoting the other two goals, democratic equality and social efficiency.
Essentially, Labaree’s findings illustrate that testocratic merit tends to
maintain the status quo by placing a higher value on testing than on
training, on aesthetics than on substance, on competition than on
collaboration. If Labaree’s thesis is correct—that is to say, if our society
truly values education as a means to prepare citizens to participate in
our democracy, to train workers, and to enable individuals to improve
their lots—then we need a culture shift about how we reevaluate the
meaning of merit by measuring its democratic values rather than its
testocratic machinery.
Democratic merit makes different assumptions than testocratic merit.
First, democratic merit is related to its context: it is a function of the
goals and purposes (mission) of the institution that wants to use it as a
metric of selection. There is no standard of merit that does not involve a
choice about which characteristics of applicants are valuable. The
measures for democratic merit you will read about in this book—peer
collaboration, leadership, drive—all may take some getting used to. It
will be important to remember that the current prevailing notion of
merit in college admissions—as a function of standardized-test scores
and secondary school grades—is neither objectively true nor natural.
The second assumption that democratic merit makes is that the
purpose of colleges and universities has a public character. The vast
majority of institutions of higher education say that directly in their
“mission statements.” Let’s take them at their word then: democratic
merit is the form of merit that views higher education, at least partially,
as a public good. As such, admissions criteria should continuously be
reassessed for the degree to which they help the institution and its
constituents to make present and future contributions to society, that is,
our democracy. Democratic merit does what our current meritocracy
fails to do: it creates an incentive system that emphasizes the
development of more and more individuals who serve the goals and
contribute to the conditions of a thriving democracy for both their own
good as well as for the collective good. Granting these individuals
educational access, regardless of their supposed possession of abstractly

measured “talent,” is what will contribute to the creation of higher-level
problem solving.
WHEN FUTURE SUPREME Court justice Sonia Sotomayor began college at
Princeton, she felt entirely out of place. “I felt like an alien landing in
another universe,” she recounted in a recent speech to college alumni
and reiterated in a rare oral dissent from the Supreme Court bench.3 The
Ivy League was certainly a long way from home; she had grown up in a
Bronx housing project, suffering from diabetes and living with an
alcoholic father.
Sotomayor’s story of a young woman who beat the odds embodies the
American Dream narrative. Despite the fact that in New York, as in the
rest of the country, the academic success of a child is heavily determined
by race and socioeconomic status,4 Sotomayor went on to receive her
law degree from Yale, work at the Manhattan district attorney’s office,
and ultimately be appointed to the highest court in the land.
Sotomayor’s story of success, despite all expectations to the contrary, is
as inspiring as it appeared rare to the white and wealthy students who
were her classmates and who viewed only themselves as succeeding by
traditional standards. Sotomayor recalls letters in the Daily Princetonian
“lamenting the presence on campus of ‘affirmative action students,’ each
of whom had presumably displaced a far more deserving affluent white
male and could rightly be expected to crash into the gutter built of her
own unrealistic aspirations.”5
But this story of the American university as a place driven by
competitive individualism and test scores, a place where students of
color, poor students, and others unfavored by wealth-dependent
standardized tests must face isolation and fatiguing odds, has not always
been the singular story of the purpose and role of our institutions of
higher education.
In the spring of 1968, after the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr.,
the Reverend John Brooks demonstrated a competing understanding of
higher education when he drove up and down the eastern seaboard to
hand select a number of African American men for admission to the
College of the Holy Cross, including Clarence Thomas, as we saw in
chapter 1. For Brooks, increasing access to higher education was a moral

imperative, as well as a practical one: Holy Cross could not shape the
nation’s leaders when it neglected a generation of ambitious black men.6
Brooks drove south from Massachusetts, searching for young men who
had ambition, leadership potential, and strong character rather than the
right family pedigree or the right test scores. Brooks found the qualities
he was searching for in a young man who was determined to become the
first black priest in Savannah, Georgia; in another who had performed
under pressure to elevate his basketball team to the state championship;
and in still another whose “quiet intensity,” molded by a childhood
spent moving from one rat-infested place to another, spoke more to his
character than his poor grades.
Brooks ultimately selected twenty black men: nineteen freshmen and
one sophomore. The men started at Holy Cross in the fall of 1968, and
during their years there, Brooks mentored them, affirming their potential
and cultivating their merit rather than expecting their individual merit
to arrive whole and intact.
When one student felt discouraged by his 2.3 grade point average,
Brooks sent him a letter of praise and encouragement. By the end of the
following semester, the student had earned a 3.2 GPA. Brooks provided
eyeglasses for another student, which allowed the young man to improve
his grades significantly. Brooks provided his students with supplies and
transportation, as well as support at their football games and antiwar
rallies.
When the students created the college’s first-ever Black Student Union,
Brooks listened to the goals they outlined in their first meeting, goals
that included adding more black students and professors and including
more black authors in the curriculum. Brooks then helped plan a dinner
between the BSU and the university president so that the administration
could learn of the students’ struggles and of their ideas.
Brooks himself fought for the inclusion of black studies courses in the
curriculum, and he successfully added the courses Black Literature and
Perspectives on Racism. He also recruited black faculty, including
Ogretta McNeil, who admired Brooks’s single-handed attempt to
integrate Holy Cross.
One of the most heated moments at Holy Cross occurred after the
school’s disciplinary board disproportionately suspended black student
protesters, who had been offended by job recruiters who did not

consider black applicants. In response, all the African American students
staged a walkout, leaving Holy Cross the option to make a powerful
statement against racism. Brooks respected the students’ unanimous
choice to walk out, and he insisted that he would work with the school
administration to remedy the situation. Brooks approached the president
of Holy Cross and said flatly, “There are times when one principle has to
override another.” Brooks worked around the clock to bring together a
council, which included a respected black community activist, so that
the president could reconsider the facts of the case. Meanwhile, Brooks
gave a couple of hundred dollar bills to the black students, who were
now living off campus; he wanted to ensure that the students could eat
since they no longer had access to the campus cafeteria.
The council meeting with the president grew increasingly heated as
faculty members spoke up against special treatment for black students.
Brooks listened to the discussion, and during breaks in the meeting, he
updated the black students as to what was happening. After a weekend
of listening to various perspectives of the student protest and subsequent
disciplinary measures, the president granted amnesty to the suspended
students. In response, the black students agreed to return to school. At
the conclusion of this ordeal, Brooks was seen with tears in his eyes.
Father Brooks never gave up on these twenty black men, and he
provided them with unwavering support throughout their time at Holy
Cross. He cultivated the potential he saw in each man, guiding them as
they were challenged academically, shaped socially, and strengthened by
the racial isolation that defined their campus and the racial tumult that
defined their country.
Brooks’s students eventually graduated from Holy Cross and went off
to storied careers. Among the twenty men are Clarence Thomas,
associate justice of the US Supreme Court; Edward P. Jones, Pulitzer
Prize winner; Theodore Wells, renowned defense attorney; and Stanley
Grayson, former deputy mayor of New York and president of M. R. Beal
& Company, one of the country’s oldest black-owned investment banks.
Even today, decades after their graduation, the men attribute their
success to Father Brooks. According to Grayson, without Father Brooks,
“none of us would have made it.”
Brooks had seen in each of the men characteristics of value and
potential for greatness that could not be assessed by tests alone. As the

men faced the academic and social challenges of higher education, the
color of their skin, the diversity of their backgrounds, and the
untraditional metrics of their aptitude did not prove to be obstacles that
left them, as Justice Sotomayor’s Princeton classmates might have
expected, flailing under their unrealistic aspirations. Rather, with
Brooks’s unwavering mentorship, each man’s democratic merit was
forged.
I mentioned earlier that this book is not about affirmative action. That
statement needs to be qualified. It is not about an affirmative action that
refuses to challenge the current meritocracy but instead simply adapts,
so that at the moment of admissions, a few students of color are selected
and the burden is then placed on them to assimilate. It is not about an
affirmative action that relieves universities of their responsibility to
mentor and nurture their students. It is not about an affirmative action
that wrongly holds at fault its so-called beneficiaries for the fundamental
flaws of our test-driven merit system. Indeed, where affirmative action
has failed, it has failed because it has not gone far enough to address the
unfairness of both our current merit system and its wealth-driven
definition of merit. However, when we redefine merit by those
characteristics that indicate a student’s potential for future success in our
democracy—leadership, the ability to collaborate with others, resiliency,
and a drive to learn, among others—then we might be able to make use
of actions that prioritize such traits. If we commit to mentoring and
nurturing that potential in our students, universities might more
successfully cultivate potential leaders as Father Brooks did.
“YOU DO NOT take a person who, for years, has been hobbled by chains
and liberate him, bring him up to the starting line of a race and then say,
‘You are free to compete with all the others,’ and still justly believe that
you have been completely fair.7 President Lyndon B. Johnson used these
words to lay the foundation for affirmative action in his 1965
commencement speech at Howard University. Johnson believed that
equal opportunity was essential but not enough. Though all people are
born with a similar range of abilities, ability “is stretched or stunted by
the family that you live with, the neighborhood you live in—by the
school you go to and the poverty or the richness of your surroundings.”
President Johnson proposed affirmative action to ensure that black

students therefore might “have the ability to walk through those gates”
of equal opportunity.
Following his commencement address, in 1965 President Johnson
issued Executive Order 11246, which required federal contractors,
including public universities, to take affirmative action to promote the
full realization of equal opportunities for women and people of color.8
Throughout the nation, university admission policies began to take race
into account, allowing students of color a “tip factor” in admissions.9 At
elite universities, admissions officers began to rely on the university’s
authority to create a student body consistent with their educational
missions.10
Affirmative action came under siege in June 1974, when Allan Bakke
filed suit after being denied admission to the University of California at
Davis Medical School. Bakke claimed that UC Davis’s policy of reserving
16 percent of the class for students of color denied white applicants like
him equal protection of law.11 UC Davis Medical School, like many
universities, justified affirmative action as necessary to produce
diversity.12 In his suit, Bakke challenged both the goal of diversity and
the manner in which the university achieved it.
For more than eight months, universities waited to hear back from the
Supreme Court, worried about the threat the case posed to “the
autonomy traditionally granted universities and their faculties in making
admissions decisions.”13 When the Court finally issued an opinion on
Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, the universities breathed a
sigh of relief. Writing for the Court, Justice Lewis Powell Jr. had bridged
the conservative desire to end affirmative action and the liberal
acknowledgment of past purposeful discrimination.14 The opinion
declared that the medical school’s racial quota violated equal protection,
but much to the relief of university deans of admissions, the Court did
not prohibit UC Davis from using race as a potential factor in
admissions.15
Instead, Powell’s opinion affirmed the academic goal of racial
diversity, writing that admissions policies may consider race to “obtain. .
. the educational benefits that flow from an ethnically diverse student
body.”16 An applicant’s race could be a factor in admissions decisions

because diversity represented a “compelling state interest.”17
At Harvard, not only did the elite university rest assured that its
control over its own admissions process was still intact; it was delighted
to find that Justice Powell praised their school, which, unlike UC Davis,
still required applicants of color to compete with all the other applicants
for available spots.18 Powell’s opinion affirmed the use of race, as well as
other factors such as geography and “life spent on a farm,” as a “plus”
factor in admissions.19 The Court applauded such a policy as being
“flexible enough to consider all pertinent elements of diversity in light of
the particular qualifications of each applicant, and to place them on the
same footing for consideration, although not necessarily according them
the same weight.”20
As we saw in chapter 1, the Supreme Court again upheld race-
conscious admissions policies in the 2003 case, Grutter v. Bollinger.
Grutter had argued that the university had discriminated against her on
the basis of her race when it had rejected her under an admissions policy
that allowed consideration of race to be a potential factor in admissions.
But the Supreme Court once again held, in an opinion written by Justice
Sandra Day O’Connor, that the appropriate use of race in university
admissions was justified and found that “student body diversity is a
compelling state interest.”21
In doing so, the Court affirmed that the democratic mission of higher
education is to train a range of future leaders who are representative of
our heterogeneous society. In the years following Grutter, the idea of
diversity gained important traction in our culture, becoming a
fundamental part of understanding what it means to live in a democracy.
It was also met with vehement backlash, as the Allan Bakkes and
Barbara Grutters of a demographically changing America felt their
coveted spots at elite institutions increasingly threatened by the access
that affirmative action gave to those populations who historically had
been kept from competing for them. Opponents of affirmative action
have derided the currently admitted “diverse” student pool as less
deserving than white students. Like Justice Sotomayor’s classmates who
wrote to the Daily Princetonian, these opponents perceive the lower
standardized-test scores of students of color to be indicators that these
students have bypassed “fair and square” competition.

The conservative opposition has even argued that affirmative action in
fact hurts those it is supposed to help by lowering admission standards,
admitting black students and other students of color to universities on
account of their race instead of on their merit (meaning their testocratic
merit, I am sure). According to these critics, once the students of color
are admitted, the programs prove too difficult for them, and they
perform 
badly.22 
Underperformance 
then 
further 
results 
in
“disidentification 
with 
academic 
excellence” 
and 
“low 
effort
syndrome.”23 According to Abigail and Stephen Thernstrom and their
colleagues, affirmative action creates “disincentives for black and Latino
students to work hard by creating expectations among such students that
they will benefit from preferential treatment on the basis of race in the
future.”24
IN JUNE 2013, the Supreme Court again addressed affirmative action in the
case I discussed earlier, Fisher v. University of Texas, which was brought
by a white student, Abigail Fisher, who was denied admission to the
University of Texas at Austin.25 Like Allan Bakke and Barbara Grutter
before her, Fisher charged that the university’s admission process
unfairly discriminated against her as a white student.
Fisher charged that race should not be considered as one factor among
many others, including letters of recommendation, personal essays, and
socioeconomic background. In bringing the suit, Fisher said she hoped
the Supreme Court would “completely take race out of the issue in terms
of admissions and that everyone will be able to get into any school that
they want no matter what race they are but solely based on their merit
and if they work hard for it.”26
Fisher and other opponents of affirmative action single out race as an
admissions criterion—before musical ability, athletic accomplishment, or
any other factor—because race is seen as undeserving of consideration in
a holistic admissions review.27 Opponents also imagine that a student’s
merit can be measured, identified, standardized, and divorced from the
context of a student’s race, a claim that is in direct contrast to the stated
mission of the UT system:
To provide superior, accessible, affordable instruction and learning

opportunities to undergraduate, graduate, and professional school
students from a wide range of social, ethnic, cultural, and economic
backgrounds, thereby preparing educated, productive citizens who
can meet the rigorous challenges of an increasingly diverse society
and an ever-changing global community.28
In its much-anticipated Fisher opinion, the Supreme Court did not end
affirmative action. But the UT admissions system, which considers race
as one factor among many, is now at risk again. Fisher and her
supporters may prevail in their crusade to eliminate race in UT’s
consideration of its next class of students. They may reduce UT’s
admissions process to a sterile measure of an individual’s test scores and
grades. In doing so, they ignore what Father Brooks knew about his
twenty young recruits: the story of any individual’s potential is told both
in the context of race and class, as well as the important role of
mentorship and the ability to work together, among other non-testable,
non-quantifiable factors. As Father Brooks discovered, it is in the context
of race that a young boy might first consider ambitions of being the first
black priest of a southern town. Or another might, while surviving a
childhood of poverty and insecurity, develop the strong character and
resilience that will one day make a powerful leader.
What’s more, Fisher and critics of affirmative action dismiss the
important benefits that diversity provides for all students on college
campuses. For the educational institutions in our democracy to be spaces
of better deliberation for all of us, they must become more diverse and
inclusive. In Justice Sotomayor’s case, her background as a Latina and
woman of color, as well as her childhood of economic struggle in the
Bronx, enabled her to contribute important insights to the jurisprudence
of the Court. In fact, if the half-century-long experiment in affirmative
action has given us a glimpse of anything, it is into how important
diversity is to the way people think, talk, and work with one another,
particularly in our institutions of higher education. The most recent
social science research and the lived experience of hundreds of
thousands of students have taught us that meaningful diversity can be an
active, if not essential, ingredient in the production of our best work as
individuals and in groups.
Racial diversity empowers those with dissenting opinions to speak up.

One study found that groups that are more diverse provide a more
comfortable, safe space for dissenting members—of all backgrounds—to
voice their differing opinions. These perspectives then lead to increased
divergent thinking and perspective-taking by the group as a whole.29
Women have also been shown to speak up more when they are in
racially diverse groups than when in all-white ones.30
Overall group performance, as well as the performance of white
participants in particular, also benefits from diversity. Research has
shown that racially diverse pairs of people are more task-focused and
engage in a more detailed, in-depth, and accurate discussion with their
partner than non-diverse pairs.31 The complexity of conversation
increases when a group includes people of color and when group
members report having racially diverse friends and classmates.32
Research has also shown that white participants make fewer factual
errors when working with a racially mixed group.33 In one study,
participants were asked to sit through a simulated trial as members of
the jury. Some of the juries were all white, while others were racially
diverse, containing four white and two black jurors. The juries’
deliberation sessions were videotaped, and researchers found in studying
the sessions that the racially diverse juries deliberated longer and
considered a wider range of information than the all-white juries did.
What is more, it was the white participants who were largely responsible
for this difference: they raised more case facts, made fewer factual
errors, and were more amenable to discussion of race-related issues than
their peers in all-white juries.
Similar findings have been made in classroom settings. One study
found that white students are more likely to read more carefully and
retain more information when they are aware they will be discussing
their readings in a racially diverse setting than when they believe they
will be doing so in an all-white setting.34 Another study found that white
college students who are assigned non-white roommates are less anxious,
more natural, and less verbally controversial when meeting a person of
color for the first time than are white students who have white
roommates.35
True diversity that brings together a group of individuals more
representative of the world we live in can help all of us rethink tasks,

synthesize information better, and innovate creative ways to solve
problems. Yet there are those who attack affirmative action as going too
far to provide “unmerited” access to higher education for students of
color at the expense of “deserving” applicants. However, the research
and the lived experiences of these students would suggest that mere
cosmetic diversity in fact does not go far enough.
Justice Sotomayor’s story provides an example of how affirmative
action does not go far enough. She was one of a handful of people of
color admitted to Princeton, where she initially struggled academically
but later flourished. Her success is surely a testament to her character,
but she was one of the lucky few admitted into Princeton through a
narrow affirmative action policy. While Justice Sotomayor’s story proves
that when students of color get into universities, they can thrive and
become successful, the rarity of stories like hers also sounds a warning
bell that affirmative action is not going far enough.
When setting out to recruit students for Holy Cross, Father Brooks
rejected a test-based meritocracy, recognizing both that a student’s
potential was not summed up in a simple test score and, even more
important, that the university needed to play an active role in mentoring
and cultivating students’ potential once they arrived on campus. By
contrast, affirmative action as it is now practiced leaves in place the
underlying values of the current testocracy, creating only a small
opening for a select few students of color. As a result, those individuals
who benefit from affirmative action are seen by some as undeserving
and illegitimate and not meritorious.
The criticism that says undeserving students of color use affirmative
action to cheat the meritocratic system is therefore problematic and
circular. It blames the canaries for the poisonous air in the defective
mine we have built.36 In the defective, poisonous mine that is our
current meritocracy, “merit” is defined by a set of characteristics that
primarily mirror wealth. And affirmative action adapts to and operates
within this meritocracy without disturbing its fundamental assumptions.
Thus, affirmative action invariably replicates test-score-driven,
individualized competition among students of color. For example, elite
institutions often compete among themselves for the small pool of
candidates of color who are “adequately prepared” to succeed at top
universities, which excludes many who could perform well academically

in college if they, like the mentees of Father Brooks, receive unwavering
support 
and 
encouragement.37 
Instead 
of 
providing 
presently
disadvantaged African American students thoroughgoing access to
higher education and genuine opportunities to have mentors and peers
who nurture and reinforce their potential, many institutions simply
achieve their stated goals of “diversity” by admitting black students from
high-income families, first-and second-generation black immigrants from
Africa and the Caribbean, and biracial students who may not even
identify as “black.”38
Aisha Haynie noticed this phenomenon when she attended Harvard
College between 1996 and 2000. She discovered that when she told her
fellow black classmates that she was not from the West Indies or Africa
but from the Carolinas, they would say, “No, where are you really
from?”39 Prompted by these experiences, Haynie wrote and later
published a senior honors thesis on the origins and ancestry of Harvard’s
black students. She found that though Harvard—like many other elite
institutions—had seen and celebrated the increasing enrollment of black
students, in fact, African American students continued to be
underrepresented, particularly those who were descended from multiple
generations of American forebears, including the descendants of slaves
and particularly those from the American South.40 This is significant
because Caribbean, African, and other biracial or bi-ethnic students had
different perceptions of their own identity within the American social
context.41 What is more, West Indian students’ parents were better off
than the families of black American students, and more than 90 percent
of the parents of Harvard’s African students had advanced degrees.42
Though Haynie’s study should not be misread as discounting the value
that Caribbean and African immigrant students bring to a college
campus, it says important things about the ways in which affirmative
action is not enough, by itself, to provide meaningful access to higher
education, in this case to poor and working-class American descendants
of slaves: a group of African American students who would likely thrive
at college—if our institutions were not so singularly focused on test-
based admissions.
JUSTICE THOMAS NOW argues that affirmative action is wrong. In a peculiar

sense, he is right—but for the wrong reason. If affirmative action has
failed, it’s not because it has admitted unmeritorious students of color at
the expense of whites, or that it has failed to propel us into a postracial,
color-blind 
society. 
Rather, 
affirmative 
action’s 
weakness 
and
vulnerability cooperate with, and perhaps unintentionally legitimate, a
meritocracy that privileges test scores over other indicators of student
potential in the first place. Affirmative action has fed into the societal
vision we have of our citizens belonging to their place in a pyramid—
some further up, some further down—our positions based to some
degree on where we were born or on how successfully we have clawed
our way up over others. What we need in order to switch to democratic
merit is to topple this pyramid onto its side and flatten it out into an
oval—the best visual representation for our democratic society going
forward.
It is always challenging to unseat a paradigm. And yet it should alarm
us all that today few shelves at Barnes and Nobles are dedicated to
students’ academic development during college, while rows and rows
offer books of test preparation and essay-writing tips for college
applicants. Parents can pay $40,000 a year to hire independent college
admissions counselors who advise high school students and guide them
into 
the 
Ivy 
League. 
The 
emphasis—and 
money—placed 
on
demonstrating “merit” on applications, rather than on nurturing a
student’s potential during the college years, results in institutions that
lack meaningful race and class diversity. Simultaneously, these
institutions may also fail not only in developing potential civic
leadership with roots in democratizing merit for We the People, not just
for We the Self-Appointed Leaders of Tomorrow.
In our admissions-obsessed college culture, institutions of higher
education too often fail to prioritize their Father Brooks–like role of
mentoring and nurturing student potential after admission. But a
growing body of strong social science research lays bare the need for a
culture shift in our meritocracy. This research explains why it no longer
makes sense to define “merit” as race-blind, individualized, and test-
score driven. We understand better now how meaningful diversity, as
discussed in this chapter, benefits us all. And we know that we must
fundamentally redefine “merit” to reflect the valuable work that
diversity does for all individuals within a group.

If our higher education system is to remain competitive in the global
information economy of the twenty-first century, we will have to move
toward creating campuses where students live with other-race peers,
have 
meaningful 
conversations 
with 
classmates 
with 
different
perspectives, and are therefore pushed to be more thoughtful about our
collective history and our democracy. To do so requires that we rethink
our meritocracy and our definition of “merit” altogether. This shift may
appear revolutionary, but there are already educational institutions,
academic thought, and practical implications of democratic merit
emerging and even thriving within today’s testocracy.
There is the University Park Campus School in the Main South
neighborhood of Worcester, Massachusetts. While many schools direct
educators to “teach to the test” and emphasize rote memorization in
their lesson plans, UPCS, a public charter school for grades seven
through twelve, advocates a “thinking curriculum” that encourages
student writing and rewards the expression of independent opinion. At
UPCS, there are no placement tests or alternative tracks for different-
level learners, and teachers and parents are jointly invested in the
raising-up of the city’s youth. As a result, UPCS’s attendance rate hovers
near 100 percent, whereas the number of dropouts, suspensions, and
expulsions has fallen to zero.43 The school’s enthusiasm has rippled
beyond its four walls and into the community itself, lifting it from
decades of blight.
About an hour drive east of UPCS, in a physics classroom at Harvard
College, the same critical thinking is taking place. In Professor Eric
Mazur’s introductory physics class, the students are fully engaged in
their own learning. Unlike most college classes where the professor
lectures for the entire period, in Mazur’s class, the students engage in
peer instruction, debating in pairs and attempting to reach a consensus
on a response to Mazur’s physics problems. Through this collaboration,
the students—as well as Mazur—have found they learn better.
In a college classroom across the country, another professor has also
shifted toward collaboration. Uri Treisman, then a graduate student at
the University of California at Berkeley, redesigned his calculus
curriculum to emphasize peer teamwork, social support networks, and
higher-level problem solving. He found that students who struggled in
his calculus class were those who studied alone. Thus, he created a

curriculum that required students to work with their peers and create a
community based on giving and receiving help. As with UPCS and
Mazur’s physics class, Treisman’s students thrived when encouraged to
collaborate.
UPCS, Mazur, and Treisman are not mere aberrations but rather three
examples of the transformation occurring in education. There are also
others offering alternatives to the traditional test-based understanding of
merit: New York City’s Vanguard High School, which replaced
standardized testing with portfolio assessments; The Posse Foundation,
which admits budding scholars based on character traits like teamwork,
rather than on grades; the Mayo Clinic, which offers better health-care
outcomes because its doctors solve problems collectively. I’m going to
turn now to explore these and other examples that will demonstrate the
benefits of a much-needed sea change in our understanding of “merit,”
as well as blueprints for making that a more far-reaching reality.

PART II
THE SOLUTION/S

CHAPTER FOUR
Taking Down Fences at University Park Campus School
THE SOLUTIONS TO the problem of testocratic merit are already in our
midst. You know you are among them when you walk down the halls of
a preparatory high school and the prevailing mood is one of
cheerfulness. Everyone is in a good mood at University Park Campus
School in Worcester; there isn’t a sense of danger or of people competing
with each other. Students who are having trouble with certain issues will
just ask somebody, “Can you help me with this?” Such collaboration
fosters a near 100 percent graduation rate and a near 100 percent
matriculation rate at four-year colleges in a neighborhood where such
statistics are unheard of. This is what comes from an interactive and
responsive approach that develops a way to work with other people who
have different strengths. The story of how this school came to be is
nothing short of inspiring.
IN THE MID-1980S, administrators at Clark University, also in Worcester,
Massachusetts, knew they had a problem. Prospective students and
faculty were deterred by the high-poverty, high-crime area surrounding
its campus. Marked by deteriorating and abandoned buildings, gangs,
and drug trafficking, the Main South neighborhood was slipping into
what some described as a state of abject disrepair. Deanna Leite, a local
student, describes a murder that took place across the street from her
house, recalling, “When I grew up, I wasn’t allowed to cross the street.”
Several years later, however, Deanna was attending the University
Park Campus School, the centerpiece of an urban renewal program that
brought world-class educational opportunities to this once-deteriorating
neighborhood. Kelleigh Surrette, whose family has battled joblessness,
homelessness, mental illness, and drug addiction, enrolled her ten
children at UPCS. After graduation, her eldest son entered Middlebury
College, and her eldest daughter went to Clark University for free, a
benefit of attending UPCS. One of Kelleigh’s younger daughters, who
suffered from auditory perception problems and did not speak until she

was four, starred in high school plays at UPCS. Kelleigh never attended
college, but after seeing her kids’ academic achievement, she resolved to
go back to school to become a teacher. “This is more than a school,” she
said of UPCS. “It’s a community.”
The community Kelleigh describes grew out of “enlightened self-
interest,” as Thomas Del Prete put it. Del Prete, director of the Jacob
Hiatt Center for Urban Education at Clark, said the university “realized
that its own future was at stake.”
The town-and-gown divide in Worcester was not so easily bridged,
however. Initially, Clark wanted to put even more distance between
itself and the encroaching urban blight. According to Jack Foley, vice
president for Government and Community Affairs and Campus Services
at Clark, the university thought its options were either to put up higher
walls or move. “But to ignore your neighborhood is hypocritical. You
can’t do that,” Foley concluded. “You’ve got to take fences down and
strengthen your neighborhood.”
Clark officials began by donating to local causes that would benefit
both the neighborhood and the school. The question for all involved
was, as Foley recalls, “How do we strengthen our future?” They created
the University Park Partnership, made up of residents, businesspeople,
clergy, and school and local government officials.
Incorporated as the Main South Community Development Corporation,
the concerned parties began to make various improvements to the
neighborhood. The university took an active but collaborative role,
holding just one of fifteen seats on the board of directors. Foley describes
how ceding control to the partnership was key to its success. “Long-term
sustainable change will only happen if all the members of the
community are making decisions,” he observes.
The corporation’s first step, from 1986 to 1995, was to create
affordable housing from the many abandoned-property units in the area.
The buildings were renovated by 1994; however, the crime and poverty
persisted.
At a loss for how to proceed, Foley and others at Clark tried putting
themselves in the shoes of local residents. “What would it take for us to
live in this neighborhood?” they asked. Then they worked with the
partnership to draw up a list of desirable qualities for a residential
neighborhood and set about creating a plan for attaining them. The list

included building and infrastructure rehabilitation, public safety,
economic development, social and recreational programs, and education.
To begin, Clark opened its doors to local students, providing free
tuition to any student living within eight blocks of the university (the
poor Main South neighborhood that the community plan was designed
to improve), provided they gained admission to Clark through regular
application. Foley explained that the goal was to make college a real
option for students who succeed academically, despite coming from
extremely disadvantaged backgrounds. “College is foreign to these kids,”
he said of the Main South students. “They think it’s for rich kids.” The
free tuition was designed to change that mind-set.
In return, Clark not only benefited from community growth—by
adding to the value of the residential neighborhood the possibility of
free college tuition—but it diversified its student body without altering
any admissions criteria. There was no added cost to the university,
either, as Clark was able to finance the free tuition by redirecting
existing financial aid dollars toward these students, all of whom
qualified for financial aid.
However, this neighborhood perk remained just that. Clark’s charitable
contribution to a select few neighborhood kids did not transform the
community in any meaningful way. Since Clark maintained the same
admissions criteria for its local students as for all others, it was merely
offering financial aid to a few underprivileged families, rather than
expanding educational opportunities for all the underprivileged students
in the area.
Clearly more was needed to improve the futures of the Main South
youth. The partnership concluded that a school could serve as “the
centerpiece for neighborhood stability,” as Del Prete described. So in
1997, they founded University Park Campus School, a full college-
preparatory program that would admit students by lottery. The
university offered $390,000 from a federal grant, Clark faculty and
tutors, and access to Clark classes and facilities. The city provided the
school building and agreed to pay for building maintenance, salaries,
and supplies.
The president of Clark at the time, Richard P. Traina, explained the
thinking behind the school: “If this neighborhood is to be revitalized, if
it’s to be a genuine community, the young people need to have hope.

This is part of that plan by trying to provide them the very best
education that we can manage with the initiatives from the school
system and the help Clark University can provide.”
As part of this collaboration, Clark master’s degree candidates and
undergraduates can complete work-study requirements by tutoring local
students after school. UPCS teachers coteach professional development
courses with Clark faculty during the summer, providing them free to
teachers at Worcester public schools. In addition, UPCS teachers and
Clark professors often teach together or teach one another’s classes.
The local school ultimately serves as a clinical-training site for the
university’s teacher preparation program, with opportunities for four to
six student teachers to train alongside UPCS faculty. This breeding
ground tends to feed qualified young teachers into UPCS, as more than
two-thirds of the faculty attended the Clark teacher-education program.
Once on staff, teachers host rounds based on the medical model, so that
senior teachers mentor younger ones, and all give each other feedback
by using common planning time on Wednesday afternoons to review
student work and their own lessons. When a teacher is out sick, a
substitute isn’t called; rather, another teacher takes over his or her class.
Since the partnership began, crime and transiency have gone down in
the Main South neighborhood, and residential occupancy is up. Some
families say they have moved in just so their children can attend
University Park. Clark also provides additional benefits to its own faculty
who live in the neighborhood, which Jack Foley describes as a “great
incentive.” First, any faculty member who buys a home in Main South
receives $5,000 at the closing, a loan that is forgiven at the rate of
$1,000 per year. In addition, for the first seven years they live there,
faculty members receive an annual check of 12 percent of their salary,
up to $4,000 per year. Finally, as with any local residents, if their
children live in the neighborhood for five years and are admitted to
Clark, they can attend for free. More than thirty faculty members have
taken advantage of this program over the last eighteen years of its
existence, and nineteen UPCS faculty members currently live in the
neighborhood.
In addition, Clark welcomes UPCS students on its campus. The students
are called “little Clarkies,” carrying college IDs of their own. They can be
found competing on the Clark athletic complex, studying at the

university library, and attending campus events. Younger students are
also welcome to enroll in mini-seminars with college professors from
Clark—a favorite is the annual Shakespeare seminar for eighth graders.
In grades eleven and twelve, students can even take courses at Clark,
tuition free. To be eligible for these classes, students must have an honor
roll average and get their teachers’ approval; once they do, they receive
college credit, and when they graduate from high school, they can enter
college with advanced standing, saving them thousands of dollars in
tuition. Two-thirds of students take at least one course before they
graduate. The placements are so successful that Clark professors
generally do not know which of their students are coming from UPCS
and which are undergraduates.
IN THE EARLY days at UPCS, local parents—many of whom had never
graduated from high school—were indifferent to the new, experimental
school. To recruit the first class of students, the founding principal,
Donna Rodrigues, talked up the school by going door to door. Rodrigues
knew the neighborhood well as a long-time resident and Worcester
public school teacher for twenty-eight years. She portrayed a safe school
and challenging curriculum with educational opportunities for children,
and the parents became intrigued. Parents were advised that their
students would have to complete a minimum of two hours of homework
every night, and students were required to attend a meeting informing
them that they should not enroll if they were not ready to meet the
challenge of a rigorous curriculum. “Having high expectations for the
kids is really important,” says former principal June Eressy. “Contrary to
what many people think, these kids will rise to the occasion.”
Soon a full class had enrolled at UPCS, and local families were
enthusiastic about the new school. “Please tell me again that this is
really true. It’s too good for me. I’ve never been picked for anything
good,” said one father when Rodrigues told him his child would be
attending University Park Campus School. In every subsequent year,
there has been no need to recruit families; the demand is twice that of
the available spots, which are allocated by lottery. Though admission is
coveted, it is not begrudged any individuals who enter what local kids
call “the smart school,” as there are no selective criteria. Parents and

kids describe being selected to enroll as winning the lotto jackpot.
Local parents are also a part of the collaboration, as the school tries to
include them in the learning community. Struggling students receive
weekly progress reports about homework completion, behavior, and
upcoming assignments that each teacher fills out and parents sign and
return. Family meetings are typically scheduled with all the student’s
core academic teachers. In addition, the lottery process includes all
younger siblings of admitted students, so as to include entire families in
the school community.
Since the process is randomized, the makeup of the school is truly
representative of the demographics of the community: 75 percent are
students of color, 88 percent receive free or reduced-price lunches, and
65 percent speak English as a second language. Many of the white
students are recent immigrants from Eastern Europe who speak little or
no English.
To date, the per pupil expenditure at UPCS—about $6,000 per year—is
far lower than that at other Worcester public schools, and the lottery
continues to be conducted at random. Nonetheless, the school has
ranked first among urban schools serving low-income students on state
English and math graduation exams and in the top quartile of all high
schools in the state over the last four years. These tests—unlike other
standardized tests, such as the SAT and ACT—actually reflect the ability
of students to engage with material they have learned, as opposed to
material that they may or may not have been exposed to, based on the
economic and educational status of their families. The school’s success
has led to a high interest level by families in the community:
approximately 75 percent of eligible students apply to UPCS.
Unfortunately, the school can only accommodate about half its
applicants.
Once enrolled, all the randomly selected students are expected to
complete a full college-preparatory program. There are no placement
tests or alternative tracks for different-level learners. “We don’t have
tracking because, to me, that is a sign that ‘some of you are going to
make it before the others,’” explains Rodrigues.
However, because there are no academic criteria within the admissions
process, the vast majority of students enter at least two grade levels
behind their age in reading and math. Ricci Hall, a former principal,

describes the students who arrived at UPCS as “depleted.” In a
wonderful example of mission over admission, seventh graders entering
UPCS attend the August Academy, a month-long summer program that
introduces them to the academic rigor of UPCS and helps get them
acclimated to its standards. The program consists of more than
academics; it’s also a chance for students to get to know their teachers,
akin to a college orientation program for incoming freshmen. “We didn’t
have to be afraid of coming here,” observed Jorge Ramirez, a UPCS
senior.
Though they are aware of a wide achievement gap among students, the
faculty are not daunted by it. Jim McDermott, a former UPCS English
teacher, understood that the low proficiency levels were a problem of
perception rather than a reflection of innate ability. Language is learned
before the age of two, he points out, which is then reflected in the way
we express ourselves and in our discourse and our dialect. Yet people
tend to judge dialect and discourse as markers of intelligence, rather
than indicators of social experience. McDermott’s goal with UPCS
students was to translate their individual abilities into traditional
academic achievement. “The student who comes from the more affluent
area speaks the school language more readily than does the person who
comes from the more urban blighted area,” he explains. “It’s not that one
is smarter than the other, but for years many teachers really treated one
as being brighter than the other because he was more ready to
understand the stories. So the gap grows and grows as the student gets
older, and after a while the student looks at himself as being dumb.”
Rather than trying to improve his students’ prospects by emphasizing
rote learning and drills to raise standardized-test scores, McDermott
focused on their ability to engage in high-level independent thinking. “I
wasn’t trying to deal with my urban at-risk kids by giving them
programs that Cambridge was giving to their urban at-risk kids,”
McDermott explains. “I was going to Phillips Exeter and Worcester
Academy and figuring if it’s good for those kids, then it’s good for my
kids. And what do they do at those schools? They have people sitting
around tables talking about what they’re writing, coming up with their
own opinions. The thing is, having a thinking curriculum is not new; it’s
only new for at-risk urban poor kids.”
This “thinking curriculum,” bolstered by a focus on reading and

writing, 
incorporates 
a 
lot 
of 
“low-stakes” 
writing—ungraded
assignments that are exercises in creative freedom and encourage the
students to draw on their own experiences. In their graded work,
students are allowed to rewrite their essays as many times as necessary
in order to score well and improve their reasoning and writing skills. As
McDermott describes, it’s “writing to learn,” rather than “writing to
show learning.”
A decision not to teach to the test has consequences, of course. When
the first round of UPCS students took the state proficiency exam, the
Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System, or MCAS, the district
sent a note to the school, warning that many of their performances on
the multiple-choice portion were low and that they were in danger of
failing. But McDermott took no action in response to the note because he
was convinced the students would redeem themselves on the open-ended
portion of the test. And he was right: all students in the first three classes
passed the MCAS on the first try, and the vast majority scored at an
advanced or proficient level. Overall, though only 40 percent of the
students enter UPCS at an advanced or proficient level in English and
math, 90 percent leave at those levels.
McDermott had an insight into the exam—after all, he was one of the
educators enlisted to draft it. But his approach to open-ended writing is
less about enhancing test performance than fostering his students’
independence. “I think it’s important that what it means to be an
enlightened citizen is not just to take things as they are fed to us,” he
says. By encouraging its students to think for themselves, this
community school creates a generation of problem solvers and
innovators who can provide unique contributions to the community that
raised them. “I don’t want my kids learning history,” McDermott opines.
“Teach my kids to become young historians. This is what we say at
University Park: don’t teach science, teach your kids to be young
scientists; don’t teach literature, teach them to become young literary
critics or writers.”
DESPITE ITS SUCCESS, UPCS cannot ignore socioeconomic realities. Because
class sizes are so small, the faculty is continually brought into the
various personal and family crises of its student body. “The principal
knows exactly what’s going on,” observes Kim Surrette, a UPCS student.

She explains that when a student’s grades begin to drop, the
administrators take him or her aside to set up a “Game Plan” for
improvement. In fact, the day before Kim was set to take an AP exam,
her family was evicted from their apartment and became homeless. She
recalls that throughout that day every teacher at UPCS approached her
with offers to help. When Kim was planning to celebrate her birthday
without a place to go home to, the principal called her into the office
and handed her an envelope containing $150—all the teachers had
pitched in to give her the gift. And in the cafeteria that day she was
presented with a cupcake while everyone sang “Happy Birthday.”
The faculty do their best to encourage their students, but ultimately
the students must rise to the challenge. “I didn’t pass out any failure
warnings,” recalls McDermott. “I handed out passing warnings. . . . If
you do these certain things, I’m warning you, you’ll pass. And some
would. But it was on their shoulders, and they came around.”
When students do succeed, the whole school acknowledges it; all
college acceptances are posted on a bulletin board outside the guidance
office, and when they are broadcast over the intercom during morning
announcements, they receive a round of applause from students in
classrooms.
ON THE WHOLE, students have risen to meet the high expectations. The
seniors boast an attendance rate of 95 percent—and dropout rates of
zero. In 2014, 100 percent of UPCS students were admitted to
institutions of higher education: 89 percent to four-year colleges and 11
percent to two-year community colleges. These statistics are striking,
even to the local residents. “Stereotypically, living in a neighborhood
like this, you are not supposed to make it that far. You are not supposed
to make it to college. You are destined to fail,” says one alumnus, who
went on to attend Brown University.
Meanwhile, Clark University has seen an incredible transformation of
social consciousness on campus. The school has gained a sense of urban
community, as well as having gained national visibility. It has begun
attracting students who share this vision of service, who contribute to
the community through ongoing involvement rather than, for example,
dropping into a homeless shelter to volunteer for an hour or two.
This partnership has also provided possibilities for academic research

from within the community, as opposed to a top-down approach. Jack
Foley, Clark’s vice president for Government and Community Affairs and
Campus Services, calls the neighborhood “a great laboratory” that
currently attracts faculty who want to work in the neighborhood, from
sociology and psychology professors to researchers collecting mental
health data and analyzing the market forces of rehabilitating an urban
area.
As a result, Clark has become nationally known as a leader in
university-community partnerships. The press coverage that has resulted
from the partnership has benefited the university’s public relations and
alumni-giving efforts, as well as outside fund-raising drives. University
Park’s reputation for successful student achievement has grown as well,
so that now the school, along with Clark University and the nonprofit
Jobs for the Future, cosponsors a professional development institute for
school teams from early-college high schools across the country. “It
helps us to know the world is watching,” says Foley.
THE SUCCESS OF UPCS has led to another partnership in Worcester, a
“fascinating story,” as Jack Foley describes it. Claremont Academy was
an underperforming school in the same neighborhood as UPCS, just
blocks away from Clark on the other side of campus. Yet while UPCS
thrived, Claremont was struggling to achieve academic success and being
threatened with state sanctions if it failed to improve.
Clark realized that reviving this school was important toward
rebuilding the neighborhood, Tom Del Prete explains, adding, “We had
this outstanding model in UPCS.” However, the start-up conditions were
very different: Claremont was a pre-existing school, whereas Clark had
started as a partner with UPCS from its inception.
In fact, when the Worcester school committee intervened under state
pressure and split off grades seven through twelve from the K–12 school,
Clark’s offer to help with the restructure of Claremont didn’t get a lot of
traction. “The culture wasn’t ready to embrace the partnership,” Del
Prete recalls.
In 2012, however, the principal of Claremont left the school, and the
superintendent saw an opportunity to take it in a new direction. Ricci
Hall, then the principal of UPCS, took leadership of Claremont, and
Clark committed to being a full partner in the new venture. Four UPCS

senior teachers and the guidance counselor followed Hall to Claremont.
Those openings in the UPCS staff were filled by Clark alumni who had
completed their teaching year in the master’s program.
Despite this commitment from UPCS and Clark, the partnership with
Claremont was not immediately embraced. In fact, there was a heated
conflict with the teachers’ union, and half the Claremont teachers left
the school rather than join in the new vision. Those in the partnership
questioned how much restaffing was needed, believing there should be a
critical mass of new talent but hoping to keep enough former teachers to
help the transition. After a tremendous fight with the union, the school
was almost entirely restaffed over the summer, and Clark sponsored a
week of professional development for new and returning teachers.
Many students also felt loyal to Claremont as it had been, and it
became clear that Claremont needed to build community support in
order to succeed. A local city councilwoman and a UPCS parent gathered
other local leaders, including a Latino community organizer and a
church minister, to get more people invested in the venture. They
created an advisory board and held a meeting that included mental
health professionals, ministers, Clark faculty, and members of the local
Boys and Girls Club. Meanwhile, Principal Ricci Hall went door to door
to discuss Claremont’s new offerings with parents and distribute
literature in English, Spanish, and Vietnamese. “Culture change is not
simple,” Del Prete observes, but they soon began “seeing signs of good
things happening” as local families began to express interest in
Claremont.
Unlike UPCS, Claremont is a neighborhood school with open admission
to all local students, rather than through a lottery. There is some overlap
with the area covered by UPCS, and 75 percent of those students enter
that lottery in addition to applying to Claremont. Students also have the
option of attending the larger area high school, which some choose at
least in part for its athletic offerings, which the smaller schools lack. As
for Claremont, Del Prete says, “We’re determined that it is going to be
parallel to UPCS.”
With that in mind, Del Prete identifies four main aspects of the UPCS–
Clark partnership that Claremont aspires to model. (“‘Replication’ is a
word we avoid,” he cautions, pointing out that every joint venture is
different.) The first and most basic goal is simply to make the university

part of the curriculum for the high school students. The intention is to
dissolve the boundary between the school and the campus and expose
the students to college life in a strategic way, thus creating a relative
seamlessness between high school and college rather than enforcing the
feeling that Claremont graduates have to “jump the walls” to go to
college. In a community where many families do not consider college a
viable option, the partnership wants to build that aspiration.
The second aspect of UPCS that Claremont seeks to model is its
“powerful learning” agenda. The question, Del Prete explains, is how to
create a culture of independent learning and to create a community
“around the idea that you can all go to college and are outstanding
young people.” Claremont hopes to create a high level of student
engagement and give robust support to those who are struggling to learn
—as well as incorporating some “controlled failure.” The students are
taught self-reliance and how to negotiate new spaces so that they are
prepared to succeed in college.
After all, one of the big lessons drawn from the last five years at UPCS,
Del Prete notes, was “getting better at shifting the responsibility for
learning to the kids.” The students must learn to be proactive about
getting help, whether that means joining a study group or reaching out
to a faculty member or taking other steps. To that end, Claremont
provides a seminar to seniors, taught by Clark graduate students and
supervised by Clark faculty, to assist not only with college applications
but also college preparation. These seminars are a far cry from the
expensive college-prep classes where students learn and plan in a silo
and an atmosphere of competition is fostered. “Finally, we’re united,”
Del Prete exults. “We’ve created this neighborhood-based approach, one
we’ve envisioned, with neighborhood partners. Everyone benefits.” Even
Clark faculty outside of the education field have volunteered to help in
these college-prep classes, and some professors teach mini-courses at
Claremont or UPCS. Another idea that has been floated is a class in
conjunction with the Clark theater department, to give high school
students a new way of thinking and a way to express themselves outside
of the traditional curriculum.
The third aspect of UPCS that Claremont hopes to model is its
collaborative approach to teaching. Clark graduate students assist at
Claremont, and the school encourages teachers to work in teams and

learn from each other’s classes. How teachers learn together will have a
big impact on students’ learning, Del Prete says. The goal is to build a
professional culture devoted to working with struggling students.
Finally, Claremont aspires to model the high level of community
involvement in UPCS. As noted, it has an advisory board composed of
local citizens, as does UPCS. One of the programs proposed and enacted
by the board was an internship program based in the community. Local
citizens identify opportunities for students, and seniors from both
schools work in these varied placements. Some observe operations at a
bank while others visit classrooms or local businesses for three hours on
Friday mornings. The teachers use that time to meet for curriculum-
planning purposes.
A big question for Clark in working with Claremont faculty was how to
focus all the teachers on the new mission for the school, provide
professional development, and structure their leadership. It settled on a
distributive-leadership model, identifying one or two leaders for every
two grades. Clark also supports a literacy position there to provide
funding and instruction.
At the end of the day, Claremont needs the support of all interested
parties to be successful. “How do you help kids who want to engage in
demanding activity,” Del Prete queries, “and also begin to appreciate
themselves as learners, future thinkers, and problem solvers?” He
concedes that these are “challenging questions” but concludes, “It’s great
to work in partnership to answer them.”
DESPITE THE INCREDIBLE results it has achieved within its small, supportive
learning community, UPCS has struggled to promote its students’ success
beyond its own campus. Many of the first-generation college attenders
have gotten lost in larger schools and failed to complete their degrees.
For example, everyone who attended the University of Massachusetts at
Amherst dropped out before graduation, as did all the first year’s admits
to Clark. Jack Foley admits, “We missed the first year, and we’re trying
to catch up.”
In the years since then, there has been an increased focus on college
readiness and the transition to college, according to former principal
Ricci Hall. She and others realized that their students were having

problems managing their time, advocating for themselves, and finding
necessary resources. In addition to selecting students to take classes for
credit at Clark, the administrators instituted a requirement a few years
later that all UPCS students must at least audit a college course before
graduation. This added exposure to college-level work appears to agree
with the high schoolers. Foley notes that the UPCS students can now
keep up with the college courses, and in fact, some have done “too
well,” in his opinion—“better than the college students!”
Initially, the UPCS teachers did so much to engage the students and
make the material come alive that the students were unprepared for the
hands-off approach to teaching at many colleges. As Hall observes, in
college much of the learning occurs outside the classroom, when
students study on their own, which is the polar opposite of the
interactive classes at UPCS. It was that “inquiry-based approach” that
UPCS developed—promoting student engagement and critical, analytical
thinking—that actually made it difficult for UPCS students to direct their
own studies in college.
Daniel St. Louis, the current principal of UPCS and a former teacher
there, addressed this issue by presenting a PowerPoint lecture to the
students in one anatomy class and presenting the same material in a
more interactive format the next. He then asked the students which one
worked best for them. Though most preferred the interactive form, some
were content to take in the material in a lecture-based form. Regardless
of the students’ preference, St. Louis wanted to help the students
“understand themselves as thinkers,” he explains, rather than wait for
the professors to identify how students learned best and how to
accommodate their learning styles.
St. Louis recalls that, at the conclusion of his demonstration of
different teaching styles, one of his students commented in surprise, “It’s
like you planned this!” He was supremely complimented but also
disturbed. After all the effort that the UPCS teachers had put into
developing their pedagogy, the students were unaware of how the
lessons had been constructed to promote their learning.
The faculty realized that they had to help their students understand the
structural framework that had been supporting them throughout middle
school and high school, so that the students could re-create this structure
for themselves after graduation. It was a matter of “uncovering the

scaffolding,” Ricci Hall explains. The teachers needed to help students
develop the skills necessary to break down challenging material on their
own.
As it turned out, the students were so used to a high level of support
that they were floundering without it. As Hall puts it, they were in a
“well-lit room” in high school, but then the light went off when they
moved on to college, and the students were left in the dark. The
challenge for the faculty was to create a dimmer switch, Hall says, so
that they could slowly shift responsibility for deconstructing the material
to the students. Although most of the students entering UPCS in grades
seven and eight were coming in below grade level and needed intensive
academic support, Hall instructed his faculty to carefully dial back the
level of support they provided to students as the grade level increased.
Another major problem for UPCS graduates in college is adjusting to
campus life. Sending students who grew up in a triple-decker with ten
siblings and two parents, many living on disability income, to places like
Middlebury and Tufts was “like putting them on the moon,” Hall
explains. UPCS now employs a full-time alumni support coordinator, and
the guidance counselor, teachers, and principal also reach out to seniors
who plan to go away to school, to discuss the impending culture shock.
In addition to providing basic services like helping students fill out
financial aid forms and decipher syllabi, the alumni coordinator, along
with the rest of the staff, discusses students’ concerns about fitting in.
Students typically raise questions about financial constraints, like what
to do when all their friends are going out for beers and pizza, and they
don’t have any money.
It became clear that, rather than coming into college with a sense of
entitlement, as paying customers demanding a service, the UPCS
students were often insecure about whether they belonged and whether
they were worthy of their spot in the class. The faculty encouraged them
to realize that they did possess critical-thinking skills at a college level.
When pressed, students admitted feeling confident in their writing skills,
as well as in speaking and presenting, given all the participation
required of them at UPCS. As Hall notes, they are “dynamite, dedicated,
personable people” who can be campus leaders, if only they are given
the opportunity and can be convinced of their own worth. Hall
continually reminds graduates that not only do they possess the ability

to succeed in college, but they bring a valuable perspective to the
campus that other students benefit from. “You are getting a lot from the
school,” Hall tells them, “but you are also an asset.”
In recognition of the value UPCS students bring, Clark has also taken
steps to support them. Those who matriculate to Clark now attend a pre-
orientation summer session, and all have the same faculty advisor in the
Hiatt Center for Urban Education. The hope is that UPCS alumni will
support one another, both socially and academically. Hall describes the
“cohorts of supportive alumni” he wants to gather; these cohorts would
connect with incoming students to provide mentorship and guidance.
The program is not yet as robust as he would like, but UPCS continues to
work toward this goal, which fits more broadly with the school’s
mission. As Hall puts it, “We are a community, and we can always
achieve more together.”

CHAPTER FIVE
No Longer Lonely at the Top: The Posse Foundation
DESPITE THE GAINS made by the students at University Park Campus School
in Worcester, their academic success often came to a halt outside the
high school hallways. This was not as a result of their supposedly lower
intellect or from a lack of dedication. Many students struggle at the
higher echelons of education for very different reasons: because they
have trouble advocating for themselves or finding necessary resources,
because they have never learned the principles of time management, or
simply because they suffer from insecurity as to whether or not they
“belong.” As it turns out, for certain students, such as children of parents
who did not go to college or in some cases didn’t even go to high school,
gaining admission to college is only the beginning of the battle;
adjusting to college life proves in some cases to be even harder than
getting in. This is where democratic merit can truly shine: when students
work together to solve problems and make advances, rather than scratch
their lonely way to the top, they can create a supportive learning
environment, one I find wonderfully embodied by The Posse Foundation.
In the fall of 1989, a twenty-three-year-old Brandeis University
graduate named Debbie Bial was running a New York City youth
leadership program when she met a young black man from East Harlem
who had recently walked away from what she describes as “a major
scholarship at a major university.” The student was known to be
academically gifted; his friends had nicknamed him “Stein” for
“Einstein.” When Bial asked him why he had dropped out, he responded,
“I could have done it if I had had my posse with me.”
From this remark came the idea for The Posse Foundation, which each
year helps urban public high school students to win full, four-year merit
scholarships from “top-ranked” colleges. Currently in its twenty-fifth
year, the foundation recruits students from Atlanta, Boston, Chicago,
Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New Orleans, New York, and Washington,
DC; it has fifty-one partner universities to date. Since its start in 1989,
when the foundation recruited five New York City students to attend

Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tennessee, more than 5,500 students
have received over $680 million in scholarships.
The foundation’s principal missions are, one, to identify promising
urban public high school students who lack the traditional testocratic
indicators of success, such as high SAT scores, and two, to send these
students on to college in groups of ten, which they call “posses.”
Although the foundation does not take race into account in its selection
process, most of its scholars are students of color, thanks to the racial
and ethnic make-up of the city high schools from which the foundation
recruits. Because these students often find themselves overwhelmed by
the cultural and academic differences between their high schools and the
elite, majority-white colleges they enter as freshmen, the posses serve as
critical peer-support networks.
We all have times in our life when we are feeling lonely, when the
situation we are in feels overwhelming. I remember working for the
NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund (LDF) after I left my
position at the Justice Department as special assistant to Assistant
Attorney General for Civil Rights Drew S. Days III. My LDF team was
sent to Arkansas to try a case. There were three of us: myself (a black
woman), a white woman, and a black paralegal. There were no
restaurants available in the part of Arkansas we were in after five
o’clock, so we’d have to cross the river to Mississippi to eat. I think we
went maybe twice to this Mississippi restaurant, and the first time we
could hear the people in the kitchen saying, “They say they’re from New
York.”
My coworkers at the LDF were my posse, and they helped me cope
with the feeling of being a stranger in a strange land; we helped each
other in this tense situation. Posse Foundation alumni have recounted
facing similar cultural barriers when they started college. Danielle Berry,
a Posse scholar at the University of Wisconsin at Madison, says her first
weekend visiting campus was “the worst weekend of my life. I didn’t see
another African American the whole time I was [there]. I actually went
into a store. . . and asked the clerk where all the black people were. I
couldn’t believe what I’d gotten myself into.” But when Berry was put on
academic probation, two other Posse students pushed her to get on top
of her studies. “Jai and Dominique and I were like a Super Posse,” she
told the alumni magazine On Wisconsin. “Especially Jai; I think of her

like a big sister. They were very honest with me, even when I didn’t
want to hear it.” Thanks to this support, Berry says, “I was more
comfortable. I was meeting other people, being myself,” and doing better
academically. By the summer of her junior year, Berry was confident and
upbeat enough to assert that everything was “falling into place for me. I
feel like I know my purpose. And I feel like I can help other people.”
Danielle not only graduated from Wisconsin but went on to get her
master of science degree in journalism from Roosevelt University.
David Perez Jr., a Posse scholar and class of 1997 Vanderbilt
University alumnus, completed his PhD in education at Pennsylvania
State University in 2010, but he was out of his element when he first
began school. A Puerto Rican kid who grew up in pre-gentrified
Williamsburg, Brooklyn, David had joined a gang when he was in his
mid-teens to gain status in his neighborhood, and he was cutting school
and failing all of his classes. In and out of different high schools, David
eventually fell two full academic years behind and finally finished his
studies at an alternative high school for students with chronic problems.
He worked hard there, doubling up on his courses and excelling
academically. A teacher took an interest in David and nominated him for
a Posse Foundation scholarship, back when the program was still fairly
new. David was stunned when he received the news that he had been
selected to matriculate at Vanderbilt University with a full scholarship.
He had never heard of the university before.
David did not have a smooth transition to college life. “It wasn’t the
first time I was away from home, but it was the first time I was on my
own,” he says of his experience. “My mom was able to scratch pennies
together to get me a plane ticket, and I went to Nashville with a word
processor, which was a pretty big deal.”
David felt like a complete outsider when he first arrived at Vanderbilt.
He looked at the students’ cars—Mercedes, Saabs, and Porsches—and
calculated that many students drove automobiles with price tags greater
than his mother’s annual salary. Nothing about him—from his limited
wardrobe to the way his noisy, cheap word processor stuck out amid his
roommates’ state-of-the-art computers—blended in. Having the campus
police stop him and question his student status one night seemed to
confirm to David that he didn’t belong. He didn’t even bother to unpack
his clothes for the first six weeks of school and called his mother every

day because he was so homesick.
By the middle of the first semester, David was convinced that the best
thing for him to do was to drop out of Vanderbilt and go back home. He
was getting up the courage to break the news to his mother when Erica
Spatz, one of the members of his posse, happened to stop by his room
one day. “She saw that my bag was not unpacked, and she was like,
‘Let’s go to the store and get some hangers.’ We began to put my clothes
on hangers, and that moment was very symbolic of the fact that I was
then going to stay.”
Though he resolved to stick it out at Vanderbilt, David struggled in his
classes. As a first-generation college student from an alternative public
high school, he hadn’t cultivated the study skills or familiarity with
academic language, such as how to decode a syllabus, which he needed
to hit the ground running in college. Like some graduates from
University Park Campus School, he also hadn’t yet mastered how to
organize his time. By the end of the first semester, David had the lowest
GPA in his posse: a near-failing 1.3. The dean placed him on academic
probation, and David realized that he would have to start asking for help
if he was going to succeed academically.
With the support of his posse, professors, and various mentors, David
was able to turn things around. He got off academic probation in only
one semester, bringing his GPA up to a 2.5. “A lot of it was learning
through the process of being with others,” he explains. “I would watch
people in my posse and ask how do they know what to read for class?
Why are they working on that paper now if it’s not due? How do you put
together a calendar?” David enrolled in study-skills classes at
Vanderbilt’s learning center, which helped him with time management,
critical reading skills, and writing. “There were also a lot of faculty who
were really invested in The Posse Foundation, so when I was placed on
academic probation, I met with a caring faculty member who really
helped me,” he says.
Of all the people who helped him, David singles out his mentor,
Shirley Collado, an older and more experienced Posse student at
Vanderbilt. The daughter of Dominican immigrants, Shirley was a
member of the very first group of Posse scholars to enroll in college, in
1989. Like David, Shirley grew up in Brooklyn and was the first in her
family to attend college. Her father drove a New York City taxicab and

her mother worked at a factory.
Shirley understood the culture shock that David was experiencing. Her
father, a traditional Dominican man, was initially against Shirley leaving
home to enroll in college in Tennessee. She says her parents didn’t have
a sense of the difference between Vanderbilt or a local community
college and couldn’t understand why she needed to go so far from home
to attend school. Shirley’s grandmother was able to persuade her father
to let Shirley go under one condition: Shirley had to agree to speak to
her father every night at 8 p.m., when he would call her from a pay
phone. He wanted to keep the family rules, Shirley explains, to let her
know that going away was a privilege, and she agreed to abide by them.
“It was an enormous sacrifice on his part,” she says. “I felt like this was
the least I could do.” They spoke every day throughout her first few
years of school, strengthening her ties to her community and providing
constant support from back home. At first Shirley thought those nightly
phone calls were for her father’s sake, but she soon found out they were
far more beneficial for her. Conversing with her father gave him an
opportunity to reinforce his confidence in her, even as the experiences
she was having were a lot to take. Though her father had not gone to
college, he was able to be an effective mentor for Shirley and gave her
the skills to mentor David in turn.
Because Shirley was a few years ahead of David, she was able to help
him adapt to the academic rituals and demands of Vanderbilt University.
Shirley would invite David to join her during her study time at the
library. She got out her datebook and showed him how to manage a
schedule. She helped him get a job at the campus bookstore so he could
get a discount on textbooks and wouldn’t have to rely as much on his
mother for funds. “There was a point where I kind of gave up on myself,
but I think those interactions enhanced my self-efficacy and made me
realize that I could take certain steps to get through Vanderbilt,” David
says.
With the help of his mentors and peers, David eventually adjusted to
life at Vanderbilt. He took advantage of a study-abroad opportunity and
went to London for a semester. He became a resident advisor in a
dormitory, made dean’s list, and started contemplating graduate school.
As David began to flourish at Vanderbilt, he started to look for ways to
give back. “I made it a point to extend myself in any way possible to a

new Posse student, because I remembered how hard it was for me,” he
says. When he returned for his sophomore year, he quickly reached out
to the new students, befriending one student in particular—another
Puerto Rican boy from New York—who also happened to share his last
name. “He was encountering a lot of the same challenges: feeling
isolated, kind of struggling academically. I spent time with him, talking
to him about how things were going. I got a sense of how he was doing
things so that I could figure out how to help him,” David says of his
friend.
The following year, when he was a junior, David made it a point to
look after Carlos, a Dominican boy from New York City who was still
suffering the raw wounds of his brother’s murder from several years
before. Whenever something bad happened at school—if Carlos broke up
with a girlfriend or got cut from the baseball team—he would post
negative quotes or phrases on a bulletin board outside his dorm room.
Remembering how bleak things had seemed to him when he first
matriculated at Vanderbilt, David wanted to help raise Carlos’s spirits.
So, every night, he would replace one of Carlos’s pessimistic slogans
with something positive. “It became a battle, and we talked about it,”
David says of the exchange. “I told him, ‘I know I’m not in your position,
but you’re going to get through this.’ Our relationship was stronger
because of these fights. We still stay connected.”
Shirley also felt compelled to share her success with others who came
through the program after her. She went on to get her PhD at Duke,
although without her posse, she says, “it was one of the hardest things
I’ve ever done.” When the atmosphere of collaborative learning that
Shirley had embraced—and mirrored for others—was replaced by one of
individual achievement she struggled. But she was motivated to set an
example of academic success for other Posse scholars. “I wanted my
story to help colleges and universities believe in people like me,” she
explains.
TO FORM ITS POSSES, the foundation relies on nominations from school
guidance counselors and other community partners to gather an initial
group of students who show promise beyond what their performances on
conventional measures of testable merit might indicate. Nominated
students receive a letter that says, “Congratulations. You have been

nominated by someone in your community for a $100,000 scholarship
because you are outstanding.”
So begins a three-and-a-half-month process, with multiple rounds,
throughout which the selection committee highlights students’ strengths
and their potential to enrich the campuses of the colleges that seek to
recruit them. Since the selection is both need-blind and race-blind, there
is no emphasis on increasing numbers of different groups on campus but
rather on selecting the next generation of leaders from an often-
overlooked pool of students from disadvantaged neighborhoods. As a
result, there is no accompanying stigma to becoming a Posse scholar and
no implication that schools are lowering their standards by including the
Posse scholars.
One donor who gives financial support to the Posse program at his
alma mater said he does so because it’s not a traditional affirmative
action program. “It isn’t about numbers but about recruiting high-quality
students,” he said. “It’s about identifying leadership potential. Posse
provides a group of kids who know how to deal with the diversity issue.
They aren’t just going to go to class and take up space. They’re leaders.
They’re involved. They’re the kind of students you really want to have
on campus.”
One of the most innovative features of The Posse Foundation is its
selection process. During the initial screening, foundation staff members
do not consider those pervasive standards of competitive merit seen on
traditional college applications such as test scores, grades, and
extracurricular activities. Rather they use what they call the Dynamic
Assessment Process (DAP), which measures collaborative merit instead.
Staff members give nominated students several group assignments
(“interactive workshops”) and evaluate them on leadership ability, the
ability to get along with people from different cultural backgrounds, the
quality of thinking, and their desire to succeed—all traits the foundation
has identified as predictors of academic success in college.
The foundation invites back approximately 60 percent of this initial
group for follow-up interviews and, together with college admissions
officers, assembles “posses” of roughly ten students per institution. The
college gives each Posse member a four-year, full-tuition merit
scholarship.
Nominees tend to find value in the foundation’s selection process in

and of itself. “I remember the first round being the best interview that I
have ever had,” says Daniel Acheampong, a Posse scholar at Brandeis
from Crown Heights, Brooklyn. “It wasn’t just the interview. You go
there and see hundreds of kids. It was about being creative. . . . I was
like, ‘This is exciting. I’m going to have fun here.’” Other Posse scholars
agree. “I think it felt less like an interview and more of a positive
experience where you could see how ideas are formed and learn how to
communicate with different people you had never met before,” says
Mosi London, a Posse scholar who graduated from Lafayette College.
Since this process often represents the students’ first experiences
interviewing, many nominees find that process useful as well. “I plan to
go to medical school, and in any career you need to do some kind of
interviewing, so the more experience I get in that, the better,” says Angel
Garcia, a Posse scholar at Brandeis.
Rather than viewing “merit” as a fixed and measurable quality that
students demonstrate to gain entrance, The Posse Foundation continues
to cultivate students’ potential for innovation and leadership after they
are selected to receive the scholarship. Before they even set foot on a
college campus, Posse scholars embark on an eight-month weekly
training program to prepare them for higher education. Each week,
posses gather to focus on four areas: (1) team building and group
support, (2) cross-cultural communication, (3) leadership, and (4)
academic excellence. The training focuses equally on preparing students
academically and preparing them for personal challenges, such as time
and money management and interacting with a majority-white student
body that is considerably better off than those in their high schools. A
range of topics are discussed, including race, diversity, sexual
orientation, and class, which helps to prepare students for conversations
on these topics once they arrive on campus. Students are encouraged to
cultivate self-awareness, which helps them set and achieve goals, and to
prepare for the challenges they might face in college. At the end of the
eight months, Posse members attend a weekend retreat outside the city.
Daniel Acheampong recalls that the pre-college training program “felt
a little forced in the beginning,” but he conceded that “it was really good
to get to know each other.” Looking back, he reflects, “I think they were
training us to be supportive of each other. They wanted us to see that
there was a difference between going to campus as a ‘posse’ and just

being a collection of students who happen to have a scholarship.” Right
from the beginning, Posse scholars are encouraged to view each other as
collaborators and to understand that they are stronger as a unit than as
an assortment of individuals.
Daniel and his posse enrolled at Brandeis after completing the pre-
college training program. As part of the scholarship requirements, the
group continued to meet weekly and members were assigned to work
with on-campus mentor Ashley Rondini, a PhD student in philosophy
and sociology. In addition to the group meetings, Daniel and Ashley met
individually twice a month for Daniel’s first two years of college. “She
was willing to give up almost anything for us as a posse,” Daniel recalls.
“She went through so much herself, but she was always there. She would
find a way to help you if you needed it and did a really good job of
bringing us all together and making us realize that we’re not friends—
we’re family.”
Daniel’s Posse family came out in full force when he decided to run for
student body treasurer in his sophomore year. Not only did his posse
help him with campaign materials like posters, fliers, and e-mails, but
they also provided the support he needed to take the emotional risk of
running for a campus office. “Posse had a lot to do with that,” he says of
his courage to run. “Everyone on campus knows what Posse is, and the
support system we have is really strong.”
In addition to assigning an on-campus mentor (usually a graduate
student or a member of the faculty or college staff), universities
designate a liaison to stay in regular contact with the foundation, and
four times a year, a foundation member visits the college. Additionally,
every spring the foundation sponsors a PossePlus retreat, in which Posse
members and members of the larger student body meet to discuss a
campus issue chosen by Posse members. Recently, the foundation
initiated a career program, which helps Posse students secure internships
at organizations in the United States and abroad (supplying a stipend for
students doing unpaid internships) and helps Posse alumni to connect
with potential employers. The career program maintains an active
alumni network (there are currently more than 1,500 Posse alumni and
more than 1,600 Posse scholars on campuses), provides job-search
training (individually or in group workshops), and facilitates a
mentoring relationship between Posse grads and current Posse students.

Yvonne Perez, another Posse scholar at Brandeis, explains the culture
of the Posse program at the university: “Posse at Brandeis is very well
known for being made up of leaders. Behind every aspect of student life,
you see a Posse scholar. We realize that you can’t keep yourself behind
your books all the time. I saw other Posse scholars going out of their
way to get involved in campus and still excelling academically. Having
that great model to follow, I found what interests me on campus and
went about doing it.” Yvonne is a co-coordinator of a Hispanic group
called AHORA (Hispanic and Latino/a Student Association) and has
organized Hispanic Heritage Month events on campus. Along with
several members of her posse, Yvonne also helped found a Brandeis
chapter of the Society for the Advancement of Chicanos and Native
Americans in Science.
FOLLOWING GRADUATION, many Posse scholars have demonstrated a
commitment to public service. Both David and Shirley went on to pursue
careers as educators and focused on expanding opportunities for
underserved students, for which they credit their experience in The
Posse Foundation’s career program. “There’s no question that I would
not be where I am today but for or because of Posse,” David says. “It has
pretty much dictated the career that I wanted to pursue.”
After graduating from Vanderbilt, David took a position in a residential
treatment center doing conflict resolution and family therapy for inner-
city youth, a job he learned about from one of his peers in his posse. He
then returned to Vanderbilt for his master’s degree in education and
became a mentor to Vanderbilt Posse 10. “I felt that serving in that
position was my calling,” David says. “I just knew that this was
something that I wanted to do forever.”
David has since worked in diversity and youth development programs
at Syracuse and New York universities, ultimately attaining his PhD in
higher education at Pennsylvania State University with a focus on high-
achieving Latino male college students. “Rather than focusing on those
in crisis, I want to interview the ones who get through and identify those
factors that contribute to their success to figure out how to help the ones
who don’t make it,” David explains. His goal is to influence education
policy and expand college access for underserved students in order to
provide others with the same opportunities that Posse gave to him.

Shirley was the first Posse student to earn a doctorate (hers was in
clinical psychology). After doing community mental health work, she
went back to work with The Posse Foundation, serving as its executive
vice president for six years. She later worked in the administration of
Middlebury and Lafayette colleges. In 2010, she returned to Middlebury
as vice president for student affairs and dean of the college. In January
2015, she will serve as executive vice chancellor for strategic initiatives
and executive vice provost at Rutgers University–Newark. Shirley
describes herself as a “quiet revolutionary,” someone working within the
system of selective, predominantly white institutions to bring about
change and inclusiveness.
To that end, Shirley believes that her experience as a Posse scholar
gives her an insider’s view of the program and insights into the needs of
Posse scholars. As part of the first cohort of Posse scholars, Shirley
initially thought her experience of going to a selective college was
unique. But she soon realized that hers was a typical story of coming to
Posse as a first-generation college attendee from an immigrant family.
“There were a lot of other versions of that story,” she observes.
At Middlebury, Shirley says, the Posse program has been “so much
more than a way to get a critical mass” of students of color. Posse’s
presence on campus is a “true partnership,” she says, and not just as a
pipeline for recruiting low-income students or a means of outsourcing
admissions. In the fall of 2012, Middlebury added a cohort from Chicago
to its original group from New York City because the program had found
such success. And in 2014, the college added a Posse STEM (science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics) cohort from Los Angeles,
which will matriculate in the fall of 2015. That will bring to Middlebury
three posses—a total of 120 scholars by 2018. “The Posse program has
allowed us as an institution to ask the hard questions,” she says of the
partnership. “How do we act and think about diversity and community
and inclusion?”
Ultimately, Shirley sees the Posse program as a way to think about
admissions in a more holistic way. The real question, she says, is how to
make sure students from all backgrounds fully participate in and get the
full benefit of their education, whether they are coming from Posse on a
scholarship or from Connecticut and paying a full ride. Shirley aspires to
“take what we know works with Posse and bring it to the rest of the

institution.” Mentoring works, she observes, and cohorts work.
Posse’s approach, says Shirley, is having a ripple effect on the rest of
the school. For example, the first-year orientation program went through
a major overhaul. Students are now broken into cohorts and take trips as
a part of orientation, which can consist of outdoor excursions or cultural,
political, or agricultural outings. Over the course of three days, the
students are in dialogue with one another, and the groups are
engineered to be racially and ethnically diverse as well as mixed in
terms of life experience. Also included in orientation is an intensive
workshop around identity called “Middlebury Uncensored,” which
encourages the students to challenge their assumptions about others and
have difficult discussions that touch on race, sexual orientation, and
financial situations, as well as personal fears and anxieties. Orientation is
facilitated by peer leaders and is mandatory for all first-year students,
including varsity athletes.
“There is no way of measuring or starting to imagine the impact of
Posse on the faculty,” Shirley adds, noting that faculty describe their
experiences with the program as transformational. “Posse has changed
mentors in a way that Posse never imagined and mentors never
imagined.”
Miguel Fernandez, a Spanish professor and former Posse mentor
agrees, calling his involvement in Posse “one of the most rewarding
experiences I’ve had as an educator.” He describes his Posse scholars as a
“remarkable, incredible group.” At weekly meetings, they talked about
different issues the students were facing, such as social life, roommate
problems, and racist comments made in class. “Why do these white
people want to drink all night and no one is interested in dancing?” he
recalls his students asking. In the group, the Posse scholars were often
able to address one another’s concerns, teaching Fernandez how to
handle various issues that affected many of his students. “The social
piece is very, very important,” he says, “and can be as challenging as the
academics, if not more so.”
Fernandez observes that general admissions to the school have begun
to take a more holistic view of students, as well, considering additional
information beyond grades, test scores, and activities. Yet he bemoans
Middlebury’s continued lack of diversity among its faculty. “Middlebury
has failed at that,” he observes, noting that there are few role models for

students of color.
Nonetheless, the school has managed to find mentors who have
successfully led and learned from their posses. Roger Sandwick, for
example, was not the usual suspect to mentor a diverse group of young
urban students. A white male chemistry professor in his late fifties, he
describes himself as a “country hick” who gets nervous about taking the
subway. He says he didn’t know what to expect when he agreed to serve
as a Posse mentor. “When I took it on, I hardly knew what Posse was,”
he recalls.
That summer, Sandwick attended a weekend retreat on campus to get
to know the students. He also attended a training session, whereupon he
was told, “Don’t be their parent; be their mentor.” But that lesson never
stuck. “I was bad at that—I was their parent. I loved them to death,” he
confesses. Sandwick admits having had a hard time being objective: if
his students were upset, he was upset; if a professor slighted them, he
felt slighted and resentful.
Meanwhile, many members of his posse struggled upon their arrival on
a campus full of rich kids, with few students of color and fewer students
from urban environments. Middlebury is in “the middle of nowhere,”
Sandwick admits, noting that the closest big town, the small city of
Burlington, is an hour away. For his students, it was as big a culture
shock as anything, he explains. More than one of his students was
surprised to learn that yellow dandelions grew from the fuzzy white
weeds they saw on the ground.
Yet Sandwick was bowled over by the qualities his posse brought to
campus, in addition to their diverse viewpoints as urban public school
kids in a largely suburban prep school student population. “Oh my God,
you guys are so much smarter than me,” he recalls thinking, amazed at
how articulate they were.
In the end, Sandwick concludes, “they taught me more than I taught
them.” Specifically, he was reminded about the social pressures that
students faced, particularly in dating and dorm life, and he learned to be
more compassionate to students. “The whole dating scene was
something I didn’t know about,” he confesses. But working with the
students gave him the opportunity to see students as individuals. “I try
to listen more to the students, to the internal struggles they have,”
Sandwick says. Moreover, his posse brought him out of his shell a little.

He concedes that he is by nature reserved and bashful, and that his
students taught him to take chances, reassuring him that he had nothing
to lose. At the Posse retreat, they’d cheer him on to speak publicly and
participate in group activities.
IN GENERAL, SANDWICK admits that his students didn’t excel academically,
although all of them ultimately graduated. He believes the problem is
with the pedagogy and not with the Posse scholars. “Grading in college
is similar to grading in prep school: students are told by their professors,
‘Here is the information, now repeat it back; here is my view, now
regurgitate it.’” As a chemist, Sandwick thinks that he and his colleagues
are some of the worst perpetuators of this “spit it back” approach. But
that’s not how it should be, he says. “I don’t think that’s what
intelligence is all about.”
Sandwick shares the view of the two educators I will feature in the
next chapter. Part of what his posse taught him was to credit different
learning styles and to give students different kinds of assignments. “If
you just do it one way, a certain population of students will rise to the
top,” says Sandwick. In the sciences, he admits, they often employ the
“regurgitation method,” where there is only one right answer, much like
the SAT. “We have to do things better,” he concludes. “The regurgitation
method doesn’t get you the best students, like my posse.”
This method certainly suited the typical Middlebury student, however.
“The prep school students are trained to take an SAT, and they’re ready
to come on campus and excel in the type of education that we
champion,” Sandwick says. Yet this method of teaching caused several
Posse scholars to fall short of their academic goals. Some came to school
wanting to be pre-med, Sandwick recounts, but they soon dropped that
course of study and switched majors, though “not because they weren’t
smart or going to be good doctors or scientists.” In fact, one of
Sandwick’s students was an especially smart young woman who had won
prestigious fellowships and was a leader among her peers. “Everyone
knew her on campus,” Sandwick recalls, and she knew where all the
resources were, so she’d direct other members of her posse to where they
needed to go. But she couldn’t handle the math in her introductory
chemistry course, so she ultimately majored in psychology. She now
plans to go to graduate school in clinical psychology, but, says Sandwick

with a sigh, “I worry about that GRE score for her.”
In the present-day testocracy, Sandwick’s fears for his student’s future
may well come to pass. Meanwhile, however, Posse’s influence has been
expanding among undergraduate institutions. New schools are added as
partners every year, allowing the foundation to expand to more cities: by
2020, the foundation expects to have seven thousand alumni. The
program comes with a hefty price tag: even at a state school like the
University of Wisconsin at Madison, the cost of four years of full tuition
for a posse of ten out-of-state scholars is nearly $1 million. Yet the
foundation’s success at attracting college and university partners despite
the cost is largely attributable to its skill at matching an often
overlooked supply of talented high school students (most but not all of
color) with a growing demand among majority-white colleges for ways
to diversify their campuses without resorting to race-based affirmative
action programs, which are increasingly maligned by the public and
disfavored by the courts.
The Posse Foundation does this largely by redefining merit as
something other than cumulative GPA and SAT and AP scores, and
focusing instead on characteristics such as leadership, the ability to
collaborate with and learn from others, and drive. This is an important
factor in the effort to shift the idea of merit from being individualistic
and competitive to being pluralistic and supportive. Of course, as I’ve
noted repeatedly, universities have long prized such traits as predictive
of student success, and since the advent of the SAT and other
standardized tests in the 1940s, they have relied heavily on such
quantifiable, comparable measures of ability for their objectivity and to
place less significance on an applicant’s “noncognitive” skills, which are
seen as immeasurable and elusive. To assess them is an inherently
subjective process, making it difficult to compare candidates across
localities or institutions. By emphasizing traits like leadership and
collaboration, Posse has found a way to help colleges identify and
nurture students who are likely to succeed in all conventional measures
of success—college GPA, extracurricular involvement, and post-graduate
attainment—students they otherwise would likely have missed.
To this end, with a $1.9 million grant received from the Andrew W.
Mellon Foundation in 1999, Posse has developed a college-admissions
assessment tool known as the Bial-Dale Adaptability Index, cocreated by

Posse Foundation founder Debbie Bial. BDI is designed to identify
students with specific leadership traits such as social interactions skills
and the ability to work in groups that predict their ability to succeed in
college and become active members of their campuses. BDI evaluates
students in groups of ten or twelve at a time through exercises such as
the “Lego test,” in which members study a robot built of Lego blocks and
then try to reconstruct it based on sharing their collective memories.
Observers watch students taking the Lego test—as well as engaging in
other dynamic interactions, such as running impromptu discussions on
genetic testing or creating a public service announcement—to see who
takes initiative, who collaborates well, and who is persistent.1
By scoring and tracking hundreds of New York City high school seniors
who have applied to college through the Posse program, the study found
that BDI can in fact predict these attributes in students: persistence,
ability to access resources, and ability to contribute to a campus
community (leadership).2 After controlling for SAT scores, the study
found that students with a high BDI were more likely to graduate in four
years than were low-BDI students, and that high-BDI students had
considerably higher GPAs than low-BDI students (again controlling for
SAT scores). In fact, students’ SAT scores had very little correlation with
their BDI scores, and the former did not reflect the likelihood of success
in school or graduation rates. Moreover, BDI students were shown to
graduate at rates similar to those of the overall student body, despite
having much lower SAT scores. BDI was found to be a particularly strong
outcome predictor for black students, in contrast to standardized tests,
which are even weaker predictors of black students’ success than white
students’.
Ultimately, the Posse program has the promise to realize its goal of
being “a catalyst for increased individual and community development.”
Mike Schoenfeld was the dean of admissions when Middlebury first
decided to partner with The Posse Foundation. Noting Middlebury’s
location in Vermont—“The whitest state in the nation,” as Schoenfeld
describes it—he initially sought to connect with Posse as a way to recruit
more African American students to campus. However, he quickly learned
that the program had more to offer. “Posse has influenced decision
making in respect to who we think merits education,” he says. “After ten

years of success [with Posse], we looked to see what these students are
doing. They rose to leadership roles and formed new clubs, and that is
merit. They would go on extraordinary service trips to do things across
the country, and that’s merit. They would go work for Teach For
America, and that’s merit. What’s more important: someone with all As
or someone with some Bs who goes out and makes a difference in the
world?”

CHAPTER SIX
Democratic Merit in the Classroom: Eric Mazur and Uri
Treisman
YOU’VE READ HERE about the problems of testocratic merit—and there are
plenty of them. It all begins with an admissions test, the SAT, that
colleges use to select the “best and the brightest.” The so-called best and
the brightest are often nothing more than students who can perform well
on a test, often by using quick strategic guessing with less-than-perfect
information. Boys, for example, do better on the math portion of the SAT
than girls. They routinely score forty to fifty points higher. Many people
say, “Well, that’s because girls are ignored in high school math.” That
may be true, yet despite their lower SAT math scores, these girls do just
as well as the boys when they take math courses in college. The
difference becomes evident when you interview students as to how they
approach the SAT. The boys basically view it as a pinball machine: the
goal is speed and winning. The girls, on the other hand, want to work
through the problems before they put down the answer. For the SAT-test
defenders, carefully analyzing a question, apparently, does not exemplify
merit. Our over-emphasis on the testocracy has us confusing merit with
speed and the confidence to guess.
How to guess is one of the topics covered for students whose families
can afford intensive and expensive test preparation and training. This
economic division, combined with the fact that the SAT is normed to the
values and culture of the upper-middle class, allows certain
demographics to replicate their success. Yet these same test defenders
ignore the fact that the SAT is a poor predictor of academic performance
over four years. As I noted in the example of the Yale class of 2009 “By
the Numbers” chart, the emphasis on tests is so great that by the time
students have graduated from college, their SAT scores are often still
their most valued trait. For this cohort, it’s unclear what the “value-
added” of the college experience has been, since they have already been
ranked and sorted in the admissions process like contestants in a beauty
contest. The result is a pyramid-shaped meritocracy where everyone

competes for the few spots at the very top. Affirmative action falls short
as a complete solution because it simply repopulates this hierarchy,
allowing it to persist.
This hierarchy under which our educational system currently operates
—which sees merit as individualistic, measured by tests, and divorced
from the notion of the collective good—poses several problems. It allows
us to become comfortable seeing the success of a few at the top as proof
of success of the group as a whole. The goal becomes moving a select
few individuals to the very top, rather than preparing every student for
future success. A meritocratic hierarchy based on individualistic notions
of success also renders irrelevant how those at the top leverage their
success: whether they lift up the whole group or only look out for
“number one.” The testocratic meritocracy blinds us to the fact that in
the pyramidal structure most students necessarily will be at the bottom.
Though a few students can leverage the system by capitalizing on their
socioeconomic class to perform well on the SAT and then win admission
to elite institutions, most students remain untouched by current
“solutions.” Society as a whole loses by embracing a system that focuses
on and rewards the lucky few, while leaving out the unfortunate many.
Despite living in a testocratic world, some educators take approaches
that seek to build from the bottom up. They are constructing a concept
of democratic merit that is interdependent because it advances, furthers,
and supports the achievement of the group as a whole. It makes an oval-
shaped meritocracy, rather than a triangle-shaped one. Everyone
benefits.
I have seen the benefits of democratic merit firsthand. At Harvard, the
final exam for my Law and the Political Process class permits but does
not require small groups of students to volunteer to work together in
teams of three or four. Working in teams generates confidence and, most
important, bolsters students’ understanding of the assigned reading over
the semester. It goes back to my own experience as a voting rights
lawyer. Often, we worked in teams. As members of a group of lawyers,
we had read the same cases but had different interpretations of those
cases. It was very helpful to have to deal with those alternative
interpretations rather than just assuming that your interpretation is right
and you can charge ahead in a straight line. So much of the way law
school works is in opposition to the reality of how one actually works on

a case: the professor does all the talking and then (in the case of some of
the research findings) about 10 percent of the class occupies 40 percent
of the rest of the class time. Most of that 10 percent are men, which
means there aren’t too many other men speaking and certainly very few
women.
My students have an option to work in a group or work individually
for the final—and it’s important to say that the exam is not predictive.
I’ve seen some group finals that are not very good and some individual
finals that are terrific. It’s not as if I’m going to give more credit to a
group final than to an individual final. But I see a final exam as a
learning opportunity rather than just a judging opportunity. Working
with two or three other people is a more creative way to complete a
final because you have to explain why you’re doing X or Y so it makes
sense to your colleagues. In the process, your colleagues may give you
feedback that can refine and expand your thinking.
I want to share the stories of two educators who use collaboration as a
teaching tool. In their classrooms, learning takes place between and
among students, rather than exclusively within the individual. The
education of one necessarily means the education of another, as they go
through the process together. All benefit from the learning of others
through these constant processes of joining minds, ideas, and ways of
thinking. Considered in this way, it is no surprise that the pedagogical
approach of these two educators has proven highly successful.
The first educator, Eric Mazur, a physics professor at Harvard
University, uses a peer-to-peer, or peer-instruction-based, instructional
model. Rather than listen passively to a lecture, students in his course
work together to solve both conceptual and complex problems. The
second educator, Uri Treisman, while teaching mathematics at the
University of California at Berkeley (he is now a professor at the
University of Texas), organized students into “calculus clubs” through an
initiative he created called the Emerging Scholars Program (ESP). With
both teachers, students at both the high and low end of the grading
curve achieve stronger learning outcomes. All students perform better,
and learning is enhanced at the individual level, regardless of the
student’s initial ability. At the same time, disparities between groups—in
Mazur’s classroom, between male and female students, and in
Treisman’s, between African American and Asian students—have been

almost completely eliminated. This is no small feat, since these
differences have persisted for as long as most of us can remember.
ERIC MAZUR’S STUDENTS start class differently from most other science
majors and pre-meds at Harvard. Instead of sitting back, taking notes,
and listening to the professor drone on, they begin the day with a quiz.
Not the type of quiz that matters in the way most do but a quiz intended
to stimulate discussion among the kids in the classroom. It’s never
graded. It’s only one question long. And its sole purpose is to generate
heated debate between and among students, rather than to rank and sort
them in a pyramidal hierarchy, or for one or more of them to try to
impress the professor.
Mazur is a typical Ivy League professor—he’s middle-aged, buried in
his research, and has taught the same course for years and years—but he
had an epiphany almost two decades ago. He had been teaching
introductory physics at Harvard and was doing great at it: his students
were performing well on tests; he was getting rave reviews, including
Teacher of the Year awards; and majors in the field were moving on
smoothly to the next courses in certain tracked sequences. Yet despite all
this, he felt that something was not right. Often, students would score
high on tough exams but then give responses to questions in class or on
a test that suggested a serious lack of understanding of the core concepts
underlying the material. He realized that his apparent success had given
him a false sense of satisfaction. Yes, his students could “plug and chug”
answers on an exam—take new numbers and use a known formula on a
familiar problem that mirrored one in their textbook—but did they
really understand physics at a deeper level?
The answer, Mazur believed, was no. Students were not grasping the
core concepts of the subject; they understood exactly and only what he
had told them during the lecture, which took up the entire sixty-minute
course period three times a week. Mazur was puzzled at this realization.
How was it that he had won all these awards, followed exactly the
instructional model he’d been taught, had some students regularly score
close to perfect on the exams, and yet many students still weren’t
learning? Once he thought about this conundrum a bit, it actually
started to make sense. Students listened to him recite formulas,
memorized them, and then reproduced his methods. They never had to

really rethink problems or have them make sense on their own terms, so
of course they didn’t grasp concepts in a deeper way.
The problem was that most students only engaged with the material by
themselves and through the professor. They never had to explain it to
someone else, which meant they never had to really think about the
concepts. So they memorized the formulas, familiarized themselves with
the standard formats for questions, and got really good at solving
problems that matched ones they had already seen. In short, they
learned how to take a test, at the expense of actually learning how to use
the assignments to solve real-world problems.
Mazur stepped back. What was his part in the students’ learning
process that was not delivering real results? The instructional format he
used was not one he had created; indeed it is by far the most common
format to follow both for science and nonscience college courses around
the country. But it had made his students dependent on him and the
lecture notes he would distribute. They never figured things out on their
own, or with each other, for that matter. They were intensely focused on
him. They had been trained to think that he possessed and had the power
to convey all of the knowledge. Mazur was the “sage on the stage.” If he
did not lecture or hand out his notes one day, what would his students
do? He decided it was time to find out.
Starting in the fall of 1990, Mazur developed and instituted a model he
now calls “peer instruction.” The model works as follows: Mazur gives
students a prompt—a conceptual, big-picture question—based on the
reading of the previous night. He asks students to think about their
response for a minute and then pick the answer they think is right.
Everyone has a clicker, and although the results are anonymous, they are
displayed on a screen for everyone to see. For example, the screen will
show that 30 percent of students chose response A, 20 percent response
B, and so on. Next, students are told to “convince their neighbor” that
their answer was correct. At this point, the classroom lights up. Students
who in any other science classroom would likely be sitting silently,
listening, and perhaps absorbing now actively engage in the teaching of
their peers. Each student is paired randomly with just one neighbor, who
may have chosen the same or a different answer. The two classmates
debate and attempt to reach a consensus on the correct response within
the two minutes or so that Mazur gives them. After the time is up, Mazur

refocuses the class attention to the PowerPoint display. “What do we
think now?” he asks. He puts up the same question on the screen and
again asks students to anonymously record their answers using a clicker.
Overwhelmingly, students get the answer right this time around. Within
just two minutes, students get a concept and really know it. As Mazur
says, the power of logic prevails.
This sequence of learning is known as “think-pair-share.” Once the
process is complete, then Mazur engages in “teaching”—meaning he
gives an explanation of the correct answer—but only briefly. The
exciting thing for the class is when he asks the new question. The class is
now on the edge of their seats and remains so for the entire period,
waiting for question after question, when they can not only figure out
the answers but also convince their classmates. Though the prompts
generally target core concepts rather than complex mathematical
formulas, Mazur manages to get in a few of those questions as well.
The ratio of professor-student talking and listening is now reversed.
Whereas Mazur used to spend almost the entire period talking, and
students used to spend almost the entire time silent, the class rhythm
now beats to a different drum. Lectures have become virtually obsolete
in his classroom. Yet despite Mazur’s more muted presence, he finds his
value as a teacher is higher. By creating the prompts in a classroom
structure that facilitates collaboration, students actually learn better.
Mazur knows this because he is a meticulous record keeper. He has
recorded students’ test scores since he began teaching introductory
physics in 1985, and he has kept detailed track of final grades. Year after
year, scores fell along almost an identical curve. Some students scored at
the very top, many in the middle range, and a portion at the bottom: it
was predictable. When Mazur saw the scores of the first class taught
with peer instruction, he was floored. Scores had gone up at the top and
bottom of the curve, both for complex problems and for core concept
ones. The achievement gap narrowed, toppling the typical cluster of
isolated high achievers at the top of the pyramid. Perhaps most notably,
the disparity between men’s and women’s scores disappeared in his
class. This disparity had persisted throughout his decades of teaching
and it persists in most college physics classrooms across the country
today. He had been stumped by it and resigned to feel that it was
beyond his control. Yet with the introduction of the peer-instruction

method, the sexes were performing both equally well and better. And
they were for once actually getting the concepts, not just plugging and
chugging answers.
Mazur has continued to use this method for more than two decades; he
has exported it to physics professors at other colleges and universities,
including junior colleges. The incredibly positive results persist across
the board. Achievement gaps among groups narrow, and all scores go
up. Why does this fairly simple method seem to work so well? Mazur
thinks it’s in part because it makes students think and reason like the
new learners of the material they are. As a result, they are better
teachers to each other. They can connect with their classmates in a way
that Mazur cannot, because concepts are so ingrained in his mind and
his way of thinking. In short, he can no longer remember the mental
links it took to get there. Students are better at that; they are
academically there with each other.
This collaboration has other benefits. Working with peers energizes all
students to engage and ensures that the education of each and every one
is accounted for. No one gets left behind. In the lecture setting, students
who did not understand were left to their own devices. Now they can
benefit from the different perspectives of their peers. And this doesn’t
shortchange learning, because the power of logic prevails: the best
argument to fit the facts wins. The concepts become more
understandable to those who aren’t catching on, and those who are
catching on learn more themselves by teaching it.
The class style of Eric Mazur’s classroom has changed from that of an
orchestra, where each student is assigned his or her own music, to a jazz
band, where communication inspires enhanced performance in the
moment. This rhythmic difference translates to a material difference as
the achievement gap within Mazur’s classroom is greatly narrowed,
moving more toward the oval-shaped concept of democratic merit and
away from the triangle-shaped testocratic one.
PROFESSOR MAZUR IS NOT the only university lecturer who has come to
dislike the “plug and chug” approach to teaching. Three thousand miles
away, at the University of California at Berkeley, Uri Treisman was
having the same realization at about the same time. Treisman was
comfortable as a graduate student teaching in the Department of

Mathematics, but he was becoming uncomfortable with the persistent
achievement gap between African American and Asian American
students in his classroom. He set out to identify what he might be doing
wrong, embarking on a journey that would point him to a similar
destination as Mazur’s: collaboration.
For Treisman, the numbers just didn’t add up—and he had developed a
career out of making sense of numbers. In the mid-1970s, 60 percent of
black or Latino students at Berkeley who completed first-term freshman
calculus scored a D or an F.1 Faculty members blamed the low passing
rate on a variety of factors outside the university’s control: lack of
student motivation, inadequate preparation, lack of family support, or a
student’s low-income background.2 Yet the data negated these
explanations. Black students with high SAT-math test scores performed
more poorly in their first-year calculus courses than did black students
with median math scores.3 So, inadequate preparation wasn’t the
problem. Furthermore, black students from lower-income brackets
performed better in calculus than those from more affluent backgrounds,
disproving the theory that socioeconomic background was the driving
culprit.4 Finally, interviews illustrated that blacks accepted into a top-
tier university like UC Berkeley were highly motivated and enjoyed
extensive family support.5
Treisman searched for a resolution to this conundrum. What he
discovered led to a redesigned calculus curriculum that embodies the
core components of democratic merit: peer collaboration, social support
networks, and higher-level problem solving. Called the Emerging
Scholars Program, it has had stunning results. Before the implementation
of ESP, only 22 percent of black students received As or Bs.6 This
number jumped to 54 percent among ESP participants.7 ESP’s effects
were most striking among black students scoring in the top third of the
SAT: only 28 percent of those in traditional sections got As or Bs, while
71 percent of those in ESP earned As or Bs.8
How did Treisman achieve these results? He knew something was
awry. The same black students who were getting Fs in calculus were
getting As in their “Study Skills” class.9 Treisman observed that both
Asian and black students were minorities at UC Berkeley, yet Asian
calculus students consistently outperformed their black peers. The

nagging question was why. When Treisman looked beyond student test
scores and toward student behavior, he had his breakthrough. Treisman
realized he needed to know more about student study habits. He turned
to his video camera.
Treisman selected twenty of the highest-achieving calculus students of
Chinese heritage, and twenty of the lowest-achieving calculus students of
African or African American heritage. He then used a film crew to
videotape these two groups of students over the next four months. In
Treisman’s own words, he and his crew “decided to literally move in
with the students and to video tape them at work. We wanted to
understand what was going on when they studied calculus [and] got
stuck on problems.”10 When filming was complete, Treisman and his
colleagues journeyed up to Lake Tahoe to analyze hundreds of hours of
unedited videotapes. The footage revealed a compelling difference
between the two cohorts: the African American students studied in
complete isolation, while the Asian American students formed study
groups.
Treisman summed up the findings of the footage:
What did studying mathematics mean for Black and Chinese
students? For the Black students it meant this: You wake up in the
morning. You go to class. You take notes. You get your homework
assignment. You go home. You do your homework religiously and
hand in every assignment on time. You put in six or eight hours a
week of studying for a calculus course, just what the teacher says,
and what happens to you? You fail. An important point here is that
the Black students typically worked alone. Indeed 18 of the 20
students never studied with their classmates. . . .
What about the Chinese students? They studied calculus for about
14 hours a week. They would put in 8 to 10 hours working alone. In
the evenings, they would get together. They might make a meal
together and then sit and eat or go over the homework assignment.
They would check each other’s answers and each other’s English. . . .
They would edit one another’s solutions. . . . They had constructed
something like a truly academic fraternity, not the more typical
fraternity: Sigma Phi Nothing.11

Thus, the videos revealed that doing your homework religiously was
not enough. Putting in the recommended hours of studying was not
enough. Completing every assignment was not enough. What was? True
mastery of the material developed out of structured conversations about
calculus with classmates.
Just as Eric Mazur at Harvard had witnessed, the footage illuminated
the various benefits of studying in collaboration rather than in isolation.
The Asian American students worked through difficult problems
together. They taught each other mathematical shortcuts and alternative
strategies for attacking tough problems.12 If a problem was still difficult
for the entire group, they would identify it as “one of the instructor’s
‘killers.’” They then felt comfortable approaching the professor for help,
since the problem had posed a dilemma for all their peers.13 These peer
networks created a secure learning environment where students
questioned and taught one another and helped develop the confidence of
all the learners.
After analyzing the videotapes, Treisman understood that black
students did not lack motivation but rather were missing out on a
collaborative approach to studying that would help them excel. Until
college, most black students had relied upon solitary study as a strategy
for academic advancement. This is how you did it if you came from
schools where your peers devalued scholastic success. To fit in with your
group and avoid ridicule, you might pretend you didn’t study, and then
achieve in private. Isolation was a strategic advantage rather than a
flaw.14
But college calculus was different. Calculus demanded that students
develop problem-solving skills and higher-level conceptual thinking.
Students needed to learn how to approach problems from multiple
perspectives, how to identify misunderstandings, and how to find
creative solutions. As shown in the video footage, these skills were best
achieved by working interactively with peers on difficult problems.15
Students made the mistake of worrying about their final test grade
rather than the process by which they learned the material. Treisman set
out to change this, so that the constant student question would no longer
be “Will it be on the test?” Instead, he wanted students to become
excited about collaborating on challenging problems. The program’s goal

was “not merely helping students pass calculus. . . but, rather, producing
mathematicians.”16
With that goal in mind, Treisman designed ESP, which author Tina
Rosenberg has described as a collection of “calculus clubs.”17 ESP differs
structurally from “traditional” calculus courses in three key ways. First,
Treisman extended the course requirements from four hours to six hours.
At the same time, he created interracial study groups, which challenged
both the black students as well as the rural white students to excel. He
makes it clear that ESP is not a remedial program but rather a highly
rigorous program of study.18 Second, the workshops reject the classic
lecture model in favor of peer-to-peer teaching.19 Teaching assistants
(TAs) monitor the classroom while students work through difficult math
worksheets in small groups. When students get stuck, they ask each
other questions and solicit help from their peers before receiving a
helpful suggestion from the TA. Third, the workshop model explicitly
teaches students to value their peer network; they have a responsibility
to their peers to attend classes, prepare each night’s assignments so they
can discuss their findings in class, and spend some of their time
collaborating with classmates to solve math problems.20 In ESP’s
opening orientation, Treisman persuaded students “that success in
college would require them to work with their peers, to create for
themselves a community based on shared intellectual interests and
common professional aims.”21
Rosenberg said that the peer-to-peer feature of Treisman’s classroom is
more than just an example of collaboration; it is actually a rare example
of positive peer pressure in which students are pushed by their friendship
to change their work habits. Treisman expanded the cohort of students
who were naturally working together to include the entire class—
creating a larger “club,” in Rosenberg’s words—and was then able to
take advantage of peer pressure. In many important ways, peers are
better educators than teachers. As Rosenberg notes, “Peer pressure
changes you, and in turn you change a community, a bureaucracy, a
culture, a government—a world.”22
These changes certainly transformed Treisman’s calculus classroom. “A
visitor to a workshop session might initially mistake it for a noisy study
hall,” he says. “But after a few moments the impression of disorder

evaporates, and the purposeful nature of the activities becomes clear: the
leader is circulating unobtrusively, alert to the dynamics of the clusters
of students, all of whom are wrestling with a set of problems on a
worksheet.”23
The program trained students to work together so that they could
“alternate giving and receiving assistance.” Such group work did not
always come naturally, as Treisman explained: “Students are responsible
for critiquing one another’s work. . . but as they continue, they learn to
question and to demand explanations. Then they are more ready as well
to defend their own ideas.”24 In Treisman’s model, students learn how to
articulate their own insights and learn from others’.
Treisman is a numbers guy through and through, and the numbers
assured him that his model was effective. He found that black and Latino
participants substantially outperformed not only their minority peers in
the traditional courses but also their white and Asian classmates with the
same incoming test scores. Black students with math SAT scores in the
low 600s were performing comparably to white and Asian students
whose math SATs were in the mid-700s. Treisman also proudly related
that “many of the students from these early workshops have gone on to
become physicians, scientists, and engineers. One Black woman became
a Rhodes scholar, and many others have won distinguished graduate
fellowships.”25 Follow-up studies have confirmed that the ESP model
benefits all students, although the greatest gains occur among
underrepresented minorities.
Treisman has developed a pedagogical formula that works: initially the
numbers didn’t add up for Treisman, but his calculus clubs now show,
both through numbers and personal testimony, that a student’s
performance in calculus is not predetermined by his or her incoming
math SAT score, nor by his or her race. Instead, all students will reach
higher levels of mastery—both individually and as a group—when the
classroom becomes a collaborative space for peers to work together by
sharing different strategies, perspectives, and approaches.
THESE CLASSROOM INNOVATIONS show that it is possible to transform our
vision of merit from a testocratic one to an interdependent, democratic
one. We can change the culture of the classroom from test-oriented

lectures to a collaborative atmosphere that teaches our students how to
problem solve. Teachers can create learning environments where
students work to understand the material together, and through this
process, the goals of learning become shared. Teachers can also reward
the ability to work in groups, which is perhaps the crucial skill for
solving the complex problems of the twenty-first century. Students who
are better skilled at working with and learning from others are better
poised to listen, to communicate, and to lead, and this structure
encourages students to cultivate collaborative skills. This is Malcolm
Gladwell’s Marine Corps approach to education, which assumes that all
students have the capacity to perform. In Mazur’s and Treisman’s
classrooms, the class-wide improvement is evidence enough of this.
When we topple the pyramidal structure of testocratic merit, students
learn better, they learn how to problem solve more generally, and,
perhaps most important, they learn that their success is the success of
the group, be it the classroom, the community, the country, or the
world.

CHAPTER SEVEN
Six Ways of Looking at Democratic Merit
MAZUR AND TREISMAN offer striking stories of transformation. The structure
of the classroom has been transformed, as have student interactions and
individual achievement. It is impressive to learn that all students
improved their test scores after Mazur and Treisman introduced
collaborative-learning models. But it is perhaps more striking still to
view these transformations together and realize that Mazur and
Treisman have created something larger: a classroom culture shift. This
culture shift affects students both internally, in how they define their
values, and externally, in how they interact with peers.
Internally, Mazur and Treisman encourage students to redefine their
personal understandings of intelligence and merit. They reject the
dominant narrative about intelligence: that it is fixed, inherent, and
measured by tests. Instead, Mazur and Treisman teach students to view
intelligence as malleable and based on success in collaborative work.
“Intelligence” is more expansive than a raw test score, and “merit”
encompasses 
positive 
character 
traits 
such 
as 
communication,
collaboration, and group leadership. Mazur and Treisman deliberately
design lectures and classroom activities to persuade students about two
key ideas: that intelligence involves hard work, yes, and that intelligence
also involves interpersonal skills. Intelligence, in a democratic and
meritocratic context, is never static.
The second shift in Mazur’s and Treisman’s classrooms involves
external relationships. These professors encourage students to redefine
their relationships with each other. Instead of working alone, students
are encouraged to work together. Students become teachers and
teammates. Classes show students that diverse perspectives can
collectively lead to better solutions. Competition is replaced with
collaboration: rather than focusing on their own isolated intelligence,
students began to value and seek out new peer perspectives and
partnerships.
These internal and external transformations shift the classroom culture

toward a celebration of democratic merit. But observing this change is
just the starting point. My question is how. How did Mazur’s and
Treisman’s practices produce such results?
The world of social science helps us answer the question of what leads
to success. Here I want to present six thinkers, six different researchers
who approach this question from different angles. Carol Dweck and Paul
Tough take up the question on an individual level by asking, What mind-
sets, behaviors, and attitudes will lead to one individual’s success and
another’s failure? The research of Anita Woolley and Scott Page
addresses the question at a group level: How can a particular group
achieve higher results than either other groups or individuals working
on their own? Marilynn Brewer has looked at how the intersection
between the individual and the group affects success. And, finally, Jo
Boaler has explored an example of these successful approaches in the
math classrooms of an urban public high school. Each of these thinkers
casts light on a different dimension of how a culture shift can occur in
classrooms like Mazur’s and Treisman’s and, perhaps most important,
how we can spread these culture shifts to new people and places.
HOW DID MAZUR and Treisman change student test scores? Research
suggests that test scores improved because a fundamental change was at
work: a shift in mind-set. Both Mazur and Treisman decided to change
how they spoke about “answers”: they encouraged students to value the
learning process, not just the final score. By changing the values in the
classroom, Mazur and Treisman worked to redefine the measures of
merit.
Both Mazur and Treisman taught students that their aim was not to get
the “right answer.” Instead, the goal was to understand how to get to the
right answer. Students needed to explain their approach to a problem
and articulate any obstacles they encountered. These professors made it
clear that students should not be embarrassed if they gave a wrong
answer or had no answer at all. Students were urged to view giving
wrong answers as an opportunity for higher understanding. They needed
to embrace their struggle so that they could understand their missteps
and learn better, alternative approaches. In this way, Mazur and
Treisman rejected the concept that merit is defined by a final test score.
Instead, they each rebuilt the platform of a meritocracy, using Amartya

Sen’s concept of merit. They redefined merit as an opportunity for both
continual self-improvement and self-reflection, as well as the
development of collaborative approaches that stimulate learning.
After creating a system that values learning processes over right
answers, both Mazur and Treisman witnessed a rise in their students’ test
scores. Why would a pedagogy that values self-improvement over test
scores yield an increase in student performance?
Dweck and Tough may have the answer. In their work, these
researchers set forth to answer the puzzling question: Why do some
children succeed while others lose their way? Dweck, a psychology
professor at Stanford University, has approached this problem by
designing tests to measure patterns of student motivation. Tough, a
writer interested in educational reform, has approached the puzzling
question by looking at methods that enable low-income children to reach
higher levels of success.
Though their methods vary, Dweck and Tough have reached similar
conclusions. They both found that children will be more successful if
they believe their intelligence is capable of growth, rather than believing
intelligence is innate. Tough has added to Dweck’s observations by
concluding that a child will also be more successful if she or he focuses
on building character strengths in a similar way, viewing them as
malleable rather than fixed. Understanding Dweck’s and Tough’s
conclusions allow for a better understanding of why Mazur and
Treisman were so effective when they changed the curricular culture in
the classroom.
CAROL DWECK’S NUMEROUS studies show that an individual who believes
intelligence is “fixed” is much more likely to fail in the face of new
challenges, while an individual who believes that intelligence can grow
with hard work is much more likely to excel in the face of new
challenges.
Dweck first investigated the underpinnings of human motivation as a
graduate student at Yale University in the 1960s.1 She had read about
“learned helplessness” in animals. Psychologists at the University of
Pennsylvania showed that after repeated failures to stop something
negative from happening, most animals conclude that the situation is
hopeless and beyond their control. After such an experience, the animal

often remains passive even when it can effect change, a state the
researchers called “learned helplessness.”2
After reading these studies, Dweck observed that some people also
exhibited “helplessness” in the face of repeated failure. But she was more
fascinated by the people who don’t—the people who still persevere in
the face of setbacks. She wondered: “Why do some students give up
when they encounter difficulty, whereas others who are no more skilled
continue to strive and learn?”3 After more than three decades of
conducting countless studies, she concludes that “one answer. . . [lies] in
people’s beliefs about why they had failed.”4 In short, students who
attribute poor performance to a lack of innate ability will continue to
perform poorly. However, students with the same incoming abilities who
believe their poor performance is due to effort—and thus can be
overcome with hard work—will improve their performance over time.5
Dweck has developed a broader theory of what separates the two
general classes of learners: helpless versus mastery oriented. Through
her research, she found that students not only diverge in how they
explain their failures but that they also hold different “theories” of
intelligence. Some subscribe to a “fixed mind-set” of intelligence, others
to a “growth mind-set.”
Dweck coined the term “fixed mind-set” to describe “the helpless ones
[who] believe that intelligence is a fixed trait: you only have a certain
amount, and that’s that. . . . Mistakes crack their self-confidence because
they attribute errors to lack of ability, which they feel powerless to
change.”6 Students with a “fixed mind-set” avoid challenges because
they want to avoid mistakes.7 They spend their time documenting their
intelligence or talents instead of developing them.8 In contrast, students
with a “growth mind-set” believe that intelligence can be developed
through education and hard work. “They want to learn above all else,”
Dweck writes. “[Since] slipups stem from a lack of effort, not ability,
they can be remedied by more effort. Challenges are energizing rather
than intimidating; they offer opportunities to learn.”9 To illustrate the
behavior of “growth mind-set” students, Dweck shared several anecdotes
from her studies:
[Growth-minded students] focused on fixing errors and honing their

skills. One advised himself: “I should slow down and try to figure this
out.” Two schoolchildren were particularly inspiring. One, in the
wake of difficulty, pulled up his chair, rubbed his hands together,
smacked his lips and said, “I love a challenge!” The other, also
confronting the hard problems, looked up at the experimenter and
approvingly declared, “I was hoping this would be informative!”
Dweck wanted to know whether a growth mind-set led to higher,
lower, or equal levels of student performance. To answer this question,
Dweck did what she was trained to do: she designed an experimental
study, and then another, and then another. All the results repeatedly
reaffirmed her conclusion that students with a growth mind-set have
greater academic success and are more likely to outperform their fixed-
mind-set counterparts. For example, in 2007, Dweck and her colleagues
shared the results of a two-year study that monitored 373 students
during the transition from elementary to junior high school, when
classwork gets more difficult. At the beginning of seventh grade, all the
students had roughly the same incoming math scores. But though
students had equivalent scores, they did not have equivalent mind-sets—
some saw intelligence as fixed, while others believed it could “grow”
with effort. To assess these students’ initial mind-sets, Dweck and her
colleagues asked students at the start of seventh grade to agree or
disagree with statements such as “Your intelligence is something very
basic about you that you can’t really change.” After determining each
student’s initial mind-set, Dweck and her colleagues tracked each
student’s grades. The results? Not only did students with “growth mind-
sets” perform better on math tests than their fixed-mind-set peers, but
this difference in performance also grew over time.10
Furthermore, Dweck’s research finds that even our “mind-set” is not
innate but malleable. The type of praise an individual receives can affect
an individual’s mind-set. When students receive praise for their
intelligence, they are more likely to adopt a fixed mind-set than when
they receive pats on the back for effort. In a 1998 study, Dweck found
that those who were congratulated for their intelligence
shied away from a challenging assignment. . . far more than the kids
applauded for their effort. . . . When we gave everyone hard

problems anyway, those praised for being smart became discouraged,
doubting their ability. And their scores, even on the easier problem
set we gave them afterward, declined as compared with their
previous results on equivalent problems. In contrast, students praised
for their effort did not lose confidence when faced with the harder
questions, and their performance improved markedly on the easier
problems that followed.11
Dweck’s studies show us two things. First, students who view
intelligence as capable of growth will perform better than those who
don’t—that is, valuing the learning process over a test score will help
students achieve at higher levels. Second, students are more likely to
adopt a growth mind-set if others praise them for their effort rather than
their intelligence. These conclusions mirror the results of Mazur and
Treisman, who in effect increased student test scores by adopting
strategies that promoted a growth mind-set over a fixed mind-set in their
classrooms. As if they had been reading Dweck’s work, both Mazur and
Treisman placed great value on the learning process, not just on giving a
right answer.
BUT THIS IS not the end of the story. Mazur and Treisman did more than
just convey to students that intelligence was malleable rather than fixed.
They also conveyed that success depended on certain study habits and
behaviors that were—like intelligence—capable of improvement.
This focus on academic behaviors, or “character traits,” may be
another secret to student success, according to author Paul Tough. Like
Dweck, Tough is interested in what makes some students succeed while
others flounder. He decided to write a book that would help him “solve
some of the most pervasive mysteries of life: who succeeds and who
fails? Why do some children thrive while others lose their way? And
what can any of us do to steer an individual child—or a whole
generation of children—away from failure and toward success?”
His research question was similar to Dweck’s. But while Dweck turned
to social science for the answer, Tough decided to take a more holistic
approach by showing the connections between very different fields of
research: 
economics, 
neuroscience, 
pediatrics, 
and 
psychology.
Surveying these various fields, Tough made a bold observation: the

prevailing “cognitive hypothesis” that saturates our culture is
misguided.12 This hypothesis, he explains, is “the belief, rarely expressed
aloud but commonly held nonetheless, that success today depends
primarily on cognitive skills—the kind of intelligence that gets measured
on IQ tests, including the abilities to recognize letters and words, to
calculate, to detect patterns.”13
This hypothesis is exactly what gives the SAT and other standardized
tests their life’s breath. Being able to half-decipher the meaning of an
arcane word or to eliminate one or two wrong math answers and
thereby improve one’s ability to guess—without knowing how one has
arrived at the right answer—these are the skills that our culture prizes.
Yet the research and testimony that Tough encountered thoroughly
discredit this “cognitive hypothesis.” In its place, he has developed a
new theory based on the importance of positive character traits. Tough
found that what matters most to a child’s success is not how much
information we can stuff into a child’s brain but rather “whether we are
able to help her develop a very different set of qualities, a list that
includes persistence, self-control, curiosity, conscientiousness, grit, and
self-confidence.”14 Thus, Tough appropriately titled his book How
Children Succeed: Grit, Curiosity, and the Power of Hidden Character.
Tough offers many studies and programs to support his assertion that
success depends upon developing key character traits more than on
simply developing rote skills. To show that IQ scores don’t summarize
intelligence, he gives the example of the Perry Preschool project,
conducted in the 1960s. In this research project, children were recruited
from a low-income neighborhood. Half were admitted to Perry, a high-
quality, two-year preschool program, while the other half served as the
“control group” without a free offer of preschool. The researchers
followed the two groups of children for decades to track the effects of
the preschool program. The results were not what you might expect.
Researchers found that attending Perry Preschool had no lasting effect
on the children’s IQ scores. By third grade, both the Perry children and
the control group had equivalent IQ scores. Researchers did observe,
however, that attending Perry Preschool carried an important long-term
effect. Compared to the control group, Perry students were more likely
to have graduated from high school, more likely to be employed by age

twenty-seven, more likely to be earning more than $25,000 a year by
age forty, less likely ever to have been arrested, and less likely to have
spent time on welfare.15
These results intrigued James Heckman, a professor of economics, who
dug deeper into the archives. Heckman found that the Perry Preschool
scored students on what Heckman called “noncognitive skills,” such as
curiosity, relationships with fellow students, social fluidity, and self-
control. Heckman found that these noncognitive factors were responsible
for as much as two-thirds of the total benefit that Perry gave its students
and led, from his perspective, to the differences in measurable life
outcomes.
From the Perry Preschool study, Tough concluded that social skills
“and the underlying traits they reflected turned out to be very valuable
indeed.”16 Tough has been able to show that character traits are
important not only in an early childhood environment but in a college
context as well. In his chapter “How to Build Character,” he writes about
David Levin, a founder of KIPP Academy. KIPP (which stands for the
Knowledge Is Power Program) is an innovative charter school program
whose mission is to provide a high-quality middle school education to
children from low-income communities. Since its start in the 1990s, KIPP
schools have yielded some highly impressive student scores. In 1999, the
students of KIPP Academy in Bronx, New York, earned the highest scores
of any school in the Bronx and the fifth-highest in all of New York City.
But Levin came to the same conclusion I am advocating in this book:
test scores in and of themselves, as a single-minded approach to
education, are meaningless. The initial cohort of KIPP in New York City
did extremely well in terms of their test scores. They left middle school
with outstanding academic results and most won admission to highly
selective private or Catholic high schools. Almost every member of the
Bronx class made it through high school, and most enrolled in college.
But once in college KIPP students started to struggle: six years after their
high school graduation, only 21 percent of the cohort had completed a
four-year college degree.17
Levin was pained by this low graduation rate. He analyzed the dropout
reports and noticed something curious: the students who succeeded in
college were not necessarily those who had tested well or excelled

academically in KIPP. Instead, they seemed to be the ones who possessed
certain other gifts, skills like optimism and resilience and social agility.
Levin knew then that he had to promote these traits among his students.
Levin worked closely with social psychologists Martin Seligman and
Angela Duckworth to identify key character traits that would enable
students to reach the highest levels of success, both in KIPP and later in
college. After much discussion, they identified seven traits: grit, self-
control, zest, social intelligence, gratitude, optimism, and curiosity. After
identifying the traits, Duckworth worked with Levin to develop an
evaluation tool that teachers and students could use to assess “character
strengths.” Then, in 2007, Levin introduced the first-ever “character
report card.” He knew there would be problems with quantifying
character, so he asked students to rate themselves, as well as having
teachers rate them. By 2011, Tough observed that the emphasis on
character traits had gone “viral”—it was everywhere at the KIPP
Academy in New York. Levin explains that the focus on character “has to
permeate everything in the school, from the language people use, to
lesson plans, to how people are rewarded and recognized, to signs on the
wall. If it’s not woven into the DNA of an institution, it will have
minimal impact.” Indeed, KIPP’s increased emphasis on character has
shown promising results. Though the first cohort of graduates was in
2003, all the academies, across the United States, saw only a 21 percent
college graduation rate in six years. However, the class of 2005 doubled
this graduation rate: 46 percent of KIPP students graduated in six
years.18
The effectiveness of KIPP’s character-building approach will become
more apparent with time, but this example highlights the importance of
developing particular traits in order to excel in college and beyond:
resilience, optimism, and social agility. These traits are important not
only for low-income students but for all students; they are essential
ingredients for success. But the prevailing focus on test scores downplays
the importance of these character traits—and it is the students who
suffer the most because of it. Emphasizing an individual test score
discourages students from taking risks, engaging in creative solutions,
and embracing failure as an opportunity for learning.
Dominic Randolph, the headmaster of the prestigious Riverdale
Country School, a prep school in New York City, shares the same

concerns about the importance of teaching students character traits such
as resilience and curiosity. Despite the different demographics of KIPP
Academy in the Bronx and Riverdale (whose students primarily come
from wealthy and highly educated families), Randolph worries that
Riverdale students are missing out on strengthening their character, by
which he means developing traits like grit and self-control that will carry
a student through struggles and failure. He criticizes the over-emphasis
on IQ testing, observing that “this push on tests. . . is missing out on
some serious parts of what it means to be a successful human.”19
According to Randolph, a culture that focuses primarily on test scores
fails to develop these critical character traits in its young people. It does
not encourage students to take risks, develop curiosity, or engage in
activities that may lead to failure and thereby growth. He explains,
“People who have an easy time of things, who get 800s on their SAT’s, I
worry that those people get feedback that everything they’re doing is
great. And I think as a result, we are actually setting them up for long-
term failure. When that person suddenly has to face up to a difficult
moment, then I think they’re screwed, to be honest. I don’t think they’ve
grown the capacities to be able to handle that.”20
Unfortunately, Randolph’s worries don’t seem that far-fetched. I have
already pointed out that the job choices of many graduates from our
most elite colleges show a lack of empathy and creativity. In fact, the
negative social repercussions of raising a generation of graduates afraid
of bold pursuits that require some degree of struggle and potential
failure could in the long run be devastating. In Tough’s closing chapter,
he observes: “There are fewer entrepreneurs graduating from our best
colleges these days: fewer iconoclasts, fewer artists, fewer everything, in
fact, except investment bankers and management consultants. Recently,
the New York Times reported that. . . more than half of the [Princeton]
class was going into investment banking or consulting—and this after
the near-collapse of the finance industry in 2008.”21 James Kwak, an
economics blogger and law professor, explained this trend toward
banking and consulting among graduates of elite schools: “It’s that the
firms make the path and the decision so easy to take and so hard to
resist.”22 Kwak concludes, “For people who don’t know how to get a job
in the open economy and who have ended each phase of their lives by

taking a test to do the most prestigious thing possible in the next phase,
all of this comes naturally.”23 A decline in creative leadership and
problem solving is one possible side effect of emphasizing test scores
over character traits like resilience, social intelligence, and curiosity.
The twenty-first century needs college graduates who can address the
prevailing issues of our era, such as global warming, an expanding
technological landscape, and the equitable distribution of opportunities.
These issues require collaboration, experimentation, creativity, and
optimistic perseverance; this kind of thinking will help us tackle old
problems in ways that will provide us with new solutions.
MAZUR AND TREISMAN encouraged their students to value the learning
process over a right answer. They emphasized the importance of openly
discussing failures to move toward solutions, creatively approaching a
problem by experimenting with different approaches, and recognizing
that struggle was the only path to improvement. These principles
fostered within students character traits such as resilience, optimism,
and grit that often led to success. The development of these traits may
partially explain why the students in Mazur’s and Treisman’s classrooms
were far more successful at the end of the semester. It may also explain
why Treisman’s students were more likely to concentrate in mathematics
as their college major and more likely to participate in, and lead,
activities throughout the campus community.
But the transformations in our students are not only internal. We can
also effect an external transformation that encourages student
collaboration and interdependent learning—the roots of democratic
merit. Research sheds light on how student collaboration can
substantially improve overall performance when students teach each
other, learn from one another, and value differing perspectives.
However, the research also shows that performance does not
automatically improve if people are put in groups; group dynamics
matter. Our next four thinkers: Anita Woolley, Scott Page, Marilynn
Brewer, and Jo Boaler help explain the dynamics that enabled the
collaborations in Mazur’s and Treisman’s classrooms to be so effective.
ANITA WOOLLEY STUDIES INTELLIGENCE. She’s a professor at Carnegie Mellon
University in the department of cognitive science, a discipline that

studies how the mind works. Woolley, however, is unlike most of her
colleagues. Instead of studying the brains of individuals, she studies the
“brains” of groups. Intelligence, for Woolley, is measured by the ability
of groups. She calls this “collective intelligence.”
In today’s world, it is increasingly common for groups, rather than
individuals on their own, to solve complex problems. A huge part of the
reason for this is the complexity of the problems themselves. The world
is getting more and more multidimensional, and it is virtually impossible
for any one person to understand all the sides of a problem. People need
to work together. Businesses organize themselves into teams to come up
with marketing strategies. Government officials meet to devise national
security plans. Scientists share information across large networks to
develop new vaccines. In today’s world, almost everyone is
collaborating.
In a collaborative society like ours, measuring intelligence only in
individual people—as cognitive scientists have traditionally done—
seems to miss the point. Woolley has believed this from the start of her
career. When everyone’s working together, we should be concerned
about how and why groups become smart. It makes little sense to focus
so much on the intelligence level of the individual when most knowledge
building and problem solving today happens within teams. Woolley
wanted to delve deeper into what accounts for collective intelligence.
In beginning this endeavor, Woolley first asked, are groups smartest
when they are made up of the smartest members? So, if we wanted to
put together the brightest group, the one that would be the most
effective at solving the problems of, say, government, or business, or
science, would we simply try to find the smartest individuals and bring
them together? This is a logical and traditional belief about group
intelligence: throw the smartest people you can find into a room, and
they’re bound to be smart together.
Woolley set out to determine whether this widely held belief was true.
She put together different combinations of individuals with varying IQ
levels, genders, backgrounds, and so forth, and asked them to perform a
variety of tasks: some simple, some hard. The groups worked away. In
observing them as they worked, Woolley noticed that the groups acted
very differently from one another. In some groups, everyone spoke and
was encouraged to share ideas. In others, one or two people dominated

the conversation. Each came to have a culture of its own.
By the end of the experiment, the performance of the groups varied
dramatically. Some were very adept at solving all sorts of problems and
tasks; some were not adept at all, and others were somewhere in
between. In short, some teams were smarter than others. But why? Was
it simply as everyone had believed, that the smartest groups were the
ones with the smartest members?
What Woolley found was striking. The cumulative intelligence of the
groups’ members—if you were to add up the IQs of everyone in the
group—was not predictive at all of the intelligence of the group as a
whole. It didn’t seem to matter whether the group was made up of the
smartest individuals or of the least smart individuals. What mattered,
instead, were a whole host of other factors.
Surprisingly, Woolley found that the sex of the members (largely
because of that the group’s internal social dynamics) made a huge
difference on the outcomes. Groups with higher percentages of women
performed better than groups with higher percentages of men. The
“female effect,” Woolley found, can be partly explained by women’s
tendency toward greater social sensitivities. Women were more likely to
read nonverbal cues and perceive accurately what others were feeling or
thinking. They were also more likely to encourage turn-taking in the
discussions. The cooperation that women fostered led groups to take
advantage of the skills and knowledge of all the members. Those
attributes were brought out and shared, and then multiplied, in a way
that didn’t happen in groups with more men and less cooperation.
Communication and inclusivity were key to the groups’ success—far
more so than the overall intelligence of the members.
Woolley’s findings were consistent with other research that’s been
done on the role of gender in group processes. In a study of groups
working in business settings, Graham Fenwick and Derrick Neal found
that groups with equal numbers of men and women, and/or with higher
numbers of women than men, performed better than groups with higher
proportions of men.24 The reason for this, they found—as did Woolley—
was the positive effect women had on the ability of the group to
collaborate. The presence of women was shown to encourage and
facilitate group processes so that all members felt comfortable
participating and sharing their knowledge and skills.

The consequences of Woolley’s findings are huge, with implications for
business, government, and the sciences. With so much happening in
groups, as it does in today’s world, Woolley’s work suggests that our
efforts would be better directed toward building group intelligence.
Group or “collective” intelligence is not simply a direct outgrowth of
individual intelligence. Rather, it grows and develops in unique ways
that have to do with social sensitivities, group norms, and internal team
dynamics. Efforts to improve productivity, efficiency, or creativity
should involve teams with a high proportion of women and be
structured to encourage inclusive, participatory group norms.
For education, the findings are even more significant. They suggest
that our heavy focus on building individual abilities—as measured so
carefully in our testocratic world—might be misplaced. Rather than
focusing excessively on enhancing individual IQs, as today’s educational
system does, we need to improve—and reward—students’ abilities to
work in groups. This is the challenge we must meet if we want to
prepare our next generation to solve the complex problems of today’s
and tomorrow’s worlds.
ACROSS THE COUNTRY from Anita Woolley, Scott Page came to a similar
realization in his research: the highest-performing group was not
composed of the highest-performing individuals. While Woolley
uncovered the importance of female participation to group success, Page
uncovered the importance of diversity, where “diversity” refers not to
what we look like on the outside but to our distinct tools and abilities. In
his book The Difference: How the Power of Diversity Creates Better Groups,
Firms, Schools, and Societies, Page recounts that he “stumbled upon” the
power of diversity.25 This happened during his “first real job,” as an
assistant professor of economics at the California Institute of Technology
in Pasadena.
The year was 1995. At the time, Page had no intention of building his
career around mathematical models of diversity. He was simply enjoying
the fact that he could wear shorts to work every day, while exploring
Caltech’s abundant resources. Page did have a budding interest in how
groups performed as problem solvers. Like other economists, Page had
made two observations. First, he saw that our modern world demanded
complex problem solving to contend with multidimensional issues like

addressing environmental policies, designing social welfare systems, and
cracking secret codes. Second, he saw that groups were more adept than
individuals at solving these multidimensional problems. However, Page
had not yet explored what types of groups were the “best” problem
solvers.
One winter evening, Page decided to have what he describes as “a
little fun.” He constructed “a computing model of diverse problem
solvers confronting a difficult problem.” To create “groups,” Page
selected members from a pool of problem solvers who had received
different test scores on an assessment. He formed two different types of
groups: one of “high performers” and the other a “diverse” group of
problem solvers. The “highest performers” group comprised members
with the highest test scores. The second, “diverse” group was made up of
a random sampling of members with a range of test scores: some high,
some low. These varying test scores reflected what Page called different
“tools,” or ways of thinking—a fascinating way of looking at democratic
merit. Page then created a mathematical formula to test each group’s
ability to solve difficult problems. From this model, Page observed that
the random sampling of diverse performers outperformed the highest
performers every single time.
This may sound counterintuitive. You mean the brightest don’t always
do the best? In Page’s model, diversity trumped ability. In truth, Page
said, he was startled by his own finding. And he wanted an explanation.
So he partnered with his colleague Lu Hong to try to explain this
surprising discovery. Unlike Woolley, in her social science study, Page
and Hong used a different method of proof: mathematical formulas.
They showed that the “highest performers” possessed the same “tools”
for, or approaches to, problem solving, whereas individuals who
received a range of scores exhibited different tools or approaches. A
group would be most successful when its members could share their
diverse approaches to a problem.26 Through his study, Page built upon
the saying “two heads are better than one” to show that two heads with
diverse approaches will outperform two heads with the same approach
but higher test scores.
Page points out one of the limits of his finding: diverse groups will
only outperform homogeneous groups if the members share their
different approaches with one another. A group’s social dynamics are

relevant; witness studies such as Woolley’s, which focus on how group
norms affect performance. But Page’s research is also important because
it demonstrates why our society should promote diversity for reasons
besides “fairness.” Today’s world demands problem solvers. Groups
outperform individuals in problem solving, and Page shows that diverse
groups—with diverse approaches—will yield the best solutions to
modern dilemmas.
IN ADDITION TO wanting to be “ourselves” as individuals, humans want to
be part of groups. This desire takes on many different forms. We
organize into families, communities, countries, nationalities, and
ethnicities. As we come to see ourselves as part of these groups, we
adopt a number of different “social identities.” Every day, people
identify themselves by referencing their membership in all sorts of
groups—by 
gender, 
ethnicity, 
college 
alma 
mater, 
hometown,
participation in a club or activity. The list goes on. What these different
group-based identities reflect is the desire to “belong” or to feel part of a
group, and one aspect of group-belonging that people particularly like is
how belonging to a certain group makes them different from members of
other groups. While being part of a group means that you share things in
common with fellow members, it also means that those things make you
stand out. For example, sports fans both love their team and their fellow
fans and think that their team’s rivals and their fans are despicable. Red
Sox fans both love other Red Sox fans and hate Yankee fans.
So what does this have to do with education? Well, as it turns out, how
much you perceive your membership in the “in-group”—whether you’re
a Red Sox fan living among other fans in Boston or alone in Yankee
territory—affects your performance. If you perceive yourself as part of
the in-group, and if that in-group is high performing, then you are more
likely to perform well, just because you are part of that group.
Alternatively, if you perceive yourself as outside the in-group that
performs well, or if you perceive yourself as part of a group that is low
performing, you are more likely to do poorly.
Marilynn Brewer, a social psychologist at Ohio State University, calls
this idea “optimal distinctiveness.” Optimal distinctiveness means that
not only do individuals want to belong to a group, but they also care
about how unique they are simply because they are a member of this

group. People seek group membership, and also group differentiation.
That’s why Red Sox fans care not only about the Red Sox and being part
of their fan base but also about how they’re different from the Yankees
and their fan base.
Research shows that belonging in groups, as well as being
differentiated by groups, influences the way people think about
themselves. When people are members of groups, they start to define
themselves in the terms of the group. They also start to shift their
concerns and motivations from themselves as individuals to the group as
a whole. The relevance of all of this for education is that students’ self-
identification as members of high-performing or low-performing groups
actually affects their own, individual performance. When students see
themselves as part of a high-performing group—for example, a particular
ethnic group, some defined “talented” group within the school, or the
like—they are more likely to perceive themselves as high-performing
and then to actually do well. Conversely, if the student perceives herself
as a member of a “low-performing” group, she is more likely to perceive
herself as a low-performing student, and then actually perform worse.
This middle step—where individuals see themselves as having the
characteristics of the group of which they are a part—is essentially self-
stereotyping. And what the research shows is that it actually leads to
behavior that confirms the stereotype.
Furthermore, research that Brewer and others have done shows that
when conceptions of self change—when people start to see themselves as
members of groups and evaluate their success on this ground—their
ideas about what might be their duty to others shifts. This effect is
particularly pronounced in high-performing groups. When individuals
are in the high-performing in-group category, they not only perform
better, but they also “develop a cooperative orientation toward shared
problems.”27 In a classroom setting, this means that when students see
themselves as part of the in-group, and that group is high performing,
they tend to care more about problems that are shared by the whole
group.
Thinking back to Mazur’s and Treisman’s classrooms, Brewer’s theory
has a lot of relevance. Essentially, most of what Mazur and Treisman do
is to create a classroom setting that treats all students as possessing
“merit” and as being capable of succeeding. In short, they make

everyone part of the in-group. All students perceive themselves as part of
the group that is high performing and develop collaborative attitudes
that foster even greater success than had they been working on their
own. It’s not surprising, then, that not only do those individuals succeed,
as the studies show, but they also develop mind-sets that facilitate
cooperation and help each other develop shared learning goals—which
raises the tide for all.
FOR THOSE OF YOU who may wonder if the work of Mazur and Treisman is
applicable to K–12 teaching, Stanford University professor Jo Boaler’s
research of the Railside School offers one such example.28 Railside is a
public high school in the Bay Area of California, considered to be on
“the wrong side of the railroad tracks.”29 Students come from homes
with few financial resources, and many are English-language learners.
Yet in Boaler’s five-year longitudinal research, students in Railside’s high
school math program outperformed the nearby school’s wealthier
students on standardized tests, even though Railside students entered as
ninth graders performing far below the comparison students on those
tests. Not only did Railside students achieve greater mathematical gains,
but more of them enrolled in higher-level math courses and enjoyed
math more. The achievement gap between students from the “better”
side of the tracks was greatly narrowed. Students also gained what
Boaler calls “relational equity,” which means they learned to collaborate
by valuing the ethnic, gender, and social-class diversity of their peers.
The success of Railside provides a perfect example of the concepts I’ve
discussed in this chapter: the power of a growth mind-set, the dynamic
impact of teamwork, and the value of drawing from diversity.
In her research, Boaler studied three California high schools: Railside,
Greendale, and Hilltop. Railside’s student body was 40 percent Latino,
20 percent African American, 20 percent white, and 20 percent Asian
Pacific Islanders; 30 percent of students qualified for free or reduced
lunch. Greendale had a predominantly white student body (90 percent)
and low poverty rates (only 10 percent qualified for free or reduced
lunch). At Hilltop, a rural high school with a student body that was 60
percent white and 40 percent Latino, 20 percent of their students
qualified for free or reduced lunch. Another useful statistic to note is

that 30 percent of the students at Railside were English-language
learners, whereas no students at Greendale and only 20 percent of
Hilltop’s students were.30
Boaler studied approximately three hundred students in “traditional”
math classes at Greendale and Hilltop and approximately three hundred
students in “reform oriented”31 math classes at Railside in a four-year
study, following their progress from ninth through twelfth grades. When
the study began, ninth graders entering Railside tested well below the
performance of Greendale and Hilltop students. At the end of the first
year of the study Railside students had approached the test scores of
Greendale and Hilltop students. By the end of the second year, Railside
students had significantly outperformed Greendale and Hilltop
students.32 At the end of the third year, Railside students continued to
outperform Greendale and Hilltop students, although not to a
statistically significant degree.33 At the end of the fourth year,
achievement tests were not administered because a more selective group
of students remained in math classes in all three schools.34 Nonetheless,
in this fourth year of the study, the twelfth grade students at Railside
were enrolled in advanced math classes at a much higher rate (41
percent of students) than were the students at the other two schools (27
percent).35 Railside students also enjoyed math more, with 71 percent
responding positively on a second-year questionnaire, compared to 46
percent of Greendale and Hilltop students.36 What made this stunning
achievement possible, especially given the ninth graders’ lower entering
test scores and the untracked classrooms? Teachers at Railside engaged
in the same practices as Mazur and Treisman yet for younger learners:
developing a growth mind-set, working in collaborative groups, and
using diversity as an asset for achievement.
To begin with, Railside did not engage in the tracking practices typical
of most high schools, where students are slotted into remedial, regular,
or honors-level math courses that predetermine and restrict their
educational opportunities both during and after high school. At Railside,
all entering ninth graders were assigned to algebra. Interestingly, the
Railside students who benefited the most from this untracked
heterogeneous approach were the students who tested highest when
entering the ninth grade—which should alleviate concerns that these

students would be “held back” by their peers who didn’t test as well as
they did on the math assessments.37
Next, teachers at Railside maintained high expectations of their
students and offered them challenging tasks—all the while emphasizing
the importance of effort over ability and continually reminding students
that they could accomplish anything if they put in the effort.38 This
message was internalized by students at Railside. In the words of Sara, a
ninth grader:
To be successful in math you really have to just, like, put your mind
to it and keep on trying—because math is all about trying. It’s kind
of a hard subject because it involves many things. [. . .] But as long
as you keep on trying and don’t give up, then you know that you can
do it.39
Railside teachers taught their students not only that they must persist
in the face of struggle but also how—by using “multiple-ability
treatments.”40 Multiple-ability treatments emphasize the importance of
multiple abilities required for a task. When beginning an activity,
Railside teachers would discuss with students the multiple abilities
necessary to complete the group task (for example, reasoning, creativity,
spatial-visual reasoning) and told students, “None of us has all these
abilities; each one of us has some of these abilities.”41 Instead, students
were told they needed to work together to accomplish their math tasks.
Throughout the students’ four years at high school, teachers continued to
remind them of the importance of effort and persistence for success in
math class. This was mainly done through teachers’ emphasis on
collaborative group work.
How does this group work operate? Analyzing six hundred hours of
classroom-observation video, collected throughout the study, Boaler
found that Railside students worked in small groups 72 percent of the
time and presented to the class 9 percent of the time. Only 4 percent of
class time was spent with teachers lecturing to students, with 9 percent
of class time spent questioning students as a whole class. In stark
contrast, in the traditional classrooms at Greendale and Hilltop, 21
percent of class time was spent lecturing, 15 percent questioning
students as a whole class, while 48 percent of the time students worked

individually in their books, and only for 0.2 percent of the time did
students present to the class.42 Writes Boaler:
Enhanced student participation had a purpose of course. Rather than
the learning by rote which was occurring in the traditional
classrooms of Greendale and Hilltop, students at Railside were
expected to justify their reasoning, which not only improved their
mathematics understanding but also created respect for each other. A
9th grader, Jasmine, explained the multiple approaches of her math
class and the expectation of justification by saying, “It’s not just one
way to do it [. . .] It’s more interpretive. It’s not just one answer.
There’s more than one way to get it. And then it’s like: “Why does it
work?”43
At Railside, students were expected to justify their reasoning for their
answers and to question each other. Teachers emphasized their
expectation that students take collective responsibility for their group.
To do so, students were taught about positive teamwork through
“complex instruction,” a group-work strategy that incorporates roles (for
example, 
team 
captain, 
facilitator, 
recorder 
reporter, 
resource
manager).44 Teaching students how to collaborate in groups not only
benefited student learning, but it also facilitated respect for the diversity
of the range of strengths that students brought to the group. Interviews
with Railside students highlight the respect that students had for each
other and the responsibility they took for both their own and their
group’s learning.
INTERVIEWER: Do you prefer to work alone or in groups?
AMADO (Year 1): I think it’d be in groups, ’cause I want, like, people
that doesn’t know how to understand it, I want to help them. And I
want to—I want them to be good at it. And I want them to
understand how to do the math that we do.
LATISHA (Year 3): It’s good working in groups because everybody else
in the group can learn with you, so if someone doesn’t understand
—like, if I don’t understand but the other person does understand,

they can explain it to me, or vice versa, and I think it’s cool.
ZANE (Year 2): Everybody in there is at a different level. But what
makes the class good is that everybody’s at different levels, so
everybody’s constantly teaching each other and helping each other
out.45
Railside students did not refer to classmates as “slow” or “dumb,” as
they did at Greendale and Hilltop. Rather they referred to some students
as those who “don’t do their work.”46 This highlights students’
internalization of a growth mind-set, where effort rather than ability
determines success in mathematics. What is perhaps most interesting
about this heterogeneous and group approach is that not only did
students achieve greater mathematical gains, but the achievement gap
was narrowed, and students learned to value each other’s ethnic and
cultural backgrounds, the “relational equity” I mentioned.
Just as Scott Page showed that a diversity of students produced the
best solutions, the students at Railside benefited from the diversity of
their classrooms. Because students were not tracked into ability groups,
math classes were diverse both in the different academic strengths that
students brought to the classroom and also in the ethnic diversity of the
student body—40 percent Latino, 20 percent African American, 20
percent white, and 20 percent Asian–Pacific Islanders. When teachers
emphasized the importance of growth mind-sets, collaborative group
work, and multiple perspectives, students learned that success in math
comes from applying these principles. This is illustrated in this interview
with Ayanna and Estelle, Railside seniors in the fourth year of the study.
INTERVIEWER: What do you guys think it takes to be successful in
math?
AYANNA: Being able to work with other people.
ESTELLE: Be open-minded, listen to everybody’s ideas.
AYANNA: You have to hear other people’s opinions, ’cause you might
be wrong.

ESTELLE: You might be wrong ’cause there’s lots of different ways to
work everything out.
AYANNA: ’Cause everyone has a different way of doing things, you can
always find different ways to work something out, to find
something out.
ESTELLE: Someone always comes up with a way to do it. We’re always
like, “Oh, my gosh, I can’t believe you would think of something
like that.”47
Boaler proposes that this “relational equity,” where students treat each
other respectfully and fairly consider each other’s diverse perspectives,
should be one of the goals of education. She argues that schools should
“produce citizens who treat each other with respect, who value the
contributions of others with whom they interact, irrespective of their
race, class or gender, and who act with a sense of justice in considering
the needs of others in society.”48 At Railside, as students learned to
value multiple and diverse perspectives in the classroom, they also came
to value the ethnic and cultural diversity of their classmates. Students’
work in collaborative groups at Railside influenced their social
relationships, as illustrated by this interview with Robert and Jon, also
seniors in the fourth year of the study.
ROBERT: I love this school, you know? There are schools that are
within a mile of us that are completely different—they’re broken
up into their race cliques and things like that. And at this school,
everyone’s accepted as a person, and they’re not looked at by the
color of their skin.
INTERVIEWER: Does the math approach help that, or is it a whole
school influence?
JON: The groups in math help to bring kids together.
ROBERT: Yeah. When you switch groups, that helps you to mingle with

more people than if you’re just sitting in a set seating chart where
you’re only exposed to the people that are sitting around you, and
you don’t know the people on the other side of the room. In math
you have to talk; you have to voice if you don’t know or voice
what you’re learning.49
Students in the diverse classrooms of Railside had higher mathematics
gains, outperformed the students of Greendale and Hilltop, enjoyed
mathematics, and enrolled in advanced math courses. The achievement
gap among ethnic groups either narrowed or disappeared.50 By contrast,
achievement disparities by ethnic group at the traditional Greendale and
Hilltop schools remained throughout the five years of the study.
Railside is not the only school engaging in this approach. The San
Francisco Unified School District, for example, is currently in its fifth
year of a professional development initiative in which middle and high
school math teachers throughout the district participate in a thirty-hour
summer course, meet throughout the year, review student work, and
watch videos of each other’s instruction. Just as teamwork is expected of
students, math teachers in these cities also work in teams. In Seattle,
former Railside teacher and current University of Washington research
associate Lisa Jilk coaches math teachers’ implementation of the
“complex instruction” approach in Seattle public schools. At Vanguard
High School, a public school in New York City in which most students
qualify for free or reduced-priced lunches, math teachers meet weekly to
support each other’s use of group work with their diverse students in the
school’s untracked, heterogeneous math classes.
RAILSIDE AND OTHER urban public schools in San Francisco, Seattle, and
New York City serve as enlightening and hopeful K–12 examples of the
same culture shift advocated at the university level by Mazur and
Treisman. Through collaboration and innovative approaches that allow
students to value effort over ability, each of these examples follows the
research of Dweck and Tough in promoting a growth mind-set rather
than a fixed mind-set. By learning how to work productively in diverse
groups, the shift in student perceptions on subjects such as intelligence

results in greater learning gains, positive attitudes, and students’
appreciation of the diversity of their peers. This echoes both Woolley’s
research on turn taking, social sensitivity, and the role of women, and
Page’s research on the value of diversity in groups and multiple
perspectives. This is democratic merit in action—and what could be the
beginning of a widespread culture shift that will ultimately benefit both
individuals and society as a whole.

CHAPTER EIGHT
Democratic Merit in a Twenty-First-Century World
TIME AND AGAIN I find myself returning to Amartya Sen’s definition of
merit as an incentive system that rewards the actions a society values. As
I have argued throughout part 2, a shift from honoring testocratic merit
toward democratic merit produces a variety of benefits aligned with the
values our culture professes: students display a higher capacity to
problem solve, a greater demonstration of both leadership and peer
collaboration, and an increase in fairness. As the title of part 2 indicates,
these are the “solutions”—but their impact does not end in the field of
education. They also carry a heightened significance: a culture shift,
from testocratic to democratic merit, can translate into benefits for our
whole society. Returning to Professor David Labaree’s observation:
America has always conceptualized education as a training ground for
tomorrow’s citizens, leaders, and professionals. Increasing collaborative
skills in a classroom can—as these students graduate and enter the
workforce—reverberate throughout society by increasing collaborative
skills in the workplace.
Thus, I’d like to go a step further in considering how a shift toward
democratic merit can not only positively affect our classrooms but also
positively affect our societal institutions and governance. There are
strong indications—through anecdotal and empirical evidence—that the
skill sets promoted by systems of democratic merit will better serve the
challenges of a twenty-first-century world, which demands complex
problem solving and collaboration among diverse individuals. Indeed, it
is becoming increasingly apparent to today’s business leaders and
politicians that increased collaboration—rather than pure competition—
is what will lead to greater outcomes.
I want to offer two examples that illustrate how both the professional
and political sectors can benefit from graduates who know how to
collaborate, problem solve, and embrace a diversity of perspectives.
First, I’ll consider the story of Atul Gawande, who demonstrates how
collaboration can improve health-care quality in this country while

decreasing its spiraling costs. I will then turn to Archon Fung’s study of
how cross-collaboration can lead to better governance and legal
solutions. Both of these stories shed light on how a shift toward
democratic merit is not only ideal but also necessary to move us forward
into the demands of a twenty-first-century world.
BY TRAINING, ATUL Gawande is an endocrine surgeon. He has a reputation
in the operating room for being bold, innovative, and detail oriented.
Colleagues will attest that Gawande is known for being a self-professed
rock ’n’ roll fanatic who listens to artists like David Bowie while
performing surgery,1 for encouraging doctors to collectively engage in
constant self-reflection, and for meticulously following checklists during
procedures.
However, it is Gawande’s work outside the operating room that
illustrates the potential power of a culture shift toward democratic
merit. Gawande is also a prolific writer. In numerous opinion pieces,
articles, and books, he has explored the best practices in medicine in
order to suggest improvements in the medical industry. In 2009,
Gawande decided to take on a major issue preoccupying Washington,
DC: how to bring health-care costs under control. In tackling this issue,
Gawande highlighted how cultures of collaboration and communication
can lead us to better solutions.
In Gawande’s words: “The explosive trend in American medical costs
seems to have occurred here in an especially intense form.”2 According
to a 2008 World Health Organization report, the United States spent
more on health care per person than any other country in the world.
WHO also found that the United States spent the highest percent of its
gross domestic product on health care. Of course, none of this would be
a problem if more expensive health care translated into better health
care. Unfortunately, most studies have found that having the world’s
highest health-care costs do not result in the United States having the
world’s best health-care system. In fact, the 2000 WHO report ranked
the United States thirty-seventh in health care, behind nations like
Morocco, Cyprus, and Costa Rica.3 In 2007, the Commonwealth Fund
did a study that looked at health care in Australia, Canada, Germany,
New Zealand, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Their report

ranked the United States last or next to last in four out of five criteria,
including quality, efficiency, and access.4
Gawande observed that rising costs were leaving countless individuals
uninsured or drowning in medical debt. Just as important, high costs
were also “devouring our government.”5 He recognized President Barack
Obama’s concern that “the greatest threat to America’s fiscal health is
not Social Security. . . . It’s not the investments that we’ve made to
rescue our economy during this crisis. By a wide margin, the biggest
threat to our nation’s balance sheet is the skyrocketing cost of health
care. It’s not even close.”6 Gawande decided to search for solutions, and
he uncovered a possible answer to efficiently curb costs while enhancing
care: greater collaboration between medical providers. Gawande would
publish these findings in a 2009 New Yorker article “The Cost
Conundrum,” which gained attention from readers across the country,
including President Obama.
That year, Gawande’s questions about health-care spending brought
him to McAllen, Texas. McAllen calls itself the Square Dance Capital of
the World, but it has another reputation: it’s one of the most expensive
health-care markets in the country. The only city that outspends McAllen
on per person health-care costs is Miami, which has much higher labor
and 
living 
costs. 
Gawande 
interviewed 
businessmen, 
hospital
administrators, and doctors in McAllen and neighboring counties, and
various theories were offered to explain why, for example, McAllen’s
Medicare costs were twice the national average.7 Some residents
hypothesized that McAllen’s population was not healthy and, therefore,
required higher spending. But Gawande disproved this theory by finding
that cities comparable to McAllen in terms of demographics, such as El
Paso, were no more healthy and yet spent much less on health care.8
Others suggested that McAllen’s health care must be superior to that of
other regions. However, there was no indication that the city’s services
produced better outcomes than those of neighboring cities, like El Paso.
But Gawande concluded that McAllen’s higher costs did not correlate
with higher quality, noting, “Medicare ranks hospitals on twenty-five
metrics of care. On all but two of these, McAllen’s five largest hospitals
performed worse, on average, than El Paso’s. McAllen costs Medicare
seven thousand dollars more per person each year than does the average

city in America. But not, so far as one can tell, because it’s delivering
better health care.”9
Instead, Gawande found a different explanation for the higher costs in
McAllen: professional culture. The hospitals that drove up spending costs
did not provide better care. They simply had medical practitioners who
were driven by profit and competitive self-interest. In contrast,
institutions like the Mayo Clinic, which provide higher-quality care and
lower 
costs, 
exhibit 
a 
different 
culture: 
collaboration 
among
practitioners.
Gawande suddenly became less interested in the problems of McAllen
and more interested in how the Mayo Clinic built a culture that
produced one of the highest-quality, lowest-cost health-care systems in
the country. The Mayo Clinic implemented two noteworthy practices.
First, it discouraged competition by pooling all the money received by
doctors and the hospital system. Doctors instead received a salary. CEO
Denis Cortese explained that this payment reorganization occurred so
that “the doctors’ goal in patient care couldn’t be increasing their
income.” Unlike the doctors in McAllen, who aggressively competed
with neighboring practitioners to maximize personal profit, Mayo Clinic
doctors worked together to provide the best care for patients. To nurture
this collaborative culture, the Mayo Clinic implemented a second
important practice: staff members participated in team brainstorming
sessions. Gawande observed that “the doctors and nurses, and even the
janitors, sat in meetings almost weekly, working on ideas to make the
service and the care better, not to get more money out of patients.”10
These two changes in industry practice were intended to produce better
care for patients. The Mayo Clinic succeeded in this goal, and as an
unintended side effect, it also produced society-wide benefits by
lowering health-care costs.
Gawande pointed out that the Mayo Clinic story is not an aberration.
Other hospitals have reached similar results when a culture of
collaboration replaces a culture of profit-driven competition. For
example, the health-care system in Grand Junction, Colorado, ranks
among the highest in quality care providers and yet incurs among the
lowest costs. Michael Pramenko, a doctor and medical leader in Grand
Junction, explained that the rise in quality and fall in costs correlated

with two changes. First, doctors agreed they would not compete over
insurance providers but would instead universally agree on fees for all
patients. This drove down costs. Second, practitioners agreed to meet
regularly in small peer-review committees to go over their patient charts
together. By increasing group problem solving, practice problems
decreased and quality of care improved. Once again, the culture of
collaboration over competition was a recipe for better outcomes, both
for patients and for taxpayers.
The methods adopted by Mayo Clinic and Grand Junction to achieve
better health-care outcomes are the same as those promoted by
classrooms 
organized 
around 
democratic 
merit: 
a 
culture 
of
collaboration rather than competition, a sharing of diverse perspectives,
and increasing equity among colleagues. By promoting teamwork and
collective problem solving, a culture shift toward democratic merit could
drive us in the direction of solving health care’s most pressing problems
while also improving quality of care. That’s just one way that workforce
practices that encourage cross-collaboration and communication can
lead to increased productivity and success in the twenty-first-century
marketplace.
Embracing democratic merit over an obsession with testocratic merit
and competition can have important implications not only in the world
of business but also in how our society is governed. Recall David
Labaree’s observation that one of the purposes of a public education
system in a democratic society is to prepare citizens to participate
effectively and meaningfully in the processes that govern us. A healthy
democracy depends on everyone having equal opportunity to understand
and shape public action. When our education system produces a culture
of competition instead of collaboration, or when it produces citizens who
cannot work together to solve problems or incorporate diverse voices,
this has important consequences for democracy. We have seen how
individuals breaking out of their narrow roles to cooperate and
experiment with others can make health care more effective, efficient,
and individualized. An example of a similar innovation in local
government can show how the culture shift that I propose can improve
democracy more broadly.
Archon Fung is a political scientist who has taken a close look at how
collaboration, experimentation, and diversity can best relate to the way

we govern ourselves. His work is concerned with a simple question: how
can we make our political institutions more democratic? To find an
answer, he decided to look not at the highest levels of the political
process but at a far more humble site: a network of community police
and school boards established throughout Chicago in the mid-1990s.
Rather than leaving the supervision of schools and police to a central
office, this innovative initiative gave the community a voice in managing
these institutions.11 For example, parents, teachers, students, and
neighbors volunteered as members of a community board for their high
school, meeting regularly to make decisions about personnel, budget,
facilities, and curriculum. These boards were set up at the level of a
single police beat or elementary school, a scale small enough that the
most closely affected individuals could have a direct say. For instance,
policing routinely involves discretion and local expertise on the part of
individual officers. Rather than managing this discretion with one-size-
fits-all policies designed by a central office, local boards allowed citizens
to come together and direct police discretion toward problems that
residents consider important.
Fung spent two years in Chicago, sitting in on these meetings, carefully
observing how they worked, and also noting when they didn’t. Because
the boards in Chicago were set up on a small-enough scale for
participants to focus on pragmatic solutions to specific problems, Fung
labeled this model “street-level democracy.” One of the hallmarks of
street-level democracy is its openness; where the traditional democratic
process expects participants to enter with their views determined by
political commitments, street-level democracy allows residents to
develop and clarify their thoughts on complex political matters through
deliberation and experimentation. Fung describes how two people with
completely different views on a political or cultural question are unlikely
to find a way to work together in the typical political process. In the
context of making the decisions that are necessary to making their
neighborhood safer, however, they can easily work together to solve
problems. Through that process, they can even learn to trust one
another.
Fung explains how these collaborative or participatory models can
produce better results than hierarchical, pyramid-like management
structures. In fact, the Chicago initiative emerged from a belief that

public services might be more effective if managed with direct input and
participation from the people they serve. Though the centralized nature
of large bureaucracies seems to promise coordination and efficiency,
Chicago residents were frustrated that the city was failing to educate
children and keep streets safe, especially in poorer communities. These
large bureaucracies had originally grown as the problems we wanted
government to address became more complex: whereas police had once
focused simply on catching perpetrators of crime, we now also expect
them to prevent crime, and we judge their performance based on the
crime rate. As cities grew, pyramid-like bureaucracies seemed like the
best way to manage complex functions like policing, education, and
environmental control. But the more complex these functions became,
the harder it was for bureaucracies to remain effective and equitable at
the individual and local levels. It took toppling these pyramid-shaped
hierarchies on their side in the form of street-level democracy to ensure
that the complex problems of Chicago residents were dealt with in a way
that remained effective.
Fung describes a neighborhood-policing board in Chicago’s Rogers
Park area. Residents of the neighborhood had noticed an increase in
drug dealing, prostitution, and late-night noise on one particular street
corner. After meeting to discuss the problem, residents learned that the
landlord of a laundromat on the street corner had refused to renew the
previous management’s lease and instead had rented the laundromat to
his son. Whereas the old management had tolerated drug activity, the
son now took steps to discourage it, removing indoor pay phones and
banning anyone involved with drug activity from the premises. As a
result, drug dealers and their customers started congregating outside the
laundromat and using outdoor pay phones across the street. Once the
residents identified this source of the problem, they immediately took
steps to fix it. First, they organized walking groups to create a positive
community presence in the streets. Second, they approached the owner
of the outdoor pay phones. When he agreed to remove the phones but
learned he could not cancel his contract with the phone company, the
community board pressured the company to at least block incoming calls
from the phones. Rather than leaving this problem to some kind of
centralized fix (such as the city removing all pay phones from street
corners) or waiting for police to catch and arrest the criminals, residents

developed a pragmatic solution, through trust, experimentation, and
persistence.
Fung emphasizes that street-level democracy requires not just creating
new political processes but also teaching the personal qualities that
citizens need to productively collaborate and deliberate with their
neighbors. If we want public education to prepare citizens who will
participate more effectively in our democracy, then we need to ask if the
values and skills our education system teaches actually nurture these
qualities. Does lining everyone up according to achievement actually
produce better citizens? How do we teach the next generation how to
effectively collaborate and deliberate with others?
Fung offers another example that shows the importance of making
decisions collaboratively: two residents of a neighborhood each faced
problems they wanted the police to address. One lived by an open-air
drug market and was worried about recent shootings there. The other
lived in a wealthier part of the neighborhood and was concerned about
teenagers drinking in the park by his house. Absent community policing,
their best means of attracting attention or resources to either problem
would probably have been for one of them to lobby more vocally than
the other. In fact, even at a community meeting, the residents’ instinct
probably would have been to show up and make the loudest case for
why his problem mattered more. But in a process that emphasizes
individual collaboration and deliberation, the two residents simply
shared and justified their concern to each other—as if they were talking
through a physics or a math problem in a classroom, both trying to find
the right answer. After a while, the resident from the wealthier
neighborhood who was worried about underage drinking recognized that
the shootings were a more pressing issue. Rather than competing, the
residents collaborated.
Unfortunately, this is not how our democracy currently works. Nor
does the meritocracy encourage this kind of thinking. Our political
process allocates public resources through a kind of competition:
individuals and groups act in their own rational self-interest, demanding
the changes most important to them, and the loudest or most
credentialed voices win. This is how defining “merit” narrowly and
individualistically, rather than collectively, manifests itself in the
political process. The problem isn’t that the resident from the wealthier

neighborhood was concerned with underage drinking because he didn’t
care about the issues his poorer neighbors faced; it was just that he was
never asked to sincerely consider them. No part of the traditional
democratic process asked him to empathize with the concerns of others
or to compare his concern to other problems in the neighborhood. He
only had to advocate for the problems he knew about. His role was to
compete against his neighbors, not work with them.
Fung emphasizes the importance of another quality that our culture’s
current obsession with testocratic merit does not cultivate: a willingness
to try fresh approaches knowing they might fail. Just as Mazur and
Treisman found in their classrooms, Fung found that meetings were most
effective when participants were open to changing their minds based on
new arguments and evidence, rather than by being stubborn or
dogmatic.
Fung further describes how this process of experimenting with and
adapting solutions also resulted in participants feeling more invested in
the outcomes. He tells the story of a crusty police officer who spends his
days stopping suspicious-looking teenagers on the street, not because he
is naive enough to believe this really improves safety but because he
simply believes it’s his job. Likewise, he attends the community policing
program only because his job requires him to do it. When he learns at a
meeting that these patrols anger residents, he cuts back on the practice
to avoid controversy, earning a bit of their trust. Later, when residents
tell him to focus on an area where they claim that criminal activity is
occurring, he discovers two drug houses he never would have known
about otherwise. With help from the residents, they evict the drug
dealers.
On one level, this story is about how police improve their work by
listening to the community. But Fung emphasizes another development:
collaboration has changed how the police officer views his job. He now
sees how his actions can actually make a difference. Before, he was just
doing what he needed to do to get paid, regardless of whether it actually
made a difference. But now he is starting to build an interest in seeing
the neighborhood improve through his actions. Likewise, residents who
previously only saw the police swooping into the neighborhood to harass
people for no clear reason now recognize an opportunity to work with
law enforcement, to limit damaging practices and encourage better ones.

Fung also looked at who exactly was doing all this participating. After
all, just as our current political systems tend to reward those with more
money or time to spare, Fung wondered if those same people also have
more influence even in supposedly collaborative processes. Instead, he
found that even in community groups that featured a range of economic
or educational backgrounds, collaboration was possible once residents
started thinking beyond their narrow self-interest. He studied a
geographically and economically segregated police precinct, where
median incomes on the east and west sides of commuter-rail tracks
differed by almost $30,000. Because the tracks were such a solid
physical barrier, the problems each side faced rarely spilled into the
other. As such, residents had a clear interest in trying to secure more
police resources for their own side. Yet they formed a board to deal with
their problems. Fung noted that cynics might expect this board to not
function productively, given residents’ fundamentally contradictory
interests and their initial inability to genuinely empathize with and
incorporate the perspectives of others. Fung wondered if the wealthier
residents would use their higher incomes, free time, education, civic
skills, and institutional connections to dominate community meetings, as
they can do with the traditional political process—or educational beauty
contest.
Fung sat in meetings observing the group for its first ten months. He
reports that, just as skeptics might suspect, the west side residents did
initially have more influence in the meetings. During the first four
months, the group set the community-policing agenda, with the more
articulate and aggressive residents dominating the conversation. Though
residents from the poorer east side continued to attend the meetings in
equal numbers as their counterparts from the wealthier west side, they
mostly kept quiet. For example, at one session, the meeting facilitator
asked residents to propose “new business” for the meeting. When a
police officer reported on multiple shootings on a particular street corner
on the east side, the facilitator attempted to open the conversation up
further by asking if anyone felt the corner was an ongoing problem. No
resident answered, and no further action was planned. In comparison,
west side residents had raised concerns about street peddlers and urged
police to enforce vendor-license requirements more strictly. The police
did, and the peddlers were gone within three months. The west side

residents also raised concerns about traffic violations, such as drivers
hopping curbs or cutting through traffic lights, and demanded a stop
sign at a busy corner. The police promised to increase traffic surveillance
at these spots, and the alderman’s representative promised to request the
stop sign.
Once again, the problem was not that west side residents were trying
to shut out their east side neighbors. Rather, the group simply operated
the way many groups do that lack the skills to work collaboratively; by
default, their proceedings fall into the hands of those who can explain a
problem the most articulately or aggressively.
Fortunately, this began to shift by the second half of Fung’s time
observing the group. Part of this was due to a change in procedure from
a free-form town-hall-style format to a five-step process in which the
group would (1) list problems and rank them according to priority; (2)
gather all the information that different residents had about the
problem; (3) figure out steps that residents, police, and other city
workers would take to deal with the problem; (4) implement the
strategy; and (5) evaluate how implementation went.
This structured, thoughtful, and open-ended approach to problem-
solving echoes the kind of thinking that the creative educators I
described earlier in the book are trying to teach, as well as the kinds of
skills that innovations like performance-based assessments are designed
to test and reward. Fung observed how it produced much better
outcomes than when the group simply focused on whatever concerns
were raised by the loudest or most articulate residents.
In the meeting that Fung observed, the idea for this structured
problem-solving process came from a community organizer who had
learned that the police issue “beat plans,” ranking safety problems
according to urgency. She thought these plans should be developed by
residents, not police, and proposed that the group list problems and
prioritize them. One resident mentioned a drug house on the west side of
the neighborhood, and everyone quickly agreed this was the single most
important safety issue for the group to address. Several months of
meetings had been largely silent on this problem, and suddenly all
participants, east and west, black and white, agreed it should be their
biggest priority. Rather than each person ranking what was the most
important to them or competing against one another, the group

proceeded to allocate shared resources based on a consensus about what
was most important for the community as a whole.
Fung also looked at areas with even more extreme poverty, to see
whether street-level democracy could be effective even in these
conditions. While one might expect that people with more free time and
resources would be the ones who can afford to spend their evenings at
meetings discussing crime, Fung found that residents from poorer
neighborhoods and residents without college education actually
participate at greater rates. Specifically, he explains that in two
neighborhoods with identical crime rates, income levels, and racial
compositions but different levels of college education or median income,
the one with fewer college-educated residents or a lower median income
was more likely to have better attendance at community meetings.
Whereas our current meritocratic approach to politics bars people from
having a meaningful say in public action unless they know how to
compete with and outperform everyone around them, street-level
democracy opens politics up to all kinds of perspectives and focuses
these perspectives directly on solving the problems people care most
about. Street-level democracy encourages citizens to listen to the
perspectives of their neighbors and peers regardless of what credentials
accompany those perspectives.
Chicago residents participated at these community meetings because
they saw that their participation made better schools and safer
neighborhoods possible. Rather than viewing themselves as passive
consumers of public action that bureaucrats produce, collaboration
encouraged and rewarded these citizens’ direct civic engagement.
Although the residents participating in these meetings had initially done
a poor job of listening to others or working together, this improved once
the city developed a curriculum to teach them problem solving and
collaboration skills and when the groups turned to a process that was
open-ended and valued diverse perspectives. Unfortunately, our
education neither teaches nor rewards these skills, instead urging
children to compete individualistically and narrowly to reach the top of
a hierarchy. Just as the obsession with competition and individualistic
merit begins in classrooms, so can a more effective democracy.

CONCLUSION
I HAVE BEEN at this a long time.
In 1966 (I realize I am dating myself!) I wrote the following letter to
the College Board about what was then called the Scholastic Aptitude
Test:
Gentlemen:
In regard to the December 3, 1966, SAT, two of the questions asked were
rather ambiguous. I am referring to two questions on the Math Section
which were part of the series of Data-Sufficiency Questions. Since this
type of problem is an attempt to determine a student’s power of logical
analysis, information is given to answer the question without giving the
student taking the test an opportunity to give the reasons for one’s
decision. I don’t think that anyone who recognized implications in the
questions should be penalized.
The two questions are as follows:
How many questions are there on a test?
a. Mary answered 15 questions correctly and received a mark of
30%.
b. John answered 35 questions correctly and received a mark of 70%.
Who has more US coins?
a. Pete has 24 cents and Ed has 26 cents.
b. One of Ed’s coins is a quarter.
Superficial examination of these two questions leads one to the
conclusion that sufficient information is given to answer the question.
Closer analysis, however, leads one to the dilemma that re: ques. 1—we
are assuming that each question is worth an equal number of points and
we have not been given any evidence on which to base such an

assumption and re: ques. 2—since we have been asked who has more US
coins we do not have any information on whether any or all of Pete’s
coins are US coins or perhaps Canadian coins. A student can therefore
come to the conclusion that there is insufficient data in both A and B of
ques. 1 & 2 to answer the questions.
It is my humble opinion that to be fair to a student who is directed to
focus on “sufficiency of data” two things should occur. . .
That was me as a sixteen-year-old. Look out world! I would like to
point out that I had the restraint to wait two days after taking the SAT to
write and mail the above letter. I don’t think I ever got a response, but
writing the letter was cathartic because it was annoying to have these
questions that didn’t make any sense.
When I got to Radcliffe College at Harvard University, the SAT
followed me there. During one of our first conversations in our dorm
room, my freshman-year roommate immediately explained that she was
worried she would never get married because she would never find a
man as smart as she was—after all she had perfect scores on the SAT!
Even then the conflation of self-worth, or other-worth (in terms of who
you wanted to spend the rest of your life with), with test scores struck
me as odd.
Instinctively I sought out my posse of black women at Radcliffe. This
was the 1960s, so there was a lot going on, not only in terms of the
Vietnam War but also the civil rights movement. Martin Luther King Jr.
was assassinated while I was in college. It was a very sad time, but it
was also a very exciting time because students felt empowered to raise
issues publicly without being considered dangerous. My posse wanted to
express our concern that there were very few black women being
admitted to Radcliffe. We sat in in the corridor leading up to the dean’s
office. We were told to be very “ladylike”; I remember well. This was our
ladylike approach, but I think we got their attention. They certainly
started admitting more students of color.
I graduated from college and then from law school, and early in my
career I took a job as assistant counsel with the NAACP Legal Defense
and Educational Fund, first in Washington, DC, when the Voting Rights
Act of 1965 was amended and extended, and later in the New York City
office, as head of the LDF Voting Rights group. That was my first

experience in collaborating with coworkers in a way that the whole
really was greater than the sum of its parts. We were a group of people
who were committed to helping make a sustainable change, not just for
blacks but also for Latinos and for poor people.
When I introduce my students to this environment now, I’m not trying
to get them to support the NAACP Legal Defense Fund. What I want
them to feel is what it is like to work with somebody else to change the
status quo. You have to be very creative. You may get a sense of pride
that you are actually making a change, but you aren’t making it yourself;
you are part of a group of people—some of whom are similarly situated,
and some of whom are differentially situated, but all of whom have a
common goal.
That’s one of the reasons that I give students in my Law and the
Political Process class the option of writing an exam in a group of two or
three. People might say, well, that’s ridiculous; that’s just cheating.
Those people most likely have never practiced law, because that’s not
my experience, for example, of how you write a brief. You don’t just
write it by yourself. Sometimes you do, but if you have someone with a
slightly different perspective, it’s very helpful. And it’s not only the
intellect that matters but also one’s ability to implement ideas and
commit to communicating one’s perspective. That was one thing I loved
about the women and men in the Legal Defense Fund. Whether they
were black or white, they had been litigating cases for years, and when I
joined them, they didn’t hesitate to push me into the rotation with
everybody else. We weren’t going to specialize and inhabit our own
individual silos—which would have been tempting for me as a black
woman in the post Jim Crow–era when we worked in the South, in
Arkansas, North Carolina, Alabama, or Louisiana. “Nope, Lani,” they
would tell me. “It’s your turn to cross-examine the governor tomorrow. .
. .”
When you actually practice as a lawyer, it isn’t as if each member of a
team is given one witness to prepare and questions him or her on the
stand, and then that’s the end of the conversation. Everybody works
together. When we don’t encourage collaboration and the whole host of
complementary skills relevant to greater understanding, we lose out.
Instead, we choose people who excel at the same, limited things; admit
them to the best schools; and send them off to do their own individual

work in their own individual careers. Testocratic, not democratic, merit.
When you look closely, it’s everywhere.
Yet there are visionaries out there, shifting our educational models
from ones that favor testocratic merit to those that favor democratic
merit; visionaries who approach the problem from many different
vantage points. Some of them have transformed the classroom, where
professors like Eric Mazur and Uri Treisman have created a culture of
collaboration rather than competition. Some transformations have
occurred on the campus, where The Posse Foundation has reimagined
what a collective college admissions process could look like and
identified students for their future leadership potential rather than their
static, pre-existing test scores. Some transformations have occurred
within the community, such as the University Park Campus School’s
commitment to training students who can give back to the neighborhood
and to society at large. The arenas of transformation may differ, but one
common, forward-looking vision emerges: success is measured by the
skills and contributions of its graduates, not its admitted students.
These examples of democratic merit are helping us rewrite how we
view achievements at commencement. More graduates are now
applauded for the growth they showed in college, both in terms of their
academics and their leadership abilities. They are being celebrated for
their commitment to solving today’s most looming challenges across an
array of sectors. We can continue seeking democratic merit by
measuring these students’ future contributions to the public at large,
rather than by simply keeping a financial scorecard. And we can apply
these forward-looking criteria of democratic merit in education to
cultivate more collaborative practices in society at large: from political
halls, to workplaces, to service systems.
A culture shift can happen. It is happening. And we need to work
together to make it happen.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
FIRST, I’D LIKE TO dedicate this book to my students, who have taught me
more than I have taught them. I am particularly indebted to the many
energetic, thoughtful, and really dedicated students with whom I worked
in writing this book. These former students spent hours finding
information and references; they assisted me in research, while
simultaneously brainstorming ideas, working jointly with each other.
They not only played key roles in developing the ideas in this book; they
also demonstrated time and again the power of collaboration. Given the
number of years it took to write this book, I cannot name all the students
who played important roles in drafting and editing the manuscript. I
can’t possibly thank each of them by name, but I deeply value their
contributions. However, the amazing display of diligence, energy,
fortitude, and insight among the following students deserves to be noted.
Indeed, without their contributions there would be no book. My special
thanks go to Genzie Bonadies, Sean Braswell, Rini Fonseca, Brandon
Johnson, Leah Kang, Kari Kokka, Annie Lee, Sandra Pullman, Nicole
Summers, and Liliana Garces (Liliana was then a student in the Harvard
Graduate School of Education; she is now an education school professor
at Pennsylvania State University).
Other scholars and administrators both at Harvard Law and many
other institutions have influenced and often responded to my ideas, at
the same time making important contributions themselves. Many of
them are cited in the text, but I especially want to thank Mahzarin
Banaji, Shirley Collado, Carol Dweck, David Labaree, Hazel Marcus, Eric
Mazur, Martha Minow, Scott Page, Claude Steele, Susan Sturm, Gerald
Torres, Uri Treisman, and Anita Woolley.
Because the book has been in development for almost a decade, Stuart
Horwitz was also of enormous help in shaping the final manuscript,
working closely with me to craft the stories I wanted to tell. I’m indebted
to him. The entire team at Beacon Press has been patient and supportive,
and I very much value their own commitments to collaboration.

NOTES
INTRODUCTION
1. Amartya Sen, “Merit and Justice,” in Meritocracy and Economic
Inequality, ed. Kenneth Arrow, Samuel Bowles, and Steven Durlauf
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1999), 5, 14.
2. Michael Young, “Down with Meritocracy: The Man Who Coined the
Word Four Decades Ago Wishes Tony Blair Would Stop Using It,”
Guardian (UK), June 28, 2001,
http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2001/jun/29/comment.
3. Ibid.
4. The Latin word deservire means “to devote oneself to the service of,”
which in Vulgar Latin came to mean “to merit by service.”
Dictionary.com, http://dictionary.reference.com/search?q=desert.
CHAPTER ONE: Adonises with a Pimple
1. Diane Ravitch, The Death and Life of the Great American School System:
How Testing and Choice Are Undermining Education (New York: Basic
Books, 2010).
2. Fisher v. University of Texas at Austin et al., No. 11–345, 570 US,
slip opinion at 1–2 (2013),
http://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/12pdf/11-345_l5gm.pdf.
3. Ibid., 1 (Thomas, J., concurring).
4. Ibid., 1–3.
5. Ibid., 18.
6. Ibid.
7. Diane Brady, Fraternity (New York: Random House, 2012), 50.
8. Ibid., 78.
9. Ibid., 79.
10. Ibid., 79–80.
11. Ibid.
12. Clarence Thomas, My Grandfather’s Son: A Memoir (New York:
HarperCollins, 2007), 53.

13. Ibid., 50–54.
14. Malcolm Gladwell, “Getting In,” New Yorker, October 10, 2005,
http://www
.newyorker.com/archive/2005/10/10/051010crat_atlarge?
currentPage=all.
15. Ibid.
16. Ibid. (Emphasis added.)
17. Ibid.
18. Robert Paul Wolff and Tobias Barrington Wolff, “The Pimple on
Adonis’s Nose: A Dialogue on the Concept of Merit in the Affirmative
Action Debate,” Hastings Law Journal 56 (2005). Quotes from this
article were taken from pages 379, 392, 393–94, 396–97, 399, 400,
and 401–2.
19. Andrew Ferguson, Crazy U: One Dad’s Crash Course in Getting His Kid
into College (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2011), 2.
20. Ibid., 185–86.
21. Beth Teitell, “College Hunt Can Bring High-Stress Summers,” Boston
Globe, March 5, 2014,
https://www.bostonglobe.com/news/local/massachusetts/2014
0305/for-high-schoolers-with-ivy-league-dreams-summer-has-gone-
from-time-kick-back-time-
lean/dG283mkMbZMxiIGCGu1g0M/story.html.
22. Ibid.
CHAPTER TWO: Aptitude or Achievement?
1. “SAT Math Practice Questions,” College Board,
http://sat.collegeboard.org practice (last visited September 27, 2012).
2. Kaplan Test Prep, Kaplan’s Guide to the New SAT,
http://www.kaptest.com /newsat (last visited September 27, 2012).
3. Jerome Karabel, The Chosen: The Hidden History of Admission and
Exclusion at Harvard, Yale, and Princeton (Boston: Houghton Mifflin
Harcourt, 2005), 27.
4. This aristocratic Protestant value was apparent in Groton’s Latin
motto, “cui servire est regnare,” which translates to “to serve is to
reign.” See Nicholas Lemann, The Big Test: The Secret History of the
American Meritocracy (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1999),

15.
5. See Karabel, The Chosen, for quotes on Ivy League admissions.
6. “The 1901 College Board (the first),” Frontline,
http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages
frontlineshows/sats/where/1901.html (last visited September 27,
2012).
7. Ibid.
8. Lemann, The Big Test.
9. Ibid., 23–24.
10. Ibid., 30.
11. Ibid., quoting Carl C. Brigham, A Study of American Intelligence
(1923) (internal quotation marks omitted).
12. F. Scott Fitzgerald, The Great Gatsby (New York: Scribner’s, 1925;
repr., 2004), 12–13.
13. Jon Blackwell, “1947: America’s Tester-in-Chief,” from The Capital
Century: 1900–1999, http://www.capitalcentury.com/1947.html (last
visited September 27, 2012).
14. Lemann, The Big Test, supra note 6, at 32.
15. Karabel, The Chosen, 141.
16. Ibid., 140.
17. Ibid.
18. Andrew Ferguson, Crazy U: One Dad’s Crash Course in Getting His Kid
into College (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2011), 86.
19. Blackwell, “1947: America’s Tester-in-Chief,” supra note 10.
20. Lemann, The Big Test, supra note 6, at 85.
21. Ibid., 273.
22. Quoted in Todd Balf, “The Story Behind the SAT Overhaul,” New
York Times, March 6, 2014,
http://www.nytimes.com/20140309/magazine/the-story-behind-the-
sat-overhaul.html?_r=0.
23. Michele Tolela Myers, “The Cost of Bucking College Rankings,”
Washington Post, March 11, 2007,
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article
/20070309/AR2007030901836.html?referrer=email.
24. Ferguson, Crazy U, supra note 25, at 37 (internal quotation marks
omitted).
25. Ibid., 43.

26. Ibid.
27. Jesse Rothstein, “College Performance Predictions and the SAT,”
Journal of Econometrics 121 (2004).
28. William C. Hiss and Valerie W. Franks, Defining Promise: Optional
Standardized Testing Policies in American College and University
Admissions (Arlington, VA: National Association for College
Admission Counseling, February 5, 2014),
http://www.nacacnet.orgresearchresearch-data/nacac-research
DocumentsDefiningPromise.pdf.
29. Ibid., 3.
30. Ibid., 11.
31. College Board, 2013 College-Bound Seniors: Total Group Profile Report
(New York: College Board, 2013),
http://media.collegeboard.com/digitalServices/pdf
research2013/TotalGroup-2013.pdf.
32. Ibid., 4.
33. See, for example, Maria Veronica Santelices and Mark Wilson,
“Unfair Treatment? The Case of Freedle, the SAT, and the
Standardization Approach to Differential Item Functioning,” Harvard
Education Review 80 (2010): 106.
34. College Board, 2013 College-Bound Seniors, 3.
35. David K. Shipler, “My Equal Opportunity, Your Free Lunch,” New
York Times, March 5, 1995,
http://www.nytimes.com/19950305/weekinreview/the-nation-a-leg-
up-my-equal-opportunity-your-free-lunch.html.
36. Ibid.
37. Daniel J. Hemel, “’07 Men Make More,” Harvard Crimson, June 6,
2007, http://www.thecrimson.com/article20076/6/07-men-make-
more-male-harvard/.
38. Ibid.
39. Jake Freyer et al., “Class of 2013 Senior Survey,” Harvard Crimson,
May 28, 2013, http://www.thecrimson.com/flash-
graphic/2013/5/28/senior-survey-2013-graphic/.
40. Ibid.
41. Leon Botstein, “SAT Is Part Hoax, Part Fraud,” Time, March 7, 2014,
17, http://time.com/15199/college-president-sat-is-part-hoax-and-
part-fraud/.

CHAPTER THREE: From Testocratic Merit to Democratic Merit
1. Leon Botstein, “SAT Is Part Hoax, Part Fraud,” Time, March 7, 2014.
2. David Labaree, “Public Goods, Private Goods: The American Struggle
over Educational Goals,” American Educational Research Journal 34,
no. 1 (Spring 1997): 39–81,
http://www.stanford.edu/~dlabaree/publications/Public_Goods
PrivateGoods.pdf.
3. Remarks delivered by Sonia Sotomayor, Associate Justice of the US
Supreme Court, Princeton Alumni Day, Richardson Auditorium,
February 22, 2014; Schuette v. Coalition to Defend Affirmative
Action, http://www.oyez.org cases2010–2019/2013/2013_12_682.
4. A report on “education redlining” in Sotomayor’s home town of New
York City sorted all high schools in the city by state-test passage rate
and found that though close to half of white and Asian students were
enrolled in the top quartile of high schools, less than one-fifth of
black and Hispanic students were enrolled in those top-performing
schools. In the lowest quartile, in which the average student has less
than a one-in-three chance of graduating in four years, black and
Hispanic students were nearly four more times as likely to be
enrolled as white and Asian students. None of the students in the
Harlem, Bronx, and Brooklyn Community School Districts had the
opportunity to learn in a high-performing school. A Rotting Apple:
Education Redlining in New York City (Cambridge, MA: Schott
Foundation for Public Education, April 2012),
http://schottfoundation.org/drupal/docs /redlining-full-report.pdf.
5. Sonia Sotomayor, My Beloved World (New York: Vintage, 2014), 183.
6. See Diane Brady, Fraternity (New York: Random House, 2012), for
quotes on Holy Cross recruiting and mentoring.
7. Lyndon B. Johnson, “To Fulfill These Rights,” commencement
address at Howard University, June 4, 1965,
http://www.lbjlib.utexas.edu/johnson/archives
.hom/speeches.hom/650604.asp.
8. University of California at Irvine Office of Equal Opportunity and
Diversity, “A Brief History of Affirmative Action,” last updated May
3, 2010, http://www .oeod.uci.edu/aa.html.
9. Ibid., 488.

10. Ibid.
11. Jerome Karabel, The Chosen: The Hidden History of Admission and
Exclusion at Harvard, Yale, and Princeton (Boston: Houghton Mifflin
Harcourt, 2005), supra note 2 at 490.
12. Ibid.
13. Ibid., 492.
14. Ibid., 494–95.
15. “Regents of the University of California v. Bakke,” Oyez Project at IIT
Chicago-Kent College of Law, accessed July 13, 2014,
http://www.oyez.org cases1970-1979/1977/1977_76_811/.
16. Ibid., 306.
17. Ibid., 279.
18. Ibid.
19. Ibid., 317.
20. Ibid.
21. Grutter v. Bollinger et al., FindLaw,
http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts /getcase.pl?
court=US&vol=000&invol=02-241.
22. See, for example, Adam Liptak, “For Blacks in Law School, Can Less
Be More?,” New York Times, February 13, 2005,
http://www.nytimes.com/2005 0213/weekinreview/13liptak.html;
Jeff Jacoby, “The Affirmative Action Myth: Lowering Admission
Standards Hurts Those It Is Supposed to Help,” Boston Globe,
December 23, 2011, http://bostonglobe.com/opinion/2011/12/23
the-affirmative-action-myth6WkneJSpLaoqhL3fzosPxO/story.html.
23. Brief for Abigail Fisher as Amicus Curiae Supporting Petitioner,
Fisher v. University of Texas at Austin, 631 F.3d 213 (5th Cir. 2011),
cert. granted (No. 11–345),
http://www.law.cornell.edu/supct/cert/11-345.
24. Ibid.
25. Adam Liptak, “Race and College Admissions, Facing a New Test by
Justices,” New York Times, October 8, 2012,
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/09/us /supremecourt-to-hear-
case-on-affirmative-action.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0.
26. Ibid.
27. Critics also conveniently ignore the ways in which admissions
criteria are often adjusted or disregarded for legacy students. Elite

institutions have historically given children of alumni, particularly
wealthy alumni, preference in the admission process. Yet those
student beneficiaries are not typically scrutinized for
“disidentification with academic excellence” or “low effect
syndrome” to the same degree as are students of color. See, generally,
Daniel Golden on this topic, including two Wall Street Journal articles:
“Family Ties: Preference for Alumni Children in College Admission
Draws Fire” (January 15, 2003),
http://online.wsj.com/public/resources/documents/golden3.htm;
and “College Ties: For Groton Grads, Academies Aren’t Only Keys to
Ivies” (April 25, 2003),
http://online.wsj.com/public/resources/documents/golden1.htm;
Century Foundation, “Affirmative Action for the Rich: A New Book
from the Century Foundation Examines College Admissions Policies
that Provide Preferences for Children of Alumni,” news release,
September 27, 2010, http://72.32.39.237:8080/Plone/media-
center/2010/affirmative-action-for-the-rich-a-new-book-from-the-
century-foundation-examines-college-admissions-policies-that-
provide-preferences-for-children-of-alumni.
28. “Mission,” University of Texas System,
http://www.utsystem.edu/about/mission.
29. K. W. Phillips and D. L. Loyd, “When Surface and Deep-Level
Diversity Collide: The Effects on Dissenting Group Members,”
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 99, no. 2
(2006): 143–60.
30. Negin R. Toosi, Samuel R. Sommers, and Nalini Ambady, “Getting a
Word in Group-Wise: Effects of Racial Diversity on Gender
Dynamics,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 48 (2012): 115–
55.
31. Denise L. Loyd et al., “Social Category Diversity Promotes Pre-
meeting Elaboration: The Role of Relationship Focus,” Organization
Science 24, no. 3 (2013): 757–72.
32. Anthony Lising Antonio et al., “Effects of Racial Diversity on
Complex Thinking in College Students,” Psychological Science 15, no.
8 (2004): 507–10.
33. Samuel R. Sommers, “On Racial Diversity and Group Decision
Making: Identifying Multiple Effects of Racial Composition on Jury

Deliberations,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 90 (2006):
597, 606.
34. S. R. Sommers, L. S. Warp, and C. C. Mahoney, “Cognitive Effects of
Racial Diversity: White Individuals’ Information Processing in
Heterogeneous Groups,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 44,
no. 4 (2008): 1129–36; Samuel R. Sommers, “Beyond Information
Exchange: New Perspectives on the Benefits of Racial Diversity for
Group Performance,” Research on Managing Groups and Teams 11
(2008): 195, 206.
35. Sarah E. Gaither and Samuel R. Sommers, “Living with Other-Race
Roommate Shapes Whites’ Behavior in Subsequent Diverse Settings,”
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 49, no. 2 (March 2013):
272–76.
36. It is my understanding that miners used to take a canary with them
into the mine to alert them when the atmosphere in the mine was
becoming poisonous. Women and blacks need to be understood as
our miners’ canaries: their experiences signal us about the health of
our social environment. In particular, the experiences of members of
these groups make visible to us fundamental flaws in the way we are
distributing opportunity to everyone, but we can’t see the flaws
except as they are revealed by the canary. Lani Guinier, “Reframing
the Affirmative Action Debate,” Kentucky Law Journal 86, no. 505
(Spring 1997/1998),
http://www.law.harvard.edu/faculty/guinier/publications
/reframing_speech.pdf.
37. “Diversity Stymied,” Washington Post, editorial, November 29, 2004,
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/A18820-
2004Nov28.html.
38. In a 2004 interview, Professor Henry Louis Gates Jr. stated his belief
that “[t]he black kids who come to Harvard or Yale are middle class.
Nobody else gets through.” Speaking on a separate occasion,
Professor Gates said that 75 percent of black students at Harvard
were of African or Caribbean descent or of mixed race. Gates, “Most
Black Students at Harvard Are from High-Income Families,” Journal
of Blacks in Higher Education (2006), http://www.jbhe.com
news_views52_harvard-blackstudents.html. See also Sara Rimer and
Karen W. Arenson, “Top Colleges Take More Blacks but Which

Ones?,” New York Times, June 24, 2004,
http://www.nytimes.com/2004/06/24/us/top-colleges-take-more-
blacks-but-which-ones.html?pagewanted=all&src=pm; Douglas S.
Massey et al., “Black Immigrants and Black Natives Attending
Selective Colleges and Universities in the United States,” American
Journal of Education 113 (February 2007),
http://www.umich.edu/~abpafs/blackimmgrants.pdf.
39. Rimer and Arenson, “Top Colleges Take More Blacks.”
40. Aisha Haynie, “Not ‘Just Black’ Policy Considerations: The Influence
of Ethnicity on Pathways to Academic Success Amongst Black
Undergraduates at Harvard University,” Journal of Public and
International Affairs 13 (2002): 40–62.
41. Ibid., 43–53.
42. Ibid.
43. University Park Campus School Institute for Success,
http://universitypark .worcesterschools.org/.
CHAPTER FIVE: No Longer Lonely at the Top
1. Rebecca Winters, “Here Comes the Lego Test,” Time, March 4, 2001,
http://content.time.com/time/nation/article/0,8599,101326,00.html.
2. Deborah Bial, “Alternative Measures for College Admissions: A
Relational Study of a New Predictor for Success; the Promise of the
Bial Dale College Adaptability Index and the Success of the Posse
Program,” PhD diss., Harvard University, 2004, p. 167.
CHAPTER SIX: Democratic Merit in the Classroom
1. Tina Rosenberg, Join the Club: How Peer Pressure Can Transform the
World (New York: W. W. Norton, 2011), 100.
2. Uri Treisman, “Studying Students Studying Calculus: A Look at the
Lives of Minority Mathematics Students in College,” College
Mathematics Journal 23, no. 5 (November 1992): 364–65.
3. Ibid., 366.
4. Ibid.
5. Ibid.
6. Rosenberg, Join the Club, 105.
7. Ibid.

8. Ibid.
9. Ibid., 367.
10. Ibid., 365.
11. Ibid., 366.
12. Ibid.
13. Ibid.
14. Philip Uri Treisman, “A Model Academic Support System,” in R.
Landis, ed., Improving the Retention and Graduation of Minorities in
Engineering (New York: NACME, 1985), 56.
15. Treisman, “Studying Students Studying Calculus,” 368.
16. Ibid.
17. Rosenberg, Join the Club.
18. Treisman, “A Model Academic Support System,” 56.
19. Ibid.
20. Ibid., 57.
21. Treisman, “Studying Students Studying Calculus,” 368.
22. Rosenberg, Join the Club, 123.
23. Treisman, “A Model Academic Support System,” 56.
24. Ibid., 57.
25. Treisman, “Studying Students Studying Calculus,” 369.
CHAPTER SEVEN: Six Ways of Looking at Democratic Merit
1. Carol S. Dweck, “The Secret to Raising Smart Kids,” Scientific
American Mind 18, no. 6 (December 2007/January 2008): 38.
2. Ibid., 38.
3. Question posed in ibid., 38.
4. Ibid., 39.
5. Janet Rae Dupree, “If You’re Open to Growth, You Tend to Grow,”
New York Times, July 6, 2008,
http://www.nytimes.com/2008/07/06/business/06unbox .html.
6. Dweck, “The Secret to Raising Smart Kids,” 39.
7. Ibid.
8. “What Is Mindset,” from the official website for Carol Dweck’s book
Mindset, retrieved November 8, 2012,
http://mindsetonline.com/whatisit/about /index.html.
9. Dweck, “The Secret to Raising Smart Kids,” 39.

10. Other studies conducted by Dweck and her colleagues reaffirm the
finding that having a growth mindset increases student performance.
Consider the 2003 study that followed 128 premed students who
were enrolled in a challenging general chemistry course.
11. Dweck, “The Secret to Raising Smart Kids,” 39.
12. Paul Tough, How Children Succeed: Grit, Curiosity, and the Power of
Hidden Character (New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2012), xv.
13. Ibid., xiii.
14. Ibid., xv.
15. Ibid., xx.
16. Ibid., xxi.
17. Ibid., 50.
18. Ibid., 102.
19. Ibid., 56.
20. Ibid.
21. Ibid., 184.
22. Ibid.
23. Ibid., 185.
24. Graham D. Fenwick and Derrick J. Neal, “Effect of Gender
Composition on Group Performance,” Gender, Work and Organization
8, no. 2 (April 2001): 205–25,
https://www.iser.essex.ac.uk/publication/504528.
25. Scott Page, prologue, The Difference: How the Power of Diversity
Creates Better Groups, Firms, Schools, and Societies (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 2007).
26. Lu Hong and Scott E. Page, “Groups of Diverse Problem Solvers Can
Outperform Groups of High-Ability Problem Solvers,” William J.
Baumol, ed., Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101, no.
46 (November 16, 2004): 16385–89.
27. Marilynn B. Brewer and Wendi Gardner, “Who Is This ‘We’? Levels of
Collective Identity and Self-representations,” Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 71, no. 1 (1996): 86.
28. All school, student, and teacher names in this chapter are
pseudonyms.
29. Jo Boaler and Megan Staples, “Creating Mathematical Futures
Through an Equitable Teaching Approach: The Case of Railside
School,” Teachers College Record 110, no. 3 (2008): 608–45.

30. Ibid., 613.
31. Railside’s “reform oriented” approach used small-group work;
students presented to the class and worked on longer, more
conceptual tasks than students in the “traditional” math classes,
where lecture and individual practice consumed the majority of class
time.
32. Boaler and Staples, “Creating Mathematical Futures,” 620.
33. Railside students outperformed Greendale and Hilltop students on
assessments administered by the research study, on district
assessments, and on the California Standards Test of algebra but did
not outperform them on the CAT 6, a state standardized test, nor on
indicators of Adequate Yearly Progress. Boaler offers hypotheses for
this discrepancy, such as the cultural and linguistic barriers
characteristic of the standardized state and federal assessments (ibid.,
624).
34. California does not require high school students to take mathematics
for all four years.
35. Boaler and Staples, “Creating Mathematical Futures,” 621.
36. Ibid., 622.
37. Ibid., 621.
38. Ibid., 637.
39. Ibid.
40. Jo Boaler, “Promoting ‘Relational Equity’ and High Mathematics
Achievement Through an Innovative Mixed Ability Approach,” British
Educational Research Journal 34, no. 2 (2008): 167–94.
41. Elizabeth G. Cohen and Rachel A. Lotan, “Producing Equal-Status
Interaction in the Heterogeneous Classroom,” American Educational
Research Journal 32, no. 1 (1995): 99–120.
42. Boaler and Staples, “Creating Mathematical Futures,” 619.
43. Ibid., 630.
44. Elizabeth G. Cohen and Rachel A. Lotan, Working for Equity in
Heterogeneous Classrooms: Sociological Theory in Practice, Sociology of
Education Series (New York: Teachers College Press, 1997).
45. Boaler and Staples, “Creating Mathematical Futures,” 634.
46. Ibid., 631.
47. Boaler, “Promoting ‘Relational Equity,’” 184.
48. Ibid., 167–68.

49. Ibid., 185.
50. The only achievement difference that did persist at Railside was the
higher performance of Asian American students versus their black
and Latino peers.
CHAPTER EIGHT: Democratic Merit in a Twenty-First-Century World
1. Charles McGrath, “Atul Gawande Rocks the E.R.,” New York Times,
April 3, 2007, http://www.nytimes.com20070403books/03atul.html?
pagewanted=all&_r=0.
2. Atul Gawande, “The Cost Conundrum,” New Yorker, June 1, 2009,
http://www
.newyorker.com/reporting/2009/06/01/090601fa_fact_gawande?
currentPage=all.
3. World Health Organization, The World Health Report 2000: Health
Systems; Improving Performance (Geneva: World Health Organization,
2000), http://www.who.int/whr/2000/en/whr00_en.pdf.
4. Stephen C. Schoenbaum et al., Mirror, Mirror on the Wall: An
International Update on the Comparative Performance of American
Health Care (New York: Commonwealth Fund, May 1, 2007),
http://www.commonwealthfund.org/usr
doc/1027davis_mirror_mirror_international_update_final.pdf.
5. Gawande, “The Cost Conundrum.”
6. Ibid.
7. Ibid.
8. Ibid.
9. Ibid.
10. Ibid.
11. For quotes on his research, see Archon Fung, “Street Level
Democracy: A Theory of Popular Pragmatic Deliberation and Its
Practice in Chicago School Reform and Community Policing, 1988–
1997,” PhD diss., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2000.

INDEX
Please note that page numbers are not accurate for the e-book
edition.
academic support, importance of, 40, 52, 61, 62, 67–69, 88, 90–91
Acheampong, Daniel, 70, 71
achievement gap, 53, 87–89, 114, 118, 120
ACT, 19, 52
Advanced Placement (AP) class, vii
Advanced Placement (AP) test, 78
affirmative action, 3–4, 5, 23, 30, 33–41, 70, 78, 82
alumni support, importance of, 61–62, 72
Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, 79
Bakke, Allan, 34, 35, 36
Balin, Jane, 19
BDI (Bial-Dale Adaptability Index), 79–80
Bender, Wilbur J., 17
Berry, Danielle, 65
Bial, Deborah, 63–64
Bial-Dale Adaptability Index (BDI), 79–80
Binet, Alfred, 15
Boaler, Jo, 96, 106, 114, 116, 117, 119. See also “Railside School”;
“relational equity”
Bok, Derek, 24
Botstein, Leon, 26, 27
Bowen, William, 24
Brandeis University, 72–73
Brewer, Marilynn, 96, 106, 112–13
Brigham, Carl C., 16–17
Brooks, John, 4–5, 30–33, 37, 39, 40, 42

California Standards Test (CAT), 152n33
Calkins, Lucy, 17
Canada, college admissions in, 6–7
Chauncey, Henry, 17
Claremont Academy (Worcester, Massachusetts), 56–59
Clark University, 46–50, 55–60, 62
classroom culture shift, xi, 43, 95–96, 120–21. See also pedagogy
“cognitive hypothesis,” 101–2
Coleman, David, 17
collaboration: and advisory/community boards, 57, 59, 127, 128–29,
132; as character trait, 95, 106, 123; in the classroom, 43, 46, 91, 94,
107, 122; vs. competition, 28, 96, 127; cross–collaboration, 123, 127;
culture of collaboration, 126–27, 138; and democratic merit, xi, 3, 28,
106, 122, 127, 139; to improve health care, 123–26; and intelligence,
107, 118–19; and Posse Foundation, 79; and practice of law, 138;
between schools and colleges, 48, 49, 59; between schools and
communities, 51, 59, 69–70; and self-government, 127–34; and self-
identity, 113–16; as teaching tool, 83, 87–89, 91–92, 95–97; and
testing, xi Collado, Shirley, 67–69, 73, 74–75
“collective intelligence,” 107, 109
college admissions: admission of Catholics and Jews at Harvard, 14; and
affirmative action, 5, 23, 33–37; and BDI, 79; catering to the
privileged, 9; changes in, 10, 48–49; counselors, 41; and democratic
merit, 29; diversity in, 23–24; flaws in process of, 7–8, 42, 82; as game
or lottery, vii, x, 9–10, 21; history of, 14–15; and legacy students,
148n49; and meritocracy, xii–xiii; and Posse Foundation, 70, 74–75,
79, 138; and race, 3, 34–37; and rejecting standardized tests as
admissions criteria, 18–20; and the SAT, ix, 19–20, 29, 81–82; and
testocracy, ix, xii, 41, 81; in US as compared to Canada, 6–7
College Board, 15–17, 20, 25, 27, 135
College Entrance Examination Board, 14
Columbia University, 10, 15
community policing, 129–32
Conant, James Bryant, 17
Cortese, Denis, 125
“The Cost Conundrum” (Gawande), 124–26
Crazy U (Ferguson), 10, 18, 21
culture shock 29 62 65 68 71 76

culture shock, 29, 62, 65–68, 71, 76
Days, Drew S., III, 64
Del Prete, Thomas, 47, 49, 56–59
“democratic equality,” 28
democratic merit, 32; in the classroom, 82–83, 88–89, 96, 120–21, 122–
23; and collaboration, 106; and culture shift, 123; in education, 138–
39; effect on society and governance, 127; fostering, 27–29, 41–42;
and health care, 126; and intelligence, 110, 126, 138–39; as “oval-
shaped,” 41, 83, 88; and peer support, 63; vs. testocratic merit, xi,
122, 126–27, 138. See also collaboration; merit The Difference (Page),
110
diversity: and collaboration, 120–21, 126, 127; in education, 3, 23–24,
32, 34–35, 37–42; for group problem solving, 110–11, 123; in higher
education, 74–75; vs. homogeneity, 111; importance of, 110–27; to
improve grades, 120; and Posse Foundation, 70, 71; valuing, 114, 118,
119, 134. See also affirmative action Duckworth, Angela, 104
Dweck, Carol, 96, 97–101, 120, 151n10
Dynamic Assessment Process (DAP), 70
Educational Testing Service, 17
“education redlining,” 146n4
Eliot, Charles William, 14
elite class, new vs. old, 24–25
Emerging Scholars Program (ESP), 84, 89–93
entrance exams, 14–17, 27
Eressy, June, 51
Executive Order 11246 (1965), 34
Fenwick, Graham, 109
Ferguson, Andrew, 10, 18, 21
Fernandez, Miguel, 75–76
Fine, Michelle, 19
Fisher, Abigail, 3, 36–37
Fisher v. University of Texas at Austin, 3–4, 36–37
Fitzgerald, F. Scott, 16
Foley, Jack, 47–48, 50, 56, 60
Franks, Valerie W., 19–20
Fung, Archon, 123; research study by, 127–34

Garcia, Angel, 71
Gawande, Atul, 123–26
“Getting In” (Gladwell), 6–7
GI Bill, 24
Gladwell, Malcolm, 6–7, 94
grade point average (GPA), 78, 79
grades, 30, 70, 75; and affirmative action, 37; as evidence of merit, xi, 2,
29; and Posse Foundation, 43; as predictor of academic success, ix, 13,
19–20; research on, 19–21, 100; and SAT, 26. See also test scores
Grand Junction, Colorado, 126
Grayson, Stanley, 32
The Great Gatsby (Fitzgerald), 16
Groton School, 14, 143n4
group dynamics, research on, 93, 106–9, 111
group identity, research on, 22, 40, 75, 111–13. See also “Railside
School”; “stereotype threat”
Grutter, Barbara, 35, 36
Grutter v. Bollinger, 3, 35
Guinier, Lani: group study in law school class of, 83; letter to College
Board, 135–36; need for posse, 136–37
Hall, Ricci, 52, 57, 60, 61, 62
Harvard Crimson, 25
Harvard University: admissions history, 13–15; and affirmative action,
35; African American students at, 40–41, 149n60; alumni employment
choices, 25; diversity in admissions, 23–24; elitism of, 10, 14; “Jewish
problem” at, 14–15; public funding of vs. benefit to community, 9; and
the SAT, 17, 23; study of alumni, 23–24; and Robert Yerkes, 16
Haynie, Aisha, 40–41
health-care costs, using collaboration to lower, 43, 123–27
Heckman, James, 102–3
higher education: admission driven vs. mission driven, 4, 8–9, 13, 21,
23–24, 26, 28–30, 35; at K–12 level, 52
Hiss, William C., 19–20
Holy Cross, College of the: Black Student Union at, 31–32; mentoring of
African American students, 4–5, 30–32, 39; Clarence Thomas at, 4–5,
30

Hong, Lu, 111
How Children Succeed (Tough), 102
“Invertia,” 7–8
IQ: scores, 102, 108–9; tests, 15–16, 105; and theories of intelligence,
101, 108
Ivy League colleges, 7, 9, 41
Jacob Hiatt Center for Urban Education, Clark University, 47, 62
Jilk, Lisa, 120
Johnson, Lyndon B., 33–34
Jones, Edward P., 32
Justice Department, US, 64
Kaplan (test-preparation service), 17
Kennedy, Anthony, 3
KIPP Academy (Knowledge Is Power Program), 103–5
Kwak, James, 105–6
Labaree, David, 28, 122, 127
Law School Admission Council, 19
leadership, 33; and BDI, 79; civic, 26, 42; decline in creative, 106;
group, 95; and Posse Foundation, 70, 71, 78, 79–80, 138; as sign of
democratic merit, 28, 122, 138
“learned helplessness,” 98
learning process: and classroom values, 97, 100–101, 106; problems
with, 85–86
legacy students, 9, 15, 148n49
Legal Defense and Educational Fund (LDF), NAACP, 64–65, 137
Leite, Deanna, 47
Levin, David, 103–4
Lewis, Marlyn McGrath, 24
London, Mosi, 70–71
Lowell, A. Lawrence, 14–15
LSAT (Law School Admission Test), 13, 19, 22
Main South Community Development Corporation. See University Park
Partnership Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System (MCAS),
54
M
Cli i
43 125 26

Mayo Clinic, 43, 125–26
Mazur, Eric: applicability of methods to communities, 131; applicability
of methods to school learning, 114, 115, 120; and classroom test
scores, 101; and collaborative learning models, 43, 84–89, 95–98,
106–7, 138; and concept of merit, 113; against testocratic method of
teaching, 94; and value of learning process, 106
McAllen, Texas, 124–26
McDermott, Jim, 53–55
McNeil, Ogretta, 31
mentoring: importance of, in college, 4–5, 30–33, 37, 39–40, 67–68, 72–
76; importance of, in school, 49, 62; lack of, in higher education, 42
merit: definitions of, ix, xi–xii, 2, 94, 97, 122, 130; democratizing, 42;
and intelligence, 95, 113; measured by test scores and grades, 2, 4, 13,
17, 29, 36–37, 41, 43, 69, 70, 95, 97; misperceptions of, 25; and race,
22–23, 36, 39–40; redefining, 18, 27–28, 42, 71, 78, 80, 97, 134; seen
as mirror of wealth, 40. See also democratic merit; testocracy
meritocracy, xi–xiii, 27–33, 42, 130; and affirmative action, 40–41;
and democracy, 130, 134; and higher education, xii, 15, 21, 23, 39–
40; meritocratic hierarchy, 82–83; and rise of the SAT, 2, 17
Middlebury College, 61, 74–77, 80
“mind-set” theory, 96, 99–101, 113, 114, 118, 120, 151n10
Morse, Bob, 18
“multiple-ability treatments,” 116
Myers, Michele Tolela, 18
NAACP, 137
Neal, Derrick, 109
neighborhood policing, 129–32
“noncognitive skills,” 78–79, 102–3
Obama, Barack, 124
O’Connor, Sandra Day, 35
“optimal distinctiveness,” 112–13
Page, Scott, 118, 121
Peabody, Endicott, 14
pedagogy, 61, 77, 83–94, 97, 114–20
peer-instruction model, 28, 43, 84, 86–88, 91–92, 94, 122
peer pressure, 92

p
p
,
peer review, 126
peer support, importance of, 43, 63, 64–69, 71–73, 75, 89
Perez, David, Jr., 65–69
Perez, Yvonne, 72–73
Perry Preschool project, 102–3
“plug and chug” teaching approach, 85, 87, 88
Posse Foundation, 43, 63–80, 138; and race, 64
posses: importance of, 64–65, 67–69, 71–72, 73, 76, 78, 136; mentors
learning from, 76–77
Powell, Lewis, Jr., 34–35
Pramenko, Michael, 126
Princeton Review (test-preparation service), 17
Princeton University, 9
problem solving, 25–26, 29, 43, 89, 91, 133; decline in creative, 106; by
groups vs. by individuals, 107, 126, 134; importance as a skill, 110–
11, 123
race: and academic success, 29; and campus diversity, 34, 42, 75, 78,
119; and campus isolation, 32; as campus issue, 71, 75; and caste
system in America, 22; and college admissions, 3–4, 34–37, 40; and
community engagement, 134; and groups, 38–39, 92; at Harvard,
149n60; and intelligence measures, 16; and the SAT, 21–22; and
wealth, 40. See also affirmative action Radcliffe College, 136–37
“Railside School” (Bay Area, California), 114–20, 152n31, 152n33,
153n50
Randolph, Dominic, 104–5
Reading and Writing Project, Columbia University Teachers College, 17
Reed College, 18
“reform oriented” approach to teaching, 115, 152n31
Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 34–35
“relational equity,” 114, 118–19
The Rise of Meritocracy (Young), xi–xii Riverdale Country School (New
York City), 104–5
Rodrigues, Donna, 51–52
Rondini, Ashley, 72
Rosenberg, Tina, 92
Rothstein, Jesse, 19

Sandwick, Roger, 76–78
San Francisco Unified School District, 120
Sarah Lawrence College, 18
SAT, 2, 11, 12, 52; as admissions screen, ix, 12, 17, 27, 81; changes to,
25–26; and college rankings, 18, 27; defenders of, 81–82; effect on
school curricula, 17; as evidence of meritocracy, 2, 15, 27, 101–2; and
gender, 81; and Guinier letter to College Board, 135–36; history of,
12–13, 15–17; as ineffective measure of aptitude, 20; as ineffective
measure of merit, 13, 81–82; and parental education levels, 22; and
Posse Foundation, 78–80; and race/ethnicity, 21–23, 89, 93; rejected
as admissions screen, 18–20; scores as mark of achievement, viii–x,
11, 82, 105; scores as predictor of college success, 13, 19, 26; scores as
predictor of professional success, x, 11; scores as reflector of
household income, 11, 19, 20–23, 82; and testocracy, 64, 77, 81, 105
SAT Reasoning Test, 13
Schoenfeld, Mike, 80
Scholastic Aptitude Test, 12, 17, 135–36
Scholastic Assessment Test, 12
Seligman, Martin, 104
Sen, Amartya: definition of merit, xi, 97, 122
The Shape of the River (Bok and Bowen), 24
Sotomayor, Sonia, 29–30, 32, 35, 37, 39
standardized tests, xi, 11; achievement tests vs. aptitude tests, 13, 52; vs.
BDI, 79–80; correlation with success in college, 13; and cultural
barriers, 152n33; as evidence of testocracy, ix; to measure merit, 29–
30, 36, 78, 101–2; and race/ethnicity, 22–23; as reflector of household
income, 22, 30, 114; rejection of, 19–20, 43, 53; used for status
placement, 13, 27. See also affirmative action; SAT
Steele, Claude, 22
“stereotype threat,” 22–23, 113
St. Louis, Daniel, 60–61
“street-level democracy,” 128–29, 134
A Study of American Intelligence (Brigham), 16
Supreme Court, US, 3–5, 29, 32, 34–37
Surette, Kelleigh, 47
Teach For America, 80
teaching methods, 61; and collaboration, 83, 85–87, 91–94; and

g
,
;
,
,
,
;
different learning styles, 77; and exams, 83–85; and peer instruction,
86–88, 115, 116–17
Teitell, Beth, 10
testocracy, ix–xii, 13, 15, 27–42, 78; and affirmative action, 39; as
aristocracy, 18; vs. democratic merit, 28, 42, 88, 122, 127, 138; and
emphasis on individual abilities, 109; and measuring merit, x–xii, 2,
27, 28, 29, 36–37, 81–82, 94, 130–31; and rejection of service to
society, 25–26; and SAT, 17–18; solutions to, 46; used to maintain
status quo, 28
testocratic merit. See testocracy test preparation, x, 11, 17, 21, 22, 41,
82
test scores: de-emphasis of, 53, 70, 75, 78, 138; and emphasis on, over
character and other unquantifiable traits, x, xi, 13, 41, 105–6; and
higher education, 30, 87, 89; and household income, 22–23;
meaninglessness of, 11, 12, 13, 53, 103; to measure merit, 2, 9, 13,
82; obsession with, xi, 11, 13, 42, 127, 130, 134; and race/ethnicity,
22, 36–37; research on, 87, 89, 95–101, 110–11, 115; for status
placement, 13, 82; use in college admissions, 17–19, 29. See also
grades; IQ; KIPP Academy; SAT
theories of intelligence, xii, 16, 26, 53, 77, 95–102, 104, 106–9, 121. See
also “collective intelligence”; IQ
Thernstrom, Abigail and Stephen, 36
“think-pair-share,” 86–87
Thomas, Clarence, 3–5, 30, 32, 41
Tough, Paul, 96–98, 101–5, 120
tracking, 42, 52, 115, 118, 120
Traina, Richard P., 49
Treisman, Uri: and achievement gap, 88; applicability of methods to
communities, 131; applicability of methods to school learning, 114–
15, 120; collaboration used in teaching, 43, 89–91, 106–7, 138; and
Emerging Scholars Program, 84; and emphasis on learning process,
101, 106–7; on intelligence, 101; on merit, 113
University of California at Berkeley, 43, 84, 88–89
University of California at Davis Medical School, 34, 35
University of Pennsylvania, 98
University of Pennsylvania Law School, 19
University of Texas 3–4 36–37 84

University of Texas, 3 4, 36 37, 84
University Park Campus School (Worcester, Massachusetts), 42–43, 46–
7, 49–61, 63, 66, 138
University Park Partnership, 47–48
UPCS. See University Park Campus School (Worcester, Massachusetts) US
News & World Report, 18
Vanderbilt University, 64–69
Vanguard High School (New York City), 43, 120
Voting Rights Act of 1965, 137
Wells, Theodore, 32
Wolff, Robert Paul, 7–8
Wolff, Tobias Barrington, 7–8
women, role of in groups, 38, 83, 108–9, 121
Woolley, Anita, 96, 106, 107–10, 111, 121
World Health Organization, 124
Yale College, 8–9, 14, 98, 149n60
Yerkes, Robert, 16
Young, Michael, xi–xii

BEACON PRESS
Boston, Massachusetts www.beacon.org
Beacon Press books are published under the auspices of the Unitarian Universalist Association of
Congregations.
© 2015 by Lani Guinier All rights reserved Printed in the United States of America This book is
printed on acid-free paper that meets the uncoated paper
ANSI/NISO specifications for permanence as revised in 1992.
Text design and composition by Kim Arney Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Guinier, Lani.
The tyranny of the meritocracy : democratizing higher education in America / Lani Guinier.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-8070-0627-6 (hardback) ISBN 978-0-8070-0628-3 (ebook) 1. Education, Higher—
Aims and objectives—United States. 2. Education, Higher—Social aspects—United States. 3.
Democracy and education—United States. 4. Multicultural education—United States. 5.
Discrimination in higher education—United States. 6. Minorities—Education (Higher)—United
States. I. Title.
LA227.4.G85 2015
378.1ʹ9820973—dc23
2014027507

