
The Myth of Disenchantment


The Myth of 
Disenchantment
M a g i c ,  M o d e r n i t y,  a n d  t h e  B i r t h  
o f  t h e  H u m a n  S c i e n c e s
Jason Ā. Josephson- Storm
The University of Chicago Press C h i c a g o  & L o n d o n

The University of Chicago Press, Chicago 60637
The University of Chicago Press, Ltd., London
© 2017 by The University of Chicago
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner 
whatsoever without written permission, except in the case of brief quotations in critical 
articles and reviews. For more information, contact the University of Chicago Press, 1427 East 
60th Street, Chicago, IL 60637.
Published 2017
Printed in the United States of America
26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17  1 2 3 4 5
ISBN- 13: 978- 0- 226- 40322- 9 (cloth)
ISBN- 13: 978- 0- 226- 40336- 6 (paper)
ISBN- 13: 978- 0- 226- 40353- 3 (e- book)
DOI: 10.7208/chicago/9780226403533.001.0001
The University of Chicago Press gratefully acknowledges the generous support of Williams 
College toward the publication of this book.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Josephson, Jason Ānanda, author.
Title: The myth of disenchantment : magic, modernity, and the birth of the human sciences / 
Jason Ā. Josephson-Storm.
Description: Chicago ; London : The University of Chicago Press, 2017. | Includes 
bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: lccn 2016049463 | isbn 9780226403229 (cloth : alk. paper) | isbn 
9780226403366 (pbk. : alk. paper) | isbn 9780226403533 (e-book)
Subjects: lcsh: Science and magic. | Philosophy, Modern. | Myth. | Magic—History. | 
Science—Philosophy.
Classification: lcc bf1623.s35 j67 2017 | ddc 001.09/03—dc23 lc record available at 
https://lccn.loc.gov/2016049463
♾ This paper meets the requirements of ANSI/NISO Z39.48- 1992 (Permanence of Paper).

The absence of myth is also a myth: the coldest, the purest, the only true myth.
G e o r g e s B a ta i l l e , “L’absence du mythe,” 1947


C o n t e n t s
Preface and Acknowledgments xi
A Note on Texts and Translations xv
Introduction 
1
A Philosophical Archaeology of the Disenchantment of the World 
4
Reflexive Religious Studies: The Entangled Formation of Religion,  
Science, and Magic 
11
Overview of the Work: Europe Is Not Europe 
16
1 
Enchanted (Post) Modernity 
22
Weird America 
23
Haunted Europe 
30
Conclusion: New Age (Post) Modernists? 
34
Pa r t  1 : God’s Shadow
2 
Revenge of the Magicians 
41
Francis Bacon and the Science of Magic 
44
The Philosophes and the Science of Good and Evil Spirits 
51
Conclusion: The Myth of Enlightenment 
58
3 
The Myth of Absence 
63
Nihilism, Revolution, and the Death of God: F. H. Jacobi and  
G. W. F. Hegel 
67
The Eclipse of the Gods: Friedrich Schiller 
76
The Romantic Spiral: Friedrich Hölderlin 
86
A Myth in Search of History: Jacob Burckhardt 
89
Conclusion: The Myth of the Modern Loss of Myth 
92

viii Contents
4 
The Shadow of God 
94
Spirits of a Vanishing God 
95
The Haunted Anthropologist: E. B. Tylor 
98
The Magician and the Philologist: Éliphas Lévi and Max Müller 
101
Theosophical Disenchantment: Helena Blavatsky 
115
Conclusion: Specters of the Transcendent 
120
5 
The Decline of Magic: J. G. Frazer 
125
The Cultural Ruins of Paganism 
128
The Golden Bough before Disenchantment 
132
The Departure of the Fairies 
135
The Dreams of Magic 
140
The Lost Theory: Despiritualizing the Universe 
147
Conclusion: A Devil’s Advocate 
150
6 
The Revival of Magick: Aleister Crowley 
153
The Great Beast: A Biographical Sketch 
156
The God- Eater and the Golden Bough 
159
Disenchanted Magic 
169
Conclusion: From The Golden Bough to the Golden Dawn 
175
Pa r t  2 : The Horrors of Metaphysics
7 
The Black Tide: Mysticism, Rationality, and the German Occult Revival 
179
Degeneration and Mysticism: Max Nordau 
182
Kant as Necromancer: Carl du Prel and Arthur Schopenhauer 
184
Hidden Depths: Sigmund Freud 
191
Conclusion: The Cosmic Night 
206
8 
Dialectic of Darkness: The Magical Foundations of Critical Theory 
209
The Cosmic Circle 
210
Magical Philosophy and Disenchantment: Ludwig Klages 
213
The Esoteric Constellations of Critical Theory: Walter Benjamin 
226
Conclusion: The Magic of Theory 
236
9 
The Ghosts of Metaphysics: Logical Positivism and Disenchantment 
240
Philosophical Technocracy: Theodor Adorno and Max Horkheimer 
241
Revolutionary Antimetaphysics: Positivist Disenchantment  
and Re- enchantment; Rudolf Carnap and Otto Neurath 
245
Positivists in Paranormal Vienna: Rudolf Carnap and Hans Hahn 
258
Conclusion: The Magic of Disenchantment 
268

Contents 
ix
10 The World of Enchantment; or, Max Weber at the End of History 
269
The Disenchantment of the World 
270
Weber the Mystic and the Return from the God Eclipse 
287
Conclusion: Disenchantment Disenchanted 
298
Conclusion: The Myth of Modernity 
302
The Myths of (Post) Modernity 
304
The Myth of Disenchantment as Regulative Ideal 
308
Against the Tide of Disenchantment 
314
Notes 317
Index 395


P r e f a c e  a n d  A c k n o w l e d g m e n t s
This monograph was born at Harizanmai, “Absorption in Needles,” a Tan-
tric Buddhist tattoo parlor in Kyoto. I was at that time immersed in a book 
project about how contemporary Japanese history meant changes in the locus 
of enchantment, but in ways unanticipated by classical theorists of modernity. 
On a particular afternoon in March of 2011, I was getting the finishing touches 
applied to a set of tattoos when news came over the radio that a major earth-
quake had occurred just off the coast of Tohoku. The bulletin came as a shock, 
but earthquakes are not terribly uncommon in Japan, and so the tattooing 
continued as usual. At least, that is, until the video footage began to come in. 
At that point, tattooing was put on pause, and everyone in the parlor gathered 
in front of the television. The scale of the tragedy took a long time to become 
fully evident, and so we made small talk— having the sort of conversations 
that would not normally have been possible between the patrons and artists 
when everyone was focused on their work. I mentioned my research project, 
and heard animated anecdotes about protective talismans and ghostly pre-
monitions. One of the Japanese patrons asked me, curiously, if these sorts 
of things didn’t go on in America. Before I could answer, however, another 
patron (whom I took to be from Scandinavia) jumped in, assuring everyone 
that Japan was a unique case and more spiritual than the West. He looked to 
me to confirm the sentiment, which I did my best to refute. But it gave life to a 
worry that had been bothering me for some time— by using Japanese history 
to challenge the thesis that equated modernity and disenchantment, I risked 
reinforcing clichés about a mystical Orient. Besides, I was fully aware that 
many Americans and Europeans also believed in protective icons and ghostly 

xii Preface and Acknowledgments
visions. So I began to wonder if I might have been better off expanding my 
project’s scope in a way that also reappraised the linkage between moderniza-
tion and enchantment in Europe and America.
In the days that followed, I found myself changing projects. I had been 
planning to conduct additional archival research in Tokyo. But in the wake 
of the tsunami and ensuing Fukushima nuclear disaster, a prolonged stay in 
the Tokyo area seemed risky and the disruption to the Japanese infrastructure 
made travel difficult. This, combined with my sense that the project I wanted 
to work on was bigger than the original research I had begun, settled my de-
cision to approach the work differently. After making sure that my Japanese 
friends and colleagues were safe, I relocated to Bochum, Germany, on the first 
of April, and there began a visiting research position at Ruhr- Universität.
Over the next six months, I delved into German materials, looking for 
parallel evidence of the history of enchantment. I was fortunate that Helmut 
Zander, a leading historian of esotericism, was both in residence and open to 
discussions about the material I was discovering. From these conversations 
with him and other European scholars, the basic outlines of this work began 
to take shape. For a while, I imagined a comparative project, but I realized I 
had enough to say about European materials alone to fill several monographs.
In the years since, the project benefited enormously from an extended in-
tellectual dialogue with two friends at Williams College: Denise Buell and 
Christian Thorne. The book would not exist without their regular suggestions 
and perceptive insights.
Inspiration also came from discussions with Zaid Adhami, Daniel Barbu, 
Jeremy Bellay, Philippe Borgeaud, David Brakke, Alexandra Cuffel, Ryan 
Coyne, Charles Fox, Sarah Hammerschlag, Uli Harlass, Bert Harrill, Jackie 
Hidalgo, Alex Hsu, Jeff Israel, Doug Kiel, Adam Knobler, Volkhard Krech, 
James Manigault- Bryant, Levi McLaughlin, Keith McPartland, Nick Mey-
lan, Okada Masahiko, Arie Molendijk, Dimitry Okropiridze, Bill Pees, Mark 
Reinhardt, Frédéric Richard, Neil Roberts, Justin Shaddock, Grant Shoffstall, 
Hugh Urban, Youri Volokhine, Anna Zschauer, my parents (both philoso-
phers in their own right), and others I have alas forgotten. Thanks are also 
due to my students in REL 317, “Disenchantment, Modernity, and the Death 
of God,” especially Mendy Bindell, Ranana Dine, Yasmine Nichols, and An-
tonia Wei Ling, who were the first critics of early chapters. Student research 
assistants Lauren Brantley, Aaron Hamblin, Hilary Ledwell, Jessica Plumbley, 
and Jasmine Thomasian also provided useful help. Thanks are due also to 
Chris Lovell for tutoring me in Latin, even if most of the neo- Latin sources did 
not make the final cut. Figures are thanks to Tatiana Tate, with suggestions by 

Preface and Acknowledgments 
xiii
Orion Buske. I’d also like to thank Johanna Rosenbohm for copyediting and  
Emily Ham for indexing. I would also like to express my gratitude to the li-
brarians at the archives consulted (see the list below).
I have greatly benefited from feedback on written drafts by Michael Ber-
gunder, Tom Carlson, Healan Gaston, Eleanor Goodman, Andrew Jewett, 
Chris Photon Johnson, Seth Josephson, Hans- Martin Krämer, John Modern, 
Jim Nolan, Julian Strube, Helmut Zander, my formerly anonymous reader 
Jeff Kripal, and my remaining anonymous reader at the University of Chicago  
Press; and from discussions of work in progress presented at the American 
Historical Association meeting in New York, Northwestern University, the 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Syracuse University, Williams 
College, Ruhr- Universität, Universität Heidelberg, and Université de Genève. 
I would also like to thank the participants of the Williams College workshop 
“Holy Spirits: Spiritualism and the Foundation of Religious Studies,” where 
I tried out what I thought was a different project, but I now realize was this 
one struggling to be born.
I would also like to thank Alan Thomas and Randy Petilos at the University 
of Chicago Press for their guidance and help shepherding it through publi-
cation.
Although the majority of the research occurred during my 2011 sabbatical, 
the writing largely happened during teaching semesters while hiding out from 
my students and colleagues in the following Western Massachusetts cafés: 
Brewhaha, Dobrá Tea, Dottie’s Coffee Lounge, Haymarket, Lenox Coffee, 
and Tunnel City Coffee. Thanks are due to these establishments for providing 
congenial places to bang away at my laptop.
Further archival research in England, France, Germany, and Austria was 
made possible by a Williams College, Class of 1945 World Fellowship grant.
I am also grateful to Williams College and Käte Hamburger Kolleg for an 
additional leave semester at Ruhr- Universität in Bochum, Germany, which 
enabled me to put the finishing touches on this book and start writing the 
next one.
I owe more than I can say to my new bride— Dalena Storm— who brings 
love and a new name to my life.
*
An earlier version of chapter 4 originally appeared as “God’s Shadow: Oc-
cluded Possibilities in the Genealogy of Religion,” History of Religions 52, 
no. 4 (2013): 309– 39, © 2013 by The University of Chicago, all rights re-

xiv Preface and Acknowledgments
served; and a portion of chapter seven appeared as “Specters of Reason: 
Kantian Things and the Fragile Terrors of Philosophy,” J19: The Journal of 
Nineteenth- Century Americanists 3, no. 1 (2015): 204– 11, © 2015 University of 
Pennsylvania Press, all rights reserved. Thanks are due to both journals for 
permission to include the material here.
To meet the needs of academic publication, this manuscript has been 
significantly trimmed from its initial draft. Rough chapters on French social  
theory, American philosophy, Japanese accounts of Western Esotericism, and 
German Monist Leagues were cut as orthogonal to the main narrative. Out 
of a desire to minimize the scholarly apparatus, I have limited citations to 
the roughly one thousand most relevant sources and eliminated the stand- 
alone bibliography. The result, while still lengthy, is leaner and stronger, but 
the reader should not mistake brevity— and the occasional simplifications it 
requires— for lack of depth.
*
This work is dedicated to my grandmothers and to the victims of the Tohoku 
earthquake and other disasters, both natural and manmade.

Archives consulted (physically or digitally) Bibliothèque nationale de France; 
the Frazer Collection at Trinity College, University of Cambridge; the Ru-
dolph Carnap Papers at the University of Pittsburgh Library; the University 
of Vienna Archive; and the Max Weber Archive at the Bayerischen Akademie 
der Wissenschaften.
Translations from Danish, French, German, Japanese, Latin, Polish, Span-
ish, and Swedish are my own unless otherwise noted, and I accept full respon-
sibility for any errors.
A  N o t e  o n  T e x t s  a n d  T r a n s l a t i o n s


I n t r o d u c t i o n
The war against mystery and magic was for modernity the war of liberation leading to 
the declaration of reason’s independence. . . . To win the stakes, to win all of them and 
to win them for good, the world had to be de- spiritualized, de- animated.
 Z y g m u n t  B au m a n, Intimations of Postmodernity, 1992
Eusapia is within our walls. . . . Her presence communicates a kind of incoherent life to 
material objects, and peoples the void with phantoms.
 G e o r g e s M o n t o r g u e i l , Les Parisiennes d’à présent, 1897
Paris, 1907. Marie Curie sat in the sumptuous chambers of an apartment on 
the Boulevard Saint- Germain. As the lights were dimmed, the chemist joined 
hands with the man sitting next to her, and together they watched the psychic 
medium across the table begin to shake and mumble, speaking in a strange low 
voice, overcome by the force of a possessing spirit called “John King.” Eusapia 
Palladino, as the psychic was called, was believed to be able to make objects 
move without touching them and to produce “visions of lights or luminescent 
points, visions of hands or limbs, sometimes in the form of black shadows, 
sometimes as phosphorescent.”1 Indeed, as Curie and others later recounted, 
in that very séance, luminous points began to appear in the darkness, as if 
crowning Eusapia’s head in a shimmering halo. Slowly, the medium extended 
her hands and ran them through Marie Curie’s hair, passing on a glowing lumi-
nescence. It seemed that the presence of unseen powers had been confirmed.2
By all rights, Marie Curie should not have been there. She was in many 
respects a paragon of the period’s scientific establishment, a hardheaded and 
critical thinker who had made a number of stunning discoveries. The first 
woman to win a Nobel Prize, she is one of the very few people in history to win 
it twice (physics and chemistry). Curie’s presence at a spiritualist séance is a 
problem because a great many theorists have argued that one of the things that 
most makes the modern world modern is the rejection of animism— basically, 
that we have eliminated ghosts, demons, and spirits from the contemporary 
worldview.3 While historians of spiritualism know different, it is widely be-
lieved that modernizers like Curie had no truck with invisible forces. Most 

2 Introduction
scholars, therefore, would be surprised to learn that she was conjuring ghosts 
or studying paranormal manifestations as part of her physics research. This 
book will address not only spiritualism’s allure, but also why that account of 
modernity as despiritualization is itself a myth.
It is tempting to imagine that Curie wanted to believe in the spectral per-
sistence of the souls of the dead because of her recent widowhood. After all, 
her husband, Pierre, had passed away in April 1906, and her diaries from 
the period frequently expressed her profound longing to communicate with 
him.4 But this was not the first séance Marie Curie had attended, and indeed 
the Curies had engaged in psychical research together before his sudden 
death.
For three years, starting in 1905, some of France’s most famous scientists 
had assembled in apartments and laboratories in Paris to study this particular 
Italian spirit medium— Eusapia Palladino. In addition to the Curies, others 
often in attendance were the celebrated physiologist Jacques- Arsène d’Arson-
val, the eminent psychiatrist Gilbert Ballet, the aristocratic doctor Count Ar-
naud de Gramont, and three future Nobel Prize winners— the physicist Jean 
Baptiste Perrin, the physiologist Charles Richet, and the philosopher Henri 
Bergson.5 The French were not the only ones interested in Eusapia; from 1872 
until her death in 1918, her powers were tested by teams of researchers in En-
gland, Italy, Poland, Germany, Russia, and the United States.6 The paranormal 
researchers who investigated Eusapia were not marginal eccentrics, but the 
cutting edge of the period’s academic establishment.7 Yet these researchers 
were exploring areas that were often marked out by their contemporaries as 
occult, if not downright magical.8 They did so not as a legacy of medieval 
“super stitions,” nor generally as a way to overturn science, but rather as a 
means to extend its borders.
Not everyone who met with Eusapia was a believer in the powers of the 
beyond; some were convinced she was a charlatan, but others came to grant 
that something extraordinary happened in those darkened rooms. In Paris 
one could find the full spectrum— from skeptics to spiritualist believers to 
those who preferred to explain the sessions in terms of previously unrecog-
nized forms of energy. Bergson, for example, began with serious doubts, but 
ended up producing a paranormally informed philosophy and even becom-
ing president of the British Society for Psychical Research in 1913.9 This is 
perhaps less surprising for a philosopher famous for formulating élan vital, 
and one whose sister Moina Mathers (née Mina Bergson) was a cofounder of 
one of the period’s most famous magical organizations, the Hermetic Order 

Introduction 
3
of the Golden Dawn (see chapter 6). But other figures whose professions 
were more conventionally scientific were also affected by their experiences 
with Eusapia.
In one of the last letters before his death (addressed to Louis Georges Gouy, 
April 14, 1906), Pierre Curie remarked, “We have had several more séances 
with the medium Eusapia Palladino (we already had sessions with her last 
summer). The result is that these phenomena really exist and it is no longer 
possible for me doubt them. It is incredible but it is so; and it is impossible 
to deny it after the sessions, which we performed under perfectly controlled 
conditions.” He added: “In my opinion, there is here a whole domain of com-
pletely new facts and physical states of space about which we have had no 
conception.”10 While Marie lacked some of her husband’s enthusiasm, she 
remarked in French in a letter to a friend on April 16, 1906, “We recently 
attended a few séances with Eusapia, some of which have seemed very con-
vincing. It is a matter of the greatest interest.”11 In a Polish letter to a friend, 
however, she was less guarded, declaring, “Personally, I am quite willing to 
accept the existence of unusual powers in mediums such as Eusapia or Ms. 
Stanisława [Tomczyk].”12 Even the psychologist William James— although he 
had not witnessed Eusapia firsthand— asserted, “That her phenomena prob-
ably are genuine seems to me established.”13
The point here is not to mock William James and the Curies for their gull-
ibility, much less to advocate on their authority that mediums really did once 
channel the dead. Indeed, our main business is not to discuss physics or spirits 
as such, but rather to provide a cultural and intellectual history of social sci-
entists and philosophers. In so doing, I challenge one conventional notion of 
modernity and suggest that we should be less surprised than we usually are to 
find scientists of all stripes keeping company with magicians; that reason does 
not eliminate “superstition” but piggybacks upon it; that mechanism often 
produces vitalism; and that often, in a single room, we can find both séance 
and science. The single most familiar story in the history of science is the tale 
of disenchantment— of magic’s exit from the henceforth law- governed world. 
I am here to tell you that as broad cultural history, this narrative is wrong. 
Attempts to suppress magic have historically failed more often than they’ve 
succeeded. It is unclear to me that science necessarily deanimates nature. In 
fact, I will argue à la Bruno Latour that we have never been disenchanted.14 
And for those readers who have already suspected the persistence of magic in 
modernity, I will trace the genealogy of the myth of disenchantment and how 
it came to function as a regulative ideal.

4 Introduction
A  Ph i l o s o p h ical  Arc h ae ol ogy  of th e 
D is e n c h an t m e n t  o f  th e  W orl d
Enlightenment’s program was the disenchantment of the world. . . . In the authority of 
universal concepts, the Enlightenment detected a fear of the demons through whose ef-
figies human beings had tried to influence nature in magic rituals. From now on, matter 
was finally to be controlled without the illusion of immanent powers or hidden prop-
erties.
 M a x H o r k h e i m e r a n d  T h e o d o r  A d o r n o,  
Dialektik der Aufklärung, 1947
While many of the old master narratives have been unraveling, it is still widely 
supposed that the defining feature of modernity is the departure of the super-
natural. Modernization is often equated with the rise of instrumental reason, 
the gradual alienation of humanity from nature, and the production of a bu-
reaucratic and technological life world stripped of mystery and wonder. Schol-
ars often pin this narrative to Max Weber’s phrase die Entzauberung der Welt, 
the disenchantment (or literally “de- magic- ing”) of the world. Indeed, if there 
is one thing we’ve been taught to take for granted, it is that the contemporary, 
industrial, capitalist societies of Western Europe and North America have lost 
their magic, and that it is this absence that makes them modern. As the Ca-
nadian philosopher Charles Taylor summarized in 2011, “Everyone can agree 
that one of the big differences between us and our ancestors of 500 years ago 
is that they lived in an ‘enchanted’ world and we do not.”15
Disenchantment is also a component of the standard account of seculari-
zation.16 According to thinkers like Taylor, part of the way that religion lost 
its grip on the modern subject was through science eliminating the supernat-
ural.17 In recent years, support for the classical secularization thesis has with-
ered in the face of religious revivals, but even the most vociferous critics of the 
death of God usually grant the decline of magic— at least, in Western Europe, if 
nowhere else. Indeed, part of relativizing secularism is often to present secular-
ism as Protestant, which in turn is positioned as antimagical. If the postsecular 
resurgence of religion is tied to the limits of reason, magic and technology are 
still widely believed to be opposed, and only a few would claim that magic is 
making a comeback.
First and foremost, I want to challenge this model, to rewrite this particular 
account of modernity and its rupture from the premodern past. As discussed 
below, I am not alone in the study of modernity’s enchantments, but the task 
takes on a special urgency because versions of the disenchantment thesis 

Introduction 
5
have recently found fresh purchase, anchoring new movements in philos-
ophy and political theory. Although they do not speak with one voice, a host 
of thinkers— Karen Barad, Jane Bennett, William Connolly, Eduardo Kohn, 
Manuel Vásquez, and others— have charged modern philosophy with despir-
itualizing nature and rendering matter dead and inanimate.18 In response, they 
aim to recover alternate animating ontologies sometimes referred to as “agen-
tial realism” or “enchanted materialism.”19 While I am sympathetic to these 
movements, I think that their diagnosis of the current dilemma too quickly 
grants, even as it inverts, the myth of Euro- American modernity and its puta-
tive relationship to rationality and nature. Simply put, these new philosophers, 
like the poststructuralists they seek to replace, are rebelling against a hegemon 
that never achieved full mastery. The enchanted ontologies and spiritualized 
orientations to nature they describe as missing have been available all along. 
In what follows, it is the both the mythic construction and contradictions of 
the supposedly hegemonic ontology that I want to explore.
I am particularly interested in the formation of the old- fashioned but en-
trenched narrative that describes the history of the modern scientific para-
digm in terms of the rise of mathematical physics and the construction of an  
influential model of a “clockwork universe” that no longer needed spirits or 
a deity to drive the motor of the cosmos.20 Leaving aside how few historical 
physicists actually subscribed to this austere model, what is fascinating to me 
is the way in which the image of a mechanical world took on its own life— 
especially among social theorists— and thus how it escaped the purview of the 
natural sciences to achieve an ambivalent status in the cultural formation of 
the contemporary world picture.21 From my perspective, this particular world 
picture is a myth insofar as it has taken on its own narrative force and bears 
little relationship to the status of physics at any given moment. Yet, some ver-
sion of this world picture was often presented exactly not as a myth, but as an 
ahistorical and universal “Real” against which other myths were shattered.22 
To be clear, I am not attacking the ontology of contemporary physics, but 
am instead interested in how a particular historical image of physics came 
to imprint the human sciences, and by doing so, spilled over into the master 
description of modernity as such, even as the physicists themselves were often 
pushing against that model from the inside.
In what follows, I ask: In the face of things like Curie’s scientific séances, 
spiritualist revivals, and the modern resurgence of magical orders like the 
Golden Dawn, how did we get the idea that modernity meant disenchant-
ment in the first place? I will answer this question by exploring the haunting 
presence of magic in the very instances when disenchantment was itself being 

6 Introduction
theorized. While we know that wonder still dwells in the counterculture and it 
is probably a truism that scientists often hold to strange ideas outside of their 
specific domain of expertise, I want to investigate the least likely people— the 
very theorists of modernity as disenchantment— and show how they worked 
out their various insights inside an occult context, in a social world overflowing 
with spirits and magic, and how the weirdness of that world generated so much 
normativity. This will put us in a position to disaggregate disenchantment into 
inconsistent and semi- overlapping claims— regarding the loss of wonder, the 
de- animation of the world, the progressive rationalization of superstition, and, 
of course, the end of magic— which I show nevertheless share a common root.
It is important, indeed, to track the persistence of the occult across the 
disciplines and not just in the natural sciences— in Bruno Latour’s own so-
ciology, for instance. It is a sociological truism that those who study foreign 
cultures are themselves less religious, and few would imagine anthropologists 
to be easy believers in the magical.23 Indeed, as contemporary anthropologist 
Tanya Luhrmann has noted, for much its history “a central task in sociology 
has been to explain how the elimination of magic was ever possible, and how 
it was that Western society moved into its rational mode.”24 But I will show 
that the human sciences (Geisteswissenschaften) emerged as academic disci-
plines in the nineteenth century alongside flourishing theosophical and spiri-
tualist movements, and shared the latter’s fascination with magical knowledge 
and the spirits of the dead. There is much evidence that the spiritualists read 
social theory and, conversely, that the social theorists were often up on their 
spiritualism.25 Moreover, it was often the self- professed magicians— not the 
sociologists who were the first to decry despiritualization and the general loss 
of magic, even as they called for revivals.
Other scholars have argued that religious studies, for one, has its origins 
in the European empires; this is a trenchant point that may nonetheless need 
refining, since the canonically early figures in the discipline— Max Müller, Max 
Weber, Marcel Mauss— never went to India or met an Aboriginal Australian 
firsthand. They were, however, profoundly enmeshed in the occult milieu, 
and much of what they thought they knew about the non- West was medi-
ated by European esotericism. Indeed, the very objects of their concern, their 
methods, and even their self- definition still bear the marks of this important 
early encounter with the occult. The larger project works out this occult side 
of the human sciences— not just the texts and thinkers who did not make it 
into the canon, but also those canonical figures whose esoteric preoccupations 
have been systematically ignored or suppressed. Instead of displacing Euro-
centrism by means of explicit comparison, what follows is a work of erasure.  

Introduction 
7
The private lives of many theorists of disenchantment seemingly run contrary 
to their own models; by exposing this, I aim to disrupt the old master narra-
tives to make way for new ones.26 By analogue to a similar move in gender  
studies, in part I am trying to “queer,” or render strange, the hegemonic tradi-
tion.27 Furthermore, while the social sciences are often supposed to be one of 
the vectors for secularization and the displacement of magic, I will show that 
sociology and its cousins were more likely to birth new revivals of paganism, 
shamanism, and even magic.28
It was not just the human sciences but also their accounts of modernity 
as disenchanted and secularized that were ironically articulated in the very 
period during which Britain, France, and Germany were in the midst of occult 
revivals. Indeed, I will argue that it was specifically in relation to this burgeon-
ing culture of spirits and magic that European intellectuals gave birth to the 
myth of a mythless society.29
To clarify this seeming paradox, I need to explain what I mean by “myth.” 
The term myth is often used either polemically to indicate an erroneous be-
lief or romantically to suggest an archaic or even sacred mode of narrative 
discourse.30 Although I admit to willfully evoking the polemical usage, by 
“myth” I mainly mean to gesture toward those repeated narrative symbols 
(e.g., the death of God, Achilles’s heel, the naked truth) that are adopted as 
prefabricated tropes or metaphors and whose transposition carries uncon-
scious meaning from one domain to another.31 The prefabricated trope I am 
most interested in is “the myth of modernity” itself, by which I mean not the 
stories from a particular epoch, but the very fable that there was such an age 
as “modernity” and that it had certain features.
By way of explanation, Hans Robert Jauss has reminded us that modernity 
was not a historical event for which we might determine a date: 1492? 1648? 
1789? 1868?32 Modernity is first and foremost the sign of a rupture.33 As a term 
and concept, it is a device for positing significant historical breaks. To speak of 
“the modern” means nothing so much as to talk of the current, of the putatively 
new: to describe a kind of novelty.34 That the term has been used for hundreds 
of years might seem through sheer repetition to forfeit its claims to originality.35
We might know now that modernity is as much a spatial as temporal cate-
gory, and that to call a culture modern is to ally it with newness and to con-
sign its opposite to colonization or the scrap heap of history.36 It is as much a 
project as a periodization. But the project of modernization and the period of 
modernity are typically entwined because modernization works by projecting 
an aspirational and utopian myth of modernity toward which it aspires. In 
this respect utopian modernity is always located elsewhere (e.g., often, colo-

8 Introduction
nized subjects thought of the metropole as embodying modernity; or German  
philosophers looked to France as the epitome of the modern while French 
thinkers looked to England for the same). It might seem that only the dysto-
pian modernity is thought of as here and now. We should also remember that 
to call an era modern, even when criticized from a postmodern vantage, is to 
characterize the epoch in terms of its discontinuity with the past.
There are different ways to stage that newness. “Modernity” is regularly 
equated with everything from specific artistic and philosophical movements 
to particular historical ruptures to distinctive sociological processes, such as 
urbanization, industrialization, globalization, or various forms of rationaliza-
tion. I will not unravel all the possible associations and nuances of the term. 
From among these, I aim to undermine the myth that what sets the modern 
world apart from the rest is that it has experienced disenchantment and a loss 
of myth. I am not claiming that industrialization never happened, nor am I 
denying that rationalization occurred in any cultural sphere; rather, I am inter-
ested in the process by which Christendom increasingly exchanged its claim 
to be the unique bearer of divine revelation for the assertion that it uniquely 
apprehended an unmediated cosmos and did so with the sparkling clarity of 
universal rationality. Sometimes this account of modernity has been celebra-
tory, rejoicing in the ascent of European science and the end of superstition. 
But equally often, it has been a lament, bemoaning a loss of wonder and magic.
*
Another key impetus for my project is to provide a response to Horkheimer 
and Adorno’s monumental Dialectic of Enlightenment and an intervention 
into critical theory more broadly. Insofar as critical theory represents a single 
interpretive community, it might appear that we are mainly united by a com-
mon literary canon and our willingness to repeat a particular story that this 
canon enshrines. Variants of this tale are to be found not only in Dialectic 
of Enlightenment, but also to some degree in many works of the Frankfurt 
School and its periphery, including: Theodor Adorno, Negative Dialektik 
(1966; Negative Dialectics), Erich Fromm, Escape from Freedom (1941), Max 
Horkheimer, Eclipse of Reason (1947), Leo Löwenthal, “Das Dämonishe” 
(“The Demonic,” 1921), Georg Lukács, Die Zerstörung der Vernunft (1954; 
The Destruction of Reason), and Herbert Marcuse, One- Dimensional Man 
(1964). One can even find it with a different affective tone in many of the writ-
ings of Jürgen Habermas.37
Critical theory broadly addresses the following problem: What went wrong 

Introduction 
9
with modernity such that it produced the horrors of totalitarianism and mass 
destruction, and not the utopia of a classless society?38 As expressed in the Di-
alectic of Enlightenment, the question becomes one of “why humanity, instead 
of entering a truly human state, is sinking into a new kind of barbarism.”39
The Frankfurt School’s answers to the broader question are essentially 
similar within a certain range of variations and important elaborations. To jux-
tapose a few: Fromm, 1941: “Freedom, though it has brought [modern man] 
independence and rationality, has made him isolated and, thereby, anxious 
and powerless,” and hence he is tempted to submit to new totalitarian leaders 
in order to “escape from the burden of his freedom.”40 Horkheimer, 1947: “It 
seems that even as technical knowledge expands the horizon of man’s thought 
and activity, his autonomy . . . appear to be reduced. Advance in technical fa-
cilities for enlightenment is accompanied by a process of dehumanization.”41 
Marcuse, 1964: instead of providing “freedom from toil and domination,” 
“Technological rationality . . . becomes the great vehicle of better domina-
tion, creating a truly totalitarian universe in which society and nature, mind 
and body are kept in a state of permanent mobilization for the defense of this 
universe.”42 The primal form of critical theory’s master narrative is that au-
tonomous reason (or freedom or science or enlightenment), once yoked to 
the domination of nature, turns into its opposite— namely, the domination of 
humanity.43 In other words, the intellectual energies that were supposed to 
liberate us are now used to keep us in chains. To my taste, the version of this 
formulation that is most perspicacious is the pithy phrase in the Dialectic of 
Enlightenment: “Enlightenment reverts to mythology.”44
It is easy to see the Weberian cast of this narrative and how it is linked to 
the de-animation of nature. Again, juxtapositions make this clear. Löwenthal, 
1921: “The primitive metaphysical world picture vanishes and makes room for 
the enlightened clearing (Auf- Klärung) of a heaven now stripped of stars. . . . 
The world becomes disenchanted (die Welt wird entzaubert), the vividness of 
the demon’s grimace turns into the abstractness of the [scientific] question.”45 
Fromm, 1941: “Man had overthrown the domination of nature and made him-
self her master. . . . The abolition of external domination seemed to be not only 
a necessary but also a sufficient condition to attain the cherished goal: freedom 
of the individual.”46 Horkheimer, 1947: “Reason has become completely har-
nessed to the social process. Its operational value, its role in the domination of 
men and nature, has been made the sole criterion. . . . As the end result of the 
process, we have . . . an empty nature degraded to mere material, mere stuff to 
be dominated, without any other purpose than that of this very domination.”47 
Habermas, 2001 “To the extent that nature is made accessible to objectivating 

10 Introduction
observation and causal explanation, it is depersonalized. Nature as an object 
of science is no longer part of the social frame of reference.”48 Again, Dialectic 
of Enlightenment: “The disenchantment of the world means the extirpation of 
animism. . . . Nature, stripped of qualities, becomes the chaotic stuff of mere 
classification.”49
In summary, magic and spirits had to go if the world was to be amenable to 
systematic and rational interpretation. By turning nature into an object to con-
trol, humanity was caught in its own trap. Beyond the domination of nature, 
enlightenment became the domination of humans over each other. Instead of 
being liberated into a new kind of autonomy, people were turned into objects, 
or more properly, into abstractions— mere numbers and statistics.50 The ob-
jectification of nature had led toward the objectification of humanity, and the 
concentration camps and Gulag are tragic expressions of this deeper impulse.
I see myself as a disciple of critical theory, and I find Dialectic intensely use-
ful and have returned to it repeatedly; yet it is effectively a late expression of an 
old myth. It rests on a set of basically mythical binaries (myth/enlightenment, 
nature/human) whose breaches it stages, but nevertheless maintains.51 More 
important for our purposes, it works by granting the triumph of disenchant-
ment and de- animation even as it traces the negative impacts of this process 
and its potential returns in new myth. But this assertion of loss relies on the  
assumption that reason once ruled or turned into its opposite.52 Yet, this event 
never occurred. It too is a myth.
Let me put this differently. What I am saying is that not only is myth myth; 
not only is the opposition to myth myth; but the recognition of the opposition 
to myth as myth is itself myth. To clarify, we know that the tale of Prometheus 
was a myth; Adorno and others have shown us that enlightenment’s claim to 
progress was a myth and that enlightenment’s attack on mythology only bred 
more irrationalism in response; what is needed now is the recognition that this 
last claim— our enlightenment critique— has yielded myth. As a critical theo-
rist, you can achieve high levels of reflexivity on the issue and still have your 
initial argument swept out from under you. If what you are doing in the mode 
of enlightenment critique is lamenting the disillusion of myth, then myth has 
not been dissolved. Your mourning reinstates the object of your grief.
Faced with this impasse, I aim to ascertain how Horkheimer and Adorno 
(and the legacy of thinkers they draw on) came to the idea that enlightenment 
was fundamentally disenchanting and thus bequeathed their left Weberianism 
to our generation. To do so requires a methodological epoché, a suspension 
of our central terms. What follows will take precisely not as given the mean-
ing of magic, religion, or science. This is necessary because the key terms of 

Introduction 
11
our analysis had different meanings in different historical moments, and their 
reoccurrence obscures breaks, discontinuities, and important shifts. More-
over, concepts are partially defined differentially, and current terminology 
often bears the legacy of lost oppositions. Accordingly, we must pay careful 
attention to the construction of putative antagonisms (e.g., between myth and 
enlightenment).
To this discourse analysis, I will contribute another area of suspicion. Be-
cause de- animation is central to many of the accounts of disenchantment (not 
the least in Dialectic), in addition to discussing magic as understood in the 
historical context in question, I will also attend to instances when nature is 
conceptualized as populated with animating entities and/or spiritual forces. 
Put differently, reaching past Dialectic of Enlightenment, I aim to perform a 
philosophical archaeology of this conception of modernity, the one that identi-
fies the modern with the Enlightenment and the end of magic, the domination 
of nature, and the extirpation of spirits.
Ref l ex i v e  R e l i g i o u s  S t u d i e s : Th e  E ntangl e d 
F o rm at i o n  o f  R e l ig i o n, S c i e nce , and Magi c
In general terms, this book is a case study in what I have been calling “reflexive 
religious studies.” Contemporary sociologists such as Ulrich Beck, Anthony 
Giddens, and Scott Lash have begun to work out the way that sociology itself 
reflexively shapes society.53 Similarly, the French sociologists Pierre Bourdieu 
and Loïc Wacquant articulated a “reflexive sociology” capable of studying 
sociology itself in sociological terms.54 This is by far the most interesting in-
sight to come out of these movements, and it is probably best to phrase it 
dynamically. Sociology suffers from a certain problem: any social knowledge 
it produces gets fed back into the system, which is thereby changed. This 
means that sociology is always describing the social field the way it was before 
sociology described it.
Beck, Giddens, and Lash point to two distinct kinds of problems. The first 
is in the domain of information theory. Their observation might seem to fit 
easily into a Weberian notion of rationalization; that is, it might initially appear 
that academic social science produces feedback in culture in such a way that 
it produces greater coherence in the social sphere that it then studies. But in 
fact, it also introduces a new element: the sociological study of society adds 
a new incalculability. It is as though the thing that information gathering can-
not properly reckon with is the effect of information gathering on the system. 
Thus, it would appear to be an analogue to the observer effect in quantum 

12 Introduction
mechanics and need to be factored in. In other words, a reflexive sociology 
becomes necessary as sociologists try to reckon with the project of gathering 
sociological information about and within a society that has taken on the in-
sights of sociology.
The second problem cuts deeper, and for our purposes is more important. 
As Beck and Giddens are both aware, sociology contributes to the production 
of certain kinds of societies. They do not just mean professional bodies like 
the American Sociological Association. Instead, sociology as a discipline au-
thorizes certain kinds of information gathering or surveillance (or censuses), 
which then produce new kinds of social locations and new kinds of collective 
organizations and institutions. Sociological surveys, for instance, influence 
their subjects producing new kinds of social identities. Reflexive sociology, 
therefore, is needed to be able to theorize the kind of societies sociology pro-
duces.
Sociology is not the only discipline that has this problem. Anthropologists 
have had to deal with the way that anthropological theory changes the peoples 
that they study; for example, producing new tribes and authenticating some 
forms of indigenous culture over others.55 The analogue of this issue for liter-
ary theorists becomes how to interpret the vast volume of novels and poems 
that have been written with literary theory in mind. As Christian Thorne has 
observed, queer theory has gained a sufficient purchase in American educa-
tion that it has now begun to shape the sexuality of undergraduates. There is 
thus a need for a reflexive queer theory to theorize the effect that queer theory 
has on constructing the interpretation of different sexual acts and identities.56
In what follows, I aim to extend this insight to formulate a reflexive religious 
studies. For some time, scholars in the field have been engaged in interogating 
the relationship between their own personal faiths and their object of study.57 
This has been useful, but what I am calling for in the name of reflexivity is not  
so much autobiographical reflections as a reflexivity addressing the discipline 
as such.58 As I conceive it, reflexive religious studies would reckon with ways 
that the academic study of religion— in a range of disciplinary formations— is 
porous and tends to seep into the cultures that it purports to study. More-
over, as I have been arguing for some time now, the category “religion” is itself 
transformative, such that importing it as a second- order category (in scholas-
tic, legal, and other discourses) transforms the society into which it has been 
introduced, effectively transforming other cultural systems into “religions.” 
“Reflexive religious studies” would examine those societies in which the cate-
gory “religion” and its entangled differentiations (e.g., the distinction between 
religion and the secular) have begun to function as concepts. It would trace the 

Introduction 
13
continuities and disruptions that this category produces in older conceptual 
orders and aim for precision. And it would also necessarily take into account 
how the disciplines of religious studies shapes and produces religions.
While to my knowledge there has never been a serious previous attempt to 
work out a reflexive religious studies, scholars have spent some time thinking 
about the way in which the higher criticism of the Bible produces different 
kinds of religious projects. The old fashioned version of this trope is to read 
the Protestant Reformation, for example, as inspired by Erasmus’s humanism. 
To the degree that there is a version of this narrative about religious studies 
today, it is often to imagine that the discipline is secularizing, that the act of 
comparison between religions tends to relativize and therefore extinguish reli-
gious beliefs. But this is far from the whole picture. The first insight of reflexive 
religious studies is that the social scientific study actually reverberates in the 
religious field, revitalizing and even producing religions. Examples are easy to 
find. One does not have to look hard to see that the study of shamanism, for 
instance, has actually worked to produce contemporary neo- shamanic move-
ments.59
*
There is another way that taking this meta- level view of the category religion 
will help our current inquiry. It is my contention that tracing the genealogy of 
the notion of a conflict between religion and science will give us clues to both 
the appearance and occlusion of enchantment. While I will explain disen-
chantment on many levels, I will argue that one of the mechanisms that both 
makes magic appealing and motivates its suppression is the reification of a pu-
tative binary opposition between religion and science, and the production of 
a “third term” (superstition, magic, and so on) that signifies repeated attempts 
to stage or prevent reconciliation between these opposed discursive terrains. 
Let me explain.
Many accounts of modernity have been undergirded by the legend of a 
titanic struggle between two opposing forces— religion and science— in which 
the latter is often declared victor. The myth that these two powers had always 
been in contestation was formed in the nineteenth century; and then, like many 
other myths we’ll explore, it was projected backward in a series of dramatized 
confrontations.60 Today many nonspecialists mistakenly believe that Galileo 
was really tortured by the Inquisition for promoting heliocentrism or that 
medieval Europeans thought that the world was flat before Columbus proved 
them wrong.61

14 Introduction
Nonetheless, religious studies and science studies have now spent de-
cades relativizing their respective objects. Scholars of religion now know that 
“religion” is not a universal part of human nature, but is a culturally specific 
category that initially took shape in Western Christendom at the end of the 
seventeenth century and then was radically transformed through a globali-
zation process over the course of the long nineteenth century, producing both 
“world religions” and discourses around “religion” as an autonomous domain 
of human experience.62 Although the issue is more controversial, philosophers 
of science also know that there is no single universal scientific method, and that 
“modern science” emerged in the long nineteenth century with a radical refor-
mulation of European natural philosophy and expanded through globalization 
and the selective absorption and disintegration of local knowledge systems.63
By combining these two critiques, the contemporary historian Peter Har-
rison has delineated how religion and science emerged together in European 
thought through a parallel process of mutual distinction and reification.64 In 
broadest of strokes, Harrison demonstrates that science and religion come into 
being with a common epistemic basis that if anything made possible the birth 
of modern science.65 But eventually they came to be understood as separate 
systems with their own spheres. Hence this initial cooperation collapsed as 
the sciences gained part of their respective notion of coherence in contra-
distinction to religion as an irrational belief system, while religion became “a 
kind of negative image of science, and this contrast has become important for 
the integrity of the boundaries of science.”66 In effect, both discursive systems 
gained coherence through a purification process in which they came to be 
distinguished from each other.
Harrison’s account is only part of the picture. While he describes the his-
tory of a binary opposition between religion and science, Serge Margel has 
emphasized an earlier dialectic between religion and superstition that gave 
each term its meaning; moreover, Michel de Certeau has noted that science 
was formulated through rhetorical opposition to superstition.67 More recently, 
Wouter Hanegraaff has argued that the broader enterprise of the European 
academy was predicated on excluding forms of pagan knowledge it marked as 
superstitious, magic, or occult.68 Both concepts of religion and science came 
into existence by being distinguished from “superstition,” understood as the 
false double of religion and later as the false double of science or scientific 
knowledge (in both humanistic and naturalistic modes). Accordingly, instead 
of binaries, I see a trinary formation in which religion is negated by science, 
which is in turn negated by superstition or magic.
Put differently, the concept of true or orthodox “religion” was in some sense 

Introduction 
15
constructed by being distinguished from the false religion of “superstition” 
(we can hear echoes of Protestant anti- Catholicism and earlier Christian anti- 
paganism). Similarly, true “science” or proper scholarship was formulated 
in opposition to “superstition” (often understood as occult or fake science). 
Moreover, from both vantages, the prototypical superstitions were belief in 
spirits and “magic.” In this respect, terms like superstition and magic, while 
fluid, open ended, and constantly changing, nevertheless were not completely 
empty signifiers because they inherited these older polemics. Superstition 
went from “wrong” because it was diabolical or pagan to “mistaken” because 
it was antiscientific.
Overlaps between “religion” and “science” were often described as “super-
stition” or pseudosciences.69 Policing “superstitions” became part of the way 
that the categories of “religion” and “science” were formed in differentiation. 
Furthermore, it is worth emphasizing that the rejection of “superstition” was 
necessarily incomplete, and hence it was always possible to partially transform 
it into a site of resistance. I am fascinated by a kind of sublation or occlusion 
that functions by suppressing something at the same moment that another as-
pect of the suppressed is being reincorporated. Treating esotericism or magic 
as predominantly “rejected knowledge” only captures part of the picture. It 
explains how categories like “superstition” were produced to exclude certain 
beliefs or knowledges, but it doesn’t explain what makes those forms of knowl-
edge appealing in the first place. My intuition is that while this type of negation 
is basically disempowering, it also represents a location from which one can 
criticize the original position.
Approached differently, the construction of science and religion as antago-
nists implied a third position representing where the categories both convene 
and collapse. In my last book I deployed this trinary in a genealogy of the cate-
gory “religion,” but here I want to follow the third term. Negatively valenced, 
it is understood to be superstition and in this respect appears as the double 
of either religion or science. Hence, a certain cross- section of scientists trum-
peted the power of their respective domain by suggesting that all of religion 
was a superstition. Positively valenced, the third term is magic, which was 
often supposed to take the best elements of religion and science together or to 
recover things suppressed by “modern” science or religion. Indeed, most of 
what gets classified as contemporary esotericism or occultism came into being 
as an attempt to repair the rupture between religion and science.70
Restated in broad terms, once “religion” and “science” are formulated as 
opposing discursive terrains, religion- science hybrids become both threaten-
ing and appealing. They are threatening because they risk destabilizing the 

16 Introduction
system’s points of closure and because they suggest pre- hybrid and therefore 
supposedely premodern systems. But also they are appealing because they 
promise to heal the split between the two notionally opposed terrains. More-
over, the more “magic” becomes marked as antimodern, the more it becomes 
potentially attractive as a site from which to criticize “modernity.” Finally, for 
all the polemical attacks against superstition and magic, disenchanting efforts 
were only sporadically enforced within the disciplines, such that notions of 
magic and spirits keep resurfacing as redemptive possibilities.
All told, this triadic structure is not the only reason that European thinkers 
came up with the theory of disenchantment and put it into place as a regulative 
ideal (the chapters that follow will explore other entangled issues). But, as I 
will demonstrate, looked at from the reverse vantage point, the myth of disen-
chantment has two divergent effects— first, it functions as a regime of truth, 
embedding the paradigm of modernity in the core of the sciences and giving 
energy to various projects aiming to eliminate superstition; and second, it is 
self- refuting, giving life to the very thing it characterizes as expiring, stimu-
lating magical revivals, paranormal research, and new attempts to spiritualize 
the sciences.
In sum, in the binary operation between religion and science, superstition/
magic functions as the third term in a Derridean sense.71 “Magic” is the point 
where the system does not close. Like all of these terms, it has a dynamic 
function. Its role emerges from a position as the negation of the negation; and 
therefore, looked at from one perspective, it is the conjunction from which the 
system emerges. From another perspective, magic is either an imitation of the 
science or an imitation of religion; the origin of the religion or the origin of 
science; or the excluded middle.
O v erv i ew  o f t h e  W o r k : E u ro pe  I s  Not E urope
Although the God of monotheism may have taken a few knocks— if not actually 
“died”— in the nineteenth- century European story of “the disenchantment of the 
world,” the gods and other agents inhabiting practices of so- called “superstition” have 
never died anywhere.
 D i p e s h  C h a k r a b a r t y, Provincializing Europe, 2000
Throughout the academy there continues to be a massive and ongoing in-
vestment in the modernization thesis, which when not taken for granted is 
alternately celebrated or condemned.72 Fortunately, two small but significant 
groups of dissenters have rejected this grand narrative: first, a cluster of post-

Introduction 
17
colonial thinkers has worked to shatter the reflexive linkage between Eurocen-
trism and modernization;73 and second, a handful of historians working on 
Europe and America have come to emphasize contemporary enchantments 
therein.74 The first group has demonstrated how the claim that disenchanted 
modernity was the distinctive feature of the West was used to justify coloni-
zation and violence. The second group of scholars has argued that magic is 
everywhere in Euro- American “modernity”— in the religious world, the secu-
lar world, popular culture, literature, the scientific academy, and so on. In what 
follows I build on the insights of both movements and in so doing I aim to his-
toricize— or we might say, following Dipesh Chakrabarty, to “provincialize”— 
the myth of modernity and its various incarnations in European social theory.75
The first implication of taking both movements together, however, is a 
seeming paradox— postcolonialists have demonstrated that modernity is just 
another name for Europe. Meanwhile, historians have shown that European 
history does not really fit the classic trajectory of modernity. Accordingly, if 
the rejection of the supernatural is supposed to be the defining feature of both 
European culture and modernity, then in this respect— Europe is not Europe.
Let me approach this differently. In the first volume of Histoire de la sex-
ualité, Michel Foucault set out to challenge what he called the “repressive 
hypothesis”; namely, the widespread belief in the twentieth century that earlier 
generations were sexually repressed. In doing so, Foucault expressed a set of 
doubts that I want to loosely adapt here to address what we might call the 
“myth of disenchantment,” the “modernity hypothesis,” or the “modernity 
paradigm.”76 First doubt: Is the disenchantment of the world truly an estab-
lished historical pattern? Was there actually a historical rupture between the 
epoch of magic and the critique of disenchantment? Does modernity really 
define a singular breach, or is it a mythic epoch? Call this the historical doubt.
Once this doubt begins to take hold, it leads to new doubts whose reso-
lution will be of interest to postcolonialists and historians of enchantment 
alike— if we reject the old European story of the “disenchantment of the 
world” (and I think there are plenty of good reasons to do so), we still have 
the second doubt: Why did European societies come to think of themselves as 
disenchanted? How did Europe come to imagine— even to the extent of tak-
ing it as the central feature of its civilization— that it did not believe in spirits, 
despite persistent evidence to the contrary? Why were social scientists drawn 
irrevocably to the very beliefs they decried as primitive superstitions? How in 
the face of widespread belief in spirits and magic did disenchantment come to 
function as a regime of truth or disciplinary norm in the human sciences? In 
other words, how did Europeans come to end up with a society that both re-

18 Introduction
presses magic and in which magic proliferates? When and how did the myth of 
disenchantment emerge? As I address these issues in what follows, the phrase 
occult disavowal will be my shorthand for the regulative function of the myth 
of disenchantment that results in the simultaneous private embrace and public 
rejection of enchantment. Call this the critical- historical doubt.
This in turn leads to a third and final doubt: Have the workings of domi-
nation in Euro- American societies really belonged primarily to the mode of 
disenchantment? Or is the critique of disenchantment part of the same power 
mechanism as the thing it criticizes? This is the politico- theoretical doubt.
To respond to these entangled issues, the work that follows is first and 
foremost therefore a novel history of the human sciences that, having sus-
pended the assumption of disenchantment, shows how their disciplining pro-
cesses occurred against a background of magic and religious revivals. Doing 
so should enable us to undercut the modernization thesis by revealing its 
paradoxical origins in the shared terrain between spiritualists, sorcerers, and 
scholars.
The argument of the book proceeds as follows:
An initial background chapter, “Enchanted (Post) Modernity,” takes as its 
starting point present- day sociology and anthropology. It shows that today in 
neither Europe, nor America, nor the rest of the globe can one find the dis-
enchanted world anticipated by the major theorists of modernity. It then uses 
sociological data to explore the function of enchantment today. Moreover, it 
unlinks traditional accounts of secularization and disenchantment to show that 
in many cases ghosts and spirits come to fill the space evacuated by the puta-
tive death of God. Significantly, it begins to excavate one of the logics of occult 
disavowal by showing how belief in one form of enchantment often comes at 
the cost of another, such that supernatural beliefs can actively function in the 
service of disenchantment.
Part 1, “God’s Shadow,” begins with chapter 2, “Revenge of the Magi-
cians,”which is historical in scope. It takes as its starting point various figures— 
from Giordano Bruno to Isaac Newton— who have been blamed for the rise 
of instrumental reason and the disenchantment of nature, and it demonstrates 
their respective magical projects. It then recovers two moments often seen 
as the watershed of modernity— Francis Bacon’s formulation of the scien-
tific method and the French philosophes’ publication of the Encyclopédie— to 
demonstrate that neither embody the disenchantment usually attributed to  
them. In so doing, it separates the putative “birth of science” from the death of 
magic, and shows that the enlightenment project was initially articulated not 
in terms of a conflict between religion and science or faith and reason, but as 

Introduction 
19
a divine science. Nevertheless, it sees in both movements the roots of occult 
disavowal in the myth of modernity as the end of superstition.
The third chapter, “The Myth of Absence,” traces the myth that the phi-
losophes and the mechanistic cosmology had eliminated the divine. It demon-
strates that several key mythemes— the mythless age, the de- divination of 
nature, nihilism, and the death of God— had a conjoined genesis in German 
philosophical circles several decades before Nietzsche. Focusing on the writ-
ings of G. W. F. Hegel, Friedrich Hölderlin, Friedrich Jacobi, and Friedrich 
Schiller, it shows how a generation of German philosophers came to believe 
that they lived in a uniquely mythless epoch and then transmitted this par-
ticular lament to later generations, including our own. Turning to Jacob Burck-
hardt, it shows how the myth- of- the- end- of- myth was projected backward, 
producing the historiography of other epochs, such as the Renaissance and 
the Enlightenment.
Chapter 4, “The Shadow of God,” highlights a crucially important dia-
lectical movement. It shows how a putative opposition between religion and 
science, combined with fears of despiritualization and mourning for the death 
of God, motivated the rise of spiritualism and occult movements, and con-
tributed to the birth of religious studies as a discipline. Looking at Edward 
Burnett Tylor, Friedrich Max Müller, Éliphas Lévi, and Helena Blavatsky, it 
demonstrates how scholars, spiritualists, and magicians not only moved in 
common social circles, but also shared an engagement with spirits, mysticism, 
and “Oriental” mysteries. The chapter maps out the messy intermediate 
terrain between two spheres that considered themselves to be different and 
were sometimes opposed, but nevertheless exhibited the same basic habits of 
thought— including a myth of lost magic.
Chapters 5, “The Decline of Magic,” and 6, “The Revival of Magick,” turn 
to the birth of the classical disenchantment narrative, noting that while it is 
often attributed to Max Weber, one of its earliest significant formulations is 
in the second edition of The Golden Bough, by the Scottish folklorist James 
Frazer. Chapter 5 argues that Frazer came late to the narrative of magical de-
cline, and that he did so within a context of psychical research and in the 
face of a folkloric narrative itself about the departure of fairies and the decline 
of magic. It shows how Frazer formulated an influential trinary opposition 
between religion, magic, and science while encoding this typology within a 
disenchantment narrative. The following chapter turns to the infamous British 
magician Aleister Crowley, who overlapped with Frazer at Trinity College, 
Cambridge. This chapter shows that Crowley drew on the very text in which 
Frazer worked out dis enchantment to stage his revival of modern “magick” 

20 Introduction
[sic]. Hence, the narrative of disenchantment was self- refuting insofar as it 
reinvigorated the very thing it described as endangered.
In part 2, “The Horrors of Metaphysics,” the seventh chapter, “The Black 
Tide: Mysticism, Rationality, and the German Occult Revival,” shifts the focus 
back to the German- speaking world. It begins with Sigmund Freud’s refer-
ences in The Interpretation of Dreams to a “brilliant mystic” named Carl du 
Prel. It explores one of Freud’s interlocutors, the German- Jewish physician 
Max Nordau, who theorized his own conception of degeneration alongside 
a broader contention that modernity led to irrationalization and mysticism. 
The chapter then shows how conceptions of magic and spirits haunted the 
German reception of Immanuel Kant and became entangled with the history of 
academic philosophy and psychoanalysis, and their counterpart constructions 
of noumena and the unconscious. It explains how Arthur Schopenhauer came 
to theorize the efficacy of magic and demonstrates the importance of “mysti-
cism” as a vanishing mediator between a philosophy dedicated to exploring 
reason’s limits, and a psychoanalysis focused on the roots of irrationality. It 
then explains why Freud polished Frazer’s narrative of disenchantment into 
a developmental theory even as he began his own exploration of an occult 
terrain. Thus, it explores how Freud projected his own taboo desires onto the 
figure of the savage.
The next two chapters look to the places where the myth of the absence 
of myth has established its most systematic philosophical purchase: critical 
theory and Vienna Circle positivism. Chapter 8, “Dialectic of Darkness: The 
Magical Foundations of Critical Theory,” focuses on the German neo- pagan 
poet and philosopher Ludwig Klages, who formulated much of the termi-
nology and critique of modernity as the “domination of nature” that would 
later become associated with the Frankfurt School. It then looks at Klages’s 
influence on German- Jewish philosopher and literary theorist Walter Benja-
min, demonstrating that much of the terminology that seems so peculiar to 
Benjamin— the aura, constellations, correspondences, angels, and Ur- images— 
all were current in German esoteric circles while Benjamin was coming to his 
most important ideas.
Having shown that the Enlightenment critique has roots in an esoteric 
milieu, critical theory’s putative enemies— the positivists— would seem to 
be the worst candidates for closet magicians. “The Ghosts of Metaphysics: 
Logical Positivism and Disenchantment,” chapter 9, explores the connections 
between the Vienna School of positivism and the esoteric milieu. It shows 
how the founders of logical positivism, such as Otto Neurath, presented 
their philosophy as a kind of magical revival. It also demonstrates that other 

Introduction 
21
positivists— such as Rudolf Carnap, Hans Hahn, and Kurt Gödel— had a pro-
found preoccupation with ghosts and the paranormal. Taken as a whole, the 
book demonstrates how magic, like metaphysics, also haunts the beginnings 
of analytic philosophy.
The final chapter, “The World of Enchantment; or, Max Weber at the End 
of History,” focuses on Max Weber’s preoccupation with “disenchantment” 
(Entzauberung) in the same period that Freud was formulating his own ver-
sion of that myth. It complexifies conventional readings of disenchantment by 
showing how the term fit into Weber’s theory of rationalization. Examining a 
set of Weber’s letters that have only recently been made available to scholars, 
the chapter argues that despite Weber’s reputation for being deaf to religion, 
“mysticism” was not wholly negative, but perhaps a positive reaction to the 
“iron cage” of modernity. It demonstrates that Weber came to theorize “the  
disenchanting of the world” (die Entzauberung der Welt) not out of frustra-
tion with Prussian bureaucracy, but rather in reaction to a Swiss neo- pagan 
commune.
To foreshadow the complexity of the argument that follows, I am not merely 
complicating Weber’s master narrative, but also examining those historical 
moments or knots in which enchantment and disenchantment turn into each 
other, or are indistinguishable. In other words, I want to show that what ap-
pears to be a binary opposition— enchantment versus disenchantment (Ver-
zauberung gegen Entzauberung)— fails to match up.

C h a p t e r  O n e
Enchanted (Post) Modernity
This book began as an attempt to make sense of some of the systems of belief which 
were current in sixteenth-  and seventeenth- century England, but which no longer en-
joy much recognition today. Astrology, witchcraft, magical healing, divination, ancient 
prophecies, ghosts and fairies, are now all rightly disdained by intelligent persons.
 K e i t h  T h o m a s , Religion and the Decline of Magic, 1971
The postmodern condition is nevertheless foreign to disenchantment.
 J e a n -  F r a n ç o i s Ly o ta r d, La condition postmoderne, 1979
If you were to travel to the small town of Kotohira on the Japanese island of 
 Shikoku, you might, after strolling past one of the country’s oldest Kabuki 
theaters and partaking of the region’s famous udon noodles, find yourself at a 
famous shrine, the town’s central attraction for tourists and pilgrims.1 There, 
on the grounds of this ancient site, you would find a dedicatory plaque sporting 
a very modern image, that of Japan’s first cosmonaut, Akiyama Toyohiro, clad 
in a spacesuit standing next to his craft. Despite its space- age content, however, 
the plaque gives thanks to Konpira, the so- called god of sailors, for Akiyama’s 
safe voyage through interplanetary space. This confluence of technology and 
public religiosity is by no means unique to the Konpira Shrine. Analogous ex-
amples dot the Japanese cultural landscape. As I have argued elsewhere, gen-
erally speaking, recent Japanese history meant changes in the locus of enchant-
ment, in ways unanticipated by classical theorists of modernity.2 In one of the 
most technologically and scientifically advanced nations today, one finds— in 
addition to old- fashioned faith healers and spirit mediums— flash drives that 
double as magical charms, funeral rituals for old photographs and discarded 
electronics, iPhone apps for automatic exorcisms or traditional fortune- telling, 
and Buddhist stupas dedicated to Thomas Edison and Heinrich Hertz as the 
“Divine Patriarchs of Electricity and Electro- Magnetic Waves.”3
Despite the Orientalist cliché of a mystical Asia, Japan does not have a mo-
nopoly on contemporary enchantments. In study after study, scholars of the 
Global South have charted not only traditional but modern forms of magic, 

Enchanted (Post) Modernity 
23
including: Internet- based virtual Haitian Vodou; epidemics of spirit posses-
sion among Malaysian factory workers; clairvoyant Brazilian spirit surgeons; 
modern witchcraft persecutions in South Africa and Indonesia; Vietnamese 
divinities that are appeased with cans of Coke and Pepsi; aerosol sprays to 
evoke the protection of Santísima Muerte in Mexico; gun- toting spirit me-
diums in Uganda; an Indian guru supposedly capable of magical material-
izations, faith healing, and even bringing people back from the dead; and a 
notorious pair of demonically possessed underpants in Ghana.4 It would seem 
that Latin America, Africa, and indeed most of Asia are inhabited by sorcerers 
and alive with spirits.
While lingering enchantments used to be taken as a rationale for the back-
wardness of non- European others, today they are often regarded as evidence 
that the disenchantment model is an uncomfortable fit outside the land of its 
birth. Hence contemporary scholars like Denis Byrne explicitly reject “the 
common assumption that post- Reformation disenchantment encompasses the 
non- European world.”5 While I agree with Byrne’s sentiment as far as it goes, 
in this short chapter I want to challenge the idea that disenchantment is the 
order of the day even in the so- called heartland of modernity.
W e ir d  Am e r ica
There is a constant war between the messengers of God and ghosts and demons, danc-
ers and drinkers, and, for all anyone knows, between God’s messengers and God him-
self— no one has ever seen him, but then no one has ever seen a cuckoo either. . . . Here 
is a mystical body of the republic, a kind of public secret: a declaration of what sort of 
wishes and fears lie behind any public act, a declaration of a weird but clearly recogniz-
able America.
 G r e i l  M a r c u s , The Old, Weird America, 2011
It is hard not to be skeptical of claims to disenchantment as I write these words 
in a café adorned with flyers advertising “crystal healing,” “energy balancing,” 
“chakra yoga,” and “tarot” readings.6 Undeniably, what Catherine Albanese 
and Courtney Bender refer to as American “metaphysical religion” would 
seem to be on display in coffee shops, co- ops, and bookstores throughout 
the country.7 Moreover, in Europe and America, films, novels, and television 
series continue to overflow with magic, providing symbolic resources— what 
Christopher Partridge and Jeffrey Kripal refer to as “occulture”— that are often 
recouped by this religious counterculture (e.g., rituals appearing first in Buffy 
the Vampire Slayer are adopted by contemporary Wiccan covens).8 It would 

24 Chapter One
seem that many of the stories we tell ourselves in the modern West are about 
superheroes and magicians, ghosts and monsters, and that these creatures 
often spill over into other parts of the culture. As Kripal observes in regard 
to the seeming ubiquity of such cultural materials: “The paranormal is our 
secret in plain sight.”9
Even setting aside the abundance of explicitly fictional forms of enchant-
ment, studies of American reading habits similarly suggest that “New Age” 
print culture has “expanded exponentially in the past thirty years” with “non- 
fiction books” about magic, guardian angels, and near- death experiences ap-
pearing in the upper echelons of Amazon’s best- seller lists.10 Moreover, the 
last ten years have seen a proliferation of “reality” television series that claim 
to report evidence for ghosts, psychics, extraterrestrials, monsters, curses, and 
even miracles.11 In both the United Kingdom and the United States, it is also 
easy to turn on the television and encounter the prognostications of celebrity 
psychic mediums.12 It might seem that contemporary audiences are at least 
willing to flirt with the existence of spirits and the supernatural.
A variety of sociological evidence would seem to support this intuition. In 
2005, Gallup conducted a telephone survey with 1,002 American adults asking 
them if they believed in things like ESP, ghosts, telepathy, and witches (see 
figure 1). Not only did a surprising number of the American respondents re-
portedly believe in each of these (e.g., almost a third believe in ghosts), but also 
other polling firms, while not covering identical beliefs, have produced similar 
numbers.13 For a recent example, a YouGov 2015 survey of 1,171 Americans 
showed that 48 percent of those sampled agreed with the claim “Some people 
can possess one or more types of psychic ability (e.g., precognition, telepathy, 
etc.),” while 43 percent agreed with the statement “Ghosts exist.”14 Even slight 
differences in the wording produce different responses, but taken together it 
appears the majority of Americans are at least open to the idea of ghosts and 
psychic powers, while a not- insignificant number believe in necromancy.
Remarkably, if one takes a closer look at the Gallup 2005 polling data, it 
shows something even more interesting: belief in different forms of the “para-
normal” (see note for terminology) are not confined to a single subculture.15 For 
example, believers in telepathy and witchcraft are likely only semi- overlapping 
sets because, as the survey indicated, 73 percent of those responding believe in 
at least one of the poll’s ten paranormal categories (see figure 2).16 Although it 
might sound shocking, this percentage is nearly identical to earlier iterations 
of the Gallup poll from 2001 and 1990.17 The implications of these statistics 
are worth underscoring because, if this data is accurate, it means that only 
approximately a quarter of Americans are not believers in the paranormal. We 

Enchanted (Post) Modernity 
25
live in a land of wonders in which most people are believers and skeptics are 
the clear minority.
It might be tempting to discount these polls as mere journalistic sensational-
ism, but sociologists have found similar results. In 2005 and 2007, sociologists 
at Baylor University conducted a fairly robust set of phone interviews (sample 
size of 3,369) from across the United States. Their main focus was a complete 
picture of American religious beliefs, but a similar pattern emerges (see figure 
3).18 Again we see evidence that about half of the American population believes 
in ghosts, while a clear majority believes in demonic possession. This latter 
claim accords with the fieldwork of the American sociologist Michael Cuneo, 
who in 2001 suggested that belief in demonic possession was not only wide-
spread, but also on the increase such that “exorcism is more readily available 
today in the United States than perhaps ever before.”19 Moreover, in a section 
of the 2007 survey not depicted in figure 3, 55 percent of those polled claimed 
they had personally experienced being “protected from harm by a guardian 
angel.”20 In sum, the picture painted by the Baylor study is one of an America 
enthusiastically engaged with angels, demons, and other invisible spirits.21
55%
41%
37%
32%
31%
26%
25%
24%
21%
21%
20%
9%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Psychic Healing
ESP
Haunted Houses
Ghosts
Telepathy
Clairvoyance
Astrology
Extraterrestrials
Necromancy*
Witches
Reincarnation
Channeling
F i g u r e  1 .  American paranormal beliefs, 2005
For the label “necromancy,” the prompt was “that people can communicate mentally with some-
one who has died.” For “psychic healing,” the prompt was “psychic or spiritual healing or the 
power of the human mind to heal the body.” David Moore, “Three in Four Americans Believe 
in Paranormal,” Gallup News Service, June 16, 2005; and Linda Lyons, “Paranormal Beliefs 
Come (Super)Naturally to Some,” Gallup News Service, November 1, 2005.

26 Chapter One
Sociologists Christopher D. Bader, F. Carson Mencken, and Joseph O. O. 
Baker published an analysis of relevant portions of the Baylor data in Para-
normal America (2010), which they combined with fieldwork interviewing 
self- described psychics and Bigfoot hunters. Bader, Mencken, and Baker ulti-
mately summarize their findings in strong terms:
The paranormal is normal . . . . Statistically, those who report a paranormal 
belief are not the oddballs; it is those who have no beliefs that are in the sig-
nificant minority. Exactly which paranormal beliefs a person finds convinc-
ing varies, but whether it is UFOs and ghosts or astrology and telekinesis, 
most of us believe more than one. If we further consider strong beliefs in active  
supernatural entities and intense religious experiences the numbers are even 
larger.22
In sum, Bader, Mencken, and Baker also estimate that more than two- thirds of 
Americans believe in the paranormal.23
Demographic trends can also be extracted from the data as specific paranor-
1 Belief (16%)
2 Beliefs (14%)
3 Beliefs (11%)
4 (11%)
5 (7%)
6 (6%)
7 (3%)
8 (3%)
9 (2%)
10 (1%)
None (27%)
73% of Americans have at
Least One Paranormal Belief
F i g u r e  2 .  Percentage of Americans with multiple paranormal beliefs, 2005
They include in the paranormal: ESP, haunted houses, ghosts, telepathy, clairvoyance, astrol-
ogy, communication with the dead, witches, reincarnation, and channeling. Moore, “Three in 
Four Americans Believe in Paranormal”; Lyons, “Paranormal Beliefs Come (Super)Naturally 
to Some.”

Enchanted (Post) Modernity 
27
mal beliefs can be identified with different populations. For example, African 
American women were the most likely to believe in ghosts and the possibility 
of communication with the dead, while Caucasians were more likely to believe 
that they have been abducted by extraterrestrials.24 But believing in at least one 
form of the paranormal is not confined to a particular counterculture and is 
evidently the norm throughout the country.
Nor has it vanished with compulsory mass education. While there is a con-
nection between education and specific paranormal beliefs, there is little cor-
relation between level of education and having paranormal beliefs as such. For 
instance, Bader, Mencken, and Baker conclude that college graduates are less 
likely to believe in UFOs but more likely to believe in psychics.25 Other sur-
veys targeting the issue specifically have also suggested that “higher education 
fuels [a] stronger belief in ghosts.” At the very least, college seniors are more 
likely to be open to the possibility of ghosts and psychical powers than their 
less educated peers.26 A related point worth underscoring is that sociologi-
cal evidence suggests that self- identified magicians and witches are generally  
81%
68%
53%
50%
37%
24%
18%
17%
14%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Angels
Demons
Demonic Possession
Ghosts
Haunted Places
UFOs
Necromancy
Bigfoot
Astrology
F i g u r e  3 .  United States beliefs, 2005, 2007
Baylor University, The Baylor Religion Survey, Wave 1 (Waco, TX: Baylor Institute for Studies of 
Religion, 2005) and The Baylor Religion Survey, Wave 2 (Waco, TX: Baylor Institute for Studies 
of Religion, 2007). 2005 data unless marked. Combining “absolutely exist” and “probably exist” 
as well as “strongly agree” and “agree.”

28 Chapter One
better educated than average and more likely to hold a college degree.27 Hence, 
it would be a mistake to assume that education necessarily leads toward dis-
enchantment.
An important corollary of these surveys more broadly is that paranormal 
belief can be found on both sides of the political aisle, albeit in different typical 
forms. This is significant because in the popular culture, the occult is often 
associated with reactionary right- wing politics, especially fascism (e.g., the 
occult Nazis in Steven Spielberg’s Raiders of the Lost Ark). This argument 
has a scholarly pedigree in sources such as Theodor Adorno, “Theses against 
Occultism” (Thesen gegen den Okkultismus), the German context for which 
will be explored in chapters 8 and 9.28 In contrast, one can also find the reverse 
association between “New Age hippies” and left- wing politics. Yet, one of the 
most straightforward implications of the wide diffusion of paranormal belief is 
that there is no particular political affiliation that is more “irrational” or more 
magical than the other (at least, according to this axis).
History bears this out insofar as one can find enchantment across the 
political spectrum (e.g., both pro-  and anticolonialist Theosophists). But this 
evidence does not neutralize political readings of magic. Specific beliefs do 
correlate with demographic backgrounds and ideological commitments.29 
Different paranormal beliefs have elective affinities with different political 
movements. One could go some length to explore the progressive political co-
ordinates of, say, spiritualism in nineteenth- century America.30 But we should 
resist too quickly assuming a clear political bifurcation between believers in 
magic and skeptics.
On a related note, as the Cameroonian philosopher Achille Mbembe re-
minds us, belief in witchcraft is often taken as paradigmatic of cultural back-
wardness and is sometimes supposed to be the very thing that makes Africa, 
for example, difficult to modernize.31 But the historian Owen Davies has 
demonstrated that despite the common claim that Salem was the last great 
witchcraft persecution in this country, “we now know of more people killed 
as witches in America after 1692 than before it,” with extrajudicial murders of 
suspected witches continuing at least until the 1950s.32 Although Davies does 
not explicitly draw this conclusion, he provides a lot of evidence that it was 
the rise of Wicca that began to shift the discourse around witches post- 1954. 
Additionally, the commercialization of Halloween combined with the popular 
Bewitched television series popularized a more harmless image of the witch.33 
But, in the same period, some Evangelical communities have if anything ampli-
fied their so- called war against witches.34 Indeed, even today, Pat Robertson, 
the controversial chairman of the Christian Broadcasting Network, cautions 

Enchanted (Post) Modernity 
29
his viewers against the dangers of witches and their curses on a seemingly 
regular basis.35 All told, it should not be surprising that surveys suggest that 
more than a quarter of Americans believe in witches.36
There has been some excellent scholarship on the decline of belief in mir-
acles over the course of European history.37 Indeed, the loss of faith in divinely 
inspired wonders is often taken to be a hallmark of the grand trajectory of 
disenchantment. But as useful as historians have been for recovering the con-
text and politics of natural philosophy, as a broad trajectory, notions of a post- 
miraculous age run into trouble in the face of contemporary sociological evi-
dence. For instance, a large survey of more than 35,000 Americans conducted 
by the Pew Research Forum in 2007 reported that 79 percent of those polled 
believed that “miracles still occur today as in ancient times.”38 Less than a fifth 
of all those surveys rejected the existence of contemporary miracles as a whole. 
It is worth remarking that some of those who reject the idea that miracles occur 
today must include a significant number of Protestants committed to the ces-
sation of miraculous gifts at the end of the apostolic age (discussed in chapters 
2 and 5). So one might imagine that many of those denying the currency of 
contemporary divine wonders are doing so on religious grounds. At the very 
least, it would seem that many Americans still live in “worlds of wonder.”39
By looking at Bader, Mencken, and Baker’s American demographic infor-
mation in greater depth, it is striking that the groups least likely to believe 
in the paranormal generally define themselves in religious and not secular 
terms. For instance, Evangelical Christians are particularly skeptical about 
the “paranormal.”40 But rather than stripping the world of animating forces, 
Evangelicals are more likely to believe that ghosts, aliens, and psychic powers 
are caused by demons or witches. It is hard to read this as a straightforward 
sign of disenchantment.
This is an important clue to the mechanisms of occult disavowal, as Evan-
gelicals are not alone in exchanging one sort of enchantment for another. In-
stead of a single amorphous New Age, different metaphysical communities 
are often dismissive of one another. Self- identified magical practitioners often 
discount spiritualists as frauds and vice versa; while psychics are often anti- 
ritualists, suggesting that mental powers explain what people think of as magic. 
Taken together, this indicates that supernatural beliefs often destabilize one 
another. By way of shorthand, I will refer to this pattern as “an interchange 
of enchantments,” as a gesture toward the way that supernatural beliefs can 
actively function in the service of disenchantment.
Finally, although social science predictions should be taken with a grain of 
salt, Bader, Mencken, and Baker— extrapolating survey trend lines combined 

30 Chapter One
with predicted demographic shifts— suggest that by 2050 it is likely there will 
be a further “14 percent increase in the mean number of reported paranormal  
beliefs in the United States.”41 If they are right, instead of further disenchant-
ment, America will get more magic in the coming decades.
H au n t e d  E u rope
God is out but spirits and ghosts are filling the vacuum.
 R o a r F o t l a n d, quoted in “Norway Has a New Passion: Ghost Hunting,”  
New York Times, 2015
That Europe is more secular than America is often taken as a given, and it 
might stand to reason that the United States is more enchanted. Indeed, it 
might seem plausible that the American children of the dissenters have forged 
an extraordinary nation of crystal salesmen and PTA witches. At the very least, 
given that the intensity of organized religion in the United States seems to be 
an outlier from global norms, some Americans might suspect that magical 
beliefs are more widespread in our country than others. But here too survey 
evidence seems to contradict this conclusion.
European survey data shows where various accounts of disenchantment 
and secularization appear to come apart at the seams. The United States and 
the United Kingdom seem quite different according to measures like church 
attendance and reported belief in God. Church attendance appears to be quite 
disparate (roughly 40 percent of people in the United Stated report to being 
regular churchgoers, compared to less than 15 percent in the United King-
dom42). In a widely publicized 2011 Gallup survey of 1,018 Americans adults, 
92 percent responded yes when asked, “Do you believe in God?” This figure is 
not much changed from the 96 percent of Americans who said yes to the same 
question in Gallup’s initial 1944 study, although, to be fair, when given the 
chance to express doubt, the 2011 numbers are less robust.43 By comparison, 
a parallel Eurobarometer study from 2010 showed that only 37 percent of Brit-
ons said that the statement “You believe there is a God” came closest to their 
personal belief.44
Despite radically different percentages of people who believe in God, how-
ever, Americans and Britons have similar paranormal beliefs. For example, a 
pair of Ipsos MORI polls in 2007 (1,005 subjects) and 2008 (1,070) showed that 
belief in ghosts, guardian angels, and telepathy was comparably widespread 
in Great Britain and Northern Ireland, with 12 percent of those surveyed even 
agreeing that “certain magical words, or spells, can have real effect” and 19 

Enchanted (Post) Modernity 
31
percent believing in the existence of “witches and wizards” (see figure 4). Even 
more important for comparative purposes, in a 2005 Gallup telephone survey, 
1,010 British subjects were polled using the same questions as the American 
sample above, thus controlling for variance in wording. In brief, it showed that 
analogous proportions of both groups believed in ghosts, haunted houses, and 
astrology, while Britons were a little more skeptical of the existence of witches 
and a little more likely to believe in the possibility of communication with the 
dead (see figure 5).45 In sum, it would seem that despite being in some sense 
less godly, Britain seems to be no less haunted.
This is worth highlighting because it suggests that increasing atheism is not 
necessarily correlated to a decline in enchantment. Although I would hesitate 
to put it in such sensational terms, the British Daily Mail tabloid was not 
so far off in 2014 when it asserted: “[Are Brits] more likely to believe in the 
supernatural than God? [The number] of people who think they have a sixth 
sense is higher than those who regularly attend church,” citing belief in the 
supernatural at 55 percent, against 49 percent belief in God.46 This sounds 
like a complete contradiction, but it is our first indication of a phenomenon 
that will become apparent in later chapters; namely, that the death of God 
58%
42%
41%
38%
32%
31%
19%
12%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Premonitions
Ghosts
Telepathy
Magic
Witches & Wizards
Guardian Angels
Necromancy*
UFOs
F i g u r e  4 .  British beliefs, 2007, 2008
“Necromancy” is my shorthand for “possible to receive communications from the dead.” Ben 
Schott, “Schott’s Almanac Survey on Beliefs,” Ipsos MORI, October 31, 2007, accessed Oc-
tober 19, 2015, https:// www .ipsos - mori .com /Assets /Docs /Archive /Polls /schottsalmanac2 .pdf; 
and “BBC Survey on Trust Issues,” Ipsos MORI, January 22, 2008. I have used the most recent 
poll in the chart.

32 Chapter One
does not necessitate the death of magic, and if anything, secularization seems 
to amplify enchantment.
Although reliable polling data on such subjects is sparse for other parts 
of Europe, the evidence suggests that despite significant regional variations, 
paranormal belief is widespread across Europe.47 A 2000 German telephone 
survey of 1,500 people conducted by the Institut für Grenzgebiete der Psychol-
ogie und Psychohygiene in Freiburg examining both beliefs and experiences 
showed a widespread engagement with the paranormal in contemporary Ger-
many and concluded that a surprising 73 percent of German interviewees were 
willing to tell an interviewer that they had personally experienced the para-
normal.48 Moreover, a French survey also conducted in 2000 with the same 
sample size demonstrated somewhat greater degrees of skepticism in general, 
with only 21 percent stating that they believe in spells and sorcery (les envoûte-
ments, la sorcellerie) and only 13 percent in ghosts (les fantômes, les revenants), 
but with a majority (54 percent) believing in “magnetic healing” (les guérisons 
92%
37%
37% 40%
25% 24%
24%
19%
21% 27%
21%
13%
Haunted Houses
Astrology
Necromancy
Witches
God**
Extraterrestrials
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
USA
Great Britain
F i g u r e  5 .  American and British paranormal beliefs, 2005, 2010, 2011
See Lyons, “Paranormal Beliefs Come (Super)Naturally to Some.” Belief in “God” has been 
taken from TNS Opinion and Social, “Biotechnology Report,” Eurobarometer 73, no. 1 (2010): 
204; and Frank Newport, “More Than 9 in 10 Americans Continue to Believe in God,” Gallup 
News Service, June 3, 2011, discussed above.

Enchanted (Post) Modernity 
33
par magnétiseur).49 A Russian survey (2006, sample size of 1,600) showed 
that a majority of Russians (53 percent) believe that “magic rituals (magi-
cheskikh ritualov, магических ритуалов; e.g., love spells, the evil eye, curses) 
can be used to influence the lives of others” with 24 percent undecided, while 
44 percent (with 36 percent undecided) believe in either “angels, demons or 
spirits.”50 Indeed, scholars have described a significant “occult revival” in 
post- Soviet Russia, with one study from 1998 observing that “no less than 39 
percent of all non- fiction publications in the humanities” concerned occult 
topics.51 Yet, despite widespread paranormal beliefs, popular attitudes toward 
the divine differ remarkably across Europe. Although this comes from about 
ten years later than the paranormal surveys, according to a 2010 Ipsos MORI 
poll, the percentage of those that “definitely believe in God” in Germany was 
27 percent (sample size 1,003 respondents), France at 19 percent (sample size 
1,004), and Russia 56 percent (sample size 524).52
Some interpretations of Weberian disenchantment describe not the death 
of magic, but instead a vanishing sense of mystery and a greater confidence 
that everything has a scientific explanation (I’ll provide my own reading of 
Weber’s notion in detail in chapter 10). But this common interpretation of We-
ber’s model too runs into trouble when met with contemporary sociological 
data. American conservatives increasing distrust of science is a well- known 
phenomenon of recent decades.53 Moreover, in a 2013 survey of 2,036 Britons, 
by the think tank Theos suggested that a striking 77 percent believe that “there 
are things in life that we simply cannot explain through science or any other 
means.”54 While there has not yet been an analogous survey of American belief, 
it would seem that at least some sense of mystery remains with us.
In summary, there are many different ways of formulating the secularization 
thesis, which is, after all, not our main topic; but at the very least, the socio-
logical data would seem to run directly counter the account of the “decline 
of magic” put forward by Keith Thomas in 1971. As quoted in the section 
epigraph, he set out to solve the problem of why magical beliefs “no longer 
enjoy much recognition today.” While still an incredibly valuable study, it 
would seem that Thomas was wrong, in that forty- five years later one can find 
strong evidence of belief in nearly his exact list of “astrology, witchcraft, magi-
cal healing, divination, ancient prophecies, ghosts and fairies” (see figure 1).55 
 Thomas’s categories are still with us.
To be clear, I am not arguing that belief in phenomena such as ghosts has 
remained unchanged throughout modern European history; there have clearly 
been significant shifts in the term’s meaning as a conception of “spirit” has 
globalized and to that extent absorbed other conceptions of the supernatural. 

34 Chapter One
As will be discussed, there have even been serious attempts to eliminate belief  
in spirits, and certainly spirits have periodically fluctuated in popularity.56 One 
could argue that their construal as a “belief” is itself a privatization of the 
uncanny. Nor am I denying that the shift in terminology from supernatural 
(or even superstition) to paranormal may represent a naturalization or partial 
secu larization of the category in question. But those qualifications aside, my 
main point is that beliefs of this sort have clearly not suffered an irrevocable and 
precipitous falling- off. Anthropologists have argued that acceptance of some 
form of the paranormal— and especially belief in spirits— is the contemporary 
global norm rather than the exception.57 So at the very least, if magic has been 
in decline since the sixteenth century, it does not seem to have declined much.
Co n clu s io n : N ew  Ag e  ( P o st) Mode rni sts ?
New Age post- modernists share a preference for the emotional, the irrational, the 
mystical, and the magical. . . . They focus on all that modern science cannot explain, 
and so, for example, they offer guides to ghostly abodes and arrange visits to haunted 
houses. . . . The supernatural and the occult are popular, too. . . . Paganism and panthe-
ism return as post- modern religions.
 Pau l i n e R o s e n au, Post- Modernism and the Social Sciences, 1992
If one looks at America and Europe through the eyes of an outsider— with the 
same sort of gaze often leveled at non- Europeans— it seems hard to assert that 
we live in a straightforwardly disenchanted world. The equivalent forms of 
evidence anthropologists have been bringing back from the far reaches of the 
globe regarding indigenous belief in spirits, witchcraft, folktales, and popular 
depictions of the supernatural can be found in the West. Moreover, as I have 
been arguing, evidence for this sort of belief is not merely anecdotal but seems 
to be borne out on an empirical level. Roughly an amazing three- quarters of 
Americans hold at least one supernatural belief. Sure, we have plenty of skep-
tics, and one might hazard the guess that more of them are housed in the 
academy than elsewhere; still, evidence suggests that higher education merely 
opens one up to some paranormal beliefs rather than others. In most respects 
it would appear these skeptics are in the minority.
I have also been working to pry apart the notion that belief in God and 
belief in magic are coterminous. While there may be good reasons to reject the 
secularization thesis, if secularization happened anywhere, it is often thought 
to have occurred in Western Europe or the former Soviet Union. That these 

Enchanted (Post) Modernity 
35
places are no less magical than postsecular America at least should begin to 
challenge the facile equation between secularization and disenchantment.
But there is another possible explanation for contemporary enchantments 
that I want to interrogate here— namely, that current belief in the supernatural 
represents an anomalous return of the repressed. According to some thinkers, 
modernity is over; but this argument can preserve the old- fashioned moderni-
 zation thesis by granting modernity’s myth even while suggesting we have 
moved beyond it. Maybe modernity and its grand narratives have died and 
thus returned us to an age of superstition and enchantment. According to the 
set of argumentation and periodization that loosely gets clustered under the 
name of “postmodernism,” perhaps postmodernism has meant the return of 
irrationality. It is this argument that I want to interrogate in the following few 
pages.
One does not have to look hard to find versions of this claim. For instance, 
Ernest Gellner has argued:
Max Weber thought that rational industrial production brought with it the 
cold ‘disenchanted’ vision of the world. . . . A really advanced industrial 
society does not any longer require cold rationality from its consumers; at 
most, it may demand it of its producers. But as it gets more advanced . . . more 
consumers, fewer producers; less time at work, more at leisure. And in con-
sumption, all tends towards easy and facility of manipulation rather than rigor 
and coldness . . . one of the advantages of the affluent society, of the further 
advance in the equalisation of conditions, is that re- enchantment itself is now 
mass- produced, standardised, and rationalised.58
Gellner imagined that something about our current economic order has 
produced a new kind of culture industry, designed to commodify and mass- 
produce a new form of magic. In this he was basically following Adorno, 
who had contended already in 1951 that “by its regression to magic under 
late capitalism, thought is assimilated to late capitalist forms.”59 Similarly, the 
contemporary sociologist George Ritzer has argued that the current iteration 
of globalization has produced “cathedrals of consumption” (like Disneyland 
and megamalls) in order to “enchant” consumers into making even more 
purchases.60 Both theorists see contemporary late- stage capitalism itself as 
a return of enchantment. I think there is some truth in their analysis of the 
powers of capitalism. Moreover, in the chapters that follow, I will argue that 
secularization enchants. In that sense, the death of God feeds into the revitali-

36 Chapter One
zation of magic. But I would resist the implicit assumption that the early capi-
talist (or precapitalist) world was any less bewitched.
At the moment, I want to focus on a different version of this argument. 
This is one that sees our current moment as unusual precisely because of 
a return of magic. As popularly presented, this is less about capitalism than 
a question of the rise of “cults” or a resonance between postmodernity and 
magical thinking. As Geoffrey Nelson has argued, “The period following the 
Second World War has seen an unprecedented burst of religious creativity of 
a world scale. . . . Cults and new religions have sprouted in profusion, old reli-
gions such as witchcraft and the occult movements have acquired new life, and 
missionaries from Asia have successfully introduced varieties of Hinduism, 
Buddhism and Islam into the West. . . . The wave of new religious movements 
may be seen as one aspect of a rising tide of spirituality that is producing a re- 
enchantment of the world.”61 Although his periodization is slightly different, 
Christopher Partridge has also suggested that a New Age re- enchantment has 
emerged on the other side of the disenchantment of modernity.62 Nelson and 
Partridge are far from alone— a number of scholars have suggested the mid- 
twentieth century as a significant turning point in Euro- American religion 
that may have reversed the secularization or disenchantment trajectories of 
earlier modernity.63 Indeed, it is often a standard account of Euro- American 
religious history to emphasize the 1960s as either a time of “religious crisis” or 
“spiritual awakening.” In either case, the rise of the New Age, Asian religions, 
neo- paganism, and the religious counterculture in general usually play part 
in that story.64
Some scholars have run postmodernism and the New Age together, seeing 
them as sharing a rejection of “the Enlightenment” and its values. As quoted 
in the section epigraph, Pauline Rosenau has argued for a correlation between 
New Age religions, occult beliefs, and the rise of postmodernism.65 Zygmunt 
Bauman also maintains that postmodernity “brings ‘re- enchantment’ of the 
world after the protracted and earnest, though in the end inconclusive, modern 
struggle to dis- enchant it.”66 David Lyon has also argued: “One of the most 
palpable similarities between postmodernity and the New Age is that both are 
responses to— or even expressions of— a crisis of modernity. Enlightenment 
Reason, that glorifies objectivity and abhors ambivalence is doubted and at-
tacked in both.”67 I will demonstrate that postmodernity too is a mythical ep-
och, which relies on a notion of modernity I aim to discredit. But it is common 
to hear that our current period has seen a crisis of reason and a resurgence of 
enchantment, or that magic reappears as the spirit of “the Enlightenment” 
fades.

Enchanted (Post) Modernity 
37
While I would not discount the cultural shifts of the last half century, I see 
them as an expression of a longer trajectory. Indeed, if the 1960s and 1970s saw 
the rise of the New Age, the 1990s the mainstreaming of the para normal, and 
the 2000s a series of well- publicized religious revivals, one could also look 
to the nineteenth century and associate it with a host of equally significant 
moments: the 1840s with the birth of spiritualism, the 1850s with its globali-
zation, the 1870s with birth of theosophy (see chapter 4), the 1890s with a host 
of the fin- de- siècle occult movement, and so on, into the twentieth century. 
Indeed, it is easy to show how debates over the reality of spirits and the super-
natural have preoccupied Euro- American thinkers over the longue durée. As 
Jeffrey Kripal has remarked, “We could easily go on for dozens, for hundreds, 
of pages demonstrating how these questions [about the paranormal] lay at 
the very center of Western intellectual and cultural life.”68 If we take the post-
modernists at their word and see our current epoch as bewitched, I will follow 
Kripal’s request to demonstrate that even at its high point, “modernity” was 
itself enchanted.


God’s Shadow
When will all these shadows of God no longer darken us? When will we have completely 
de- defied nature?
 N i e t z s c h e , Die fröhliche Wissenschaft, 1882
* Part I *


C h a p t e r  T w o
Revenge of the Magicians
Do not trust those who analyze magic. They are usually magicians in search of revenge.
 B r u n o L a t ou r , Les microbes, guerre et paix, 1984*
With the contemporary reappraisal of enlightenment— led by Max Horkheimer 
and Theodor Adorno— the main debate among some theorists is about who 
is most to blame for the disenchantment of nature. It is as though if we could 
identify the one person responsible for modernity’s intellectual wrong turn, 
thinking could be put back on a firmer course. A number of candidates have 
been proposed: Was it Giordano Bruno, who expelled humanity “from the 
Closed World to the Infinite Universe”?1 Was it René Descartes, whose bi-
furcation of mind and matter relegated the physical world to mere extension 
(Lt. res extensa)?2 Was it Isaac Newton whose mathematical physics cen-
trally contributed to the mechanization of the world picture?3 Was it Francis 
 Bacon, whose construction of the scientific method equated knowledge with 
the domination of the natural world?4 According to some accounts, they are 
all equally culpable for dethroning humanity from the center of the cosmos, 
conquering nature, despiritualizing matter, or eliminating magic.5
At the outset, I want to address a central problem with these narratives 
of modernity and their respective scapegoats/heroes: all the disenchanters 
above to some extent saw themselves as magicians. This is important because 
it shows that enchantment and disenchantment can be brought together in a 
paradoxical unity, if unstably or dialectically so. To illustrate, let me retread 
the aforementioned list.
* The epigraph for this chapter was also quoted as an epigraph in Randall Styers, Making 
Magic: Religion, Magic, and Science in the Modern World (New York: Oxford University Press, 
2004), 3.

42 Chapter Two
At this point, we know from the historians of science that magic and science 
keep bleeding into each other. The paradigmatic case is Giordano Bruno, 
who has been so convincingly classified as a magus that one could forget that 
for many centuries he counted as a hero of science. Given the popularity of 
Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition (1964) by Frances Yates, it may 
be hard to imagine the Dominican monk as anything but a magician.6 But 
it is worth remembering that Bruno used to occupy pride of place in many 
scientific disenchantment narratives. For example, Alexandre Koyré in From 
the Closed World to the Infinite Universe (1957) and to a lesser extent Arthur 
Lovejoy in The Great Chain of Being (1936) both credit Bruno with the ideas 
the older historiography had extended to Copernicus— namely, destabilizing 
the geocentric solar system and exiling humankind into an infinite cosmos.7 
Prior to Yates, over a century of scholarship had treated Bruno as the scien-
tific martyr par excellence, a reading that persists in some popular histories.8
Today more of Bruno’s works are available, including his De magia (On 
magic), and now we know he was fascinated with magic and that his aim was 
not despiritualizing astronomy, but elaborating an infinite and richly animated 
cosmos full of spirits and demons.9 Insofar as Bruno was a martyr, it is now 
hard to see him as a scientific one. The important point is that nearly all the 
equivalent major figures in the early history of science— from Roger Bacon to 
Johannes Kepler— have been made magical in more or less Bruno’s fashion.10
René Descartes’s wide reading in Kabbalistic and magical texts is a well- 
established part of his biography— as is his interest in Rosicrucianism— to 
which he dedicated his early writings.11 In the autobiographical section of 
Discourse on Method (Discours de la méthode, 1637), Descartes recounted 
that as a young man he had thought that he was capable of distinguishing 
between true knowledge and that of magicians and alchemists, with the clear 
implication that as an adult he had become less capable of maintaining this 
distinction.12 While most scholars place Descartes’s obsession with magic in 
his youth, anyone coming to his writings without presuppositions is going 
to notice the importance of occult themes— from magical spells, illusions, 
prophetic dreams, to demons (malin génie). Descartes is also known to have 
believed in the prophetic power of visions to foretell death or danger.13 Even 
more telling, he claimed that his philosophical system was rooted in a lost 
divine science, discovered by the ancients but long suppressed.14 In effect, 
the Cartesian method— the very method that is now often thought to be the 
birth of modern philosophy— was supposed to be the popularization of a pre-
viously secret occult tradition. On balance, however, Descartes can be seen 
as primarily an advocate of disenchantment insofar as he repeatedly asserted 

Revenge of the Magicians 
43
that his theological science could disclose the mechanistic workings of even 
the most occult of phenomena.
Isaac Newton is a clearer case. For a long time scholars have known that 
he had an obsession with alchemy and the philosophers stone, and that he 
dedicated much of his life to searching for hidden codes in the Bible.15 As 
contemporary historian Charles Webster argues, “Newton in particular saw 
himself as a magus figure intervening between God and His creation.”16 It is 
not hard to find evidence for this claim, and in Newton’s unpublished papers 
one can find an extensive collection of magical and Kabbalistic texts and his 
own translations of alchemical writings. Even during his lifetime, Leibniz 
and others charged Newton with importing “occult qualities” into Cartesian 
mechanism and in effect enlivening nature with hidden forces— like gravity— 
and mysterious action at a distance.17 Strikingly, the father of modern physics 
even took a stab at authoring his own prophecy about the end of the world, 
which he also saw as predicted by his model of the cosmos.18 Indeed, New-
tonian physics was not the stripped- down mechanism he is associated with, 
but a dynamical cosmos inclined toward apocalypse and dissolution, which 
required active intervention by God and angels. In sum, it is hard to imagine 
Newton as a disenchanter insofar as he explicitly rejected the very clockwork 
universe he is often said to have discovered in favor of an animated world.19 
As John Maynard Keynes famously put it: “Newton was not the first of the 
age of reason. He was the last of the magicians.”20 But Newton was not in fact 
the last of his kind.
Francis Bacon and his connection to magic will be treated momentarily; 
but despite the fact that it was once held that few oppositions were more 
fundamental than that between science and magic, historians of science have 
been providing counterevidence for a long time now, as in study after study, 
individual scientists’ and philosophers’ alchemical experiments, magical pre-
occupations, mystic visions, or grandiose sense of prophetic mission have 
been trotted out to dramatic effect. In sum, historians have shown that for gen-
erations of scientists— from Robert Boyle to Robert Oppenheimer— scientific 
and magical worlds were often intertwined.21 At bare minimum, we should 
know by now that the alchemist and the chemist are often two sides of the same 
figure, and we should no longer be surprised to discover scientists who aim at 
producing enchantment and wonder.
I introduced this list of figures to make the basic point that if the magical 
preoccupations of the establishment have been outside the canon of Western 
thought (or we might say, outside the text of “modernity”), this is not because 
the “rationalist” tradition has excluded magicians. Rather, it is because later 

44 Chapter Two
scholars have consistently occluded this aspect of their patriarchs’ individual 
projects. Biographers from Whiggish historians to postmodernists alike have 
often suppressed these esoteric undercurrents in order to bury those things 
that did not fit the received narrative. That the heroes of the “age of reason” 
were magicians, alchemists, and mystics is an embarrassment to proponents 
and critics of modernity alike.
Read together, these studies of the occult preoccupations of the establish-
ment also suggest a new problem: If the philosophical elite were regularly 
drawn to magic and spirits, why have these attitudes vanished from the his-
toriography? Why is magic seemingly both ubiquitous and repressed? This 
chapter begins to address these questions by looking for the early roots of 
occult disavowal.
The first part of the chapter focuses on Francis Bacon— perhaps the most 
famous putative disenchanter— to show how knowledge and magic, enchant-
ment and disenchantment were entangled in his work. In Bacon’s writings 
one can find a telling transformation of the meaning of superstition that in 
retrospect will begin to seem epochal. The second part of the chapter ad-
dresses the famous Encyclopédie, often described as the culmination of “the 
French Enlightenment.” It shows how the existence of God and the promise 
of knowledge were mutually constituted in the work and further exposes its 
own intermingling of magic and disenchantment.
F ra n cis  B aco n  an d  t h e  S c i e nce  of Magi c
For the Persian magic, which was the secret literature of their kings, was an application 
of the contemplations and observations of nature.
 F r a n c i s B a c o n,  “A Brief Discourse of the Happy Union  
of the Kingdoms,” 1603
Francis Bacon (1561– 1626)— often described as “the father of modern science” 
and the ur- progenitor of “the Enlightenment”— is the single figure most fre-
quently accused of providing a rationale for the domination of nature and 
hence the disenchantment of the world. At first pass, the charges certainly 
seem plausible, since even scholars who have never read his work firsthand 
often associate Francis Bacon with the saying “Knowledge is power” and 
equate his experimental method with torturing nature.22 As Ernst Cassirer 
put it: “Bacon sits as a judge over reality, questioning it as one examines the 
accused. Not infrequently he says that one must resort to force to obtain the 

Revenge of the Magicians 
45
answer desired, that nature must be ‘put to the rack.’ ”23 In Dialectic of Enlight-
enment, Horkheimer and Adorno begin with Bacon as the key figure in their 
diagnosis of enlightenment and its failings, arguing that:
Bacon well understood the scientific temper which was to come after him. The 
“happy match” between human understanding and the nature of things that 
he envisaged is a patriarchal one: the mind, conquering superstition, is to rule 
over disenchanted nature. Knowledge, which is power, knows no limits, either 
in its enslavement of creation or in its deference to worldly masters.24
For the Frankfurt School, Francis Bacon exemplified all that was wrong with 
science and instrumental rationality. Later scholars have often been unable to 
resist putting Michel Foucault and Bacon in dialogue, often in such a way as 
to suggest that Foucault’s analysis of knowledge- power (le savoir- pouvoir) is  
basically a repudiation or inversion of a Baconian knowledge- as- power ide-
ology that set European thought down dangerous paths.25 Two influential 
accounts of the despiritualization of nature, William Leiss’s Domination of 
Nature (1972), and Carolyn Merchant’s The Death of Nature (1980), also lay 
their charges at Bacon’s feet— a verdict that has been echoed by more recent 
scholars.26 It might be tempting, therefore, to see Francis Bacon as the single 
most important architect of disenchantment.
Nevertheless, we now know that Francis Bacon saw himself as an alchemist 
with a prophetic mission to recover the lost knowledge of Adam in order to 
prepare man for an immanent apocalypse.27 In his writings, Bacon drew cen-
trally on occult texts in the formation of his intellectual project, and he took 
as given various aspects of the magic described by avowed magicians such as 
Cornelius Agrippa, as can be seen in Bacon’s description of sympathies or 
correspondences, the importance of judicial astronomy, and even the power 
of the evil eye, not to mention his attempt to induce the transmutation of 
metals.28 It is thus easy to establish Bacon’s undertaking in the continuity of 
esotericism.
Faced with these contradictory readings, Francis Bacon might seem to 
epitomize the paradox of a magician of disenchantment. In what follows, I 
explore Bacon’s conception of magic and to expose the seeds of the logics of 
occult disavowal. This in turn should give us a sense of where enchantment 
and disenchantment turn into each other.
*

46 Chapter Two
Francis Bacon was so complementary to magic that nearly all his biographers 
have been forced to address the issue, although they normally frame it as part 
of a transition from superstition to science. Paolo Rossi, Francesco Bacone: 
Dalla magia alla scienza (Francis Bacon: From magic to science, 1957) is cele-
brated for showcasing the primacy of Bacon’s alchemical interests, but sug-
gests that trajectory with its very title. This characterization is partially right 
insofar as Bacon did attempt to purge superstition and the diabolical, but I 
will argue that his aim was neither modern science nor disenchantment, but 
purified magic.29
Critically, Bacon described his famous experimental method— considered 
by some to be the foundation of modern science— explicitly in terms of magic. 
As he put it in De Dignitate et Augmentis Scientiarum (The dignity and ad-
vancement of learning, 1623): “Magic aims to recall natural philosophy from 
a miscellany of speculation to a greatness of works,” which was exactly what 
he was trying to do with his own project.30 Bacon further defined magic “as 
the science which applies the knowledge of hidden forms to the production 
of wonderful operations; and by uniting (as they say) actives with passives 
displays the wonderful works of nature.”31 Magic was a pragmatic, or instru-
mentalist, form of natural philosophy of exactly the sort Bacon saw as missing 
from scholasticism.
Bacon did not just want to enchant natural philosophy; he also aimed to im-
prove magic. As he argued in De augmentis, “I must here stipulate that magic, 
which has long been used in a bad sense, be again restored to its ancient and 
honorable meaning. For among the Persians magic was taken for a sublime 
wisdom, and the knowledge of the universal harmony of things (Lt. scientia 
consensuum rerum universalium).”32 Bacon thought the crucial problems with 
magic were its tendancy toward secrecy and its presumption of the hubris of in-
dividual genius. Magic could not make real progress because magicians resisted 
collaboration and cloaked their insights in obscure jargon. Accordingly Bacon 
worked not to eliminate magic, but to “restore it”— opening up magic; strip-
ping away secrecy, falsehoods, and obscurantism; and subjecting it to public 
scrutiny. In total, what we now call Baconian science was intended to be public 
anti- esoteric or anti- occult magic. To see him as a straightforward disenchanter 
is flat- out wrong, as Bacon wanted more people to have magic, not fewer.
*
By the same token, Bacon’s epistemology has been popularly misunderstood. 
He never said “Knowledge is power,”— at least, not in the sense that everyone 

Revenge of the Magicians 
47
from Cassirer to Adorno understands him to have used the phrase.33 The Latin 
expression scientia potestas est does occur in Sacred Meditations (Meditationes 
Sacrae, 1597), but it is in the middle of a discussion of various heresies.34 In 
context, Bacon is navigating a position between those who think that God is 
the author of evil and those who think that God is powerless. When the ex-
pression appears it is a reference to divine power and knowledge.35 The phrase 
is excerpted from a larger clause that means something different. Indeed, the 
full phrase nam et ipsa scientia potestas est was translated the following year 
by either Bacon or one of his contemporaries into English as “for knowledge 
it selfe [sic] is a power whereby He [God] knoweth.”36 Our modern version of 
the slogan should therefore not be “Knowledge is power” but “God’s power 
is knowledge.” This theological statement is not a praise of instrumental ratio-
nality, but an expression of divine potency and by implication human finitude.
Bacon’s conception of knowledge was predicated on human fallibility, 
made worse by a universe he described as a vast dark labyrinth, full of blind 
alleys, hidden passages, and intricate convolutions.37 Further obscuring things 
was the postlapsarian condition of the human mind, which was imperfect and 
at best a distorting mirror of an already deceptive world.38 Adorno and com-
pany would seem to have gotten Bacon’s “happy match” between mind and 
world exactly wrong. Instead, Bacon argued that because the human mind was 
profoundly defective and the world fundamentally enigmatic, the best a person 
could hope for was a fragmentary form of knowledge, and even then, this was 
only possible by means of faith in God.
This is important because excavating the Christian (and in particular, Prot-
estant) mission behind Bacon’s scientific magic is key to understanding the 
roots of occult disavowal. The thing that made magic unpalatable to many 
of Bacon’s contemporaries was its association with “superstition” and hence 
both Catholicism and the devil. To explain this bundle of concepts, we have 
to retrieve the history of the term superstition.
For much of European history, the presumed opposite of religion (Lt. re-
ligio) was superstition (Lt. superstitio).39 For example, in Summa Theologica 
(1265– 74), Thomas Aquinas opposed religion to superstition, which he under-
stood as the practice of offering “divine worship either to whom it ought not, 
or in a manner it ought not.”40 For Aquinas, religion as true worship gains co-
herence as a category only by excluding false modes of worship (superstitions). 
The definition of both is built into the structure of their opposition.
By the sixteenth century, “superstition” referred primarily to misdirected 
worship and the powers that the devil granted unscrupulous people. By way 
of example, in Reprouación [sic] de las supersticiones y hechizerías [sic] (1530), 

48 Chapter Two
Pedro Ciruelo, a member of the Spanish Inquisition, argued: “All types of 
superstitions (supersticiones) come from evil spirits. . . . The devil has discov-
ered and taught men all superstitions.”41 Although the archetypal superstition 
was diabolically inspired pagan idolatry, in the context of the famous Euro-
pean persecution of witches launched in the fifteenth century, “witchcraft” was 
itself a superstition— not because it did not work, but because witches were 
confused about the source of their power.
In the hands of the Protestant reformers, “superstitious” was often de-
ployed as a near synonym to “Catholic.”42 But by using this language, Protes-
tant theologians were not disenchanting Catholicism— if anything, they were 
linking the Papacy to paganism and witchcraft. Indeed, Luther titled one of 
his later works “Against the Papacy at Rome, Founded by the Devil” (Wider 
das Papsttum zu Rom, vom Teufel gestiftet, 1545).43 Lest the reader think this 
is mere metaphor, one might note that in his commentary on Galatians (1535), 
Luther states explicitly, “For it is undeniable that the devil lives, yes, rules, 
in all the world. Therefore witchcraft and sorcery are works of the devil, by 
which he not only injures people but sometimes, with God’s permission, de-
stroys them.”44 He also charged his theological opponents with being literally 
inspired by the devil.45 Statements of this sort were not confined to Luther 
but can be seen in the language of many of the reformers.46 Hence, one of the 
principal rhetorical innovations of the period was the transposition of demo-
nological discourse about witches and heretics onto the Roman Church itself. 
In a nutshell, one might describe the Protestant Reformation (contra- Weber) 
as producing a super- enchantment of Europe by making the Catholic Church 
seem both pagan and magical.47
In Bacon’s writings, he too used “superstition” as a code for Catholics and 
pagans, and also to indicate the doppelgänger of religion.48 As he put it in 
Essayes or Counsels, Civill and Morall (1625), “Superstition, without a veil is a 
deformed thing; for as it addeth deformity to an ape to be so like a man, so the 
similitude of superstition to religion makes it all the more deformed.”49 Thus 
paraphrased, religion and superstition resemble each other so much that it is 
uncanny. In this Bacon is following a long history of accepted usage. But he  
also used superstition in an unusual way: to describe a kind of epistemological 
idolatry. In the early uncompleted sketch for his natural philosophy, Valerius 
Terminus (ca. 1603), he cautioned against “the inherent and profound errors 
and superstitions in the nature of the mind, and of the four sorts of Idols or 
false appearances that offer themselves to the understanding in the inquisition 
of knowledge.”50
Bacon also discussed mental idols (of the tribe, cave, marketplace, and 

Revenge of the Magicians 
49
theater) in one of the most famous sections of Novum Organum (The new 
organon, 1620), where he uses the scriptural language of idolatry to talk 
about general errors of thought.51 With a host of theological predecessors, 
Bacon argued that natural philosophy, like the Puritans, smashes idols; how-
ever,  Bacon had not fully replaced the older meaning of idolatry and indeed 
elsewhere evoked the worship of Neptune as an example of an “Idol of the 
Tribe.”52 Hence, iconoclasm was working in both theological and philo-
sophical registers and in so doing fortified Bacon’s Christian mission as well 
as his philosophical enterprise.
Strikingly, Bacon’s use of the term superstition involves a similar doubling 
of registers. Superstitions are not just types of false worship for Bacon, but 
they are also a type of intellectual error involving mistakes about causality.53 
Yet, the exemplars of this definition continue to be the same sort of paganism 
or idolatry that were the focus of older usage of the term. It is telling that Bacon 
explicitly stated that superstitions resemble the faulty thinking of the pagan 
Greeks who could not recognize a natural explanation of thunder because they 
were convinced that the lightning appeared at the summons of the gods.54 Al-
though Bacon may not have been the first to do so, the important thing is that 
he makes “superstition” the direct opposite and obstacle of not only religion, 
but also natural philosophy, stating: “Nor should we fail to mention that in 
every age natural philosophy has had a troublesome and difficult adversary, 
namely superstition.”55 While it would be an anachronism to presume a hard 
division between theology and natural philosophy, I want to emphasize that 
Bacon was using “superstition” in a distinctive way.
This is key because a launching point for the current project is the obser-
vation that a crucial moment in the eighteenth century is an incomplete shift 
in the oppositional structure of a religion- superstition binary to a science- 
superstition binary. In Bacon’s day, an attack on “superstition” was part of an 
attempt to de- demonize, or we might say “Protestantize,” magic. Later, when 
Bacon was retroactively transformed into the natural philosopher, and then 
scientist par excellence, the opposition between religion and superstition was 
ultimately transposed into an opposition between science and superstition. 
But again, obstacles to science and obstacles to faith were one and the same. 
Scientists inherited the theologians’ list of superstitions, and indeed, both 
groups often attacked the same paradigmatic superstitions, such as astrology, 
magic, and spirits.
While Bacon was describing superstition as a kind of false belief, he was not 
trying to banish it completely. He concluded his description of superstition 
in the essay cited above by noting: “There is a superstition in avoiding super-

50 Chapter Two
stition. . . . The good [should] be not taken away with the bad.”56 In Novum 
Organum, Bacon is even more explicit:
Lastly, matters of superstition and magic (in the common acceptation of the 
word) must not be entirely omitted. For although such things lie buried deep 
beneath a mass of falsehood and fable, yet they should be looked into a little; 
for it may be that in some of them some natural operation lies at the bottom; 
as in fascination, strengthening of the imagination, sympathy of things at a 
distance, transmission of impressions from spirit to spirit no less than from 
body to body, and the like.57
Bacon was appropriating the conceptual structures that had previously been 
understood as “magic,” and purifying them in order to enchant what would 
become science. In other words, the enterprise of Bacon’s distinctive version 
of natural philosophy is grounded in an anti- superstitious magic, or we might 
say, rational magic.
Bacon is following a long line of European magicians who worked to excise 
the demonic from magic in order to make magic less heretical. The most im-
portant of these was probably Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa von Nettesheim, 
whose De occulta philosophia libri tres (Three books of occult philosophy, 
1533) set the gold standard for spellbooks, even as Agrippa criticized the su-
perstitions of demonic magic. To be sure, his motivating assumption was that 
demons were real and dangerous. From Bacon’s reputation you might think 
that the difference between the two men is that Bacon did not believe in ani-
mating spirits. But this would be wrong.
The enterprise Bacon sought to conjure into being was not cold mecha-
nism, but an approach appropriate to a vibrant and spiritually energized 
nature. Indeed, he described a world completely enlivened by spirits with 
their own appetites.58 The Baconian project was not an attempt to strip the 
world of animating forces. In sum, Bacon cannot be the intentional author of 
the despiritualization of nature.
The further problem is that while many of the quotes attributed to Bacon 
are false attributions, in one respect his critics are right, because he discussed 
subduing nature and putting “her” in bonds.59 The references are infrequent 
and it is always possible to argue that they do not represent his mature thought, 
but they are there.60 I am not interested in debating which moralizing tone 
(praise or blame) to extend to Bacon’s work. I don’t think being a magician is 
necessarily redemptive, just as I don’t think being a disenchanter necessarily 
makes one a hero. The key point is that the critics of Bacon who see him as 

Revenge of the Magicians 
51
despiritualizing and torturing nature cannot be right about both. Nature can 
only be tortured if it is alive. Bacon cannot be a disenchanting mechanist and 
at the same time engage in vexing a vibrant nature.
T he Phi l o s o p h e s an d  t h e  S c i e nce  of Good and 
E v i l  S p ir it s
For some years, the spirit of philosophy, while rejecting devout theologizing, has not 
opposed otherworldly knowledge.
 M a r i e -  D a n i e l  B ou r r é e  d e  C o r b e r o n, Journal, 1776
Superstition is more offensive to God than atheism.
 D e n i s  D i d e r o t, Pensées philosophiques, 1746
In 1751, Denis Diderot and Jean le Rond d’Alembert commenced the pub-
lication of their great work, the Encyclopédie; ou, Dictionnaire raisonné des 
sciences, des arts et des métiers, whose aim was the linking together of all human 
knowledge.61 In their first volume, Diderot and d’Alembert provided the reader 
with their vision of the division of the world, which they represented in the 
form of a great systematic taxonomy, or grand tree, of knowledge (Système 
Figuré des Connaissances Humaines). Significant for our purposes is the loca-
tion of religion in this system. While Diderot and d’Alembert were inspired 
by the map of human learning articulated by Francis Bacon, the philosophes 
radically altered the place of “religion” in their conceptual hierarchy.62 For 
Bacon, religion was located in an autonomous sphere of revelation; the philos-
ophes, by contrast, located religion within the realm of reason more generally 
and philosophy more specifically.63 This structure places the study of religion 
in the domain of philosophical or scientific inquiry and outside of ecclesiastic 
authority, but it still constitutes itself around an idea of the divine.
More specifically, the Système Figuré imagines the study of religion as the 
focus of a “Divine Science” or “Science of God” (Science de Dieu). Despite the 
later infamy accorded to “godless” philosophes, their system actually includes 
an important role for comparative theology. Furthermore, for all their attacks 
on priests, according to the philosophes, the Supreme Being is a philosophi-
cally demonstrable truth. A rational religion, such as the Cult of the Supreme 
Being (Culte de l’Être suprême), is therefore implied by the whole project.64 
This is worth underscoring because, as will be shown in the next chapter, the 
philosophes quickly garnered a false reputation not for deism (which would be 
fair), but for virulent atheism, which has proved hard to shake.

52 Chapter Two
Crucially, the Système Figuré further subdivides the Science of God into 
two asymmetrical branches: Natural and Revealed Theology (Théologie Na-
turelle et Révélée), on the one hand, and the Science of Good and Evil Spirits 
(Science des Esprits Bien et Malfaisans) on the other. Lest we think by “spir-
its” Diderot and company meant something like psychology, know that this 
last entry is further split into “divination” and “black magic” (Magie Noire).65 
For comparison, this means that magic occupies a position roughly compa-
rable to “geology” in its scale and importance in the chart that defines the 
project of the philosophes. There is no indication that magic is any less real 
or legitimate.
This poses a problem for theorists who believe that Diderot and company 
lived in age that was already disenchanted. For instance, it is often assumed 
that the philosophes lived after the end of the witch trials in Europe.66 But 
even this latter claim is mistaken; witches were legally executed in Western 
Europe as late as 1782.67 Even in France, a priest named Bertrand Guillaudot 
was burned as a witch by the government of Dijon in 1742, and his confession 
led toward the arrest and trial of twenty- nine accomplices. Although most 
of these were let off with fines, four were executed in 1745.68 This was only 
five years before Diderot published the first prospectus for the Encyclopédie 
(1750). Regardless of its legal status, belief in magic and witchcraft was still 
widespread in France and would remain so long after Diderot was gone.69 
Hence, the appearance of magic in the prospectus to the Encyclopédie might 
suggest that rather than working toward disenchantment, the philosophes were 
promoting their own magical project.
Before I get carried away, however, you should know that in the very mo-
ment that the Science of Spirits is being generated, it is occluded. When one 
reads the actual entries in the Encyclopédie, the Science of Spirits is interpreted 
not as a way to better understand God, but as a rotten branch of the tree of 
knowledge.70 It has become a dead end, not worth studying, a superstition. 
Thus, while the Science of Spirits might appear to be a legitimate domain of 
knowledge, it is instead classified as an irrational approach to a subject that is 
viewed as essentially rational.71
In this section I want to explain the appearance and disappearance of the 
Science of Spirits in the Encyclopédie, taking us a step closer to undoing the 
myth of “the Enlightenment” and exposing a further wrinkle in the history of 
the logics of occult disavowal. To foreshadow, in addition to inheriting Francis 
Bacon’s taxonomy of the disciplines, the philosophes also drew on his dis-
course against superstition. The further complexity is that in doing so they 
also produced a counterposition from which they too could be attacked.

Revenge of the Magicians 
53
*
The first thing to note is that superstition is a key term not only in the Ency-
clopédie but also for the whole enlightenment movement, for what it believed 
it was overcoming. After all, as cited above, Diderot attacked superstition; 
Voltaire too argued that “superstition sets the world on fire; philosophy puts 
out the flames.”72 Similar sentiments were echoed by other philosophes, such 
as Jean Castilhon, who dedicated a whole book to the subject (Essay sur les er-
reurs et les superstitions, 1765).73 Even Immanuel Kant in Kritik der Urteilskraft 
(1790; Critique of the Power of Judgment) would state explicitly: “Liberation 
from superstition (Aberglauben) is called enlightenment.”74 This is important 
because insofar as Adorno and Horkheimer’s Dialectic of Enlightenment is 
meant to capture the project of the philosophes (and this is debatable), it would 
seem that the dialectic offered by Diderot and company was not enlightenment 
versus myth, but enlightenment versus superstition.
The focus of the campaign against “superstition” can be seen in the En-
cyclopédie entry on the subject written by Louis de Jaucourt, which states: 
“Superstition is a certain kind of enchantment or magical power, that fear 
exercises on our soul; unhappy daughter of the imagination, it assaults the 
imagination with specters, dreams, and visions, it is [superstition], that ac-
cording to [Francis] Bacon, has forged idols for the vulgar, invisible spirits, 
fortunate and unfortunate days, irresistible bonds of love and hate.”75 The 
reference to Francis Bacon establishes his place in the philosophes’ genealogy 
of “superstition.” Furthermore, as with Bacon, superstition functions first and 
foremost as a category of intellectual error and overabundant imagination. Yet, 
as the quote above illustrates, the Encyclopédie’s main examples of superstition 
might just as well have come from the period’s theologians.76 It would seem the 
main superstition the philosophes opposed was belief in the demonic.77 This 
is because, like Bacon, they had inherited a theological conception of “super-
stition” understood primarily in terms of paganism, idolatry, and magic. Vol-
taire said as much in his philosophical dictionary: “Superstition [was] born 
in Paganism.”78 Indeed, contemporary scholar Wouter Hanegraaff has argued 
that “the basic error the Enlightenment ideologues tried to remove from Chris-
tian culture was paganism,” which they merely redefined from worshipping 
demonic spirits to believing that such things exist.79
I think this argument is mostly right, but it does not fully explain why the 
“Science of Good and Evil Spirits” appeared in the first place. Our first clue 
is the disproportionately long Encyclopédie entry by Diderot on a group called 
the théosophes (theosophists) who are associated with the problematic spiritual 

54 Chapter Two
science.80 For the nonspecialist, “theosophists” might suggest the Theosophi-
cal Society founded in New York in 1875 (discussed in chapter 4). But Diderot 
has in mind earlier Christian théosophes. He lists Paracelsus, Valentin Weigel, 
Robert Fludd, Jakob Böhme, Jan Baptista van Helmont, and Pierre Poiret.81 
For our purposes, the two important members of this list are Paracelsus and 
Böhme.
The Swiss- German physician Paracelsus (Philippus Aureolus Theophras-
tus Bombastus von Hohenheim, 1493– 1541) is mostly remembered for his con-
tributions to alchemy. His project was rooted in a direct assault on the Greek 
Galenic model of the humors that was central to European medical thought 
in the period. Paracelsus aimed to banish this “pagan” medicine and replace 
it with a practical Christian natural philosophy, based on recovering signs that 
God had hidden in the natural world.82 Moreover, Paracelsus described nature 
as vibrantly alive with hidden spirits, and part of his call for revitalizing medi-
cine was that it needed to recover lost magic.83 The historian Charles Webster 
has argued that the first major conflict of the scientific revolution was between 
Paracelsus and Galen, not Copernicus and Ptolemy.84 Leaving aside the use-
fulness of the scientific revolution as a periodization, if one were to grant Para-
celsus pride of place, it would invert many of the established narratives about 
that scientific revolution, because we would have to make Christianization and 
enchantment central to that epoch.
For Diderot, Paracelsus is the principal théosophe, but the next most sig-
nificant theosophist was probably the Lutheran mystic Jakob Böhme (also 
written Boehme, ca. 1575– 1624).85 Böhme, a self- educated shoemaker from 
the German- speaking town of Görlitz, claimed to have received a mystical 
vision around 1600 in which God showed him the key to all creation.86 In his 
subsequent writings, Böhme elaborated on a Paracelsian idea of divine signa-
tures and attempted to discover a hidden revelation, albeit one that was more 
theological than chemical. Significantly, Böhme distinguished a positive and 
divine “magic” (Magia) from a negative “sorcery” (Zauber).87 He also rooted 
this divine magic in the power of the will, combined with imagination to work 
literal wonders.88 This is relevant because Böhme de- ritualized magic and gave 
magical power roots in something very like faith. Böhme is important for our 
purposes because his theology came to be known— perhaps in spite of his 
intentions— as “theosophy,” which later thinkers would present as a mystical, 
but nevertheless Christian, alternative to various forms of religious orthodoxy.89
In the Encyclopédie, Diderot described the théosophes in general terms as 
anti- philosophes, who detest philosophy and the “empire of reason” and who 
are dedicated to imagination instead of rationality, contending: “[The théoso-

Revenge of the Magicians 
55
phes] corrupted Theology, obscured Philosophy and took advantage of their 
chemical knowledge. . . . There are still some théosophes among us . . . who 
have taken a violent dislike to Philosophy and to Philosophes and who would 
succeed in extinguishing among us the spirit of discovery and of research and 
plunging us again into barbarism.”90 Diderot went on to argue that these mys-
tics pursue the manipulation of the world through magic and search for the 
“hidden” principles of God and Nature; interesting enough, the same prin-
ciples pursued by philosophes, but through the wrong mode of “false” mysti-
cal union rather than rational speculation.91 Diderot was effectively not only 
rejecting the magical manipulation of spirits, but also discarding unio mystica, 
or the inward looking experience of God, as a false path. The possibility of a 
world that is itself fundamentally outside of rational comprehension is a threat 
to the whole philosophical enterprise. We can see why the théosophes might 
have been unappealing to the philosophes.
For all his critique of theosophy as such, the Encyclopédie suggests a mark-
edly different attitude toward Paracelsus, and this attitude points toward a 
similar ambiguity in the whole project. In the “theosophy” article, Diderot for 
the most part spared Paracelsus from criticism and focused his attack Böhme 
and the others.92 But this is not all. Diderot also wrote positively about Paracel-
sus in other places in the work. For example, in a strange footnote to his entry 
on “The Academy of Architecture,” Diderot remarked: “Paracelsus said that 
he had studied in neither Paris, nor Rome, nor in Toulouse, or in any academy. 
That he had no other university but that of Nature in which God displays 
his wisdom, his power and his glory, in such a way that they can be sensed 
by those who study them. It is to Nature, he added, that I owe my being, and 
what truth there is in my writings.”93 This digression basically praising Para-
celsus might seem out of place, but it is not the only entry that demonstrates 
a familiarity with alchemical or magical sources, nor are those sources always 
treated with derision.94 For instance, in the Encyclopédie entry on “Chemistry” 
(Chymie ou Chimie), Diderot’s friend Gabriel François Venel explicitly called 
for a “New Paracelsus.”95
Crucially, as noted above, “magic” appears as a science in the figural system 
of the philosophes; moreover, the anonymous entry on “Magic (Magie)” is not 
completely dismissive, dividing its subject into three subtypes: divine, super-
natural, and natural magic.96 Divine magic is described as a kind of spiritual or 
charismatic gift bestowed on saints and prophets by God.97 This entry does 
not deny the existence of miracles, but suggests a possible cessation of such 
gifts in the current— perhaps post- apostolic— age, thereby evoking the Prot-
estant debates about the cessation of the charismata.98

56 Chapter Two
Supernatural magic is rejected as false basically because it relies on belief in 
the illusory power of demons.99 In effect, this is a legacy of an older theology 
of disenchantment that suggests that only God and not the devil can work mir-
acles.100 But it is also consistent with the changing legal conception of witch-
craft in the period. In the early eighteenth century, many Western European law 
codes redefined witchcraft as an issue of pretense, fraud, or deception rather 
than blasphemy or dangerous maleficia (as it had been primary understood), 
but like the changing notions of witches’ “superstition,” this did not necessar-
ily mean that the law completely denied that witches had powers.101 Rather, it 
meant that witches’ powers (as those of the devil in general) were increasingly 
understood as diabolical illusions and only later as delusional.102 Moreover, 
the new laws meant that European states could still imprison witches (even 
if they were less likely to execute them). For instance, the British government 
continued to enforce the 1735 Witchcraft Act into the twentieth century. After 
predicting the sinking of a British ship in World War II, the psychic medium 
Helen Duncan was imprisoned as a witch according to this act in 1944.103 Let 
that register for a second.
By pinning supernatural magic to illusory demons, the author of the En-
cyclopédie entry was straddling the line between granting demons deceptive 
powers and dismissing their existence (even if likely leaning toward the latter). 
By contrast, “natural magic” is described as the “exhaustive study of nature, 
the wonderful secrets discovered there in,” and praised for “the inestimable 
benefits which this study has brought to all of humanity in almost all the arts 
and sciences.”104 This entry seemingly suggests that natural magic was itself  
a source of the philosophes’ whole project. Nor was this an isolated reference: 
a closer look and one can see that “natural magic” appears elsewhere in the 
Encyclopédie in a positive light.105 This is a problem because in many accounts, 
natural magic was supposed to be long gone by the eighteenth century.
Since natural magic often used chemicals and crucibles, it has been mis-
taken for natural philosophy or science by another name, but while some of the 
Encyclopédie entries may suggest this, the philosophes did not own the expres-
sion “natural magic.” Indeed, historians have long characterized the period of 
the Encyclopédie in terms of a shift in reading habits and the proliferation of 
a cheap literary format known as the Bibliothèque bleue (called such because 
they were originally bound in blue paper).106 Many of these blue books were 
spellbooks that described natural magic, and thus give a sense of its meaning.
The contemporary British historian Owen Davies has estimated that in 
the eighteenth century, tens of thousands of cheap magical grimoires were in 
public circulation, and the most infamous of these was Secrets merveilleux de 

Revenge of the Magicians 
57
la magie naturelle et cabalistique du Petit Albert (Marvelous secrets of natural 
magic and the Kabbalah of Lesser Albert).107 The Lesser Albert would be hard 
to mistake for a scientific work. It includes love charms and instructions for 
making protective talismans. Its most famous recipe describes how to ampu-
tate the hand of a hanged criminal and use it to cast a spell of invisibility.108 This 
was the most popular work of “natural magic” in the era of the philo sophes.
To be clear, I am not suggesting that Diderot and the philosophes were cut-
ting off the hands of criminals and secretly casting hexes; nor am I saying 
that the Encyclopédie is a spellbook. I am arguing instead that it draws on 
and repurposes a positively valenced natural magic even as it works to sup-
press it. Tellingly, Diderot associates “natural magic” with the théosophes and 
in condemning them, attempts to banish the Hermeticism that set the stage 
for enlightenment. Thus we see how the concept of “natural magic” was a 
double- edged sword. On one hand, it could suggest that magic is merely a 
misunderstood natural phenomena, but on the other, it could mean that nature 
is inherently magical.109 “Natural magic” is hardly alone in this respect. We 
will encounter enough terms that function both to disenchant and enchant 
in different registers that I’d like to use “bimodal concept” as shorthand for 
these in the future.
To recap, as the taxonomy of the Encyclopédie suggests, the philosophes’ 
project more broadly imagines its own antithesis, which it understands as a 
kind of mystical science of spirits.110 In other places, the movement draws 
on aspects of this very same science, even positing problems that only spirits 
seem to solve.111 This should not be a total surprise, because the Encyclopédie 
represents a diverse group of thinkers. It is no secret that some encyclopedists 
were Freemasons, alchemists, and even magicians.112
I am mostly interested in the Encyclopédie on its own rather than in a par-
ticular thinker, but if one had to pick a disenchanter from out of a lineup of 
encyclopedists, Diderot might seem to fit the charge, as he is known as “the 
first of the atheists.”113 Nevertheless, Diderot mentioned studying with a com-
mitted alchemist in his youth, and some scholars have seen in his project a 
semi- concealed Paracelsian cosmology, made more credible by his frequent 
positive references to Paracelsus.114 Diderot’s writings also demonstrate that 
he had read the texts of magicians.115 Moreover, in his philosophical writ-
ings, Diderot argued against dead mechanism in favor of a vitalist reading of 
nature.116 This is worth emphasizing because if Diderot exiled God, it was 
in order to enchant nature with powers previously reserved for the divine.117
While the philosophes sought to amplify the light of reason to banish su-
perstitions, their movement was being mythologized, and not always flatter-

58 Chapter Two
ingly so. Diderot’s lifetime already saw active counterprograms and new anti- 
philosophes declaring themselves. Opponents often framed the philosophes in 
terms of mechanism and anti- Catholicism, arguing that Diderot and company 
were secretly working to spread Protestantism— or even worse, libertinism— 
and unbelief.118 But this was not the only narrative on offer.
The former Jesuit Augustin Barruel saw darkness behind the philosophy of 
light, and in his widely read Mémoires pour servir à l’histoire du jacobinisme 
(1798; Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism), Barruel described a 
vast conspiracy of philosophers, Freemasons, and occultists aiming to hurl 
Europe into chaos and anarchy. This was precisely a pagan and enchanted 
enlightenment, albeit one no less anti- Christian.119 This was not as farfetched 
as it seems; many occult thinkers of the period saw themselves as allies of the 
philosophes, and they often argued against the deployment of evil spirits, even 
as they sought to expand human knowledge via an engagement with angels 
or neutral elemental powers.120 And while the narrative of an occult enlight-
enment did not find much traction, as we’ll see in the next chapter, it was 
the charge that the hubris of the age was a conspiracy to kill God that later 
produced haunting echoes.
Co n clu s io n : T h e  M y t h  o f Enl i gh te nme nt
An attentive reader will notice that I have largely avoided a certain phrase— 
namely, “the Enlightenment.” There is a method to my circumlocutions. If 
like some scholars you imagine a myth is alive only so long as it is being re- 
elaborated and retold, then it would seem that one of today’s most vivacious 
myths is about a lost age called “the Enlightenment,” often pinned to the 
eighteenth century and characterized as the dawn of modernity. In the last 
ten years, thousands of books and articles both academic and popular have 
been published on the subject.121 But this is a newer phenomenon than one 
might think. While the late nineteenth- century roots of the Enlightenment as 
a periodization in German philosophical circles will be discussed in the next 
chapter, “the Enlightenment” mainly came to occupy a place in the shared 
memory of the Anglophone world in the 1950s, and began flourishing only in 
the 1980s as the conflicting critiques and defenses of the Enlightenment and 
its presumed project proliferated.122 One can see a similar pattern in France.123 
The Enlightenment leaped into view as a period largely by way of translation 
or transposition from German scholarship and a struggle over the meaning of 
the Weimar Republic, and intensified after the Second World War.124 In sum, 
the Enlightenment as a self- conscious period and entity is an anachronism.125

Revenge of the Magicians 
59
Similarly, despite a whole crowd of scholars who see themselves as defend-
ing the Enlightenment from “postmodern” critique, when we look to those 
works that are supposed to have originated the critique, it turns out they were 
mostly talking about something else. Michel Foucault largely used a different 
periodization in his works. Folie et Déraison: Histoire de la folie à l’âge clas-
sique (Madness and unreason: History of madness in the classical age, 1961), 
for example, divides its temporality between an age of reason and a classical 
age, neither of which fit our sense of the Enlightenment as an epoch.126 What is 
more, Dialectic of Enlightenment describes “Enlightenment” as a project not a 
period and it is hard not to read it alongside the Nazis’ Reichsministerium für 
Volksaufklärung und Propaganda (Reich Ministry for Popular Enlightenment 
and Propaganda). To the extent that Horkheimer and Adorno’s critique of 
enlightenment is focused on historical figures, it seems that Francis Bacon is an 
important early representative, but they describe a process stretching back into 
the dawn of historical time and reaching its culmination in positivism. Indeed, 
some scholars have suggested that all along, the Frankfurt School really had in 
mind the legacy of the scientific revolution.127
Before moving on, I want to briefly historicize this latter periodization. The 
“scientific revolution” was not a master historiographical epoch before it was 
popularized by Alexandre Koyré in Études galiléennes (1939).128 The various 
thinkers who have been retroactively associated with the scientific revolution 
did not generally think of themselves as pursuing a common undertaking; 
nor was there a common conception of “science,” much less an epochal dis-
covery of a unitary “scientific method.” The term science entered English and 
French in the twelfth century as a synonym for “knowledge,” but it took an 
Aristotelian notion of logically demonstrable and certain truth based on rea-
soning from first principles.129 It was the opposite of empirical experimenta-
tion, which was basically regarded as a probabilistic and dependent on the 
senses and hence uncertain. But Newton and company did sometimes deploy 
“science” to give natural philosophy the prestige previously associated with 
logical certainties.
As Sydney Ross has observed, there was a long period (roughly 1800– 
1850) when the words philosophy and science were functionally regarded as 
synonyms.130 Over the course of this period, however, physics and chemis-
try gained increasing prestige for their capacity to be transformed into easily 
demonstrable technological achievements. Ultimately, in English and French 
the meaning and status of philosophy and science basically switched. Physics, 
rather than philosophy, was seen as the paragon of certain knowledge (despite 
its roots in probabilistic experimentation), and the human sciences emerged 

60 Chapter Two
as older humanistic disciplines fractured or attempted to refashion themselves 
with the natural sciences as a model.
It is worth noting that Wissenschaft— what would become the main term 
for “science” in the German- speaking world— initially had a different trajec-
tory. According to lexicographic sources, like Johann Christoph Adelung’s 
Grammatisch- kritisches Wörterbuch der hochdeutschen Mundart (Grammat-
ically critical dictionary of the High German dialect, 1808), during the eigh-
teenth century, Wissenschaft referred to “the circumstance in which one knows 
something or has knowledge or a report of it,” but under the influence of the 
period’s philosophical debates, this sense of Wissenschaft was displaced by a 
meaning of the term as referring to “objective truths,” such that “there are ac-
cordingly as many Wissenschaften as there are [ways in which] general truths, 
or truths of one kind, are examined as grounded in one another.”131 In sum, 
at the end of the eighteenth century, Wissenschaften was generally used in the 
plural, and instead of a single scientific method, it pointed toward a plurality 
of truths.
Over the course of the nineteenth century, Wissenschaft came to function as 
a reference to any form of systematic knowledge or academic discipline, even 
as its meaning came to be shaped by its use as a translation term for the French 
and English “science.” Nevertheless, for a long time, Wissenschaft continued to 
be modeled primarily on philology as the prototypical science.132 This had the 
effect of reducing the separation between the natural sciences and the human-
ities we find in the American academy— the later German bifurcation between 
Geisteswissenschaften (human sciences) and Naturwissenschaften (natural sci-
ences) popularized by Wilhelm Dilthey being less strict. But even philology, 
with its rigorous method of historical- critical textual analysis, could just as 
easily be positioned in opposition to religion and the authority of revealed 
texts.133 Moreover, the language of Wissenschaft also more closely tended to 
ally philosophy with science— a result being that philosophy’s gradual separa-
tion from theology would come to suggest a problem for “religion.”
Over the course of the nineteenth century, English, French, and German 
academics would come to establish scientific unity via a putative opposition 
between “science,” now fully identified with reason, and “religion,” increas-
ingly associated with faith or perspectival belief. These shifts in turn increas-
ingly amplified the authority of a unitary conception of “science” as the source 
of civilizational progress.134 If today the term science has come to stand for 
both truth and the crystalized essence of all that is modern, in what follows I 
will trace the various others against which “science” (or enlightenment) was 
historically constituted.

Revenge of the Magicians 
61
*
While the next chapter will excavate the seeds of the myth of the Enlight-
enment in nineteenth- century German philosophy, here I have worked to 
reconstruct some figures often associated with “the Enlightenment” and the 
“scientific revolution” as much as possible in their own context. In so doing, 
I have made several broad points.
Many of the thinkers we associate with the disenchantment of nature— 
from Giordano Bruno to Francis Bacon— were themselves magicians. We keep 
reminding ourselves of this fact because we have internalized a false myth of 
modernity that makes this a surprise. These magicians of disenchantment 
point us to the limit of the categories. While classical narratives of modernity 
can explain magicians in terms of atavistic resistance, they cannot account for 
magicians who themselves worked to produce disenchantment on one hand 
and magic on the other. This demonstrates that science and magic could be 
brought together even if unstably, producing at least temporarily natural magic 
and supernatural science. Abandoning these oppositions should put us into a 
position to undo some of the myth of modernity.
Additionally, when we return to the thinkers associated with enlightenment, 
they do not fit the received narrative, as they have a messy relationship to 
religion, to spirits, and to esotericism itself. Meanwhile, enlightenment ratio-
nalism and scientific empiricism were entangled with theological speculation. 
This is far from the nineteenth century’s myth of a religion- science binary. In 
this sense, “the Enlightenment” turns out to have challenged the secularization 
that is attributed to it.
Importantly, following Francis Bacon and the philosophes’ campaign against 
superstition, the conceptions of philosophy and then science would come to 
inherit a Christian (or even Protestant anti- Catholic) polemic predicated on 
excluding features of an imagined “paganism,” which were labeled with terms 
such as superstition, magic, and myth.135 Simply put, the terms magic and su-
perstition formerly referred to an arbitrary collection of beliefs and practices 
understood to be diabolical, dangerous, and pagan and only later came to  
indicate those that were primarily supposed to be ineffective, primitive, or 
savage. The phrase the occult came to function as a repository for the con-
trasting category to modernity. Not that all were persuaded. Indeed, it might 
seem there was no real historical rupture between the epoch of magic and the 
critique of disenchantment.
Another implication of what I have said above is that the very logic that 
suppressed such things as theosophy and magic made them appealing. It gave 

62 Chapter Two
these categories a certain allure (as locations for the critique of modernity or 
enlightenment, or as ways to suture the fissure between religion and science); 
but it also made their suppression key to pretensions of scientific status. The 
philosophes had conjured their own enemies into being. More important, the 
putative opposition between magic and science was inherently unstable, and  
having romanticized both science and religion, one can find repeated attempts 
to restage their reconciliation. In the era of science, occult sciences proliferated 
and yet were rarely able to fully shake the aura of an imagined paganism.136
To foreshadow my larger argument in the chapters that follow, the human 
sciences came into being with the shared presumption that “modernity” repre-
sented a historical and cultural rupture decisively demarcating contemporary 
Europe from both its past and its non- European other. Although the human 
sciences were born alongside interest in the occult and spiritualism, the dis-
avowal of “superstition” became crucial to the formulations of the human sci-
ences that have all tended to take as given— at least, at the moment of their 
birth— the idea of newness inherent in the modern rupture. In that sense, 
modernity has functioned as a master paradigm, or episteme.
As we shall see, the founders of the human sciences all tended to take as 
given the idea that there was something distinctive and original in “modern” 
European thought and culture, even as they treated the specifics of European 
history as the blueprint for universal history that all cultures were supposed 
to follow. Moreover, they inherited the bias that this distinctiveness was to 
be found in the dismissal of magic, myth, and spirits. There were necessarily 
vested interests, both colonial and disciplinary, in maintaining this claim to 
uniqueness. But European culture was not as different in this respect from 
Africa and Asia as they wanted to believe. They were wrong. Modernity was 
a false paradigm. It was itself a myth.

C h a p t e r  T h r e e
The Myth of Absence
We must have a new mythology, but this mythology must be placed in the services of 
ideas; it must become a mythology of reason.
 Das älteste Systemprogramm des deutschen Idealismus, 1796/97
Modern poetry’s inferiority to classical poetry can be summed up in the words: we have 
no mythology . . . . The new mythology must be formed from the deepest depth of the 
spirit. It must be the most artificial of all artworks.
 F r i e d r i c h  S c h l e g e l , Rede über die Mythologie, 1800
In 1913, the German- Jewish philosopher Franz Rosenzweig made a startling 
discovery among a collection of papers acquired that year by the Prussian 
Royal Library in Berlin. He found a strange and fragmentary manifesto written 
in G. W. F. Hegel’s handwriting in about 1796 but, as Rosenzweig went on to 
argue, expressing sentiments that would have been completely alien to Hegel’s 
thought in that period.1 Even today, scholars dispute whether the ideas in the 
fragment should be attributed to Hegel or his comrades F. W. J. Schelling or 
Friedrich Hölderlin, yet “Das älteste Systemprogramm des deutschen Ideal-
ismus” (The oldest systematic program of German Idealism), as Rosenzweig 
titled it, is generally regarded a momentous landmark in German philosophy.2 
What is important for our purposes is that it suggested a cultural absence or 
vacuum that could be remedied only by creating a “new mythology,” and it 
was not the only work in the period to make such a demand.
One of the most striking features of German philosophy from the eigh-
teenth and early nineteenth centuries is a passion for mythology. In point of 
fact, Germany shared this fascination with other parts of Europe.3 But it is in 
the writings of German thinkers such as Johann Herder, the Jena Romantics, 
the Brothers Grimm, Richard Wagner, Friedrich Nietzsche, and later Martin 
Heidegger that one can find this sentiment elevated to a “longing for myth.”4 
While the turn toward myth was largely a retrieval project aimed at “Orien-
tal,” Greek, or antique Germanic source material, not all of this impulse was 
nostalgic.

64 Chapter Three
Starting in the late eighteenth century, a number of German philosophers— 
from the author of Systemprogramm to the Schlegel brothers to Schelling— 
lobbied for the construction of a new mythology.5 In System des transzen-
dentalen Idealismus (System of transcendental Idealism, 1800), Schelling 
suggested: “In mythology there was a medium [for science in poetry], before 
the occurrence of a breach that now seems beyond repair. But how a new 
mythology could come into being, which is not the [conscious] invention of 
an individual poet, but of a new generation represented, as it were, in a single 
poet— this is a problem whose solution can be sought only in the future des-
tinies of the world, and in the unfolding of history.”6
At first pass, it is hard not to be puzzled at these appeals for a new my-
thology. They might seem destined to disappoint. While a mythology was 
believed to give cultures their coherence, in German, as in English, to call  
something a “myth” (Mythos) was already to suggest at least embellishment, 
if not outright falsehood. A consciously formulated myth would seem to be a 
paradox. In order to construct a mythology, it might appear you cannot think 
of it as such. Indeed, scholars who have addressed this subject generally as-
sume that this attempted mythopoesis was a complete failure. And almost no 
one would suggest that this longing for myth had a far- reaching impact, except 
insofar as it contributed to the contours of German nationalism.7
Here is where the consensus is exactly wrong. In the very act of calling for a 
new myth, German thinkers had actually come up with one. And as I’ll argue, 
it had legs. To be sure, these philosophers were not the myth’s sole authors, 
but they succeeded in giving form to more widely held sentiments. What later 
scholars have typically missed is that the real myth was not in their proposed 
solutions: it was not Orientalized reconstructions of Aryan mythology nor 
Teutonic revivals. Its core was the very idea that, as Schlegel stated, “we have 
no mythology.”
In nutshell, the myth born from this philosophical conjuncture was an anti- 
myth, a myth that described itself in terms of longing, absence, and mythless-
ness. Its paradox is that only by being a myth that there was no myth could its 
status as myth go unnoticed and hence not be demystified. It was a myth in 
search of myth. Insofar as this myth is still our myth— or at least an animating 
narrative across many sectors of modern society— their project worked. Let 
me explain why.
*

The Myth of Absence 65
There is a narrative that scholars have repeated so often that it can sound like 
a fable. Although applied to different time periods, from the birth of Greek 
philosophy to the Renaissance to the scientific revolution to the Enlighten-
ment, its outline is nearly always the same: that at a particular moment the 
darkness of superstition, myth, or religion began to give way to modern light, 
exchanging traditional unreason for technology and rationality.8 When told 
in a soaring tone, this is a tale of triumph; and when recounted in a different 
and descending emotional register, it can sound like the inauguration of our 
tragic alienation from an idealized past. To be clear, the absent myth has two 
significant components— that we have lost myth and that we need myth— and 
the celebratory version of this narrative omits the latter theme. But notwith-
standing variations in tenor and cast of actors, it is basically the same story, 
which has been imposed on a range of epochs.
Sometimes— especially in a certain older genre of anthropological 
theorizing— the turning point is said to have occurred in the movement between 
vague lost eras or mentalities, such as the supposed shift from mythology to 
rationality, from metaphysics to positivism, or from the age of magic to the age 
of science. When presented as grand phase transitions, these old- fashioned 
social scientific models inadvertently disclose their own “mythic” progenitors 
in sources, such as Hesiod’s five ages (Golden, Silver, Bronze, Heroic, Iron). 
To be clear, I am not arguing against periodization as such, but rather con-
cerned with the reuse of grand historical story lines. Even when articulated 
with a greater degree of specificity, it is striking that many different historical 
ruptures— from the Protestant Reformation to the age of Enlightenment— 
have all been told according to the same basic narrative blueprint.
It could almost go without saying that these were not the self- narratives 
of the periods in question; not only were they less likely to be self- conscious 
of themselves as epochal, but insofar as there were new movements in these 
eras, they were often presented as returns— for example, the Italian recovery  
of Plato or the Evangelical emphasis on primitive Christianity. So why do 
 scholars keep recycling the same basic plot to talk about these disparate events?
I argue in this chapter that there is a reason we keep telling essentially the 
same story about the dawn of rationality. It is not a narrative that originated 
independently in five different historical periods; rather, it largely came from 
one. It was formulated mostly in German in the nineteenth century and was 
then transposed backward into different historical epochs and geographical 
locations. In effect, it was an interpretation gone in search of something to 
interpret; or we might say, it was a myth on a quest for an event on which to 

66 Chapter Three
project its own genesis. The pages that follow will trace some of the seeds of 
this myth- of- the- end- of- myth.
Tellingly, the absent myth had influential mythemes whose very language 
points toward their largely poetic character. You likely know one of them as 
“the death of God,” another as “the end of the age of myth”; still another we 
might call “the eclipse of the gods” or “the de- deification of the world.” These 
motifs are neither identical nor fully distinct, and while today they are associ-
ated foremost with different strains of existentialism or postmodernism, they 
share an origin, and it was much earlier than is often supposed. They have 
been prolifically retold because they have instigated different responses— a 
myriad of attempts to replace divine death with religious revivals, occult and 
artistic movements, and further philosophical gestures. Moreover, like other 
myths, they are basically narrative tropes that can be extended to different 
historical instances.
These mythemes have also come down to us in abbreviated form. As I will 
show, they were originally formulated not in linear teleological terms, but as a 
spiral, whose final act we have generally overlooked.
*
The previous chapter showed that the thinkers usually associated with “the 
Enlightenment” and the “scientific revolution” were far from disenchanting 
materialists. This chapter will trace the idea that the philosophes and the new 
scientific mechanism dispelled the divine. It begins from the following obser-
vation: many of the most portable formulations of generalized secularization 
and disenchantment were all articulated in a narrow period of history within 
a small circle of German philosophers and poets. This is the community and 
moment that gave us nihilism, the death of God, the end of myth, and the de-
spiritualization of the world as characterizations of an age. Moreover, it was the 
following generation of German thinkers that not only embraced this terminol-
ogy, but also engaged in some of the first explicit philosophical theorization 
about “alienation” and “secularization.”
The first part of the chapter charts the historical context of late eighteenth- 
century Germany, locating the origins of what have become disparate tropes in 
the political context of the period and in a debate within German philosophy 
about rationality, Spinoza, and the specter of nihilism. The second part of 
the chapter focuses on the roots of the formulation that will concern us most; 
namely, “the disenchantment of the world.” While that phrase owes its par-

The Myth of Absence 
67
ticular place in our cannon to the writings of Max Weber, it is widely asserted 
that Weber’s inspiration was Friedrich Schiller (although this turns out to be 
only partially correct). This section of the chapter will trace Schiller’s par-
ticular version of universal history and his famous formulation of the eclipse 
of the gods (1788). It explains how these themes resonated in the world of 
early German Romanticism and shows how they did so against a backdrop 
of interest in theosophy, magic, and spirits. The final section of the chapter 
returns to the myth of mythless modernity and shows how it moved from phi-
losophy to history in German- speaking circles in the 1860s to 1870s, where it 
gave shape to the notions of both the Renaissance and the Enlightenment as 
historical periodizations.
N i h i li sm , R evo lu t i o n, an d  t h e De ath  of God: 
F . H . J aco bi  an d  G . W . F. H e ge l
Nothing frightens man so much, nothing darkens his mind to such a degree, as when 
God disappears from nature . . . when purpose, wisdom and goodness no longer seem 
to reign in nature, but only a blind necessity or dumb chance.
 F r i e d r i c h J a c o b i , “Fliegende Blätter,” Minerva, 1817
Near the end of the nineteenth century, Friedrich Nietzsche memorably de-
scribed his epoch in apocalyptic terms, stating in 1882: “The greatest recent 
event— that ‘God is dead’; that the belief in the Christian God has become 
unbelievable— is already starting to cast its first shadow over Europe.”9 Else-
where in the same text, Nietzsche puts these oft- quoted words in the mouth 
of a madman: “God is dead! God remains dead! And we have killed him! 
. . . The holiest and the mightiest thing the world has ever possessed has bled 
to death under our knives: who will wipe this blood from us? . . . What then 
are these churches now if not the tombs and sepulchers of God?”10 Nietzsche 
is conjuring a divine specter, whose haunting shadow marks the signs of God’s 
absent presence extending over the whole of modernity.
This famous phrase— “God is dead”— might seem to be Nietzsche’s single 
most significant contribution to philosophy, and indeed, it is often character-
ized as such.11 But despite what is popularly believed, Nietzsche did not coin 
this expression. The phrase appears in German much earlier. One can find it 
in a well- known seventeenth- century hymn, “Ein trauriger Grabgesang” (A 
mournful dirge, 1641/42) by the Lutheran pastor and poet Johann von Rist, 
which contains the lines:

68 Chapter Three
God Himself lies dead,
He died on the cross,
And thereby from [His] love for us,
Heaven was won.12
This hymn evokes the theology of substitutionary atonement with the gener-
ally Protestant tendency to emphasize Christ’s sacrifice in terms of forensic 
(or penal) substitution— put in plain language, God died for our sins. In these 
theological terms, the death of God evokes not the departure of Christianity, 
but the divine self- sacrifice that opened the gates to salvation.
The question becomes, how did we get a sociological shorthand for sec-
ularization from a theological dirge? The pages that follow will explain. Our 
first clue is that not only was Nietzsche a latecomer to this particular phrase, 
he was not even the first philosopher to utter it. Our second clue is that the 
“death of God” dates not from the end of the nineteenth century, but from 
its beginning; and it shares an origin with characterizations of nihilism and 
mythlessness.
*
In 1796, the German novelist Jean Paul (Johann Paul Friedrich Richter) pub-
lished a graphic depiction of a dream in which Christ testifies to God’s ab-
sence before an ensemble of ghosts, as follows:
All the dead exclaimed— “Christ, is there no God?” And [Christ] answered 
“There is none!” . . . Christ continued— “I traversed worlds. I ascended into 
suns, and flew along the Milky Way through the wastes of the heavens; but 
there is no God! I descended as far as Being throws its shadow, and gazed 
down into the abyss, and cried aloud— ‘Father, where art thou?’ but I heard 
nothing but the eternal storm which no one rules. . . . And when I looked up 
to the immeasurable world for the Divine Eye, it stared back at me with an 
empty, bottomless socket, and Eternity lay brooding upon chaos . . . Cry on, ye 
discords! Cleave the shadows with your cries; for [God] is not!”13
The passage juxtaposes a divine absence with a series of ghostly presences in 
ways that anticipates Nietzsche’s funerary oration on divine death. But it does 
not actually use the pithy phrase “God is dead.” For that we have to look to 
elsewhere.

The Myth of Absence 69
In 1831, Hegel gave a series of lectures on the philosophy of religion at the 
University of Berlin. In one lecture, more than fifty years before Nietzsche’s 
Die fröhliche Wissenschaft (1882; The Gay Science), Hegel had already stated: 
“God died, God is dead— this is the most dreadful thought, that everything 
eternal and true does not exist.”14 This was hardly the first occasion he had 
made a similar pronouncement. Already in Glauben und Wissen (1802; Faith 
and Knowledge), Hegel had observed: “The unending grief— that previously 
existed only historically in culture (Bildung) and as an emotional feeling— is 
where modern religion is based, as it [too] feels that God Himself is dead.”15 
Indeed, nearly all Hegel’s major works contain some reference to the grief 
inspired by perceptions of divine death, and variations on the death of God 
appear as a regular phrase.16
Hegel was not alone in poetic laments of this sort. If his 1802 writings were 
the first appearance of the death of God as philosophy (although perhaps 
foreshadowed by Richter in 1796), and the birth of “the end of myth” came 
either from the Systemprogramm (1796/97) or Friedrich Schlegel’s Rede über 
die Mythologie (Speech on mythology, 1800), then these mythemes nearly co-
incide.17 To foreshadow the other themes of interest here, the “eclipse of the 
gods” is first discussed by Friedrich Schiller in 1788, and “nihilism” (Nihilis-
mus) enters philosophical usage in the same period, appearing independently 
in 1787 and 1799. What was it about this generation of German intellectuals 
that caused them to produce these influential mythemes? The following will 
first describe a significant debate in early German philosophical circles about 
pantheism and nihilism, and go on to deal with the political changes in the 
period that proved such fertile ground for a critique of enlightenment.
The Pantheism Controversy
Perhaps we will live to see the day when a dispute will arise over the corpse of Spinoza 
like that between the archangel and Satan over the corpse of Moses.
 F r i e d r i c h J a c o b i , Letter to Moses Mendelssohn, April 26, 1785
The Pantheism Controversy (Pantheismusstreit) started in 1783 as a minor 
fight between two philosophers, Moses Mendelssohn and Friedrich Jacobi, 
about their recently deceased colleague Gotthold Lessing.18 Jacobi claimed 
that in a private conversation shortly before his death Lessing had confessed: 
“The orthodox concepts of the Deity are not for me; I cannot stomach them. 
Hen kai pan! I know nothing else.”19 This enigmatic Greek phrase, Hen kai 

70 Chapter Three
pan (Έν και Παν, the One- in- All), made Jacobi think that Lessing was a fol-
lower of Spinoza. Why this phrase was a shibboleth among Spinozists is a 
matter of some dispute.20 But the following day, Lessing ostensibly confirmed 
to Jacobi that “there is no other philosophy than the philosophy of Spinoza.”21
Lessing’s confession might sound trivial today, but the debate quickly ex-
panded to include almost all the major German philosophers of the period 
and sparked successor arguments such as the atheism and materialism con-
troversies.22 To understand why this issue came to call into question the fate 
of reason and even belief in God, you need to know what Spinoza evoked in 
the period.
Contemporary scholar Jonathan Israel has argued that covert Spinozism 
was the key factor in the “radical enlightenment,” giving inspiration to both its 
secularizing impulse and republican spirit.23 Given that Spinoza’s Tractatus 
Theologico- Politicus (1670; Theological- Political Treatise) was read alongside 
works such as Traité des trois imposteurs (ca. 1777; The Treatise of the Three 
Imposters, which basically accused Moses, Jesus, and Mohammad of charla-
tanism), one can see why an allegiance to Spinoza might therefore have sug-
gested a commitment to upending the established forms of church and state.24 
But it would anachronistic to describe the alarm at Spinoza as resistance to 
secularism.
Spinoza was portrayed as a heretic, whose philosophy was both polytheistic 
and atheistic. These contradictory readings flow from different interpretations 
of Spinoza’s slogan “Deus sive Natura,” another bimodal concept that could 
be understood as either divinizing nature or naturalizing God. For a pagan in-
terpretation of the phrase, the German philologist Johann Wachter described 
a Cabbalist Spinoza deifying (Vergötterte) the world and filling it with gods.25 
But the French philosopher Pierre Bayle’s reading of Spinoza qua atheism was 
more influential. For Bayle, not only was Spinoza an atheist, but “Spinozism is 
only a particular method of explaining a doctrine, which prevails in the [East] 
Indies.”26 It is striking to see the compulsive need to further Orientalize Spi-
noza, a figure whose very Jewishness rendered him already “Oriental” in the 
eyes of many Europeans. But this should be seen alongside Bayle’s claim that 
the core of Asian religion was the contention that “there is nothing to seek, nor 
anything to pin one’s hopes on, except the nothingness and the void that is 
the first principle of all things.”27 Recast, Buddhists worshipped nothingness 
and the void. Bayle saw Spinoza as one representative of this vast system of 
nothing- ism or “atheism” centered in the “Orient.” This idea of atheism will 
take some further explaining.
The term atheism (Fr. athéisme) had entered modern European languages 

The Myth of Absence 71
by way of French only in the mid- sixteenth century as a rehabilitation of the 
Greek ἄθεος (átheos, godless or impious), but initially it was used to refer to 
any kind of intellectual, moral, or behavioral “ungodliness,” from idolatry to 
deism to homosexuality.28 As atheism gradually stabilized to mean a denial 
of God, it was primarily understood as a matter of the heart, not the mind.29 
This conception was given scriptural grounding, particularly in Psalm 14:1, 
“The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God” (KJV). Atheism was not an 
intellectual position so much as an emotional impulse rooted in a willful denial 
of divine punishment for one’s sins.
Prior to Bayle’s day, belief in God was thought to be an inborn trait and 
the existence of God such an obvious fact that atheism could only be asserted 
through a kind of bad faith or self- deception motivated by carnal passions. 
The sane human conscience would not allow God to be denied completely, 
and it was widely believed that libertine atheists must be either mad or pro-
foundly racked with guilt.30 To be sure, theologians argued against intellectual 
positions they saw as atheistic, but terminating a position in atheism was what 
supposedly rendered that line of thought absurd. It was believed that no one 
could rationally deny the existence of God because it was such a manifest and 
inescapable truth.
Although by the eighteenth century some cracks had begun to appear in this 
consensus, the philosophes generally assumed that the pursuit of reason and 
commonsense empiricism both led toward God. More concretely, Cartesian 
mechanism and Newtonian physics were both theological projects, and their 
influential interpreters Nicolas Malebranche and Samuel Clarke, if anything, 
more strongly emphasized God’s omnipotence.31 Some French intellectuals 
did believe in the absconding god of deism, and rejected organized religion as 
an unnecessary intermediary between humanity and the Book of Creation. But 
for most French philosophes and even more easily for their German Protestant 
cousins, rationality left God and morality intact.
It was this basic contention that Jacobi challenged in the Pantheism Contro-
versy.32 Moreover, he did so at a moment when the very concept of enlighten-
ment was being formulated. This is important because even after the Panthe-
ism Controversy was forgotten, many of its debates were basically transposed 
onto accounts of “the Enlightenment.” Indeed, if we wanted to reconstruct the 
seeds of the genealogy of the myth of the Enlightenment, we might look to the 
beginning of the 1780s, when the term Aufklärung (enlightenment) came to take 
on a new meaning in German academic circles to describe something that was 
happening in France.33 The conversation about enlightenment was instigated 
in part by a footnote that appeared in an essay in the Berlinische Monats schrift 

72 Chapter Three
in 1783. In the midst of condemning civil wedding ceremonies, the German 
theologian Johann Friedrich Zöllner asked a fateful semi- rhetorical question: 
“What is enlightenment (Aufklärung)?” and thus launched a controversy 
about the term’s meaning and importance.34 Kant’s response is well known 
today, but Kant’s essay was hardly representative and it was largely ignored 
until the late nineteenth century.35 Zöllner’s prompt solicited varied explana-
tions of “enlightenment” over the ensuing decade, covering everything from 
popular moral instruction to emotional awakening. Indeed reactions were so 
diverse that by 1790, an anonymous contributor to the Deutsche Monatsschrift 
complained that Aufklärung had no particular meaning and represented noth-
ing more than a free- for- all of idiosyncratic definitions.36
As an intervention in this debate about the meaning of enlightenment, the 
Pantheism Controversy had lasting implications. In the first case, the charge 
that a well- respected enlightener like Lessing had come under the sway of 
Spinoza was troubling because it amplified fears of philosophical crypto- 
Spinozists who were only outwardly pious. But most important, Jacobi argued 
that Lessing’s pantheism was not merely a personal predilection, but an inevi-
table outcome of Lessing’s allegiance to enlightenment. Put differently, while 
the philosophes thought they could embrace both reason and deism, Jacobi 
suggested that their whole project inevitably terminated in pantheism and 
hence fatalism and atheism. Accordingly, as Frederick Beiser and Hermann 
Timm have argued, the Pantheism Controversy disrupted the assumption that 
one could work from reason to God.37 It suggested that instead of an identi-
fication between God and logos, reason was fundamentally anti- theological.
To make sense of this, we have to recognize that Jacobi understood Spinoza 
primarily as the foremost systematic advocate of the principle of sufficient rea-
son: that nothing happens without a reason or cause— a position that the scho-
lastics characterized as Ex nihilo nihil fit (Nothing comes from nothing).38 
At first glance, this principle might suggest merely that the world is rational 
and nothing happens without a reason. But Jacobi understood the principle 
of sufficient reason in terms of proximate or mechanical causation, stating: 
“We conceive of a thing if we can derive it from its proximate causes, or if we 
can grasp its immediate conditions in a series what we grasp or derive in this 
manner gives us a mechanical connection.”39 This was a problem for Jacobi 
because if every event happened due to an earlier determinate cause, there was 
no longer any room for freedom (and hence no room for ethics) or miracles 
(hence no room for God). That is, for Jacobi, if natural philosophy is right and 
everything has a proximate cause, then the universe is deterministic, and we 
are nothing but clockwork automatons imprisoned in a mechanical cosmos.

The Myth of Absence 
73
Jacobi put the term nihilism (Nihilismus) into common philosophical us-
age to describe this philosophy of Ex nihilo nihil fit.40 To interpolate, nihilism 
was synonymous with a species of naturalistic rationalism that reduced every-
thing to mechanical causation, evacuating the world of God and meaning.41 
But Jacobi had one more trick up his sleeve, because in his first use of the term 
nihilism in print (Jacobi an Fichte, 1799), he attacked not just materialism, but 
also Johann Gottlieb Fichte’s idealism.42 Jacobi’s argument was that Fichte 
had reduced everything to consciousness and subjectivity. Furthermore having 
abandoned Kant’s thing- in- itself, Fichte had left no room for God or mean-
ing external to consciousness. If all was human ego, nothing was God. Taken 
together, Jacobi argued that these normally opposite philosophical positions 
of empiricism, rationalism, and idealism all necessarily terminated in nihilism 
because they all presumed reason could wholly apprehend the world.43
The Pantheism and successor controversies inspired heated discussions 
across the German philosophical world, and eventually Jacobi succeeded in 
making “nihilism” the philosophical problem par excellence. Nihilism had 
come to mean more than emotional atheism, but rather robust materialism or 
even robust idealism that reduced the world to either human subjects or sheer 
mechanical causation. Indeed, in Jacobi’s eyes, nihilism was the natural crys-
tallization point for philosophy and was unavoidable as long as one venerated 
the power of reason. If one could not reason one’s way out of reason, then it 
seemed philosophy would be forced to devour itself from within. But instead 
of causing his peers to reaffirm their faith in God and religion, Jacobi’s critique 
had produced unintended consequences.
First and foremost, Jacobi had introduced new doubts into the heart of 
philosophy. Generations of European intellectuals had effectively taken for 
granted that they had Christian or at the very least deistic conversation part-
ners. Bayle and company’s reevaluation of China had produced the possibility 
of nontheistic interlocutors, but almost nobody thought they were writing phi-
losophy for an Asian audience. Had they done so, it would have been with the 
assumption that they were writing to inferiors. To be sure, there had been a few 
outspoken atheists before Jacobi charged Lessing and then Fichte with athe-
ism (especially in the circle around Baron d’Holbach), but the general assump-
tion was that they were few in number and easy to refute. Yet, following Jacobi, 
it seemed to many that atheism could not be rationally disproven because 
an ethical and philosophical nihilism emerged from the use of reason itself. 
Granting this position seemingly placed Jacobi’s contemporaries between the 
devil and the deep blue sea: either reject reason and enlightenment, or cham-
pion atheism and immorality.

74 Chapter Three
One potential way out was to embrace Kant’s critical philosophy, which 
supposedly located faith and reason in their respective domains.44 But an alter-
nate possibility was a positively valenced pantheism. Jacobi had inadvertently 
popularized the very position he attacked. In the midst of these debates, Jo-
hann Herder published Gott: Einige Gespräche über Spinozas System (God: 
Some discussions of Spinoza’s system, 1787), which rebutted the charge that 
Spinoza was a mechanist and insisted that Spinoza’s God was a mind ani-
mating the universe with forces.45 Jacobi had made too good of a case that 
pantheism was the natural outcome of philosophy. Thus, in Germany at least, 
a whole crop of philosophers— including Goethe, Hegel, Heinrich Heine, 
Herder, Hölderlin, Novalis, Schelling, Schiller, and Schlegel— began to ex-
plore Spinoza or pantheism, and the expression Hen kai pan often appeared 
as a common motto among them.46
For our purposes, the most important thing about the pantheism dispute is 
that it led to early references to the death of God, and to an increasing sensi-
tivity to the dangers of a mythless or nihilistic age. It was not physics that pro-
duced the nihilistic clockwork universe, but philosophy. As noted above, Jacobi 
himself had made reference to God’s disappearance from nature in favor of a 
world ruled by blind chance. Many of the figures discussed in this chapter— 
including Hegel, Hölderlin, Jean Paul, Schelling, Schiller, and Schlegel— all 
were directly influenced by Jacobi or the Pantheism Controversy.47 Hence, it 
came to be seen as an earth- shattering episode in the memory of German phi-
losophy.48 Indeed, political events if anything soon amplified its impact.
*
By way of context, the French Revolution if anything seemed to justify Jacobi’s 
fears, as enlightenment came to evoke less rational Protestantism or enlight-
ened absolutism than regicide. Furthermore, the effects of the French Revolu-
tion quickly spilled over into the German political sphere. Readers not overly 
familiar with the details of German history need to know at least the following 
thumbnail sketch. When the Revolution happened in France, the Holy Roman 
Empire was already fragmented into hundreds of small, largely autonomous 
principalities, bishoprics, and semi- independent city- states. From 1792 until 
Napoleon’s final defeat at Waterloo in 1815, the German states were often at war 
with France, and for extended periods some states were effectively little more 
than French vassals. The conflict caused the slow collapse of the Holy Roman 
Empire, and it finally fell into dissolution in 1806. Along the way, the various 
German states began devouring each other, a process that the contemporary 

The Myth of Absence 
75
German historiography refers to as mediatization (Mediatisierung).49 This was 
a massive shift. By some counts Germany had about 1,800 distinct political 
units in 1789, but by 1815 the German Confederation had only 39 members 
(and by 1871 German was united).50
Here is the important point: one of the key features of this historical moment 
was a literal secularization as German states appropriated property previously 
belonging to the church. Versions of this happened first in French- occupied 
territories; but after 1802 it became policy all over the Empire, and the process 
continued even after the Empire collapsed. Many Catholic universities were 
suspended, thousands of monasteries were disbanded, and the ecclesiastical 
territories previously governed by bishops were given over to secular states.51 
Thus when the German philosophers and poets who witnessed these shifts 
began writing about the death of God, they were making grand themes out of 
the specifics of their local history.
*
Hegel and Richter were not the only ones to describe divine death. References 
to the death of God also occur in Heinrich Heine (1835), Bruno Bauer (1841), 
and Max Stirner (1844), all significantly before Nietzsche put pen to paper.52 
Stirner’s version even evokes Nietzsche’s famous deicide while blaming it on 
enlightenment: “When in our days they brought to a victorious finish the work 
of enlightenment, the vanquishing of God: they did not notice that man has 
murdered God in order to become now ‘sole God on high.’ ”53 Taken together, 
these scattered references to the death of God are still not sociological descrip-
tions of secularization, nor are they sober reflections on de- Christianization; 
rather, they are modern jeremiads or laments. They indicate more a presence 
of grief than an absence of religion. Although Heidegger would later imagine 
a moment in which the Deity is so far gone that even God’s departure goes 
unremarked, the God described here is retreating but pursued.54
Strikingly, it was among Hegelians of the 1830s and 1840s that we find the 
death of God shifting from the terrain of poetical abstraction into some of 
the earliest theorization about “alienation” (Entfremdung) and “seculariza-
tion” (Säkularisierung, Verweltlichung) as general patterns of history.55 This is 
less of a surprise when we remember that Marx and Feuerbach were working 
out their respective theories of alienation in the Economic and Philosophic 
Manuscripts of 1844 and Das Wesen des Christentums (1841; The Essence of 
Christianity). Moreover, there is good evidence that the first deployment of 
secularization to describe an epochal process of de- Christianization is in the 

76 Chapter Three
writings of the Christian theosophist and right- Hegelian Richard Rothe, Die 
Anfänge der Christlichen Kirche und ihrer Verfassung (The beginning of the 
Christian church and its constitution, 1837).56 The theme of theosophical 
disenchantment (in a different sense) is discussed in the next chapter. Later, 
these Vormärz writings would seem prophetic in the face of the new political- 
religious fault lines that emerged in Western Europe following the revolutions 
of 1848; and even though the Anglophone world largely avoided the impact of 
those revolutions, the publication of Charles Darwin’s On the Origin of Species 
(1859) would come to evoke similar concerns. Still, it is worth underscoring 
that Rothe and company extrapolated recent German political history into 
macro- historical trends in ways that continue to be influential today.
Furthermore, the death of God was felt outside the churches as philoso-
phers began to search for secure nontheological foundations for epistemology, 
morality, and mathematics, while inheriting standards of certainty, ethics, and 
rational harmony that preserved earlier Christian presuppositions. Restated, 
divine absence was not merely a problem for orthodox faith, but undergirded 
academic disciplines that devoted ages to trying to recover lost certainties. If 
this was secularization, it came at the expense of many endeavors we usually 
regard as secular. Still, as this section has shown, a small fight between Ger-
man philosophers catalyzed by the French Revolution was transformed into 
a poetic characterization of modernity and the nihilism that lurked at its core. 
But this was not the only fallout from the rejection of mechanism.
In the same period and among the same circle of thinkers, one can find 
reference to the de- divination of the world and the end of myth. Indeed, from 
another vantage, it was less the rise of pantheism or the death of the Christian 
deity that was a problem, but instead a new alienation from a cosmos of dead 
matter. The following section explores the genesis of that insight.
T h e  E c l i p s e  o f t h e Gods :  
Fr ie d r i c h  S c h il l e r
The old world began to decline. . . . The gods vanished with their retinue— Nature 
stood alone and lifeless. Dry Number and rigid Measure bound her with iron chains.
 N o va l i s , Hymnen an die Nacht, 1800
Less than a year before his untimely death from tuberculosis at the young 
age of twenty- eight, the German poet and philosopher Novalis (Friedrich 
Leopold, Baron von Hardenberg) published his most famous work, Hymnen 
an die Nacht (1800; Hymns to the Night). As evidenced in the quote above, 

The Myth of Absence 
77
these hymns— instead of merely bewailing de- Christianization— mourn de- 
Paganization. In so doing, they evoke a lost vibrant nature, abandoned by the 
gods. As Novalis continued: “No longer was the Light the abode of the Gods, 
and the heavenly token of their presence— they drew over themselves the veil 
of the Night. The Night became the mighty womb of revelations— into it the 
Gods went back— and fell asleep.”57
The gods have left the world and retreated into darkness and slumber. This 
quasi- pagan lament was not unique, and many of Novalis’s contemporaries 
gave vent to a similar longing. Nor was Novalis merely a poet; his incomplete 
philosophical writings suggest that he was searching for a solution to a crisis 
that would have been readily intelligible to many of his fellows.58 Novalis’s pro-
posed solution is considered below, but our primary concern is his diagnosis 
of calamity in the vanishing (Verschwinden) or eclipse of the gods.
The death of the gods seems like only a subtle modification of the more 
famous “death of God” discussed above, merely the addition of an s. It is not 
surprising that scholars often conflate the two. But while they share a historical 
origin, I want to show here where the tropes diverged and how dying gods 
serve as a prototype for the disenchantment myth. To trace the wellspring of 
this theme, we will turn to Novalis’s teacher at the University of Jena, the Ger-
man philosopher and playwright Friedrich Schiller (1759– 1805). The pages 
that follow are structured around one of his poems, “The Gods of Greece” 
(“Die Götter Griechenlands,” 1788, revised 1800).
Written in 1788, during the height of the pantheism controversy and on the 
eve of the French Revolution, “The Gods of Greece” is more than merely a lyri-
cal evocation of antiquity or contemporary events. Accordingly, in what follows 
I read it in three keys: first as universal history, then as theosophy, and finally 
focusing in on the theme of disenchantment. It might seem strange to give that 
much weight to a single poem, but many of the thinkers crucial to the history of 
the disenchantment narrative from Hegel to Frazer to Max Weber to Sigmund 
Freud to Ludwig Klages, all made reference to “The Gods of Greece” and 
usually in the context of despiritualization. It is hard to exaggerate the impact 
that this poem had on future characterizations of modernity, and it is in Schil-
ler’s writings more broadly that the eclipse of the gods took its classic shape.
*
“The Gods of Greece” is a long, hundred- line poem. Here is my translation 
of the key lines from the 1788 version without attempting to preserve rhyme or 
meter (1800 variation indicated in notes), numbered for later reference:

78 Chapter Three
1. When the poetic art’s picturesque shroud59
still delightfully enveloped the truth!
2. The fullness of life flowed through creation,
and, they felt what will never be felt again.
3. Pressed to Nature’s loving bosom,
they acknowledged her higher nobility.
4. For initiated eyes everything pointed to
the traces of a god.
5. Where now as our wise men claim, only
a soulless ball of fire revolves,
6. Then Helios guided his golden chariot
in silent majesty.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7. To enhance One above all,
the world of gods had to perish.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8. Unconscious of the pleasures that she bestows,
never impressed by her own perfection,
9. Never aware of the forces that guide her,
never enriched by my own gratefulness,60
10. Numb to her artist’s glory,
like the pendulum’s dead stroke,
11. Godless Nature,
slavishly serves the law of gravity!
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12. When the gods were still human,
humans were more divine.61
*
The first thing you need to know about “The Gods of Greece” is that it is only 
superficially about Greek culture. To understand why, we have to pierce the 
veil of German philhellenism. A widely studied aspect of German culture in 

The Myth of Absence 79
Schiller’s day was a movement in German classicism (often credited to Johann 
Joachim Winckelmann),that directed its attention toward Greece rather than 
Rome. Since at least Eliza Butler’s pioneering The Tyranny of Greece over Ger-
many (1935), historians have characterized late eighteenth- century Germany 
in terms of its reverence for Greek culture, a theme that has been explored 
in multiple monographs.62 While this is a valuable line of research, there are 
two crucial points that are easy to overlook amidst the welter of details: first, 
Germans were far from the only Europeans to romanticize classical Greece in 
the period; and second, Greece broadly functioned in this discourse as the 
epitome of primitive naturalism.
In the broadest of strokes, Greece, having been colonized by Rome and 
then the Ottomans, represented for many Europeans not Athenian urbanity or 
philosophical sophistication, but an idyllic past that was identified with a lost 
naturalness. Accordingly, a host of influential European thinkers described 
the Greeks of antiquity in terms that suggested Rousseau’s noble savage.63 
Winckel mann praised both the aesthetics and primitiveness of Greek culture 
by, for example, comparing Homer’s heroes to “swift- footed [American] 
Indians” (schnelle Indianer).64 In effect, the Greeks were positioned where 
nineteenth- century anthropology would situate Native American or African 
“savages” as historical relics, but instead of denigrating the Greeks as back-
ward, the German classicists were celebrating their primitiveness.65 Moreover, 
from 1770 to 1832 Greeks were attempting to rebel from the Ottoman Empire, 
and while not all European classicists supported Greek independence, when 
they did so, philhellenism functioned as a species of postcolonial critique.66 
Insofar as Germans saw themselves as inheritors of Greek civilization, this was 
an idealized internal or ancestral primitivism.
We can see this in Schiller’s writings. In Über naive und sentimentalische 
Dichtung (On naïve and sentimental poetry, 1795) an influential work of aes-
thetic theory, Schiller suggest that ancient Greek culture was both close to 
nature and represented the childhood of humanity.67 This is our first clue that 
“The Gods of Greece” is about more than a particular civilization; rather, it 
explores the primordial condition of humanity, the point of maximal natural-
ness. It is only about Greece inasmuch as Greece signifies the de- alienated 
human condition.
Although full of classical allusions, the structuring principle behind “The 
Gods of Greece” was an interest in universal history that would find formal 
presentation in Schiller’s lectures at Jena the following year.68 The poem’s 
broader philosophical context is the birth of history itself. In less hyperbolic 
terms, it is no secret that European conceptions of time underwent epical shifts 

80 Chapter Three
in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. One might think of the gradual dis-
placement of the biblical six- thousand- year chronology in favor of the “dark 
abyss of time” conditioned by vast geological ages, or the standardization of 
international timekeeping alongside Greenwich mean time and the marine 
chronometer. Most important for our current purposes was the novel reflec-
tion on the meaning of history itself, often described in terms of “philosophy 
of history” or “universal history.”69 Under these last headings, philosophers 
and historians engaged in a concerted effort to discover the universal natural 
laws that governed the evolution of human history and society.70 This rise of 
new universalizing metanarratives served as the precondition for any kind of 
grand narrative of progress or disenchantment.
“The Gods of Greece” is thus primarily a statement about both the dawn 
of humanity and the grand architectonics of history. Concretely, “The Gods of 
Greece” suggests three historical epochs— a golden age of myth (verses 1– 6), 
the advent of Christianity (verse 7), and the rise of natural philosophy (verses 
8– 11)— not unlike the four ages of the world Schiller described elsewhere.71 
The crucial feature of primitive humanity is not a Hobbesian war- of- all- 
against- all or the barbarism of “savage superstition,” but a unity with nature 
(see verses 1– 4).72 As Schiller recounted in Über naive und sentimentalische 
Dichtung, “As long as we were mere children of nature, we were happy and 
complete; we have become free and lost both.”73 Moreover, in the same work 
Schiller provides a typology of poetry, including the elegy (Elegie), a kind of 
poem rooted in the sadness evoked by lost nature and the passing of a golden 
age.74 “The Gods of Greece” portrays the arc of history as an elegy of estrange-
ment from the natural world.
The first transition between ages occurs when monotheism banishes the 
pagan deities (see verse 7). Another of Schiller’s poems, “Die vier Weltalter” 
(1802; “The Four Ages of the World”), suggests something similar with these 
lines: “The age of divine fantasy / has vanished (verschwunden), never to 
return. / The gods have fallen from heaven’s throne / and the Virgin’s Son has 
been born.”75 There were plenty of historical precedents for this. Famously, 
Plutarch in On the Eclipse of the Oracles (ca. 100 CE) had recorded the expres-
sion “The great Pan is dead” as part of a larger attempt to explain the decline of 
oracles.76 Late antique and medieval Christian authors had described Greco- 
Roman gods as demons that could be exorcized, and in that sense killed by 
Christ and his apostles.77 But Schiller’s elegiac tone is important. Instead of 
celebrating the Christian triumph over paganism or reveling in the technolog-
ical mastery of the environment, it would seem that Christianity is itself the 

The Myth of Absence 81
cause of estrangement from nature. In the place of the death of God, we have 
Christ as executioner.
We see a similar sentiment in Novalis, who also described Christianity as 
having killed pagan deities:
Where there are no gods, ghosts reign, and the actual period of origin of Euro-
pean ghosts, which also almost completely explains their shape, is the period 
of transition from the doctrine of the Greek gods (griechischen Götterlehre) to 
Christianity.78
For Novalis, the vestigial dead gods of paganism are literally haunting Europe. 
Together, these are our first clues that in the hands of Christian, or even post- 
Christian, thinkers to announce the death of a “pagan” deity has a different 
theological force from announcing the death of God as such. Indeed, Schil-
ler’s contemporaries saw “The Gods of Greece” as being unequivocally anti- 
Christian.79 But in most respects, this was an unfair charge.
*
Schiller’s personal faith is still a subject of scholarly debate.80 It is tempting, 
however, to see Schiller’s religious views as expressed in the Christian Kabbal-
istic conception of divine emanation that appeared in his Theosophy of Julius 
(“Theosophie des Julius” in Philosophisch Briefe, 1786).81 As the title indi-
cates, the theosophy that Diderot and others had worked to expunge contin-
ued to have an appeal, and Schiller was far from alone in turning to theosophy 
as either antidote or complement to reason.
Contemporary scholars such as Ernst Benz have noted that there was a 
revival of theosophy in German philosophical circles following the pantheism 
controversy.82 Decades earlier, the Pietist theologian Friedrich Christoph Oet-
inger (1702– 82) had already begun to recoup Jakob Böhme in Germany as a 
way to oppose the rationalism of Leibniz and Christian Wolff.83 Accordingly, 
after the enlightenment project began to sour, various German philosophers 
actively turned to Böhme and other theosophists as potential sources of specif-
ically German thought. It should therefore come as no surprise that one finds 
references to Böhme or theosophy in not just Schiller and Novalis, but also 
Hegel and Schelling.84 Moreover, Schlegel even hinted that Böhme’s theoso-
phy was one route to a Christian Spinozism.85
To return to Schiller’s Theosophy, he remarked, “Nature is an infinitely 

82 Chapter Three
divided God.”86 He then elucidated his version of theosophy with an opti-
cal analogy that could almost have come from Jewish Kabbalistic tradition as 
 articulated in the Zohar: just as the prism scatters a single ray of white light into 
a spectrum of colored bands, so too God’s essence is refracted into the play of 
substances that animate the natural world. Both humanity and nature are thus 
expressions of divine radiance. As he went on to describe it:
Everything in and outside of me is only the Hieroglyph of a Power, which is 
similar to me. The laws of nature are the ciphers, which the [Divine] Thinker 
assembles to make itself understandable to other rational beings— they are the 
alphabet, by means of which all spirits confer with the Perfected Spirit and 
with themselves.”87
It would seem that like Böhme, Schiller imagined the world as populated by 
a multiplicity of minds or spirits, which are nothing less than God’s path to 
self- knowledge via creation. It is unclear how much this theology survived 
into his later periods.88
If one reads “The Gods of Greece” in light of Schiller’s Theosophy, the gods 
it refers to are divine signatures (see esp. verse 4). From this vantage, the poem 
describes three stages: seeing the divine in the world (1– 4); only being able to 
see the divine as outside the world (7); to finally perhaps not being able to see 
the divine at all. In theosophical terms, this would be nothing less than the fall 
of humanity, which is crucially the self- alienation of God.
Nevertheless, Schiller described “The Gods of Greece” differently in a 
1788 Christmas letter about the poem to the writer, lawyer, and Freemason 
Christian Gottfried Körner, stating: “The general rule here is that the artist 
and especially the poet never portrays the real, but only the idealized or the 
artistically mediated truth of the object. . . . The God that I put in the shadows 
in ‘The Gods of Greece’ is not the God of the philosophers, nor the benevo-
lent dream of the masses, but rather a freak produced by running together 
flawed and distorted conceptions. The Greek gods I depicted in this light 
are merely the lovely characteristics of Greek mythology condensed into one 
conception.”89 It appears that the gods were less actual entities than artistic 
conceptions— or more specifically in his technical vocabulary, they were what 
he referred to as aesthetic semblances (Schein).90 References to “gods” were 
how the ancient poets depicted an enchanted nature.
That said, the gods were not mere fictions. Schiller may have been first and 
foremost an “aesthetic pagan,” but it is worth underscoring that aesthetics was 
the core issue of his grand philosophical project.91 There is not space here 

The Myth of Absence 83
to fully work out Schiller’s aesthetic theory, but in sum he was attempting to 
suture morality to aesthetics by making art the means of joining sensibility with 
the harmony of reason.92 Put in starker terms, Schiller saw in aesthetics the 
possibility of reuniting mind and world. Thus, the theosophical and aesthetic 
readings are not incompatible because Greek “gods” could be both aesthetic 
semblances and divine signatures pointing toward the true divinity or nature 
beyond them. At the very least, it seems unlikely that Schiller’s poem was 
intended to attack the Christian deity.
*
The real resentment in “The Gods of Greece” was directed against a natural 
philosophy that reduced the vibrant world of the primitive humanity into dead 
mechanism. As one can see from verses 5 through 6 and 8 through 11, this 
attitude has stripped the soul from the sun god, transforming him into merely 
a hunk of celestial matter, and has even rendered the whole of nature into 
nothing but a clockwork pendulum. Accordingly, the thrust of the piece is not 
an assault on Christianity, but rather a critique of mechanism. We might hear 
echoes of Jacobi’s contention that the exploration of proximate causation leads 
toward determinism and nihilism. But despite some later readings of Schiller’s 
project, he was not antiscientific, nor was Schiller straightforwardly against 
enlightenment.
Schiller had studied medicine at the Karlsschule in Stuttgart, and his early 
medical writings— such as Philosophie der Physiologie (The philosophy of 
physiology, 1779)— emphasized the dynamic interaction between the hetero-
geneous substances of body- mind. So while it would be a mistake to suppose 
that Schiller was a classical holist, he clearly had sympathies with various 
forms of medical vitalism and was committed to the refutation of reductionist 
biological mechanism.93 Restated, Schiller’s hostility to mechanism was not 
an advocacy for faith or a repudiation of reason. Rather, he wanted to reject a 
clockwork cosmos in favor of a living world.
We can see this project in “The Gods of Greece,” which expresses hostil-
ity toward the mechanical philosophy physics associated with Descartes and 
Christiaan Huygens and to a lesser extent Newton.94 It was far from the only 
text of Schiller’s that gave vent to similar criticisms.95 For Schiller, mecha-
nism is fundamentally alienating; it silences nature, instead of compelling it 
to speak. Where once humanity celebrated the wonders and beauty of the 
natural world, we are now numb to its majesty, and have reduced it to mere 
instrument. This was not a new claim, but “The Gods of Greece” crystallizes 

84 Chapter Three
in poetic form sentiments that had long paralleled the rise of mechanism and 
hence gave expression to alternate ontologies that had long been in the works. 
Indeed, we can see versions of this critique of the mechanization of the world 
picture down to our present day. Crucially, Schiller identified this loss with the 
departure of animating spirits, or at the least with the vanishing of the gods. As 
he put it in a fragment preserved in his literary remains: “Everything divine is 
vanishing from the world and the old gods are making room for humanity.”96
The image from “The Gods of Greece” that epitomized its elegy for the 
modern world, that of “Godless nature,” would recur in the writings of Freud 
and others. Lacking any theosophical subtext (or Schiller’s positive project, 
discussed below), the poem was read as a characterization of the disparity 
between a lost premodern mentality and the contemporary alienated indi-
vidual: as if in some ancient epoch we saw the world alive with gods, and we 
now see it as drained of both divinity and meaning. The original German 
phrase Die entgötterte Natur also communicates nuances that are difficult to 
translate into English, above all the verbal quality of entgöttert: not just “god-
less” or “Godless,” but “de- god- ed” or “de- defied,” stripped of a former di-
vinity. Read in the context of the poem, however, there is a certain ambiguity 
about the beginning of de- deification. Did it set in when Christ displaced the 
“world of gods”? Or did it appear when scientists transformed the sun into a 
“ soulless” (Seelenlos) ball of fire? Likely Schiller imagined both as phases, but 
it is worth looking at what the two readings entail.
In the first case, the interesting thing is that it is not a modernization narra-
tive. If Christianity caused the alienation from nature, then de- deification set 
in long before Galileo and Newton. Moreover, it prevents Christianity from 
posing as an alternative to disenchantment, since religion is at the heart of the 
thing. In the latter case, estrangement is rooted in the more familiar rise of 
philosophical reason, but Schiller’s philosophical vitalism already hints that 
he imagined a way to reunite what had been cast asunder.
*
“The Gods of Greece” was almost instantly controversial, inspiring essays and 
response poems that variously condemned or defended the work.97 Schiller’s 
poems were ultimately enshrined in the German literary canon, providing 
inspiration for later generations. Although Schiller was not the only critic of 
mechanism, the image of the eclipse of the gods found many resonances in 
nineteenth- century Europe. One can find fugitive or vanishing gods evoked 
by period thinkers across the political spectrum and long after Hellenism was 

The Myth of Absence 85
exchanged for other nationalist narratives. The trope occurs over the next few 
decades in works in German by Hegel (1795– 1830), Novalis (1800), Friedrich 
Hölderlin (1800), Heinrich Heine (1827), Ludwig Feuerbach (1846), and Lou-
ise Dittmar (1848); in Danish by Adam Oehlenschläger (1808– 9); and in En-
glish by Bryan Procter (1823) and Elizabeth Barrett Browning (1844).98 It would 
also be picked up by many of the thinkers discussed in the following chapters.
Taken together, these early responses suggested a lost animist or pagan 
past in which humanity was in harmony with nature, and they often share an 
attempt to pinpoint the moment that this bond was shattered. For some it was 
the rise of mechanism, but for others it was Christianity that had dispelled old 
gods. But they generally granted the sentiment of the elegy as though panthe-
ism had been humankind’s spurned inheritance.
In Hegel’s writings, the god eclipse appeared in both poetry and philos-
ophy. In 1796, Hegel wrote a poem, “Eleusis,” inspired by Schiller. The rele-
vant lines are:
But your halls are silent, O Goddess!
The Circle of the Gods has flown back to Olympus,
Fleeing from the consecrated altars,
And the defiled human grave!99
Hegel is not famous as a poet (perhaps for good reason), but these lines indi-
cate how important Schiller and the death of the gods were for Hegel’s early 
thinking.100 Elsewhere, in fragments dating from roughly the same period, 
Hegel remarked that Christianity had “emptied Valhalla, felled the sacred 
groves, [and] extirpated the national imagery as a shameful superstition.”101 In-
deed, it is probably fair to say that the entire project of Hegel’s philosophy was 
to join the divisions between humanity and nature, man and God, reason and 
myth, which are encapsulated in the mythemes we have been discussing.102
In Vorlesungen über die Philosophie der Geschichte (delivered 1822– 30; 
Lectures on the Philosophy of History) Hegel goes to the greatest lengths 
to formulate his own version of disenchantment. In these lectures, Hegel’s 
main argument is that disenchantment— or more precisely, de- divination 
(Entgötterung)— really starts with Judaism. For Hegel, antique Judaism is 
where Geist (spirit- mind) first comes into self- consciousness, but in so doing, 
it already begins to see itself as the fundamental root of existence and therefore 
as distinct from the sensible world. God and the spiritual world are seen as 
distinct from the natural world. Further, the more God is exalted, the more 
“nature is conceived as having the ground of its existence in another.”103 Every 

86 Chapter Three
emphasis on divine power and unity makes God more otherworldly. The 
natural world becomes the domain of understanding. “Men are regarded as 
individuals, not as incarnations of God; sun as sun, mountains as mountains— 
not as possessing Geist and will.”104 The result of this is that nature becomes 
accessible to a kind of positivism or scientism. The thinking of nature is now 
accessible in terms of Verstand (literally “understanding,” but Hegel used it as 
a technical term for the particular kind of thinking faculty that transforms sense 
data into empirical knowledge). For Hegel, the ancient Israelites, because they 
are only just beginning the process of empirical knowledge, are not very good 
scientists. Their Verstand has not yet resulted in any gains; as Hegel put it, 
“nature is entgöttert, but not yet understood.”105 Here we have Hegel arguing 
for a version of disenchantment or de- divination as the core innovation of 
Judaic monotheism. Later in life Max Weber would express a similar position.
The main reason I introduce Hegel’s philosophy of history here is to make 
the basic point that the departure of the gods is not just a lyric convention or an 
occultist article of faith, but it is also a serious argumentative framework, first 
in philosophy and then in various scholarly disciplines, as I will demonstrate 
at some length in the chapters that follow.
T h e  R o m an t ic  S pi ral :  
F r i e d r i c h  H ö l d e rl i n
Every development, including yours, advances in a spiral— leaving nothing behind, re-
turning to the same point on an upper curl.
 H ug o  v o n  H of m a n n s t h a l ,  “Letter to Richard Strauß,” 1912
As a poem, “The Gods of Greece” is a melancholy elegy for a lost golden age. 
Schiller’s 1789 lectures on universal history, however, are more hopeful. He 
describes early human history in idealistic terms, but then argues that “from 
a Paradise of ignorance and slavery, [humanity] should work its way upward, 
even if it also takes a thousand years, to ascend to a Paradise of knowledge and 
freedom.”106 For Schiller, paradise lost could not only be regained, but perhaps 
even improved. This idea of progress as return in a greater synthesis was not 
unique to Schiller. It is an example of what M. H. Abrams calls the “Romantic 
Spiral,” the historiographical structure that fuses narratives of historical de-
cline and progress to suggest that the goal of history is a return of the past in 
a higher key.107 While I’m not interested in wading into fraught debates about 
the meaning of “Romanticism,” I think Abrams’s pattern holds insofar as many 

The Myth of Absence 
87
of the figures we have been discussing deployed narratives of despiritualization 
and even the death of God with a conception of a higher- order return.108
By contrast, today the myth of disenchantment is usually evoked to char-
acterize a loss, or the supremacy of one culture over another, but it is rarely 
described as being necessary for re- enchantment in a higher mode. We rarely 
hear claims like: We had to be free of nature so that we could give nature freedom; 
or magic had to be eliminated so that we could make it real; or God had to die 
in the church so that God could be reborn in the world. But these are the sorts 
of narrative tropes implied by early uses of the proto- disenchantment myths.
Later chapters will pinpoint the moment the narrative became truncated, but 
for further insight into the Romantic Spiral, we can look to the German poet 
Friedrich Hölderlin (1770– 1843), the college friend of Schelling and Hegel. The 
Romantic Spiral is often evident in Hölderlin’s work, but nowhere more clearly 
than in a 1795 text known as “Die Vorrede zur vorletzten Hyperion- Fassung” 
(The Preface to the Penultimate Version of [the Novel] Hyperion), which states:
The blessed unity, Being (in the only sense of that word) is lost to us, and 
we had to lose it if we were to gain it again by striving and struggle. We tear 
ourselves loose from the peaceful Εν και παν [Hen kai pan, One- in- All] of 
the world, in order to restore it through ourselves. We have fallen away from 
nature, and what was once one, as we can believe, is now in conflict with itself, 
and each side alternates between mastery and servitude. Often for us, it is as 
though the world were everything and we nothing, but often it is as though 
we were everything and the world nothing . . . . To end the eternal conflict 
between our self and the world, to restore the peace of all peace, to bring us 
back into unity with nature so as to form one unending whole— that is the goal 
of all our striving, whether we understand it or not.109
Hölderlin is describing a historical progression that will be familiar to any 
Hegelian. It is history in three stages— primal unity, an extended alienation, 
and then a higher unity— which subsumed the previous opposition between 
humanity and nature. It would seem this essay describes what Hegel would 
later make famous as the dialectical progression of thought from early abstrac-
tion, through its own negation, and on to a new position that sublates the old 
opposition. In that sense, the Absolute Geist passes through alienation from 
itself as nature to an eventual return in a higher state. In a thumbnail of Hegel’s 
version of this grand trajectory, however, this is not the return of nature, but 
actually something more like the technologic rationalization of the world.

88 Chapter Three
In Über die ästhetische Erziehung des Menschen (On the aesthetic education 
of man, 1794), Schiller also discusses a three- stage historical cycle, beginning 
with the physical domination of nature over humans, human emancipation, 
and finally a new state of coexistence between reason and nature.110 As he 
argued, we have to dominate nature so that we can escape its tyranny, but the 
future goal is a return of a new harmony that no longer requires this opposi-
tional struggle.
Varieties of this broader philosophy of history were widespread among the 
nineteenth- century German philosophers, who often saw reconciliation with 
nature as the goal of their project and understood it in terms of a higher syn-
thesis. As Schelling put it, “All philosophizing consists in recalling the condition 
in which we were at one with nature.”111 This is evidence that it is glib to char-
acterize German “Romanticism” as a species of traditionalism or conservatism. 
Rather than being reactionaries, these philosophers were looking for a form of 
progress that could embrace a higher synthesis. Indeed, Hölderlin advocated a 
Jacobin politics that would have made any radical enlightener proud.
The key issue for many of these thinkers was not how to get back to a nos-
talgic past, but how to produce the union of opposites or reconcile humanity 
and nature, subject and object. Schiller and his fellows had different versions 
of what this was going to take, but even the later thinkers he inspired were at-
tempting to identify the reconciliation or synthesis of the contradictory terms. 
As Oehlenschläger stated: once Christianity killed the gods, “the Holy Cross 
must become one with Thor’s Mighty Hammer!”112
Novalis’s attempted solution to disenchantment was novel insofar as he 
called for a return of a higher- order magic, which he called “magical idealism” 
(Magischer Idealismus).113 Although he died before he could fully articulate his 
system, tantalizing clues can be found in various fragments such as: “Nature is 
a petrified magical city”; “The physical magus knows how to enliven Nature, 
to use it at will, as with his body”; and “In the age of magic, the body obeys the 
soul, or the spirit world.”114 Because Novalis uses the term magic, he is there-
fore addressing alienation from nature as a kind of disenchantment, not merely 
de- paganization, or the end of myth. Although his magic includes simultane-
ously artistic, scientific, and philosophical goals, at the very least it would seem 
that it is the key to enlivening petrified nature.
To return to Hölderlin, his poem “Bread and Wine” (“Brod und Wein,” 
1800), inspired by Schiller’s “Gods of Greece,” fuses Dionysus and Christ, as 
expressed in their shared symbolism of bread and wine. Like Schiller’s work, 
it begins with the Greek world to describe the despiritualization of nature. 
But it completes the Romantic Spiral latent in Schiller’s version to suggest 

The Myth of Absence 
89
both the gods’ departure and their eventual return. This is summarized in the 
line “Therefore, we also help to remember the Celestial Ones [Himmlischen], 
those who were once with us, / and who will return when the time is right.”115 
The whole poem mixes longing for “fugitive gods” (entflohenen Götter) with 
messianic expectations. It would seem that for Hölderlin, the gods needed 
to die in Greece so that they could be reborn in modern Germany. As will 
be shown in chapter 10, this return of the gods would find expression in the 
twentieth century in a literary circle around the German poet Stefan George, 
which in turn was central to the later revival of Hölderlin and his work.
To summarize in slightly anachronistic terms, in the hands of early theorists, 
disenchantment had to happen in order for a higher enchantment to appear at 
a later date. But if today the prediction of despiritualization sounds prescient 
and the return far- fetched, the reverse was striking in the period. This is be-
cause, as the next chapter will show, just half a century after Schiller decried the 
de- animation of nature, a full- blown spiritualist revival was in full swing— and 
indeed, many thought the cosmos was animated by spirits of the dead.
A  My t h  in  S e arc h  o f Hi story: 
J aco b B u rc k h ar dt
The Italians were the first modern people of Europe who gave themselves boldly to 
speculations on freedom and necessity. . . . Their belief in God began to waver.
 J a c o b B u r c k h a r d t, Die Kultur der Renaissance in Italien, 1860
It is a commonplace of critical theory that narratives about the past are really 
the present in disguise. But the sheer level of repetition in our versions of dis-
parate ages might leave one wondering what contemporaneous moment was 
projected backward to become our most common story of the past. The issue 
is how the characterization of an epochal rupture between myth and logos, or 
between reason and superstition, gained purchase in the historical narratives 
that are often repeated unthinkingly by nonspecialists today. Restated, how 
did the myth- of- the- end- of- myth take hold as a narrative about a specific his-
torical period?
There is not space here to give this issue full treatment, but one place we 
can see this “myth of absence” transforming itself into historiography is in the 
work of Nietzsche’s friend, the Swiss historian Jacob Burckhardt (1818– 97). 
Burckhardt is interesting for our purposes for three reasons: first, it is easy 
to demonstrate the influence of Schiller and company on his work; second, 
Burckhardt searched for the moments when myth fell into decay and moder-

90 Chapter Three
nity was born; and third, he was the central figure in producing the Renais-
sance as a historical period. Indeed, Burckhardt’s ambivalent construction of 
that historical epoch served as a prototype for later narratives of the rupture of 
modernity that have been hung on a host of different periods.
In a set of lectures Burckhardt gave on Greek history, which were published 
after his death as Griechische Kulturgeschichte (A cultural history of Greece, 
4 vols., 1898– 1902), Burckhardt referred to Schiller and specifically to “The 
Gods of Greece,” while elsewhere he mentioned Jacobi, Hegel, Herder, and 
Schelling.116 More important, Burckhardt also looked for the rejection of my-
thology, which he saw as having begun in the fifth century BCE and the time 
of the “sophists.” As he argued, “Philosophy is essentially as always dedicated 
to the destruction of myth,” and when combined with a new sense of irrever-
ence toward the gods, it accelerates the “decay of mythical understanding.”117 
In sum, the rise of philosophy in classical Greece was the end of mythology.
Ancient Greece was not the birth of modernity for Burckhardt. Instead, he 
turned to a different periodization that he would make his own. If Burckhardt 
is remembered today, it is for his role in the formation of the Italian Renais-
sance as a periodization with Die Kultur der Renaissance in Italien (1860; The 
Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy), which remains in print.
Burckhardt did not coin the term Renaissance. We owe this word to the 
French historian Jules Michelet, whose work also fits the chapter’s broader 
theme— Michelet was a reader of Schiller, who described “the death of the 
gods,” remarking that with the death of Pan “the old universal god of nature 
was no more. . . . The gods of old had come to an end.”118 But Michelet in-
stantly complicated this god eclipse because he argued that the exile from pa-
gan nature in Christian Europe led to the rebellion that was European witch-
craft (a movement that he romanticized in La sorcière [The witch, 1863]). It 
is worth noting that despite the temporal proximity of the last Swiss juridical 
execution of a witch (1782), the early nineteenth century was the period in 
which European historians began to theorize a definitive rupture between the 
persecution of witches and their own epoch.119 Indeed, it is tempting to see 
the whole disenchantment narrative in European thought as an attempt to uni-
versalize this particular cultural shift. Nonetheless, Michelet is significant here 
because he coined the term Renaissance in Histoire de France au xvie  siècle 
(1855). Unlike our current usage of the term, for Michelet the Renaissance 
was essentially French, largely scientific in nature, and spanned a long period 
from the age of exploration to its later fulfillment in the French Revolution.120
Regardless, Burckhardt is more important to our larger argument because 
he defined Renaissance in terms of the time period and geography that non-

The Myth of Absence 
91
specialists know today, and it was Burckhardt who portrayed the Renaissance 
as a movement that drew together art, philosophy, and politics. Crucially, he 
did not just set the stage for a historical period, but also made the case that 
the Renaissance was the birth of the “modern man.” Furthermore, this was 
a figure toward which Burckhardt felt a distinct apprehension. In the most 
famous passage in the text, Burckhardt expressed his ambivalence toward the 
Renaissance and all that it had wrought, characterizing the “development of 
the Italian into modern man,” as follows: “In the Middle Ages both sides of 
human consciousness . . . lay dreaming or half awake beneath a common veil. 
The veil was woven of faith, illusion, and childish prepossession, through 
which the world and history were seen clad in strange hues. . . . It is in Italy 
that this veil first melted into air; an objective treatment and consideration of 
the State and of all the things of this world became possible. . . . Man became 
a spiritual individual, and recognized himself as such.”121
For Burckhardt, the modern individual, having been liberated from the 
“veil,” or myth of Christian faith, was born into a host of contradictions, tor-
mented by a raging battle between rationality and selfishness.122 As he also 
remarked, “When once the veil of illusion was torn asunder, when once the 
dread of nature and the slavery to books and tradition were overcome, count-
less problems lay before them for solution.”123 In other words, Burckhardt 
was describing an epochal rupture in which myth, superstition, and tradition 
were lost, but also one in which the newfound freedom of reason results in a 
profound alienation, atomization, and conflict.124
This should sound familiar, as it is narrative that has been told with weight 
toward either the positive or the negative about a range of epochs. Accordingly, 
in his construction of the Renaissance, we can see Burckhardt begin to chart 
a narrative that later scholars would essentially pin on different periods from 
Socratic philosophy to the Enlightenment to modernity to the condition of 
postmodernity. In a way, “modernity” postdated Burckhardt insofar as Baude-
laire coined the term modernity (Fr. modernité) in 1863, and it took decades 
before modernity was transformed to mean an all- consuming epoch and given 
the kinds of weight that Burckhardt had already given to the “modern man” 
of the Renaissance.
Strikingly, however, we can see Burckhardt’s influence on the historian and 
philosopher Wilhelm Windelband, who in 1878 first tried to popularize the 
idea of “Die Aufklärung” (the Enlightenment) as a periodization; he did so in 
a volume that addressed Burckhardt’s version of the Renaissance.125 Further-
more, Heidegger and Wilhelm Nestle— two of the most significant thinkers 
who articulate the claim that Socratic philosophy represented an epochal 

92 Chapter Three
break from primordial past— were both readers of Burckhardt.126 Later, an-
other reader of Burckardt, Alexandre Koyré, would popularize the “scientific 
revolution” as a periodization in part to steal the Renaissance’s thunder.127 
Max Weber and his version of disenchantment are discussed in chapter 10, 
but before moving on, I want to underscore the observation that Weber read 
Burckhardt, and he did so before writing The Protestant Ethic.128 It was that 
last work that essentially shifted the birth of modern rationality from the Italian 
Renaissance to the Protestant Reformation.
Burckhardt’s portrayal of the Renaissance as a complete period was a 
prototype for a host of later narrative tropes we now associate with not just 
the Renaissance, but also classical Greece, the Enlightenment, the Protestant 
Reformation, and, of course, other vaguer descriptions of the birth of moder-
nity. To exaggerate slightly, we might say that Burckardt was one of the authors 
of modernity as a literary device.
To be completely clear, I am not arguing that Burckhardt singlehandedly 
produced the idea of a historical rupture and the alienation of man from nature 
or the womb of myth. Rather, I see him as one of a generation of thinkers 
crucial in transforming the more abstract mode of quasi- pessimistic universal 
history suggested by Schiller and company into a concrete historiography. 
Indeed, Burckhardt was at the vanguard of projecting the myth of disenchant-
ment into the past and providing it with a genesis and pedigree.
Co n clu s i o n : T h e  M y t h  o f t h e  Mode rn L os s 
o f  My t h
Now mythless man stands there, surrounded by every past there has ever been, eternally 
hungry, scraping and digging in a search for roots, even if he has to dig for them in the 
most distant antiquities. The enormous historical need of dissatisfied modern culture, 
the accumulation of countless other cultures, the consuming desire for knowledge— 
what does all this point to, if not to the loss of myth?
 N i e t z s c h e , Die Geburt der Tragödie, 1886
With such a long chapter, I will keep the conclusion mercifully short. I would 
like the reader to keep in mind the following ideas as we move forward. The 
philosophes were not in fact godless apostles of a stringently mechanical and 
de- animated nature, nor did they initiate a war of science against religion. The 
Pantheism Controversy was one key moment— maybe the key moment— when 
some Europeans convinced themselves that enlightenment rationality had ini-
tiated a treacherous slide toward the death of God and the de- animation of the 

The Myth of Absence 93
world. From that point forward, it seemed to some that nihilism or atheism 
lurked in the heart of philosophy. When natural philosophy was cannibalized 
by the new notion of “science,” it also came to seem that scientific progress 
pointed away from the divine.
It was Schiller who produced one of this discourse’s most portable for-
mulations. In “The Gods of Greece,” the arc of history showed not just de- 
Christianization, but a broader loss of the gods and the end of a harmony with 
a living nature. Nevertheless, nostalgia, or neo- traditionalism, was not the only 
response to this kind of grief. Looking at Schiller alongside Hölderlin, we can 
see one specific feature of early nineteenth- century disenchantment narratives 
that has since gone missing; namely, the return in a higher state. Hence, dis-
enchantment already included re- enchantment. It would be the work of later 
thinkers to make a modern rupture seem inevitable and to transform the spiral 
of disenchantment into an arrow with teleological inevitability.
Lastly, Burckhardt asked the historian’s question: When did the modern 
age begin? His answer was that the “modern man” was born in the Renais-
sance, and while others would transpose this periodization into other epochs, 
the disenchantment narrative had found its coroner.

C h a p t e r  F o u r
The Shadow of God
God is dead; but given the way people are, there may still for millennia be caves in which 
they show his shadow.— And we— we must still defeat his shadow as well.
 N i e t z s c he, Die fröhliche Wissenschaft, 1882
There is already a standard narrative in place about the birth of religious stud-
ies as an academic discipline. It is generally imagined by scholars as emerging 
from the encounter between the trajectory of Enlightenment rationalism and 
non- European culture. The rise of higher criticism led to the reappraisal of the 
Christian Bible as a historical document, while simultaneously European trav-
elers were presented with an unanticipated diversity abroad, which challenged 
their long- standing assumptions about the autonomy of Christian revelation. 
To make sense of these diverse cultures, Europeans extended to them the es-
sentially Protestant category of “religion.” Comparative religion is represented 
as a self- conscious reaction to theology from which it differentiates itself in 
the same moment that it is relying on a Protestant conception of religion itself. 
It is often regarded as secularizing and Protestant in the same breath. This is 
not seen as a contradiction, since both Protestant and non- Protestant scholars 
have tended to interpret modernity as an essentially Protestant project. For 
some Protestant thinkers, this secularizing Protestantism could represent a 
kind of triumph, while for the others the Protestant character of modernity 
often represents its failings. Religious studies, in this account, is thus one en-
gine of Protestant disenchantment.1
In this chapter, I challenge this conception of religious studies as a disen-
chanting discipline and shift the classical account of the field’s origins and 
preoccupations. While emphasizing different nations and thinkers, historians 
of the discipline have generally pegged the start of religious studies to the 
mid- nineteenth century and described it as predicated on the formation of an 
academic discipline independent from theology.2 By contrast, another set of 

The Shadow of God 
95
scholars have emphasized comparative religion as a central component of “the 
Enlightenment” itself, emerging from the rise of toleration and the liberation of 
European rationalism from religious orthodoxy.3 A few scholars have stressed 
that the roots of the field go further back into antiquity or the age of European 
exploration.4 Regardless of their chronology, these accounts generally stage 
religious studies over and against Christian orthodoxy, whether they celebrate 
or condemn the field’s rationalist Protestant character.5
In what follows, I invert much of this narrative and show religious studies as 
emerging from a very different milieu and in a very different context, demon-
strating the shared history of religious studies, spiritualism, and theosophy. I 
place my re- narration of disciplinary formation along with a minority account 
that has emphasized the influence of esotericism on specific scholars’ work 
(especially Mircea Eliade and the Eranos Circle).6 But the modes that they 
generally present as exceptions, I show here to be the ordinary functioning 
of the discipline. As an antidote to the dominant narrative, I show that the 
discipline emerged in relation to enlightenment critique and was connected 
to a vibrant tradition very different from mainstream Protestantism, namely 
esotericism. The doppelgänger of religious studies turns out not to be philol-
ogy but theosophy.
S p ir it s  o f  a V an i s h ing God
“When future times write the history of our century . . . they will tell our 
grandchildren that the conviction of the pervasive conformity to scientific 
laws penetrated all levels of the people for the first time in our century,” ob-
served the German sociologist Georg Simmel in Etwas vom Spiritismus (Note 
about spiritualism, 1892), adding a caveat: “We, who are still in the midst of 
these things, still notice all sorts of counter- movements and side- currents. . . . 
Alongside that progress of natural science and the increased insight into the 
strict regularity and comprehensibility of all events, we find the belief in the 
spirits of deceased people who have either returned to earth or have always been 
with us, and are able to communicate with us as to this and the next world 
through the mediation of persons with special gifts.”7
Simmel knew that the nineteenth century would be remembered as a period 
of the rise of scientific authority. Indeed, in both German and Anglophone 
spheres, the notion of a conflict between “religion” and “science” had taken 
hold, to religion’s detriment.8 Despite the period’s vibrant religious revival 
movements, in the eyes of many, organized religion was in danger, wounded 
from its battle with science, assailed by critical reason and nihilistic skepticism, 

96 Chapter Four
and in the eyes of some, in the process of vanishing. While most Europeans in 
the nineteenth century did not in any sense suppose that God was dead, they 
did remark on a lingering sense of divine absence.9
Simmel, however, was sensitive enough to the epoch’s countermovements 
to observe that those who lived through it also experienced its culture as vi-
brantly animated by ghosts. He went on to note that “thousands of people 
from all of the civilized countries in Europe and America adhere to spiritual-
ism, that hundreds of books are published on it— in 1870 over one hundred 
thousand spiritualist books were sold in the United States of America.”10 If 
anything, Simmel was understating the case. A recent crop of historians have 
shown that spiritualism was a major transnational movement in the nineteenth 
century and into the twentieth, perhaps peaking with as many as two and a 
half million members in the United States and Great Britain, and affecting 
everything from women’s rights movements to literature to psychoanalysis.11
The following section presents the first major dialectical movement under 
consideration here. It shows how fears of despiritualization and laments about 
the death of God contributed to the rise of spiritualism, occult movements, 
and new religions. It is perhaps not surprising that the philosophes’ attempt to 
banish mystical “sciences” failed as much as it succeeded. Indeed, the same 
epoch that saw the birth of the human sciences also saw an intense fascination 
with ghosts and the widespread popularity of the Theosophical Society and 
other forms of “public” esotericism. Against these shifts, the figure of the ghost  
or spirit came to play a distinctive role in the writings of seminal theorists of 
the nineteenth century (Hegel, Marx, and Spencer).
Beliefs about the possibility of contact with dead spirits were not new in 
the nineteenth century; there were plenty of earlier precedents in the works 
Emanuel Swedenborg and others. In the mid- nineteenth century, however, 
there was a resurgence of interest in the possibility of communicating with 
the dead. In part this was inspired by the popularity of the Fox sisters (1848– 
88), but also by changing ideas of the nature of biological life.12 This interest 
had its origins in a new attitude toward the departed that no longer fit ghosts 
into the neat place provided by ecclesiastical authorities.13 Spirits therefore 
emerged as a new possibility in the secular West not as atavistic survival, but  
as a product of the nineteenth century, which was then projected back into the 
past in various forms (such as gothic novels). In this way, ghosts represent the 
present haunting the past.
“Modernity” was haunted in other ways as well. Just as the nineteenth cen-
tury produced new ghosts, it also gave birth to new mysticisms. Faced with an 
evaporating God and world full of spirits, some turned toward the alternate 

The Shadow of God 
97
mode of knowing rejected by Diderot and the philosophes. In this context, 
the term théosophie resurfaced to describe different attempts to overcome the 
perceived failings of modernity. While “the Enlightenment” is often accused 
of radical anthropocentrism, it was anthropocentric mysticism that imagined 
itself to be enlightenment’s antidote. Despite its earlier meaning as a form of 
Christian esotericism, Helena Blavatsky and her followers started using the 
term Theosophy to describe their Westernized appropriation of “Oriental” 
thought (discussed below), but they were not alone in using the term, which 
continued to evoke alternate forms of knowledge.14 Beyond theosophy, there 
was a broader occult or esoteric undercurrent that relied on many of the tropes 
that Diderot had rejected. Common to these various groups and individuals 
was frequently a drive to recover a divine science, often combined with the 
new wave of spirit phenomena.
The nineteenth- century surge of interest in spirits gave birth to a range 
of spiritualist and occult groups. These movements can be interpreted as a 
kind of internal critique and supplement to “modernity,” legible especially 
in relationship to contemporary practices and debates about imperialism, as 
well as scientific and religious authority. They evoked the absent uncanny 
Unheimlich supposedly suppressed by contemporary skepticism, which they 
claimed could be rediscovered through a recovery of the Heimlich (secret, 
concealed, hidden).
For these movements, the existence of spirits had two contrasting but 
sometimes complementary functions. First, they provided a kind of necro- 
vitalist critique of the limits of science by presenting a world paradoxically 
and vibrantly alive with the souls of the dead. While one persistent counter- 
enlightenment impulse had been formulated as an epistemological critique 
(think Nietzsche), another form taken by those who rejected enlightenment 
was as a challenge to the perceived completeness of materialism and the uni-
versal dominion of science in the face of spirits.15 Spirit phenomena were 
sometimes imagined as outside the realm of causation and accordingly as evi-
dence of miracles, which seemingly provided an exit from the deterministic 
nihilism that Jacobi had criticized.16
Second, and more important, the spiritualist séance functioned as a reli-
gious laboratory that appeared capable of providing an empirical route for the 
modernization of religion. These movements embodied dissatisfaction with 
the perceived consequences of enlightenment while benefiting from many of 
its basic assumptions. Their practitioners often called them “occult sciences.” 
It was believed by many spiritualists that the rupture between religion and 
science (or faith and reason) could be repaired through these spirit- based 

98 Chapter Four
demonstrations of the powers of the soul. Instead of “empires of reason,” they 
worked to establish a rational “science of spirits.”17
*
Religious studies arose precisely in a cultural context where spirits and the oc-
cult were lively objects of inquiry even as the fledgling discipline defined itself 
in contrast to spiritualism and theosophy. The conventional historiography 
would view these movements as completely separate. It turns out they are not 
so easy to tell apart. In this chapter, I want to map out the messy intermediate 
terrain between two spheres that consider themselves different but neverthe-
less exhibit the same basic habits of thought.
Scratch the surface and we quickly find a preoccupation with spiritualism 
among foundational scholars of religious studies. William James, Marcel Mauss, 
and Andrew Lang all took seriously the possible reality of spiritualist phenom-
ena. Spiritualism is also addressed, if ultimately criticized, in the work of Émile 
Durkheim, Rudolf Otto, and Bronislaw Malinowski, among others.18 In each 
case, these thinkers appropriated certain aspects of the contemporary spiritual-
ist undercurrent while simultaneously distancing themselves from active spiritu-
alism. Nowhere is this clearer than in the writings of the English anthropologist 
E. B. Tylor. A closer look at Tylor’s work illuminates the depth of his preoccu-
pation with managing the significance of spirits and the claims of spiritualists.
T h e  H au n t e d  An t h ropol ogi st:  
E . B. T y l o r
The world is again swarming with intelligent and powerful disembodied spiritual be-
ings, whose direct action on thought and matter is again confidently asserted as in those 
times and countries where physical science had not as yet so far succeeded in extruding 
these spirits and their influences from the system of nature . . . As of old, men live now 
habitual intercourse with the spirits of the dead.
 E .  B .  T y l o r ,  Primitive Culture, vol. 1, 1871
Edward Burnett Tylor (1832– 1917), considered one of the founders of the 
anthropological study of religion, is most famous for promoting the concept 
of animism as the foundation of “primitive” religion. Tylor’s minimalist defi-
nition of religion, that religion is belief in “spiritual beings,” continues to be 
influential today.19 Against his contemporaries— who compared the thinking 
of “savages” to madness— Tylor advanced the notion that a kind of natural reli-

The Shadow of God 
99
gion is everywhere established rationally. The Tylorian savage, like a primitive 
philosophe, engages in an essentially empiricist study of the world around him 
or her, positing explanations for his or her experiences according to the kinds 
of forces he or she understands. The primitive’s experiences with death and 
dreams give birth to an idea of spirits or ghosts, which are then believed to per-
vade the natural world, serving as the foundation for primitive religion. This is 
almost the same definition of religion described by the spiritualists themselves, 
who also believed that spirits were and should be the foundation for religion.
Tylor argued that over time the rude animism of the savage is ultimately 
replaced by polytheism; and then, finally, the most rational system of all— 
monotheism— emerges. Again, in Tylor’s evolutionary teleology, we arrive at 
a Voltaire- esque rational Supreme Being as the ultimate fruit of human cogni-
tion, and a rational religion that looks like Tylor’s minimalistic Quaker faith.20 
Although never explicitly stated as such, cultural progress means the gradual 
elimination of paganism.
Tylor also explained why humans, despite our inherent empiricism and 
rationality, are not all believers in a rational Supreme Being. To do so, he in-
vokes the concepts of superstition and survivals. Tylor argued that in direct 
contrast to a positive and progressive religion, humans also retain certain hold-
overs from previous cultural forms.21 According to a false etymology originally 
proposed by Cicero, Tylor calls these survivals, or remnants, “superstitions.” 
These false “superstitions,” which ought to vanish through successive stages 
in human cultural evolution, obscure or occlude the essentially rational nature 
of religion. Indeed, in a move reminiscent of the philosophes’ project, Tylor 
argues that the goal of ethnography is precisely “to expose the remains of 
crude old culture which have passed into harmful superstition, and to mark 
these out for destruction.”22
“Magic” and the “occult sciences”— two terms Tylor treats as synonymous— 
represent the most dangerous form of superstition.23 In his account, magic be-
longs to “the lower races” and the “lowest known stages of civilization,” and 
the racialization is clear insofar as he means it to be the providence of Africans, 
Aborigines, and Native Americans.24 Magic resembles science in its style of 
reasoning but is based in a basically backward way of thinking or a confusion 
that mistakes an analogy or a symbol for the thing it represents.25 Magic is 
based in a savage semiotics, which fails to appreciate the civilized realization 
of the meaninglessness of the relationship between the sign and the thing. 
Tylor gave the example of a West African “Obi- man” who makes a packet of 
grave dust and bones in order to kill an enemy, thereby mistaking symbolic 
killing with real death.26 Moreover, in these primitive societies, Tylor argued, 

100 Chapter Four
the sorcerer is also the priest and implicitly the primitive scientist.27 It would 
seem magic is at the intersection between religion and science, and hence is 
the paradigmatic superstition.
By positioning magic as a type of superstitious thinking associated with 
the lowest primitive, Tylor suggested that it would fade with the coming of 
modern civilization.28 This is an early kernel of a disenchantment narrative. 
But Tylor was forced to complicate it because he was aware that many of his 
contemporaries embraced the occult sciences and spiritualism, and that magic, 
far from vanishing, seemed to be flourishing.29
This realization puts pressure on his embrace of linear evolution. If the 
definitional feature of superstition is its archaism, newfangled superstitions 
would appear to be a fundamental contradiction. Indeed, the very distinction 
between modern and primitive culture central to his whole project would seem 
to be in danger of collapse. Moderns might turn out to be no less magical an-
imists than his putative savages.
Tylor’s response was to produce a new category of “active revival” to 
describe a “passive superstition” that resurfaces in strength.30 Magic— and 
witchcraft in particular— serves as a paradigmatic case of this return of the 
repressed, representing the nightmarish reappearance of the archaic in the 
modern.31 Thus, Tylor spent a good number of pages effectively telling his 
readers to resist magic at all cost, but while doing so acknowledged that the 
revival of magic is tied to the popularity of spiritualism.32
The spiritualism of his day, therefore, occupies an important position in 
Tylor’s system. Insofar as religion is essentially belief in spiritual beings and 
insofar as spiritualism seems to be the “animism” Tylor posited at the origin of 
religion, spiritualism is both the quintessential religion and the quintessential 
superstition. This is all the more striking, because as Robert Segal observes, 
for Tylor, primitive spiritualism was materialist in that “primitives” did not 
have a concept of immateriality.33 Accordingly, spirits were part of the physical 
world. For Tylor, the problem with modern religion is that it has shifted reli-
gion into an immaterial or ethical realm. But nineteenth- century spiritualism, 
as a science of spirits with material impact (and hence explainable accord-
ing to quasi- mechanistic models such as animal magnetism), would therefore 
seem to be a return to a pre- dematerialized religion. It would then appear to 
be the ideal form of a revival, and Tylor treated it as such, arguing “modern 
spiritualism” is “a direct revival from the regions of savage philosophy and 
peasant folklore.”34 But in order to make spiritualism into a proper archaic 
return, Tylor had to obscure spiritualism’s position and history as a reaction 
to enlightenment itself. He had to dismiss its contemporary origins and in-

The Shadow of God 
101
stead insist that it is a holdover from an ancient and savage past, and he did so 
repeatedly in Primitive Culture.35 Of course, he was not alone in this. Many 
spiritualists validated their project by similarly imagining continuity between 
contemporary spiritualism and earlier epochs in human history.
Perhaps more surprising is own Tylor’s attendance at séances. According 
to notes unpublished during his lifetime, in November 1872, Tylor went to a 
series of spiritualist events, attempting to ascertain the truth of the phenom-
ena.36 He ultimately concluded that there “may be a psychic force” involved, 
but remained skeptical of the existence of spirits as independent entities. Tylor 
seems to have believed in the possibility of a kind of vitalism, even as he re-
jected spiritualism itself as a superstitious survival. His conclusions were never 
published, but Tylor’s attendance at séances was no secret.37 Yet Tylor failed 
to take the next step and recognize that he was one of his own primitives— or 
at least, that Victorians were the real animists.
His intellectual heir, Andrew Lang, however, used evidence from spiritual-
ism to argue that primitive animism was not pure self- deception, but instead 
represented insights into the spiritual world and the powers of the human 
mind. Primitive protoscience was right about some things. By bridging to the 
indigenous, Lang was identifying a latent aspect of Tylor’s own program and 
explicitly deployed it as a critique of materialism.38 What this also tells us is 
that for a brief moment, there was space for modern animism or a secular 
science of spirits inside Tylor’s own anthropology, even if this possibility was 
ultimately foreclosed.
T h e M ag ic ian  an d  t h e  P h i l ol ogi st:  
Él i p h as  L év i  an d  M ax  Mül l e r
Behind the veil of all the hieratic and mystical allegories of ancient doctrines, behind 
the darkness and strange ordeals of all initiations, under the seal of all sacred writings, 
in the ruins of Nineveh or Thebes, on the crumbling stones of old temples and on the 
blackened visage of the Assyrian or Egyptian sphinx, in the monstrous or marvelous 
paintings which interpret to the faithful of India the inspired pages of the Vedas, in the 
cryptic emblems of our old books on alchemy, in the ceremonies practiced at reception 
by all secret societies, there are found indications of a doctrine which is everywhere the 
same and everywhere carefully concealed.
 É l i p h a s L é v i , Dogme et rituel de la haute magie, 1854
A critique of enlightenment is explicit in the writings of other scholars from 
the period, here illustrated by two thinkers in the study of religion: Friedrich 

102 Chapter Four
Max Müller, the canonical founder of the discipline of the scientific study of 
religion; and Éliphas Lévi, absent from our field’s historiography but famous 
in his period as a professed magician and for popularizing the term occultism 
(occultisme).39 To be clear from the outset, I am not suggesting that we want to 
recoup Lévi as a central thinker in the field of religious studies, but I believe 
juxtaposing both figures is productive.
Éliphas Lévi (1810– 1875) was born in Paris as Alphonse- Louis Constant, 
the son of a shoemaker. Constant attended seminary in preparation for enter-
ing the Catholic priesthood, but departed prior to ordination.40 In the 1840s, 
he was very active in Christian socialist circles.41 Constant got in trouble with 
the authorities for authoring La Bible de la liberté (The Bible of freedom, 
1841), an ecstatic work of creative theology that described a pantheist divinity 
and called for a quasi- feminist, mystical socialism. The work already touched 
on themes that would continue to be important to his later explicitly occult 
works— particularly, a positively valenced Lucifer and a gesture toward an en-
chanted India.42 La Bible de la liberté was confiscated on publication, and 
Constant was charged with promoting blasphemy and subversion. Ultimately 
found guilty, he was sentenced to the prison of Sainte- Pélagie in Paris. While 
in Sainte- Pélagie, Constant came across the writings of Emanuel Swedenborg, 
with their elaborate cosmology of the afterlife.43 Starting in the 1850s, Constant 
reinvented himself under the Hebraic name Éliphas Lévi and began writing 
books about magic and the occult sciences. By the time he died, Lévi had 
become one of the most famous “magicians” in Europe. He also actively used 
the word théosophie in a positive sense in his work, although he preferred the 
term he coined and popularized occultism to describe his own efforts.44
Throughout his writings on magic, Lévi set out to invert the program of 
enlightenment. He started from the presupposition that magic— the original 
science of the magi— has been largely lost or has fallen into disrepute, con-
cealed under allegories whose true meaning has been mislaid. Remarkably 
for writings later recognized as the mid- nineteenth century’s most important 
works of magic, Lévi often began his writings by testifying to magic’s con-
temporary absence. He mainly argued that wise initiates originally guarded 
magic as a divine science, but it was suppressed by the fearful masses and 
fell into superstition and half- remembered allegory.45 This is not a version of 
disenchantment a scholar would recognize, but it is important to note that the 
precondition for a project rooted in the recovery of magic is the assumption 
that magic has gone missing.
Ironically, in his retrieval of enchantments, Lévi deployed a definition of 
superstition that would have appealed to Tylor, writing: “Superstitions are 

The Shadow of God 
103
religious forms surviving the loss of ideas. Some truth no longer known or a 
truth which has changed its aspect is the origin and explanation of all of them. 
Their name, from the Latin superstes, signifies that which survives; they are 
the dead remnants of old knowledge or opinion.”46 While for Tylor the role 
of superstitions as survivals is precisely the reason they need to be banished, 
Lévi took this in the opposite direction, arguing that superstitions represent 
lost knowledge that needs to be rediscovered. As he elaborated, “that for-
gotten science of Magic, still lives undivided in hieroglyphical signs and, to 
some extent, in the living traditions or superstitions which it has left outwardly 
untouched.”47 Accordingly, Lévi sought to “recover” lost wisdom, as inten-
tionally occluded knowledge that can be unveiled (dévoilé) by the true magical 
initiate.48 This unveiling process works through a programmatic comparison 
of religions and mythologies, viewing all religions as expressions of a perennial 
or occult philosophy (philosophia perennis, philosophia occulta), glossed as 
“transcendental magic.”
Strikingly, Lévi positioned magic (also described as “occult science” or 
“transcendental science”) as the mediating term between philosophy/science 
and religion, stating that magic “reconciles perfectly and incontestably those 
two terms, so opposed on the first view— faith and reason, science and be-
lief.”49 Instead of an antagonism between religion and magic, Lévi described an 
opposition between a disenchanting materialism and a spiritual vision of the 
cosmos. Unlike later anti- Christian occultists, Lévi situated his occult science 
and Catholicism as natural allies.50 Magic, in this account, is less an alternative 
to the established churches than an attempt to reinforce religion in the face of 
modern skepticism. Moreover, religious studies— at least, in Lévi’s hands (and, 
as we’ll see later, in Müller’s)— is an explicit denial of secularism.
Despite his emphasis on God and his commitment to a version of Catholi-
cism, some of Lévi’s notoriety came from his intentional deployment of satanic 
imagery, which he justified by stating, “The Devil is God as understood by the 
wicked.”51 On the one hand, Lévi denied the reality of the devil as an active 
agent of evil. On the other, he suggested that what seems diabolical is revealed 
to be the true essence of the divine when penetrated by the gaze of the magical 
initiate.52
*
The text that made Lévi’s reputation, Dogme et rituel de la haute magie (Doc-
trine and ritual of high magic, published initially as pamphlets in 1854 and 
then in two volumes, 1855– 56), is basically a work of comparative magic. While 

104 Chapter Four
there had been previous attempts to discover Egyptian mysteries or “Oriental” 
spirituality, Lévi was one of the first major thinkers to make the comparative 
analysis of “world religions” in general the proper business of a magician— 
basically adapting Hermeticism to the age of comparative theology— a pro-
gram that would be picked up in Theosophical circles.53
Initially, Lévi described his project as a reaction to a previous generation of 
scholarship that had attempted to expose the world’s mythologies as a product 
of primitive miscomprehension of the natural world.54 He rejected this smug 
reductionism because it seemingly dismissed all religion as nothing more than 
primitive superstition. In contrast, Lévi deployed terminology evocative of 
Christian Neoplatonism and Paracelsian semiotics, arguing that the divine 
“Logos” has been revealed to all peoples, and that “analogy is the key of all 
secrets of Nature.”55 Different mythologies therefore encode veiled insights 
into both nature and the mind of God (which for Lévi are linked). Accord-
ingly, he proposed an esoteric science rooted in investigating the parallels in 
mythological source material to discover new truths both divine and scientific.
Each volume of Dogme et rituel is divided into twenty- two chapters. Al-
though never explicitly stated, the rationale behind this structure can be found 
in the tarot. For readers unfamiliar with it, the tarot is a stylized deck of play-
ing cards divided into four suits and twenty- two trumps known as major ar-
cana. Although today associated with fortune- telling, when it first appeared in 
fourteenth- century Europe, the tarot was understood merely as a card game. 
In 1781, Antoine Court de Gébelin argued that the tarot had originated in 
Egypt as an encoded form of the Book of Thoth. As such, he suggested, it was 
actually an occult instrument.56 Building on Court de Gébelin’s claims, Lévi 
seems to have furthered the transformation of the tarot into a central piece of 
occult paraphernalia.57
Each chapter of Dogme et rituel corresponds to one of the major arcana of 
the tarot. The cards thus provide a key for unlocking a symbolic level to the 
text. This formal structure distinguishes the work from conventional academic 
scholarship, but it also illustrates Lévi’s emphasis on polysemy and the power 
of analogy. Lévi claimed that when the tarot cards are arranged in order, it 
reveals itself to be a narrative work encoded by the Egyptian prophet Hermes 
Trismegistus, which itself is the key to unlocking other symbolic systems.58 
Moreover, each of the major arcana is connected to a Hebrew letter, such that 
through combination and recombination in the right sequence, the cards can 
be made to reveal Kabbalistic truths about the emanations of God.59 In part, 
anticipating Carl Jung, Lévi regarded the tarot as a set of archetypes that repre-

The Shadow of God 
105
sent cross- cultural mythic universals. But more important, Lévi saw the tarot 
as “the universal key to the initiations of the Logos” and the true bible of the 
magi hidden in plain sight.60 The tarot’s polysemy traces fundamental connec-
tions that allow us to decode God’s revelation to different religions. While this 
kind of claim would be out of the reach of a contemporary scholar of religion, 
we will see its resonance with Müller’s own theological commitments shortly.
*
In a later work, La clef des grands mystères (The key to great mysteries, 1861), 
Lévi employed his Hermetic hermeneutics to get at what he considered to be 
the essence of religion— namely, humankind’s engagement with the “mysteri-
ous,” or with all that lies beyond human knowledge.61 He maintained: “Mys-
tery is the abyss, which ceaselessly attracts our unquiet curiosity by the terror 
of its depth.”62 Müller and Herbert Spencer would later grapple with this idea 
that religion is directed toward the unknown or unknowable.63 For Lévi, how-
ever, this mystery originates in the inability of human beings to grasp “the 
infinite,” which he asserted is by definition incomprehensible.64
Religion will never vanish in the face of science because human language is 
fundamentally limited and one can “never find in the language of the finite the 
complete expression of the infinite.”65 Accordingly, human reason “may twist 
and coil its spirals ever- ascending” toward the absolute, but it will never elimi-
nate its own foundations, which lie beyond its bounds.66 In order to represent 
the incomprehensible we must resort to symbolic language, which is in itself 
necessarily paradoxical.67 Symbolic language directed toward the unknown 
appears contradictory because it aims at using limited terms to suggest the in-
finite. Science can only be expressed in finite language, so other means, such as 
the comparative method, are needed to unlock the symbolic power of infinity.
Given his Christian theological commitments and neo- Catholic back-
ground, it should be no surprise that for Lévi, the ultimate symbol is the 
paradox of the Trinity and that God is the supreme mystery.68 Moreover, Lévi 
argues that the symbols that represent humanity reaching toward the infinite 
are also the divine (or infinite) God revealing himself to humanity.69 This long-
ing for the infinite comes not from human nature but from God, and represents 
the bond between human and divine.70 In sum, the myths of different religions 
are metaphorical love letters exchanged between God and humankind.
*

106 Chapter Four
In a provocative later book, The Science of Spirits (La science des esprits, 1865), 
Lévi tried to recover the divine science abandoned by the philosophes. He 
strove to rehabilitate both magic and divination as approaches to the divine. 
But in recovering the science of the spirits, Lévi also distanced himself from 
contemporary spiritualism. Fundamentally his intervention was metaphysical, 
or we might say, ontological— Lévi believed the spiritualists were wrong about 
what sort of stuff spirits were made of. By way of explanation, in comparison 
to contemporary thinkers like Jane Bennett who imagine a “vital materialism,” 
Lévi argued for a magnetic vitalism or occult pneumatology that grounded his 
reenchantment efforts.71
Lévi charted his alternative to materialism in detail— referring at various 
points in his writings to “the great magnetic agent” (le grand agent mag-
nétique), “the world soul” (l’âme du monde), or most frequently to “astral 
light” (la lumière astrale).72 Behind the mechanistic world of dead matter, 
Lévi described the universe as bursting with life and even mind, arguing that 
“there is no void in nature; all is peopled. There is no true death in nature; 
all is alive.”73 Flows of magnetic energy, or basically pure life, infuse all living 
things, bringing them into connection with one another and illuminating all 
corners of the world. Although it is invisible to our waking eyes, this hidden 
side of the world can be seen by the eye of the soul or the imagination, which 
allows us to perceive the infusion of the world with “astral light.”74
The human mind also imprints this astral world with its own dreams or 
mental images, which live on long after the originator has died. Hence, one 
can see with the eye of the soul impressions of the imaginations of people from 
ages past, appearing like visions, phantasms, spirits, or demons in the astral 
light.75 The rituals of different religions are designed to evoke the imagination 
and transform the astral light.
The science of spirits (and Lévi’s occult project more generally) presented 
itself as a way to use the imagination and will to manipulate these astral forces. 
This is his break from spiritualism— because in order for the science of spirits 
to work, the spiritualist would have to recognize that spirits are not truly pos-
sessed of autonomous agency, but merely impressions left on the astral plane. 
Moreover, at its root, this astral light is a radiance originating from the mind 
of God (think the fiat lux of Genesis 1:3). To discover this light is therefore a 
return to the divine. Accordingly, Lévi directed an invective against all forms 
of spiritual mediumship that do not partake in the true “communion” with 
infinite being, or in other words, God.76 The true science of spirits is revealed 
to be a kind of esoteric Christianity. Surprisingly, an esoteric Christianity will 
be revealed as the hidden core of Müller’s comparative project as well.

The Shadow of God 
107
In sum, Lévi’s project demonstrates that comparative religion was the basic 
business of a magician (or at least, of this magician). It shows that the study of 
world mythology could be rooted in an attempt to enchant Europe rather than 
disenchant the globe. It is also hints at the kind of theological commitments 
engendered by the search for a hidden unity behind the world’s religions. It 
suggests too that the study of religion can appear not just as an emergence 
from Protestant theology, but also as a kind of Catholic mysticism or Christian 
esotericism.77
The Philologist
[After the death of the body,] what remains is only the eternal One, the eternal Self 
(ewige Selbst), that lives in us all without beginning and without end, and in which each 
individual has his true being in which he lives and moves. Each temporal Ego is just one 
of the million incarnations (Erscheinungen) of this eternal Self. . . . The Self is the bond 
that binds together all souls, the red thread that runs through all being. . . . The Self that 
runs through the whole world, through all hearts, is the same for all men; it is the same 
for the highest and the lowest, it is the same for Creator and created; it is the “Âtman” of 
the Veda, the oldest and truest word for God.
 M a x M ü l l e r , “Das Pferdebürla,” Deutsche Rundschau, 1896
Friedrich Max Müller (1823– 1900), born in Dessau, studied philology in 
Leipzig, Berlin, and Paris, before moving to England, where he was appointed 
Taylorian Professor of Modern European Languages at Oxford in 1854 (the 
year before Lévi published his magical manifesto). Today Müller is probably 
most famous for overseeing the publication of Sacred Books of the East and for 
arguing that mythology is a “disease of language.” His importance to the field 
of religious studies is clear in the historiography, and he is generally portrayed 
as a rationalist figure, fundamental to the secularizing trend of the discipline.78 
He might seem to be a bad candidate for a critique of enlightenment, yet in 
many ways his project approximated that of the magician.
Like Lévi, Müller’s main work on comparative theology is an attempt to 
arrive at a common philosophy located behind the diversity of the world’s 
mythological systems. Recognizing that previous scholars had rejected as su-
perstitions much that did not fit into their worldview, Müller attempted to 
recover the lost wisdom of the East as a way to supplement something missing 
from the contemporary European world.79 In this respect, Müller can be seen 
as benefiting from the legacy of the German Romantics, especially Friedrich 
Schiller, whose influence Müller readily admitted.80 Müller was not as pro-

108 Chapter Four
grammatic as Lévi in recovering the magic missing from the West. Instead he 
believed that while each religion had its own grains of truth, one must separate 
these truths from the chaff of “superstition.” Müller saw the essence of religion 
as a transcendent reach for an “infinite” beyond rationality. In that, Lévi would 
have been in agreement.
In his construction of an academic “science of religion,” Müller worked to 
fulfill an enlightenment- inspired mission to produce a rational and empirical 
field of study. He worked to exclude the academic theology of his day, and 
the legacy of its absence can be seen in the whole field. In its methodology, 
the science of religion seems at first pass to also rule out the possibility of the 
divine. But like the occult sciences, Müller’s new field also aimed to occupy 
the intersection of religion and science.
Müller’s project, indeed, reveals its esoteric Christian substructure in a 
series of Gifford lectures he gave late in his life, later published as Theosophy; 
or, Psychological Religion.81 These lectures have been largely overlooked per-
haps because they do not fit the image of Müller as arch- secularist or impartial 
scholar. As a result, Müller’s esotericism has been suppressed by omission 
from the normative accounts of the formation of the discipline.
Emphasizing these lectures allows us to see a very different side to Max 
Müller. Indeed, while Müller is often presented as a fairly conventional Lu-
theran, his contemporaries knew differently.82 As recollected by the translator 
and educator Thomas McCormack in his obituary for Müller:
As to his personal belief, which is not easy to grasp in its precise details in his 
works, we may say generally that Professor Max Müller was a Vedantist. He was 
a believer in the Brahman doctrine of the âtman, or soul- in- itself, the monad 
soul; he believed in a “thinker of thoughts,” a “doer of deeds,” a Self within 
the person, which was the carrier of his personality, and a Self without, which 
was the carrier of the world, “God, the highest Self”; and these two Selves are 
ultimately the same Self: Tat tvam asi, That art thou, as the Brahman said.83
Although I will argue that Müller was less a Hindu than a kind of Christian 
mystic, foregrounding this version of Müller allows us to see an aspect of his 
thought that provided a hidden unity to even his earlier writings in religious 
studies. The lectures Müller delivered at the University of Glasgow in 1892 
offer the ideal entry point.
Having already given Gifford lectures in preceding years on “Natural Reli-
gion,” “Physical Religion,” and “Anthropological Religion,” Müller dedicated 
his final lectures to the topic of “Theosophy.” In Müller’s own estimation, 

The Shadow of God 
109
these lectures are the “key” to the whole series of Gifford talks, representing 
the final culmination of both physical and anthropological religion and there-
fore the essence of his approach to comparative religion.84
Müller began the set of lectures by charting his vision for the study of com-
parative religion, describing the importance of the burgeoning discipline and 
the techniques at its disposal. This form of scholarship is described as philo-
logical and based on the comparison of textual religions, but the conventional 
reading of Müller would have trouble accounting for the theological register 
of his language and its evocation of a kind of prisca theologia, or ur- theology, 
behind the religions of the world.85 Müller wrote:
We learn that that no human soul was ever quite forgotten, and that there 
are no clouds of superstition through which the rays of eternal truth cannot 
pierce. Such moments are the best rewards to the student of the religions of 
the world— they are the moments of true revelation, revealing the fact that God 
has not forsaken any of his children.86
The metaphor here is one of superstitions as dark clouds periodically pierced 
by the light of divine truth. The role of the scholar of religion is to engage in 
a search for fragments of God’s revelation, which illuminate the sacred texts 
of different religions. Rather than being a secularizing enterprise, Müller’s Re-
ligionswissenschaft provides proof of a kind of theological monism despite 
apparent religious pluralism.87 The parallels to Lévi’s project are plain: like the 
magician, Müller’s vision for the study of religion suggested the Hermeticist 
notion of prisca theologia— namely, that a diversity of “paganisms” all point 
toward an original and universal divine truth.
Müller’s most famous phrase, “He who knows one [religion], knows none,” 
now appears less as a call for scholastic breadth than a religious mission itself.88 
Indeed, elsewhere he referred to prophecies of Hermes Trismegistus and then 
added the gloss “Every religion, even the most imperfect and degraded, has 
something that ought to be sacred for us, for there is in all religions a secret 
yearning after the true, though unknown God.”89 In sum, Müller seems to 
position comparative religion as a form of classical Christian Hermeticism.90
Müller, like Lévi, charted an explicitly Christian project, albeit one informed 
by his engagement with Hinduism— which emerges from his assumption that 
while all religions have some truth, they do not have it in equal measure. Hence 
Müller could argue that comparative religion proves Christianity to be “in-
finitely superior to all other religions,” and it should have nothing to fear from 
the newfound discipline. This should not come as a surprise because while 

110 Chapter Four
other religions seem to have semi- occluded the divine light, the very meaning 
of religion is so interwoven with Christian theology that it would appear Chris-
tianity alone has access to the full plenitude of divine revelation.91
Müller’s account of the discipline concludes with a description of three reg-
isters, or types, of natural religion, each of which is focused on the perception 
of the infinite in a different mode, and again showing clear parallels to Lévi.92 
First Müller describes “Physical Religion,” which is directed toward the belief 
in the invisible as the power behind the visible. Its determinate characteristic is 
the “discovery of the Infinite in nature,” which Müller describes as essentially 
an evolutionary progression, beginning with the belief in the gods of nature 
and culminating in the recognition of an infinite monotheistic divinity.93 He 
contrasts this “Physical Religion” with “Anthropological Religion,” which 
he describes as founded on the “discovery of the Infinite in man.”94 By this 
Müller means to describe how various peoples have come to their belief in 
the immortality of the soul.95 In essence, these two forms of religion chart the 
apprehension of the infinite in nature and in humankind.
Having discussed these forms of religion in previous lecture series, Müller 
dedicated his 1892 lectures to demonstrating how these two infinities relate 
to each other. He did so by describing a third type of religion, “real religion,” 
as emerging from the combination of physical and anthropological religion. 
“Real religion” arises from the realization that these two orders of infinity— 
God and the immortal soul— are commensurate.96 That is, instead of two in-
finities there is but one; or in other words, it is the identification of the human 
soul with the divine.97 Müller floated various possibilities for christening this 
third form of religion. In the running are the terms theosophic, psychic, or mys-
tic. Each has its problems: “Theosophic conveys the idea of speculations on 
the hidden nature of God; Psychic reminds us of trances, visions, and ghosts; 
Mystic leaves the impression of something vague, nebulous, and secret.”98 His 
solution is to call this highest and most advanced form of religion “Psychologi-
cal Religion” or “Theosophy,” which he defined as “all attempts at discovering 
the true relation between the soul and God.”99 While the reader might be 
tempted to overlook the normative claim built into this statement, Müller went 
on to describe this theosophy in positivist terms as the “knowledge of the unity 
of the Divine and the Human.”100
As is clear, Müller is attempting to appropriate the term theosophy for his 
own project of comparative theology.101 In adopting this term to describe the 
study of religion, Müller knew that he was picking a fight with the Theosoph-
ical Society. The conflict was not as farfetched as it might at first appear, since, 
as discussed below, the Theosophical Society presented an institutional al-

The Shadow of God 
111
ternative to Müller’s own discipline of religious studies. Moreover, when one 
explores Müller’s book in detail, the distinction between these two projects 
turn out to be even harder to maintain.
As becomes increasingly clear over the course of these lectures, Müller 
is not describing Theosophical religion in dispassionate or anthropological 
terms. Instead he is arguing for the Theosophical discovery of the relationship 
between human and God as a true insight into the structure of creation, and 
simultaneously the evolutionarily highest point of religion. As he will argue, 
true religion’s ultimate form can be encapsulated in the Hindu identification of 
Brahman and Atman, which anticipates Theosophy’s purest expression in the 
writings of Christian mystics with their unio mystica.102 He will later produce 
the gloss “Theosophy or Mystic Christianity” to describe the essence of this 
higher form of religion.103
Müller focused attention on the Hindu Veda in a way that evokes the posi-
tion occupied by the tarot as the heart of Lévi’s system.104 In his lectures, 
Müller explained that the Veda is the beginning of Indian Theosophy, a form 
of religion that only takes its “fullest realization” in the Vedānta.105 As a signifi-
cant instance of “natural revelation,” it should not surprise the reader that the 
Veda is a key— if not the central— text for Müller’s project. He also character-
ized it in terms redolent with esoteric imagery: the Veda is described as a work 
of “seven seals,” each of which must be unlocked by the serious scholar.106
In the following lecture, Müller expanded on this esoteric metaphor, de-
scribing the Veda’s unveiling: “Unless we learn to understand this metaphor-
ical or hieroglyphic language of the ancient world, we shall look upon the 
Upanishads and on most of the Sacred Books of the East as mere childish 
twaddle; but if we can see through the veil, we shall discover behind it not 
(indeed, as many imagine) profound mysteries or esoteric wisdom, but at all 
events intelligent and intelligible efforts in an honest search after truth.”107 
Here Müller evoked in relationship to Indian sacred texts imagery of “hiero-
glyphics” and “veils” similar to those used by Lévi almost forty years earlier. 
The difference is that for Müller, behind the mask of these ancient texts one 
finds not “esoteric wisdom,” but what is basically rational— or at the very least, 
philosophical— conceptions. That said, Müller was also ultimately committed 
to proving that these very same works express a kind of universal mysticism. 
He described this mysticism as rational because, he argued, “The true relation 
of the two souls, the human soul and the divine, is, or ought to be, as clear as 
the most perfect logical syllogism.”108
In what might sound like circular reasoning, the truth behind the Sacred 
Books of the East turns out to be rational because its ultimate claims about the 

112 Chapter Four
relationship between humans and God are true. Still, it is a truth attested to 
by magicians and mystics. Put differently, Müller is treating Vedānta Hindu-
ism as both mystical and rational, but objecting to those who would read it as 
backward nonsense. Because he has attributed to it his own insights about the 
relationship between divinity and the soul, Müller’s own rational mysticism is 
therefore presented as Vedānta Hinduism stripped of its mysteries (one might 
think of Müller’s confession of faith cited above).
*
For Müller there are three moments where Theosophical Religion came into 
fully into being: Vedānta Hinduism, Greek Neoplatonism, and Christian mys-
ticism.109 Each of these represents the flourishing of Aryan thought taken to its 
ultimate fulfillment.110 It is Christianity that has greater “theosophic wealth” 
than the others, but its aims turn out to be shared.111 All aspire to a mystical 
recognition that the individual soul is part of God’s soul. This is a claim Müller 
earlier described as the identification of Brahman and Atman, but now he 
recasts it in Christian terms.112 As Müller elaborated, “The principal object 
of the Christian religion has been to make the world comprehend the oneness 
of the objective Deity— call it Jehovah . . . with the subjective Deity— call it 
self, or mind, or soul, or reason or Logos.”113 By echoing so- called Gnostic 
conceptions of the divine, this claim would have been rejected by a number of 
Christian theologians. Müller compensated in the pages that follow by arguing 
that mysticism the real heart of Christianity.
To do so, Müller focused on the Neoplatonic Christian theological concept 
of the “logos,” which he argued is both the essence of Christianity and the 
best description of the relationship between God and man.114 He argued that 
“logos” originally meant the “word” understood as “thought embodied in 
sound.”115 It therefore described a fundamental truth: “Word and thought, as 
I hope to have proved in my Science of Thought, are inseparable.”116 In both 
Science of Thought and Science of Language, Müller argued for the identity of 
speech and thought, or what we might call reason and language. The impli-
cation is that there are no concepts without language, no meaningless words; 
and moreover, that each word represents a separate concept.117 Furthermore, 
building on arguments made originally by both Leibniz and Locke, Müller 
argued that concepts function at the broad level to denote general ideas, 
understood at the level of the species (or category) rather than the individual 
exemplar.118 This was an argument Müller made repeatedly.

The Shadow of God 
113
In his lectures on “Theosophy,” however, Müller disclosed the Neopla-
tonist metaphysics he omitted elsewhere, remarkably revealing that his phi-
losophy of language is indebted to a Neoplatonist concept of forms: “We must 
use our words as we have defined them, and species means an idea, or an εἶδος 
(eîdos); that is, an eternal thought of a rational Being. Such a thought must 
vary in every individual manifestation of it, but it can never change. Unless we 
admit the eternal existence of these ideas in a rational Mind or in the Primal 
Cause of all things, we cannot account for our seeing them realised in nature, 
discovered by human reason, and named by human language.”119 Paraphrased, 
meaning exists in the mind of God. According to Müller, this is both what 
was meant by the Greek concept of the logos and is the claim proved by his 
own philological research. While it was perhaps predictable that Lévi was a 
mystical Neoplatonist, coming from Müller’s position in the historiography, 
it is more surprising.
Lest we take this “Primal Cause” language to be merely a metaphor, the 
lecture then takes a seeming swerve as Müller staged this Neoplatonic concept 
of εἶδος in relationship to a biological concept of species. He was interested in 
ratcheting the theology up rather than down, stating: “The idea that the world 
was thought and uttered or willed by God, so far from being a cobweb of ab-
struse philosophy, is one of the most natural and most accurate, nay most true 
conceptions of the creation of the world, and, let me add at once, of the true 
origin of species.”120 Müller had Darwin in his sights. Such a stark claim would 
be out of place in contemporary religious studies, but Müller was unasham-
edly placing his theological commitments on the table. As he made explicit, 
God’s reason does the work behind evolution, and there is a fundamentally 
unbridgeable gap between humans possessed of divine Logos and animals.121 
Regardless of what developed in nature, human intelligence is not evolved. It 
is clear that Müller’s main target is not the religious believer, but the skeptical 
scientist. Hence he argued: “It is of no use for Physical Science to shut its ears 
against such speculations [about the forms in the divine Mind] or to call them 
metaphysical dreams.”122 In sum, the Platonic forms are no mere allegory.
Having represented logos in Christian Neoplatonist terms, Müller was able 
to cast his own philological research as Christian theology:
I am glad to see that my critics have ceased at last to call my Science of Thought 
a linguistic paradox, and begin to see that what I contended for in that book 
was known long ago, and that no one ever doubted it. The Logos, the Word, 
as the thought of God, as the whole body of divine or eternal ideas, which 

114 Chapter Four
Plato had prophesied, which Aristotle had criticised in vain, which the Neo 
Platonists re- established, is a truth that forms, or ought to form the foundation 
of all philosophy.123
The logos turns out to be the heart of both Christianity and Müller’s own 
project. This is not all. As he argued, “The Logos, therefore, the thought of 
God, was the bond that united heaven and earth, and through it God could 
be addressed once more as the Father, in a truer sense than He had ever been 
before.”124 The logos is nothing less than the Word in the mind of God func-
tioning as the bridge between man and the divine.
For Müller, oneness with God is not merely a feature of Christianity, but 
is the goal strived for by all religions, or at the very least, all theosophical 
religions.125 In a solar metaphor he continued throughout his final lecture, 
Müller described the human soul as the light of the Godhead and the goal of 
religion to recognize this light and embrace the human union with the divine. 
Theosophical religion, aka mystical Christianity, is the ultimate expression of 
these aims because it achieves the divine union toward which all religion is 
directed.126
Amazingly, Müller argued, one can achieve the realization of this truth 
through the labors of a historian of religion. Indeed it turns out that this recog-
nition of the oneness of the divine and human souls asserted by philosophers 
and mystics is also the goal of comparative theology. As Müller concluded:
In this, my last course, it has been my chief endeavor to show how [physical 
and anthropological religion] always strive to meet and do meet in the end 
in what has been called Theosophy or Psychological Religion, helping us to 
the perception of the essential unity of the soul with God. Both this striving 
to meet and the final union have found, I think, their most perfect expression 
in Christianity . . . as what Master Eckhart called the surrender of our will to 
the Will of God. . . . And if the true meaning of religion is the highest purpose 
of religion, you will see how after a toilsome journey the historian of religion 
arrives in the end at the same summit which the philosopher of religion has 
chosen from the first as his own.127
We might say the same of the philologist and the magician. Strains of Neopla-
tonism and Hermeticism can be seen in both. Both Lévi and Müller also had as 
their end goal a kind of Christian mysticism or theosophy, which they read into 
Eastern and Western religion alike. They both thought that the juxtaposition 
of different mythologies would cause them to open up and reveal God’s truths. 

The Shadow of God 
115
They differed, however, as to the means for unlocking this revelation— the 
tarot versus Indo- European philology. Moreover, while they both postulated 
a hidden core behind all religions, the infinite truths of Deus absconditus, for 
Müller, the essence of the divine was reason; while for Lévi, it was ultimately 
beyond the grasp of rationality. Nevertheless, both saw the study of religion as 
a means to approach the infinite.
Th e o s o p h i cal  D i s e n c h antme nt:  
H e l e na B l avat s k y
Studies on India are of interest to a wider and wider audience, and “theosophy” has 
almost been made fashionable among us by the adepts of a certain brand of Western 
occultism. . . . Theosophical ideas become an extremely important and precious frame-
work that was missing from the regular nomenclature of India, for classifying certain 
ideas that otherwise could not be put under the heading either of “religion” or of “phi-
losophy.”
 F e r d i n a n d  d e  S au s s u r e , “La théosophie brahmanique,” 1907
This section emerges from a simple insight with important implications— 
religious studies had a historical doppelgänger, a parallel movement, that drew 
from nearly the same social sphere, shared many intellectual objectives and 
political coordinates, and for a time was more successful in recruiting members 
and placing different religions in dialogue.128 Approached without presuppo-
sitions you might imagine that the relevant discipline is comparative theol-
ogy or some kind of lost comparative philosophy, but as the section heading 
suggests, the movement I have in mind is theosophy— and in particular, the 
Theosophical Society founded in 1875. Moreover, not only does theosophy 
share its name with Müller’s term for the core of Religionswissenschaft, but 
many scholars of religion were also members of the Theosophical Society. 
Indeed, the closer one looks, it appears that theosophy had a certain allure as 
the esoteric side of the discipline of religious studies. The further problem is 
that theosophy was both dedicated to magic and promoted a disenchantment 
myth, such that having read the account of theosophical disenchantment, it  
is going to be even harder to identify disenchantment as a merely scholarly 
trope.
The Theosophical Society was a large movement peaking in 1928 at about 
45,000 official adherents and more than a thousand lodges in over forty coun-
tries, not counting a number of influential offshoots.129 It was also crucial to 
the Euro- American adoption of yoga and Buddhism, and was the dominant 

116 Chapter Four
source of many features of globalized metaphysical religion, from auras to spir-
itual evolution to the idea of ascended masters.130 A particular Theosophist— 
Alice Bailey— is often regarded as the main source of the very expression 
“New Age.”131
Crucially, the Theosophical Society explicitly claimed to occupy the medi-
ating position between religion and science. This was the location Max Müller 
had imagined for the “science of religion,” but it was also the position Éliphas 
Lévi had accorded to “magic.” Both were influences on the founder of the 
movement— Helena Blavatsky’s first major work, Isis Unveiled (1877), which, 
while primarily modeled on Lévi’s writings, drew from Müller’s project and 
the Indian texts that he helped make available.132 The ease with which Bla-
vatsky merged religious studies and magic goes some distance in demonstrat-
ing their fundamental similarities. Moreover, insofar as religious studies is a 
science whose theological presuppositions we have been working to flush to 
the surface, the Theosophical Society appears as a religious movement whose 
scientific impact also needs to be exposed. The further surprise is that while 
Müller’s claim to scientific status came by way of philology, theosophists also 
had a lasting impact on linguistics.
*
Perhaps the most important esoteric theorist of the late nineteenth century, 
Helena Petrovna Blavatsky (1831– 91), was born to an aristocratic- military 
family in the Russian city of Yekaterinoslav (today Dnipropetrovsk, Ukraine). 
In 1849, shortly before her eighteenth birthday, Helena married a provincial 
official more than thirty years her senior. The marriage was disastrous, and 
within three months, Helena Blavatsky had left her husband to travel across 
the globe. The actual extent of her voyages is unknown, but she would later 
claim to have visited Egypt, India, America, and even Tibet, allegedly studying 
with various spiritual masters en route.133 In 1873 Blavatsky arrived in New 
York, where she developed a reputation as a spiritualist medium and occult 
journalist. In 1875 she joined the American lawyer and Civil War veteran Col-
onel Henry Olcott in founding the Theosophical Society. Initially dedicated 
to psychical and occult research, the group evolved to focus on cross- cultural 
comparison.134 The most significant development in the Theosophical Soci-
ety’s history occurred in 1878, when Blavatsky and Olcott relocated to India. 
Although the founders themselves returned to Europe in 1884, they left in 
place important transnational connections.

The Shadow of God 
117
*
Blavatsky promoted an influential version of the myth of disenchantment. This 
is already evident in “The Science of Magic” (1875), in which she intervened in 
a debate between spiritualists about the existence of magic. Blavatsky argued 
that commanding spirits is itself a magical science and that “magic exists and 
has existed ever since prehistoric ages.”135 She then described the history of 
magic in antiquity and emphasized its brief flourishing in various Neoplatonic 
and alchemical circles. But then, Blavatsky argued, magic was persecuted by 
the Christian church, and it “finally died out in Europe” when confronted 
with “the frozen- hearted skepticism [of] its native country,”136 or we might 
say, suffered a deathblow at the hands of enlightenment thought.
This sounds like an account of the decline of magic we might get in a dozen 
different sources. European modernity, and especially scientific skepticism, 
has meant the departure of enchantment.137 This was a set of claims that Bla-
vatsky amplified elsewhere, portraying the nineteenth century in terms of a 
“death- grapple” between science and theology, which resulted in the rise of 
a particularly pernicious form of materialism (like Müller, she was especially 
opposed to Darwinian evolution).138 But Blavatsky was neither a herald of 
progress nor a melancholy sociologist. Instead, she embraced an Orientalist 
cliché about the lost wisdom of a timeless Asia, arguing that “in India, magic 
has never died out, and blossoms there as well as ever.”139
In Isis Unveiled Blavatsky also came up with an alternate explanation for 
why magic was particularly scarce in modern Western Europe: “Magic being 
what it is, the most difficult of all sciences to learn experimentally— its ac-
quisition is practically beyond the reach of the majority of white- skinned 
people,” to which she added that because of their “sense of superiority over 
those whom the English term so contemptuously ‘niggers,’ the white Euro-
pean would hardly submit himself to the practical tuition of either Kopt, Brah-
man, or Lama.”140 To paraphrase, magic is innately difficult for white people 
to learn, and European prejudice makes it harder. Blavatsky was embracing  
what is now described as the racist stereotype of the “magical negro,” but she 
was also identifying her project with the minoritized position.141
One of Blavatsky’s innovations was her embrace of a particular philosophy 
of history that took seriously a vast chronology. In a different part of the work, 
Blavatsky projected back an extended temporality of prehistory, arguing that 
magic was the spiritual science of ancient sages, whose powers had not yet 
been achieved by modern science.142 She also described history as broadly 

118 Chapter Four
cyclical, arguing that civilizations rise, reach their height, and then collapse 
into barbarism.143 The divine science of the ancients was largely lost in one 
such collapse. Nevertheless, she anticipated an eventual recovery of all that 
had been lost: “Physical science has reached the limits of its exploration; the-
ology sees the spring of its inspiration dry. Unless we mistake the signs, the 
day is approaching when the world will see proofs that only ancient religions 
were in harmony with nature, and ancient science embraced all that can be 
known. . . . Who knows the possibility of the future? An era of disenchantment 
and rebuilding will soon begin— nay, has already begun. The cycle has run its 
course, a new one is about to begin.”144
Blavatsky used the term disenchantment to describe not the death of magic, 
but her perception of an affect resulting from the failures of both science and 
theology. Moreover, Blavatsky and Tylor would have agreed about modern 
magic as a recovery of primitive science, the difference being that for Tylor, 
primitive science was generally incorrect, while for Blavatsky, the ancients had 
true wisdom. Finally, like Müller, Blavatsky argued that to know one religion 
requires that one know them all. In her account, different religions have pre-
served rays of light due to their shared origin in the primordial theosophy 
(religion/magic/science), which is their common ancestor.145
In Blavatsky’s hands, theosophy was partially a quasi- academic retrieval 
and philological interpretation of Asian texts; but she also claimed privileged 
access to inner teachings that had been preserved by a secretive group of “As-
cended Masters” still living in Asia. While this might sound farfetched, the 
grounding assumption of the early Theosophical Society was precisely this 
claim: the perennial philosophy had vanished in Europe, only to be preserved 
by the “mahatmas,” or Great Brotherhood of India and Tibet. In some re-
spects, this was comparable to Müller and company’s turn toward India as a 
source for lost wisdom. An important difference, however, is that instead of 
spending their time in European libraries painstakingly translating ancient 
texts, the Theosophists went to South Asia in search of Gurus and further 
revelations.
*
In her influential magnum opus The Secret Doctrine (1888), Blavatsky posited 
a developmental history of languages, describing an evolution from monosyl-
labic to agglutinative to inflected languages that evoked the linguistic theories 
of her day (except for the fact that she pinned one of these language phases 
onto Atlantis).146 Her aim was a reconstruction of the ancestor of Sanskrit, or 

The Shadow of God 
119
what scholars today would call Proto- Indo- European.147 In many respects 
Blavatsky was following academic linguistics of her period, but she was also 
attempting to reconstruct the original perennial philosophy (which she identi-
fied with magic and esoteric wisdom). It is worth emphasizing that trying to 
use a comparative method to recover a primordial revelation was something 
theosophists and many scholars of religion shared.
The influence between theosophy and linguistics was not unidirectional. 
Theosophy also had a broader impact on linguistic theory. It is no accident 
that the only thing Ferdinand de Saussure actually completed for publication 
during the long period he was giving his famous “Course in General Linguis-
tics” (1906– 11) was a review article about Brahmanical theosophy (cited in the 
epigraph above). Saussure was far from a theosophist. But he was likely drawn 
to the work because he had just spent five years attending the séances of a 
psychical medium who claimed to have visions of a past life in India. Hence it 
seems likely Saussure undertook a reading in Indian philosophical and “theo-
sophical” literature to reassure himself that the medium was making it all up.148
Much later, one of linguistics’ signal contributions to the human sci-
ences is the controversial notion of linguistic relativity, or the “Sapir- Whorf 
hypothesis”— usually understood to mean that language determines thought. 
Debates around linguistic relativity often focus on Language, Mind, and 
Reality (1941) by Benjamin Lee Whorf. That the essay was initially published 
in the Theosophist journal rarely accords more than a passing mention.149 But 
Whorf was a practicing Theosophist, and if you reread that essay with that 
knowledge in mind, the theosophical connections are impossible to ignore. 
Not only did he describe “Mantra Yoga” as “the next great step” of “Western 
consciousness” and cite theosophical authors to make his argument, but he 
also testified to the theosophical origin of his ideas: “It is known, or something 
like it is known, to the philosophies of India and to modern Theosophy.”150 In 
these respects, linguistic relativity might seem to be a theosophical position.
*
The main point of this brief section has been to touch on some of the many 
parallels between religious studies and the Theosophical Society. Before 
concluding, I want to show how much the two movements overlapped. 
The French philologist Émile Burnouf (cousin to Eugène Burnouf)— in 
his own day famous as a Sanskritist and author of La science des religions 
(1876)— publically lent his authority as a Buddhologist to the Theosophical 
claims to be authentic interpreters of the original Buddhism.151 Nor was he the 

120 Chapter Four
last. Walter Evans- Wentz, the American anthropologist and scholar of Bud-
dhism, a lifelong theosophist, embedded theosophical concepts in his famous 
version of The Tibetan Book of the Dead (1927), which remains in print.152 
The Japanese scholar D. T. Suzuki (Suzuki Daisetsu Teitarō), founder of 
the academic study of Zen Buddhism, had joined the Theosophical Society in 
Tokyo in 1920, and later testified to the authenticity of Blavatsky’s teachings.153 
This does not exhaust the list, and beyond famous and committed members, 
there were many more scholars who took the Theosophists seriously enough 
to engage with their writings.154
More broadly, the Theosophical Society mediated transcultural exchanges 
between Europe and Asia; connected scientists and magicians, scholars, and 
native practitioners; and delivered public access to the “secrets” of esoteri-
cism.155 Even after the Theosophical Society began waning in 1929,156 it em-
bedded its idiosyncratic concepts in a range of domains. Indeed, scholars of 
religion are still grappling with the legacy and unconscious influence of Theo-
sophical terminology.157
Co n clus io n : S p e c t e r s  o f  t he  Trans ce nde nt
Here you see the transcendent character of the Self maintained, even after it has become 
incarnate, just as we hold that God is present in all things, but also transcends them.
 M a x  M ü l l e r , Three Lectures on the Vedânta Philosophy, 1904
The main aim of this chapter has been to locate Max Müller and E. B. Tylor in 
the spiritualist and Theosophical milieu of their period and to explore habits 
of thought scholars shared with occultists like Éliphas Lévi and Helena Bla-
vatsky. I have also introduced a theme that will be important over the course 
of this book— namely, that the loss of magic was a common trope among self- 
professed magicians. If these points are granted, the broad goal of this chapter 
has been met; but as a religious studies scholar myself, I want to use this con-
clusion not only to deepen those points, but also to explore the implications 
of this alternative cultural context for the origins of the discipline.
There is a shadow over the discipline of religious studies. The Encyclo-
pédie’s early definitions of religion have God in them and seek to explain the 
diversity of world religions according to a causal agency originating in that 
divinity. After all, the entry on “religion” in the Encyclopédie begins, “The 
foundation of all religion is that there is a God who has dealings with his crea-
tures and who requires them to worship him.”158 But a monotheistic deity has 
become increasingly displaced by terms like the sacred or the transcendent.159 

The Shadow of God 
121
On the one hand, this shift signals the recognition that not all the traditions 
conventionally grouped under the category “religion” worship a monotheistic 
divinity. On the other hand, this recent transformation in the meaning of reli-
gion suggests both a secularization and radical broadening of the definition. 
The changing language marks a critical difference. This shift in meaning seems 
to represent the vanishing of God, and words like transcendent, infinite, or 
sacred are attempts to cover for an absence, to describe a shadow. Yet the very  
category of “religion” was formulated around a Christian concept of God. In 
talking and writing about religion, it is often mistakenly assumed that religions 
have a common hidden essence that marks them as “religious.” In excluding 
God from its explanatory apparatus, “religion” remains as a category struc-
tured around a hole or fissure. In other words, we find ourselves in a discipline  
organized around a core that no longer exists and we cannot in good con-
science reconstruct. Moreover, this constitutive absence menaces the very task 
of discipline formation and the forms of circumscription it presumes. The 
language of haunting is particularly appropriate here, as it evokes a ghostly 
presence that is simultaneously the sign of a fundamental absence.
In the study of religion, terms like the transcendent are supposed to be 
more cosmopolitan or universal, structuring the definition of religion. Thus, 
defining the field around these terms instead of God was supposed to be more 
inclusive. For the most part, this vocabulary does not work for other cultures; 
and it does not accurately describe assumed commonalities. The new termi-
nology is nearly just as Christian as that which it has replaced. Indeed; this 
language— imported in many ways from mysticism— is easily transformed into 
a suppressed Christian triumphalism; or the claim, as William Blake put it, 
that “all religions are one.” If God is dead, God is still haunting the study of 
religion; and “the transcendent” is a divine shadow. This chapter has worked 
to reveal some of the early processes by which versions of mysticism fostered 
the substitution of the transcendent for God.
Moreover, this absent or abstract God is precisely the deity of the philos-
ophes approached by different means. Whether framed phenomenologically 
or through an interpretation of cultural symbols, insofar as the academic 
study of religion takes God or the transcendent as its organizing principle, 
the field functions as a modern mysticism, striving for a hidden center. Mir-
cea Eliade was less exceptional than he has been presented. These mystical 
undercurrents are also in tension with the discipline’s self- presentation as a 
secular science, understood as the rational study of an irrational subject. Thus, 
bringing this occult underground to the surface has generally met with resis-
tance. Even as religious studies has attempted to purge mysticism in its public 

122 Chapter Four
disciplining process, a specter remains and refuses to vanish. As portions of  
religious studies have become increasingly specialized, the transcendent 
shadow has resurfaced in other disciplines in the so- called “turn to religion 
in postmodern thought.”160
Jeffrey Kripal, Steven Wasserstrom, and Hans Thomas Hakl have explored 
the mystical side of twentieth- century religious studies, but mysticism goes 
further back, to the “origins”— whatever those are— of the discipline. Indeed, 
what Kripal advocates as “academic gnosticism” or “comparative mysticism” 
has long been a common thread in the discipline’s history.161 While not every 
scholar is a mystic, the very terms that have defined the field, that have struc-
tured the profession, pull in this direction. The contrary reaction has often 
been to close down dialogue by arguing that those things marked as “reli-
gions” have no common essence, and thus to risk balkanizing the discipline.162 
It should not be surprising, then, that many of the most influential members of 
the field have turned to mystical language in their attempts to produce grand 
syntheses. When following this latter route, religious studies might seem as 
but the crest of the modern esoteric wave.
Scholars of nineteenth- century religion have increasingly come to recog-
nize that spiritualism was one of the most important transnational movements 
of the era.163 This was also the period that religious studies was born, and it 
is now a matter of revising our narrative of the history of religious studies in 
the face of this insight. The cultural setting of the disciplinary formation of 
religious studies has been misread. It was neither antireligious skepticism nor 
mainstream Protestantism, neither secular disenchantment nor liberal theol-
ogy. Instead, it appears as though occultists, spiritualists, and many scholars 
of religion were fellow travelers, or at least, inhabitants of the same conceptual 
universe.
I would like to reconstruct some of this milieu in concrete historical terms. 
As fellow Oxford professors, it should be no surprise that E. B. Tylor and 
Max Müller knew each other and corresponded regularly.164 The surprise is 
that, as I have shown, despite their different politics and positions in the his-
toriography, Müller and Éliphas Lévi were not far apart intellectually. Socially 
they were not that far apart either, as both were acquaintances of the English 
novelist and politician Edward Bulwer- Lytton.165 Further, members of the 
Theosophical movement equally appropriated the work of Lévi and Müller 
into their project.166 Blavatsky’s cofounder of the Theosophical Society, Henry 
Olcott, connects all four figures.
In fact, Olcott even corresponded with Müller. In one letter remaining from 
this exchange (sent to Olcott on June 10, 1893), Müller betrays both his con-

The Shadow of God 
123
flicts with the Theosophical Society and the similarity of their ultimate aims. 
In response to the Theosophists, Müller denies the very existence of an eso-
teric Buddhism, arguing “Buddhism is the very opposite of esoteric. . . . There 
was much more of that esoteric teaching in Brahmanism.”167 Here he seems 
to be privileging his appropriation of Hindu materials over the Theosophists’ 
use of Buddhism. It is perhaps even more telling that Müller argues against the 
Theosophists’ “mahatmas,” suggesting that even if they were real, no “living 
Pandit” knows more than what is contained in the text. It becomes clear that 
what is at stake for Müller is the value of European philology versus native 
informants, contacted spiritually or in the flesh (and in that, he might as well 
be attacking anthropology as theosophy). Nevertheless, both Müller and the 
Theosophical Society viewed Indian materials as crucial for the “enrichment” 
of European religion.168
Although he never met Lévi in person, Olcott made it his business in 1884 to 
track down Lévi’s two remaining pupils for discussions of their departed mas-
ter.169 Furthermore, in a diary entry from October 1888, Olcott recounted that 
not only had he met with Müller— who welcomed him as a fellow Orientalist— 
but also that Müller had introduced him to Tylor. Olcott noted that despite his 
warm reception, he and Müller agreed to disagree about the existence of the 
hidden masters and other issues.170
Despite Müller’s rejection of the Theosophical Society, his work continued 
to speak to members of the movement. P. D. Ouspensky, a Russian former 
Theosophist and follower of the Greco- Armenian thaumaturge G. I. Gurd-
jieff, was inspired by Müller’s lectures on theosophy in the formulation of 
his own mystical system. In the text that announced that project as Tertium 
Organum, we return full circle, because like the French philosophes, Ouspen-
sky was inspired by Francis Bacon (particularly Bacon’s Novum Organum) to 
produce what Ouspensky saw as a continuation of Bacon’s grand synthesis of 
philosophical and mystical knowledge. To do so, Ouspensky believed he was 
activating the mystical aspect of Müller’s theosophy and partaking in his quest 
for the infinite behind all religions.171 Tertium Organum implies an alternate 
genealogy of the study of religion, rooted not merely in “the Enlightenment” 
or in Hume’s rationalism, but also in Romantic recovery and magic.
It might be tempting to equate accounts of disenchantment with the em-
brace of secularization or a theoretical commitment to cultural evolution. But 
this is an assumption that gets harder to sustain when confronted by Lévi’s 
and Blavatsky’s discussions of the European loss of magic as part of broad 
narratives of the alienation of divine revelation. It would seem that both magi-
cians and sociologists have had reason to describe an atomized and alienated 

124 Chapter Four
Western modernity. It would also seem that even in occult circles, where tes-
tifying to spirits and enchantments was a regular experience, theorists found 
reasons to describe magic as marginalized. All this should make us more sus-
picious of the function of the myth of disenchantment, as it often occurs along-
side attempts to reinstate missing wonders.
This has implications not only for the field of religious studies but also for 
narratives about secularism and disenchantment. Living as we do in the per-
ceived shadow of an absent God, models of secularization have been pressed 
to explain the current so- called religious revival, manifesting as it does now in 
the face of scientific modernity.172 Insofar as the discipline of religious studies  
is both a fulfillment and a counterreaction to “modernity,” it has, therefore, a 
parallel function to those other revivals. Common to both is a kind of occlusion 
that functions by suppressing something at the same moment that another 
aspect of the suppressed is being reincorporated.
Despite the way in which religious studies represents a recovery of the 
théosophes, it has repeatedly distanced itself from the science of spirits.173 
A secular study of the science of spirits remains excluded even as a semi- 
occluded occult pervades the underground of the field. This rejection of 
spirits represents the victory of a kind of quasi- materialist ontology that has 
clearly delimited and disciplined the realm of the possible. Moreover, reli-
gious studies is still haunted by the legacy of the philosophes in its rejection of 
“superstition.” Particularly striking from this vantage point is the production 
of a superstition- religion binary. In defining religion in terms of monolithic 
essences (transcendent, sacred, etc.), the discipline has historically produced 
a “remainder” of things that do not count as religion and are therefore outside 
our realm of inquiry. Much of what was rejected was labeled as superstition 
and relegated to the fields of folklore or anthropology (as will be discussed 
in the next chapter). Although some of this has begun to shift, the exclusions 
built into this structure gave shape to the formation of religion as category 
both academically and legally, and continue to determine the field’s trajectory. 
While the word superstition has vanished from our conversation within the 
discipline, the things once occluded under its name remain blocked from view.

C h a p t e r  F i v e
The Decline of Magic:
J. G. Frazer
As religion grows, magic declines into a black art.
 J a m e s F r a z e r , The Golden Bough (third edition), 1906
They thought that she was not Bridget Cleary at all, but a witch.
 J a m e s F r a z e r , The Golden Bough (third edition), 1913
In March of 1895, the Irish newspaper Nationalist & Tipperary Advertiser ran 
an article titled “Mysterious Disappearance of a Young Woman: The Land 
of the Banshee and the Fairy.” It reported that a local Clonmel woman had 
vanished under strange circumstances:
Her friends who were present assert that she had been taken away on a white 
horse before their eyes, and that she told them when leaving, that on Sunday 
night they would meet her at a fort on Kylenagranagh hill, where they could, 
if they had the courage, rescue her. Accordingly, they assembled at the ap-
pointed time and place to fight the fairies, but, needless to say, no white horse 
appeared.1
In the weeks that followed, the fate of the twenty- six- year- old seamstress 
Bridget Cleary would make international headlines. As reported by the Na-
tionalist and other papers, her husband, Michael, and other family members 
had originally claimed that Bridget had been spirited away by the fairies. When 
her badly burned body was found a few days later, Michael Cleary asserted that 
the corpse was not his wife, but either a witch or a nonhuman changeling that 
had taken her place; the real Bridget, he said, would soon appear.2
As the case came to trial in the following months, it became a lightning- rod 
issue for those supporting and opposing Ireland’s right to Home Rule. Did 
the Irish really believe in fairies and magic? If so, did this disqualify them 
from self- governance? Or was Michael Cleary’s reference to fairies merely an 

126 Chapter Five
attempt to justify the murder of an unfaithful spouse?3 Thus the issue basi-
cally became whether Ireland was still enchanted, and whether or not that 
was normal, and these questions were frequently addressed by the recently 
founded discipline of folklore studies (British Folklore Society, established 
1878).4 Mainly, self- appointed experts asserted that “superstitions” such as 
belief in ghosts, magic, and fairies were common to most if not all peoples.5 
Moreover, scholars generally granted that these “superstitions” had always 
persisted and were in no danger of vanishing in the face of modernity. Accord-
ingly, the verdict of judge and jury in the Cleary case was that rural Ireland had 
never been truly disenchanted— that belief in “magic” and “fairies” endured 
and was the primary motive for Bridget’s murder.
Bridget Cleary was far from the only public case of “superstition” in the last 
decades of the Victorian period. The English politician John Morley, observ-
ing what he saw as a rise of religious enthusiasm in 1873, argued that “our age 
of science is also the age of deepening superstition and reviving sacerdotal-
ism.”6 By the same token, while looking back on the late Victorian epoch, the 
British journalist George Holbrook Jackson characterized the period in terms 
of a “revival of mysticism.”7
Indeed, while in the eyes of many the nineteenth century was increasingly 
godless, Victorian scholars were in a position to know different. In the latter 
part of the century, folklorists could point to a range of evidence that suggested 
anything but disenchantment. Along with the previously discussed rise of spir-
itualism and Theosophy, this evidence included a boom in the number of 
Anglican priests; the birth of the Salvation Army (1865); the popular attention 
given to apparitions of the Virgin Mary reputed in France at Lourdes (1858), 
Pontmain (1871), and Pellevoisin (1876) and Germany at Marpingen (1876); 
and in the United States, the appearance and then suppression of the Ghost 
Dance revival in 1890.8
Hence, it is all the more striking that the 1890s brought out a classical ver-
sion of the disenchantment thesis, and from the pen of someone not just em-
bedded in the field of folklore studies, but intimately aware of the Cleary case 
and contemporary evidence of magical survivals. I speak of the Scottish folk-
lorist and classicist James George Frazer (1854– 1941), who both reacted vis-
cerally to the “Witch Burning of Clonmel,” as it was known, and authored the 
most significant early formulation of the disenchantment narrative in terms of 
the death of magic. While many sociologists understand the term disenchant-
ment to refer to the classical theory that cultures evolve through successive 
stages from magic to religion to science, this claim is not formulated as such 

The Decline of Magic 
127
in Max Weber’s writings, but does appear in those terms in Frazer’s works.9 
The common usage of disenchantment therefore to describe this three- phase 
cultural evolution is a conflation of those two theorists and misses Frazer’s 
historical priority and influence.
Part of the work of this chapter will be to locate Frazer’s role in the genesis 
of the disenchantment narrative. Despite his immense influence in the early 
twentieth century, Frazer’s star has been on the wane for quite some time. 
His masterwork, The Golden Bough, is mentioned in the historiography but 
today rarely gets cited approvingly. To the degree that there is an established 
line about Frazer, scholars characterize him as an “undertaker” of religion or 
an arch- secularist, and this is not meant as a compliment.10 So while Frazer 
lingers in undergraduate textbooks, unlike the profusion of Weberians and the 
occasional committed Freudians, there are few, if any, “Frazerites” remaining 
in the academy.11 He has also largely vanished from the pedigree of philoso-
phers of disenchantment, and when scholars have reconstructed the history 
of the narrative, they tend to begin with Weber or even Descartes.12 This is a 
striking omission because Frazer was a large influence on subsequent theorists 
from Freud and Weber to the Frankfurt School and the Vienna Circle.
Tracing Frazer’s version of the evolution of human thought should help us 
understand the roots of the disenchantment narrative as it appears today, long 
after The Golden Bough has been discredited. While disenchantment has come 
to be a driving sociological narrative, its early form as the project of a folklor-
ist has concrete implications. This is because despite what I’ve just written, 
there is a certain belatedness to Frazer’s formulation. Reading the history of 
British folklore studies with an eye to the end of magic does indeed produce 
a number of precedents for Frazer’s famous formulation. But the shock is that 
disenchantment appears not primarily in the theory of the master folklorists, 
but within the folktales themselves that often located fairies, magic, and mir-
acles in a bygone age. In fact, the departure of fairy enchantments was one of 
the first motifs that the nascent discipline discovered. Although these tales 
were not his only source, Frazer seems to have been allowing his theory to be 
imprinted by folkloric conceptions— not, as we may have thought, the other 
way around. And though Frazer is famous for his repudiation of magic, I show 
that he had an unsettled relationship to magic, such that his work could lead 
to easy recuperation by European magicians.
In the pages that follow, I begin by locating Frazer’s project in the larger 
context of Victorian folklore, and show that his vacillations were not peculiar 
to him but endemic in the early days of the discipline.

128 Chapter Five
T h e  C u lt u r al  R u i n s  o f Pagani s m
It is commonly imagined that superstition avoids great cities, and locates itself amid 
woods and streams in the depths of the country. A slight acquaintance with the inhabi-
tants of London must speedily dissipate this idea. On the outskirts of our prodigious 
city, where the sheen of the gas- lamps mingles with the light of the glow- worm in the 
fields, beliefs as ancient as the world still prevail in unimpaired force. The Lamia of an-
tiquity, that roamed about moonlit shores, and through the dark recesses of forests, to 
entrap and devour stray children, has found her way to the environs of London.
 J a m e s Au g u s t u s S t.  Jo h n, The Education of the People, 1859
Since the early 1970s, anthropologists have formulated a now standard aut-
ocritique of their discipline, succinctly summarized as the claim that “theories 
of anthropology represent nothing more than types of imperialist ideology.”13 
The essence of this observation is not only that anthropology emerged from 
the asymmetrical power relations between Europe and conquered peoples, 
but also that anthropologists facilitated the practical enterprise of managing 
empires. Furthermore, anthropologists reinforced the inequalities that existed 
between European elites and the rest of the world, by objectifying indigenous 
peoples under the ahistorical categories of the “primitive” and “the savage 
without history” as part of the process of legitimating European expansion and 
civilizing missions.14 All of this critique is applicable. Yet, for all the scholar-
ship on the history of anthropology, the history of folklore studies has received 
remarkable little attention, perhaps because it remains a comparatively mar-
ginal field in the contemporary Angolophone academy.15
This gap in the scholarship is important for three reasons: first, folklore 
studies had an outsized influence on the other social sciences of the period; 
second, its politics were a mess, but they do not map well onto the standard 
critique of anthropology; and finally, to the degree to which folklorists were 
invested in the notion of cultural survivals, they often argued that the central 
feature of modernity was not the departure of the supernatural, but its uncanny 
persistence in the face of modernization. Therefore it becomes important to 
locate Frazer, a classicist turned folklorist, in this milieu.
*
Superficially, folklore studies might seem to resemble anthropology insofar as 
it produced a comparable ahistorical other. By way of illustration, in the 1884 
essay “The Method of Folklore,” Andrew Lang famously summarized the field 

The Decline of Magic 
129
as follows: “The student of folklore is thus led to examine the usages, myths 
and ideas of savages, which are still retained in rude enough shape, by the 
European peasantry.”16 To be a folklorist was therefore to study the supersti-
tions of “savages” as preserved in the world of the European peasant. If British 
anthropology was about objectifying foreign “primitives,” folklore seems to 
have been preoccupied with the savages within the home islands, even as folk-
lorists like Lang (and Frazer) gestured at the importance of studying both. In 
this sense, folklore studies inhabited a position we might today associate with 
sociology: as a kind of internal anthropology of the modern West.
To trace what was specific to the historical trajectory of British folklore, we 
need to know right off that its conception of the “folk” emerged across a set 
of domestic, rather than extra- national, screens of difference. It can be viewed 
as developing from the long process of internal turmoil, consolidation, and 
cultural differentiation of the United Kingdom, which during the Victorian 
period was experienced as an internal English empire imposed variously on 
the Welsh, Scottish, and Irish nations. By the 1850s, the conception of human-
ity as classified into distinct “races” was also coming into vogue. These factors 
combined to produce racializing discourses that differentiated supposedly 
superior “white” Britons, referred to as “Teutons” or “Anglo- Saxons,” against 
the supposedly inferior race of “Celts,” while simultaneously further stigma-
tizing other minority “races.”17 Folklore as a field started from the assumption 
that all these minority groups possessed distinct cultures and thus folkloric 
traditions. Moreover, coming into the nineteenth century, British identity was 
partially routed through the Protestantisms of the official Anglican Church 
and the Scottish Kirk. While Protestant dissenters were largely invisible to 
folklorists, the field also focused on Catholic, Jewish, and “pagan” customs 
and their purported survival in local communities. In effect, the only people 
who truly lacked folklore were urban, educated English Protestants.
British folklore studies, accordingly, coalesced around a particular set of 
tensions regarding its basic subject, “folklore.” On one hand, some folklorists 
described the project as rooted in uncovering and exposing those supersti-
tions that were an obstacle to modernization. In that sense, they were actually 
working to demolish their own subject matter and extend the reach of “civili-
zation” deeper into the British world and later its colonies.18
On the other hand, many folklorists often worked to preserve local cultures 
and traditions in danger of being lost by “modernization.” Representatives of 
internal minorities were overrepresented in the early history of folklore stud-
ies, which had important members who were Jewish (Moses Gaster, Joseph 
Jacobs), Scottish (Lang, Frazer), Welsh (John Rhŷs), and Irish (Douglas Hyde, 

130 Chapter Five
Thomas Keightley, Ella Young); and they often figured prominently in various 
political campaigns to encourage the devolution of Great Britain’s internal em-
pire. Indeed, Douglas Hyde’s trajectory from folklorist and cofounder of the 
Gaelic League to first president of Ireland is extreme but emblematic of one of 
the political impulses that animated the discipline.19 Because of the era’s fac-
ile equation between the civilizing and the Anglicizing process, we could see 
folklore studies as either analyzing those groups who need to be assimilated 
or as reinforcing those cultural resources that might resist Anglicizing. It thus 
could be seen as either a consolidation of empire or resistance to imperialism 
and modernization.
Given that for much of anthropology’s early history, its practitioners were 
external to the populations that they observed, even when anthropologists 
spoke out on behalf of non- European peoples, it is hard not to imagine the 
kind of Dances with Wolves version of anticolonialism, which portrays a white 
savior figure as crucial to the protection of indigenous cultures. Early folklor-
ists from internal minorities seem therefore to be in a different camp because 
they were able to speak not just for the Irish, say, but as Irish. Still, they were 
not the whole of the conversation. Within the community of early folklorists, 
one might find procolonialists and anticolonialists; some were attempting to 
consolidate enlightenment, while others seemingly worked to undermine it.
*
Early folkloristics’ fundamental orientation presupposed a persistence of the 
primitive within the modern. Despite the field’s deep political fault lines, folk-
lorists were largely united in the notion of “superstitions” as cultural survivals. 
It was largely taken as given that folktales, myths, and rituals were “antiquities” 
representing remnants of prehistoric cultural systems.20 The supposition that 
folkways were ubiquitous in even civilized cultures tended to undercut the 
notion that cultures represented complete evolutionary stages. Again, the com-
parison to anthropology is useful because while early anthropologists often 
saw non- European “savages” as living museum relics preserving complete 
stages of cultural evolution,21 the folklorists were invested in seeing “prim-
itives” within European culture, and thus they were inclined to see cultural 
evolution as incomplete; this meant that folklorists often insisted on the per-
sistence of superstition and belief in magic.
A version of the disenchantment of the world— or at least, the idea that 
modernization or urbanization would abolish superstition— was a known 
narrative, but folklorists often presented it as the nonscholarly or naïve view. 

The Decline of Magic 
131
As this section’s epigraph illustrates, scholars argued that even in urban and 
modern London, “beliefs as ancient as the world still prevail in unimpaired 
force.” The average Joe might imagine that all superstitions would vanish with 
the coming of progress, but the folklorist knew different and was even more 
likely to stage the counterargument: that modernity was still haunted.22
By way of another example, in Primitive Manners and Customs (1879), the 
English folklorist and archeologist James Farrer reminded his readers that 
Victorian Britons lived amidst the cultural (and physical) ruins of the Roman 
world, and he went on to describe “the mass of purely pagan ideas, which 
varnished over by Christianity, but barely hidden by it, grow in rank profu-
sion in our very midst and exercise a living hold.”23 Embracing an analogue 
as old as the discipline, Farrer argued for a vision of folklore studies as a kind 
of cultural archeology capable of recovering pagan structures beneath their 
contemporary Christian veneer. The assumption of the whole enterprise is 
that such cultural relics still exist, and in such a state that they can be analyzed.
In part because British folklorists were initially more restricted than an-
thropologists in their geographic focus, they often imagined that within Brit-
ain, they saw evidence of a specific pre- Christian religion, associated with the 
mysterious “Druids” and preserved in fragmentary form in local folkways, 
standing stones, and peasant superstitions.24 In effect, they often supposed 
that tales of goblins and fairies were vestigial remnants of half- remembered 
pagan gods.25 Accordingly, in addition to its spadework in excavating national 
essences and local cultures, folklore studies was almost from the get- go preoc-
cupied with reconstructing the cultural ruins of a pagan past.
Insofar as folklore studies cohered around “superstition” as a master cate-
gory, the field presumed an ability to perceive continuities across cultural 
epochs. Indeed, folkloristics was able to make a case for itself only to the de-
gree that superstitions remained, and remained relevant. They also provided 
empirical evidence to bolster this claim. In the Germany, Britain, and France 
of 1879, Farrer reminded his readers, enchantment still lingered with supersti-
tions around specific days, and belief in magic charms, wise- women, and even 
witchcraft. By way of example, he provided statistical evidence indicating the 
persistence of superstitions around unlucky Fridays in France and observed 
that
many a German that lay dead on the carnage fields of the late [Franco- 
Prussian, 1870– 71] war was found to have carried his word- charm as his safest 
shield against sword or bullet. Most English villages still have their wise men 
or women whose powers range, like those of the shamans in savage tribes, from 

132 Chapter Five
ruling the planets to curing rheumatics or detecting thieves; and witchcraft still 
has its believers, occasionally its victims, as of yore.26
For all the folklorists’ talk of evolution, evidence like this suggested to many 
that peasant life remained fundamentally unchanged from that of pre- Christian 
Europe and hence would have pushed against any narrative of disenchantment 
as a universal or uniform trajectory. Initially, at least, James Frazer agreed with 
this assumption.
Th e Go l d e n  B o u g h be fo r e  D i s e nch antme nt
The primitive Aryan, in all that regards his mental fibre and texture, is not extinct. He is 
amongst us to this day. The great intellectual and moral forces which have revolutionised 
the educated world have scarcely affected the peasant.
 J a m e s F r a z e r , The Golden Bough (first edition), 1890
Frazer is today famous as a cultural evolutionist and for describing the tran-
sition from magic to religion. It is often said that this argument appears in his 
most well- known work, The Golden Bough. In fact, these claims do not make an 
appearance in the first edition in 1890. In this edition, Frazer blurs rather than 
distinguishes magic and religion, and he largely overlooks grand narratives of 
cultural evolution. Instead, his main argument is that little has changed in the 
religious- magical landscape of Europe.
The main aim of the first edition of The Golden Bough was to reconstruct 
the whole edifice of primitive “Aryan” religion, which, like other folklorists, 
Frazer saw expressed in the seasonal rituals of the European peasant.27 In this 
project, Frazer had a number of interlocutors, including Max Müller. Frazer, 
however, dismissed Müller’s analysis of the Veda and philological reconstruc-
tion of primitive religion on the basis of myths, and went straight to the Italian 
peasant. In this, Frazer followed the standard model in folklore studies by 
simultaneously romanticizing and denigrating the rural population of Europe. 
In the first edition of the work, he betrayed some ambivalence about supersti-
tion, making it simultaneously valuable as the remnant of the ancient Aryan 
religion, and yet also a sign of the primitive savagery in the heart of modern 
Europe.
The narrative of the work is far from the teleological progression of epochs 
for which Frazer would later be famous. While he described an evolving trans-
formation of elite thought, he imagined that the mentality of rural Europe had 
remained largely unchanged from time immemorial. In other words, before he 

The Decline of Magic 
133
ever formulated a narrative of disenchantment, Frazer emphasized timeless-
ness, albeit with some exceptions.28 This was, of course, in keeping with the 
disciplinary assumptions of early Victorian folklore studies.
It is worth emphasizing the distinctions Frazer did not make in the first 
edition, but which became crucial to later editions. He initially described 
contemporary European peasants as practicing religion mostly for the sake 
of this- worldly magical effects.29 In this the peasant preserves the character 
of “primitive religion,” whose rites, Frazer argued, are “magical rather than 
propitiatory.”30 Magic is not opposed to religion, nor is it prior to it, in the first 
edition’s account; instead it is merely one type of religious ritual. This would 
not have been a controversial claim; there were many precedents for the asser-
tion that magic was a lower type of religion.31 Furthermore, Frazer maintained 
that primitive religion is “superstitious,” and hence generally amalgamated 
rather than differentiated the categories of religion, magic, and superstition.32
The main thrust of The Golden Bough is that Christ, especially as figured in 
the passion narrative, is just the latest incarnation of a primitive Aryan god or 
King of the Wood. Christianity (or at least, Catholicism), is really paganism in 
Semitic guise.33 Frazer concluded the first edition of The Golden Bough: “The 
result, then, of our inquiry is to make it probable that, down to the time of the 
Roman Empire and the beginning of our era, the primitive worship of the 
Aryans was maintained nearly in its original form in the sacred grove at Nemi, 
as in the oak woods of Gaul, of Prussia, and of Scandinavia; and that the King 
of the Wood lived and died as an incarnation of the supreme Aryan god, whose 
life was in the mistletoe or Golden Bough.”34 As Frazer has argued over the 
course of the text, it was a King of the Wood who dies and is reborn as a sign of 
the agricultural cycle and toward whom Aryans had historically directed rites 
in order to assure the fertility of the womb and field. Frazer cued his readers to 
the identification between Aryan paganism and Catholicism in the final para-
graph of the first edition, which conjures the sound of Catholic church bells, 
ringing out the angelus and echoing through the groves of modern Nemi, and 
concludes with the sentence: “Le roi est mort, vive le roi!”35
Frazer began his scholarly career as a classicist and the first edition is an 
attempt to show that contemporary Europe has preserved classical paganism 
more than it wants to admit. As we know from a query letter Frazer wrote to 
his publisher George Macmillan in 1889, one of the aims of the work was to 
demonstrate the continuities between Aryan paganism and Christianity.36 Ba-
sically, Frazer wanted his reader to think of Christian faith or at least Christian 
praxis as superstitious and atavistic. Here the characterizations of Frazer as an 
undertaker of religion are fair. But the work would undergo significant shifts 

134 Chapter Five
in later editions that would make its aims and basic arguments quite different. 
Instead of continuities, it would come to emphasize evolutionary progressions.
*
If the main claim of the first edition of The Golden Bough is that very little has 
changed from the primitive Aryan cult to the modern Catholic Church, why 
and when does Frazer move on to a disenchantment narrative? Using Frazer’s 
letters, we can date the shift with some degree of precision. Its first appear-
ance is in a letter Frazer sent to the Australian anthropologist Walter Baldwin 
Spencer on November 28, 1898, as part of a longer correspondence between 
the two about how to interpret the “totemism” of the Australian aborigines. 
In this context, Frazer wrote:
I am coming more and more to the conclusion that if we define religion as the 
propitiation of natural and supernatural powers, and magic as the coercion of 
them, magic has everywhere preceded religion. It is only when men find by 
experience that they cannot compel the higher powers to comply with their 
wishes, that they condescend to entreat them. In time, after long ages, they be-
gin to realise that entreaty is also vain, and then they try compulsion again, but 
this time the compulsion is applied within narrower limits and in a different 
way from the old magical method. In short religion is replaced by science. The 
order of evolution, then, of human thought and practice is magic— religion— 
science. We in this generation live in a transition epoch between religion and 
science, an epoch which will last of course for many generations to come. It is 
for those who care for progress to aid the final triumph of science as much as 
they can in their day.37
In this letter Frazer had arrived at his famous master narrative: the cultural 
evolution of humankind and the progression from magic to religion to science. 
Frazer’s sketch here nicely matches the popular summary of the myth of dis-
enchantment. I explore this narrative and its implications in greater detail in 
the next section, but it is worth underscoring that Frazer’s initial rhetorical 
purpose is especially clear in this passage: he takes for granted the opposition 
between religion and science and seems to be suggesting that he can use the 
disenchantment narrative to facilitate the death of religion. In other words, the 
myth of disenchantment is itself supposed to be secularizing.
If this letter represents the terminus ante quem by which the disenchant-
ment narrative had been formulated, it does not take us very far in teasing 

The Decline of Magic 
135
out the details of what inspired Frazer.38 There is some disagreement about 
this in the small world of Frazer studies. Peter Baker has argued it emerged 
from Frazer’s falling- out with Andrew Lang; Robert Ackerman has shown 
that Frazer remained friends with Lang until much later and has argued that 
the new schema emerged organically from Frazer’s reading of ethnographies 
of Australian Aborigines; finally, Robert Fraser (no relation to James Frazer) 
emphasizes the publication in 1896 of An Introduction to the History of Reli-
gion by Frank Byron Jevons.39 Of these, the last suggestion has the most merit, 
insofar as Frazer seems to have imported some of his distinction between 
religion and magic from Jevons, but Jevons explicitly rejected reading them 
chronologically.40
Instead, Frazer’s turn to disenchantment is more closely mirrored in Die 
Religion des Veda (The religion of the Veda, 1894), an otherwise overlooked 
work by the German philologist Hermann Oldenberg, which argued that in 
pre- Vedic India there was widespread popular belief in the efficacy of magical 
arts (Zauberkunst) directed toward compelling spirits and nature demons; 
and as demons became gods, magic evolved into religion.41 The work largely 
confines its conclusions to the Indian case, but it utilizes the basic evolutionary 
schema that Frazer would make famous. From a catalog of Frazer’s library in 
1907, we know that he possessed a nearly complete collection of Oldenberg’s 
writings.42 Frazer refers to Die Religion des Veda in the notes to a translation 
he did in 1897.43 More conclusively, there is a brief reference to Oldenberg in 
the preface to the second edition of The Golden Bough.44
Taken together, I think Frazer’s turn toward disenchantment was in some 
sense intellectually overdetermined.45 But there was another place Frazer 
could have found disenchantment, and in a form that parallels some of its 
later iterations. Following the Bridget Cleary case in 1894, Frazer as well as his 
peers in folklore studies returned to the issue of fairy belief. In that context, 
Frazer could not help but noticing a central motif: the departure of the fairies, 
which represented one primary site within the field for theorizing about the 
transformations of modernity and the departure of magic.
T h e  D e part u r e  o f t h e Fai ri e s
The boy and his sister stood gazing in utter dismay and astonishment, as rider after 
rider, each one more uncouth and dwarfish than the one that had preceded it, passed the 
cottage, and disappeared among the brushwood, which at that period covered the hill, 
until at length the entire rout [sic], except the last rider, who lingered a few yards behind 
the others, had gone by. “What are ye, little mannie? and where are ye going?” inquired 

136 Chapter Five
the boy, his curiosity getting the better of his fears and his prudence. “Not of the race of 
Adam,” said the creature, turning for a moment in his saddle: “the People of Peace shall 
never more be seen in Scotland.”
 H u g h  M i l l e r , The Old Red Sandstone, 1841
Civilization has crept in upon all fairy strongholds and disenchanted the many fair 
scenes in which they were wont to hold their courts. . . . The light of science has shone 
upon every green mound and dispossessed it of its fairy inhabitants.
 R o b e r t  F e r g u s s o n, Rambling Sketches in the Far North, 1883
From almost the beginning of its history, British folklore studies was preoccu-
pied with a class of beings known as the “fairy,” and indeed, the terms folktale 
and fairy tale were regularly treated as near synonyms.46 Had folklore studies 
originated in a different cultural milieu, it would likely have found a different 
representative classification. But when thinkers from the British Isles turned 
their attention toward regional cultures, their informants often described fabu-
lous creatures, magical objects, and unusual features of the physical landscape 
in terms of the “fay” or “fairy.” Indeed, the term fairy (also written faerie, 
fae, fay, faye) was not just a particular class of magical beings but first and 
foremost a general reference to the unusual, fated, bewitched, or enchanted.47 
Early folktales are full of references to fairy mounds, fairy rings, fairy animals, 
fairy enchantments, and, of course, the strange doings of fairies more gener-
ally. Hence, folklore studies from the beginning would seem to have been an 
exploration of magic and enchantment.
“Fairy” also quickly became a master classification for a type of being, 
which partially subsumed a range of different local creatures (e.g., goblins, 
pixies, lutin) under one heading. If at the word fairy you are imagining a small 
winged pixie, then you should know at the outset that Tinker Bell came later 
and that folklorists usually had something much more sinister in mind.48 With 
substantial regional variations, the general belief about fairies characterized 
them as shadowy or invisible creatures of uncertain size, adept at inflicting 
illness, causing accidents and deaths, blighting crops, and abducting children 
and sometimes adults. They were even thought to be capable of assuming 
human form.49 It was not that fairies were necessarily thought to be evil, but 
that they were mischievous and adept at harming those who gave them offense. 
Significantly, fairies were also often located in the past or described as in the 
process of vanishing. Hence, fairy tales themselves often provided an embry-
onic version of the myth of disenchantment.
By way of explanation, as folklorists began sifting through the material of 

The Decline of Magic 
137
oral culture, they took a mess of local histories, story variations, ballads, and 
anecdotes, and classified them according to repeated themes (later formalized 
in motifs and tale types as Aarne– Thompson [AT] classification). Some of 
these necessarily had to do with fairies. It was observed, for example, that in 
many tales, a fairy offers to aid someone who is willing to marry her (in the 
later AT classification, motif F302.3.2.1).
Crucially for our purposes, one of the oldest and most widespread motifs 
was the departure of the fairies (motif F388), which we might gloss as the claim 
that while there used to be fairies everywhere, they have since, aside from a few 
fugitives, left our world.50 As has been noted by several contemporary scholars, 
“The very idea of the fairies’ departure and of the fading of the fairy faith may 
be seen as an integral part of the fairy lore complex.”51 For a concrete example 
of this motif, glance at the section epigraph, describing the fairies’ exodus from 
Scotland as recounted to the Scottish folklorist Hugh Miller.52
The fairies’ farewell is an old trope. An early version appears in Geoffrey 
Chaucer, The Tale of the Wyf of Bathe (ca. 1380– 1400), which includes the 
lines:
In th’olde dayes of the Kyng Arthour,
Of which that Britons speken greet honour,
All was this land fulfild of fayerye.
The elf- queene, with hir joly compaignye,
Daunced ful ofte in many a grene mede.
This was the olde opinion, as I rede;
I speke of manye hundred yeres ago.
But now kan no man se none elves mo.53
To paraphrase in modern English: in King Arthur’s day, the land was full of 
fairy enchantment, and the elf queen and her companions danced in many 
green meadows, but by the fourteenth century, nobody could see the elves 
anymore. By describing the loss of magic and the withdrawal of animating 
beings, the departure of the fairies could be seen as a kind of embryo for the 
myth of disenchantment in folkloric form. At the same time, its appearance in 
about 1380 means that the departure was first articulated significantly earlier 
than most scholars would see or even date the onset of modernization or ratio-
nalization. Although we’ll look at later attempts to explain their departure, it 
is worth noting that this trope suggests that magic was over— banished— long 
before the printing press, the Protestant Reformation, the “scientific revolu-
tion,” or the urbanization of England.

138 Chapter Five
Chaucer’s pronouncement might seem prophetic, but for the fact that the 
fairies would continue to be described in regions that they had supposedly 
abandoned, down to the present day.54 Britons would not only talk of fair-
ies for the next six hundred years, but they would also repeatedly describe 
different variations on the departure of the fairies. Indeed, it would be hard 
to overstate the frequency of this trope, which was expressed in hundreds of 
iterations in recorded oral tales, novels, and poems, such as works by Edward 
Bulwer- Lytton, Charlotte Brontë, Robert Graves, Rudyard Kipling, and Wil-
liam Butler Yeats.55
*
Significantly, some iterations of this motif included theorizing about the rea-
sons behind the fairies’ withdrawal from the world. In effect, storytellers were 
preserving folk theories of disenchantment. A few examples by way of illus-
tration:
Already in the 1680s, John Aubrey suggested in Remaines of Gentilisme, 
“the divine art of Printing and Gunpowder have frightened away Robin- good- 
fellow and the Fayries.”56 This might sound as though Aubrey is describing 
rationalization and disenchantment, but Aubrey was a believer in supernatural 
apparitions, and elsewhere he recounted anecdotes of fairy abductions in a 
way that suggested that he thought them to be veridical.57 So the fairies being 
“frightened away” are likely what he understood to be real beings going into 
hiding.
In 1810, the English engraver Robert Hartley Cromek asserted that the 
“Fareweel [sic] o’ the Fairies” was a well- attested event of about 1790, during 
which thousands of fairies were witnessed entering into a hill, bidding human-
kind goodbye, and then vanishing.58 By way of explanation, Cromek recounted 
the Scottish adage “Whare the scythe cuts and the sock rives / Hae done wi’ 
fairies an bee- bykes” (in my modern paraphrase: plowing and mowing eradi-
cated both fairies and bees’ nests), which he explained thus: “The land once 
ripped by the plowshare, or the sward once passed over by the scythe pro-
claimed the banishment of the Fairies from holding residence there forever 
after. The quick progress of Lowland agriculture will completely overthrow 
their empire; none now are seen, save solitary and dejected fugitives, rumi-
nating among the ruins of their fallen kingdom!”59 While scholars would later 
theorize that urbanization or broader changes in rural life were engines of 
disenchantment, these early examples might seem to have more to do with 

The Decline of Magic 
139
the older strain of folklore, which suggested that fairies could not stand the 
presence of iron and that they were averse to plows disrupting fairy rings.60
*
One of the most common explanations for the departure of the fairy described 
them as having been expelled by the arrival of Protestantism. As one Scottish 
informant put it in 1838, “The Methodist preachers are driving away all the 
trows and bogues and fairies.”61 This might sound like a consequence of the 
Protestant attacks on superstition, but other versions of the motif describe 
the conflict literally. For example, in 1591, the English bishop Richard Corbet 
penned a poetic adieu to the elves, which included the lines:
By which wee note the faries
Were of the old profession,
Theyre songs were Ave Maryes,
Theyre daunces were procession;
But now, alas! they all are dead,
Or gone beyond the seas . . .62
By “old profession,” the bishop does not mean that the fairies were prostitutes, 
but that they were Roman Catholics (hence the Ave Marias). Tellingly, this 
was also the period in which Catholics and Protestants had begun arguing 
over the cessation of miracles (the notion that divine miracles had ended some 
time after the apostolic age). While not all Protestant denominations agred that 
miracles had ended, Catholics were routinely attacked for believing in false 
miracles and other supperstitions.63 So by 1591, one can already see versions 
of the narrative that suggest an antagonism between the Protestant confessions 
and enchantment. But the surprise of Corbet’s poem is that instead of fading 
paganism, it is the fairies themselves who are leaving, like Catholic refugees 
fleeing to France.
Nor were these isolated anecdotes. Throughout the nineteenth century, 
folklorists recorded accounts that suggested both that preachers had expelled 
the fairies and that the fairies were real beings who had gone into exile.64 In-
deed, as late as 1909, the Anglo- Scottish noblewoman and occultist Lady 
Archibald Campbell suggested that “the tyranny of the Calvinist fanatic in 
Scotland” and the Christian persecution of witchcraft had dimmed people’s 
psychical perception of the hidden folk. Moreover, she suspected that “the 

140 Chapter Five
inroad of restless civilization” had “disenchanted many a faery centre.” But 
she also claimed to have experienced firsthand encounters with fairies in out- 
of- the- way places.65
In sum, various iterations of the fairies’ disappearance often encoded both 
nostalgia and speculation about exactly why magic or animating spirits might 
have been inclined to vanish. Frazer may have heard versions of this motif 
during his childhood in Scotland, but it is indisputable that he was struck by 
the Bridget Cleary case, citing the incident repeatedly in various publications, 
including later editions of The Golden Bough.66 He was interested in fairy tales 
more broadly, and when he turned his hand to fiction, he put fairies in his 
work.67 We know too that as part of his process of getting further enmeshed 
in the academic world of folklore studies, Frazer read many works that them-
selves contained the departure of the fairies.68 Moreover, in my research at the 
Frazer archives at Trinity College, Cambridge, I found a collection of news-
paper clippings Frazer made from 1888 to 1899 that demonstrate that he was  
closely following contemporary folk customs. Strikingly, in 1893, just as he was 
coming to theorize disenchantment, he excerpted and marked with an X an 
article from the Scotsman that included an account of the fairy farewell.69 None 
of these versions of the fairy farewell were identical with Frazer’s theory, but 
they do suggest a certain backdrop against which that thesis was formulated.
T h e  D r e ams  o f M agi c
The dreams of magic may one day be the waking realities of science.
 J a m e s F r a z e r , The Golden Bough (second edition), 1900
When the second edition of The Golden Bough was issued in 1900, it came 
with a new subheading: A Study in Magic and Religion— the appearance of the 
new term magic demonstrating its importance to the work’s revised structure. 
Though built around the skeleton of the previous edition, The Golden Bough 
was now animated by a new master narrative, what we might call a canonical 
version of the disenchantment thesis; namely, history as an evolutionary pro-
gression from magic through religion and on to science.70 Not only was this 
historical sequence influential, but also the distinctions between the terms 
it rested on— magic, religion, and science— would have a lasting impact on 
subsequent scholarship.
There is a standard scholarly reading of The Golden Bough that sees the 
work as rooted in a secularization thesis, a naïve “faith in progress,” or an 
Enlightenment impulse.71 But Frazer continued to link magic and science to-

The Decline of Magic 
141
gether, and often in a manner that suggested their shared opposition to reli-
gion. This does little to disturb Frazer’s reputation as anti- Christian thinker, 
but begins to put pressure on the received view of his attitude toward en-
chantment. Moreover, later editions of The Golden Bough, if anything, hint 
at a more favorable attitude toward magic. The second striking aspect of the 
text, which has very rarely been commented on, is that science was not the 
terminus of Frazer’s version of the evolution of thought. As the following will 
explore, Frazer conceptualized a fourth position beyond science, and he also 
demonstrated serious misgivings about the scientific enterprise. All of this 
becomes hard to square with his image as a classical enlightener or proponent 
of unidirectional cultural evolution.
At first pass, Frazer’s three phases are evocative of Auguste Comte’s three 
conditions or stages. Comte had described the law of human progress in “three 
different theoretical stages: the theological or fictional stage; the metaphysical 
or abstract stage; finally, the scientific or positive stage.”72 I discuss Comte’s 
project in greater detail elsewhere.73 But a significant difference between the 
two models is that Frazer sees magic, rather than some form of religion, at the 
beginning of history. This point is worth emphasizing because it was neces-
sary for the whole myth of disenchantment to take shape. It might not sound 
innovative today, but distinguishing religion from magic and locating magic at 
the origin of culture was a novel claim. Indeed, what Frazer in the first edition 
called a form of primitive religion, in the second becomes magic.74 As Frazer 
explained, “Just as on the material side of human culture there has everywhere 
been an Age of Stone, so on the intellectual side there has everywhere been an 
Age of Magic.”75 What were the stakes of presenting cultural history in terms 
of Stone Age magic?
At the core, Frazer intended to counter two widely held views of “savage” 
religion. First, the ghost theory of religion— found in the work of Tylor, Her-
bert Spencer, and even Hume— that claims human culture was originally ani-
mistic, either in terms of spirits or ghosts.76 In this conception, primitives saw 
a world alive with spirits. The second and older theory— common to much of 
hermeticism and reinvigorated by Andrew Lang (especially in The Making of 
Religion, 1898), and to a lesser degree Max Müller— described earliest human-
ity as worshipping a High God or practicing an original monotheism, which 
only later decayed into polytheism and magic.77 This camp tended to suggest a 
primordial divine revelation from which humankind later strayed. Regardless, 
both of these schemas depicted religious primitives believing in spirits or gods.
The debate about primitive religion was particularly active in the period in 
which Frazer was revising The Golden Bough, but remarkably, when he chose 

142 Chapter Five
to intervene, it was not to come to the aid of either camp. Instead, he rejected 
the idea that early humanity might have been under the sway of religion. It is 
easy to suspect that Frazer, himself of an atheistic or agnostic temperament, 
was necessarily opposed to the idea of primitive revelation, but also hesitant 
to accept the idea that religious beliefs of any sort were primitive and thus a 
fundamental aspect of human nature.
In his attempt to refute the idea of primordial religions, Frazer turned to a 
set of ethnographies that supposedly described the most “savage” of all living 
peoples: the indigenous inhabitants of Australia. By way of context, the latter 
half of the nineteenth century was a crucial period in the European coloni-
zation of Australia. Colonial settlers gradually forced the indigenous peoples 
out of the fertile farmlands on the coast, and this— combined with the Austra-
lian gold rushes of midcentury and increased immigration more generally— 
pushed European colonization into the less fertile Northern Territory. Often 
having been exiled from their historical lands and driven to the point of sub-
sistence, the Australian “aborigine” became a significant object of scholarly 
study as emblematic of the primitive.78 Freud, Durkheim, and other European 
thinkers of the period would use these reports of Australian tribes to theorize 
primitive mentality or the most basic form of society.79
Frazer’s innovation was to take seriously a common theme in many of these 
accounts— that indigenous Australian tribes were supposedly so backward 
that they lacked religion altogether.80 For example, as George Angas argued 
in Savage Life and Scenes in Australia and New Zealand (1847), the indige-
nous inhabitants “have no religious observances whatever. They acknowledge 
no Supreme Being, worship no idols, and believe only in the existence of a 
spirit whom they consider as the author of ill and regard with superstitious 
dread.”81 Frazer read and cited this account, as well as numerous others that 
made similar claims.82 The widely accepted, if imperialist, notion that religion 
was nonexistent among the indigenous peoples of Australia allowed Frazer 
to make the argument that religion was not truly a universal aspect of human 
nature.83 In this Frazer transformed colonial ideology into the foundations of 
his theoretical enterprise.
Frazer was presented with a choice as to how to characterize the most 
primitive form of human thought. The “savages’ ” lack of religion was often 
read in two ways: they were said to possess either “superstition” or “witch-
craft” (although often the two categories were blurred). If Frazer had described 
the basic trajectory of human history in terms of the progression from super-
stition to knowledge or science, he would not have been saying anything new. 
This was a popular theme in Victorian Britain.84 But instead Frazer chose 

The Decline of Magic 
143
“magic” as his master category, relegating “superstition” to a secondary posi-
tion. As he argued: “Now in regard to the question of the respective priority 
of magic or religion in the evolution of thought, it is very important to observe 
that among these rude savages, while magic is universally practised, religion 
in the sense of a propitiation or conciliation of the higher powers seems to be 
nearly unknown. Roughly speaking all men in Australia are magicians, but 
not one is a priest.”85 Frazer’s choice of “magic” here expresses an ambiguity 
that superstition lacked, allowing later thinkers with a Rousseauean bent to 
advocate on his authority for magic as the most natural state. This is not too 
far from some of the arguments Frazer himself would make.
Having shown that aboriginal peoples lack religion, Frazer then went on to 
argue that magic is a cultural universal, stating: “Magic remains everywhere 
and at all times substantially alike in its principles and practice.”86 While today 
it is common (especially outside the field of religious studies) to insist on the 
universality of religion, whether understood cognitively or culturally, the uni-
versality of magic is rarely discussed and even more rarely asserted. Even in 
Frazer’s own period, where others had seen the ubiquity of natural religion, 
he has identified instead a kind of primordial natural magic.
Frazer rejected the idea of truly primitive religion. But, intriguingly, he 
shared a common conception of religion as rooted in belief in superior powers. 
As Frazer stated: “By religion then, I understand a propitiation or conciliation 
of powers superior to man which are believed to direct and control the course 
of nature and of human life. In this sense it will readily be perceived that religion 
is opposed in principle both to magic and to science.”87 The conflict between 
religion and science has been projected backward into human prehistory. The 
“superior powers” here are basically invisible agents or spirits. While today 
most people would assume that propitiating invisible powers has no place in 
science, they might balk at the same claim extended to magic. Instead of re-
treating from this position, however, Frazer repeatedly amplified it in the text, 
writings, for example, “Wherever sympathetic magic occurs in its pure unadul-
terated form, it assumes that in nature one event follows another necessarily 
and invariably without the intervention of any spiritual or personal agency.”88
Here one might imagine the typical Victorian reader spitting out their 
tea. Even a Victorian with no knowledge of Hermetic magic, who had never 
cracked open a grimoire, would have associated magic with demons or spirits. 
To argue the case that magic preceded all religion, Frazer had to make his 
primitives basically materialists or savage scientists, and so had to assert that 
spirits and magic do not naturally go together. He seems to have built on what 
used to be called “natural magic” as opposed to “demonic magic.” But the 

144 Chapter Five
occult of his day was rooted in spirits and had come to be more so alongside 
the rise of spiritualism. The contemporary European magical tradition thus 
looks to be the very anathema of Frazer’s carefully crafted typology.
Frazer was necessarily aware of this difficulty, but discounted it by suggest-
ing that when magic deals with invisible agents, “it treats them exactly in the 
same fashion as it treats inanimate agents.”89 Basically, the magician system-
atically compels, rather than implores, demons as if manipulating impersonal 
forces. It is unclear how the popular idea of witchcraft as devil worship would 
fit this conception of magic. But in general, Frazer interpreted spirit magic 
not as a failure of his schema, but as a “confusion” on the part of his infor-
mants who were themselves blending religion and magic. Frazer quoted R. H. 
Codrington’s The Melanesians to claim that among this group of East Indian 
islanders, magic is widespread, and that “almost every man of consideration 
knows how to approach some ghost or spirit, and has some secret of occult 
practices.”90 But Frazer glossed this: “The same confusion of magic and reli-
gion has survived among peoples that have risen to higher levels of culture.”91 
When magic is involved with spirits or ghosts, it is not unalloyed magic, but 
worse, a magic- religion hybrid.
What did Frazer imagine pure magic looked like?
*
In brief, unadulterated magic looks like science. Frazer suggested that magic’s 
“fundamental conception is identical with that of modern science.”92 Both 
magic and science are rooted in natural laws and the desire to understand and 
command the universe. They also both oppose religion. The main difference 
between the two turns out to be efficacy. As Frazer put it, “All magic is neces-
sarily false and barren; for were it ever to become true and fruitful, it would no 
longer be magic but science.”93 Basically, we can hear the position that Kurt 
Vonnegut would later make famous as “Science is magic that works.”94 Frazer 
elaborated on the parallel thus: “In both [magic and science] the succession 
of events is perfectly regular and certain, being determined by immutable laws, 
the operation of which can be foreseen and calculated precisely; the elements 
of caprice, of chance, and of accident are banished from the course of nature. 
Both of them open up a seemingly boundless vista of possibilities to him who 
knows the causes of things and can touch the secret springs that set in motion 
the vast and intricate mechanism of the world.”95 Although perhaps Frazer’s 
prose had gotten away from him, the implications of this passage are worth 
exploring. By his day, thinkers like Tylor had already argued that “savages” 

The Decline of Magic 
145
had a kind of proto-  or pseudoscience.96 The assumption was that attempt-
ing to explain the natural world led primitives to construct elaborate spiritual 
cosmologies. But Frazer was pushing the parallels between magic and science 
further than he has generally been given credit for doing. Like science, magic 
is based in calculation and repetition and presumes the regularity of nature 
and natural laws. Basically, magic is against supernatural miracles. Frazer also 
argues that magic is not traditionalist, but future- looking.97
To be fair, Frazer frequently criticized magic’s failings. He characterized 
“sympathetic magic” as rooted in the perception of false connections or ana-
logues, often as a kind of savage idolatry or savage semiotics that mistakes the 
symbol for the object it refers to.98 Later, Frazer would characterize magic as 
belief in action at distance and “savage telepathy.”99 But basically, magic is a 
folk science rooted in the way that the mind naturally perceives the world— 
just not the way the scientist builds on these common intuitions (amplifying 
some, subverting others) to create his or her system.100 In sum, science is the 
perfection of magic.
Despite the general evolutionary trajectory for which Frazer is famous, he 
also described occasions when the archaic mode of magic was reawakened. 
Frazer treated the first of these in positive terms. As he argued, after the age 
of magic had passed into the age of religion, magic was banished as supersti-
tion. Yet magic then reappered “from the obscurity and discredit into which 
it had fallen,” to give birth to science.101 His example is alchemy returning 
to become chemistry. The first thing to notice about this is that it flies in the 
face of Frazer’s grand narrative of disenchantment. According to the standard 
interpretation of Frazer, magic is supposed to be gradually eclipsed (or at the 
very least, relegated to the masses) over the course of cultural evolution. Its 
return to make way for science, as a therefore positive form of liberation, com-
plicates the picture.
This reveals that the core of Frazer’s philosophy of history is that religion 
was a momentary aberration in the grand trajectory of human thought. Science 
is a reversion to the commonsensical mentality of our distant ancestors. Which 
is to say, religion had extinguished a despiritualized magic, which then, para-
doxically, returned as science. Here Frazer does not sound like a stereotypical 
enlightener; instead, one might hear hints of the Romantic Spiral, as the initial 
term returns in a higher- order synthesis.
The complication is that in The Golden Bough, the second return of mag-
ic— or to put it properly, Frazer’s prophetic announcement of a possible return 
of magic— is described ominously: “We seem to move on a thin crust which 
may at any moment be rent by the subterranean forces slumbering below. From 

146 Chapter Five
time to time a hollow murmur underground or a sudden spirt of flame into 
the air tells of what is going on beneath our feet. Now and then the polite 
world is startled by a paragraph in a newspaper which tells how in Scotland an 
image has been found stuck full of pins for the purpose of killing an obnoxious 
laird or minister, how a woman has been slowly roasted to death as a witch 
in Ireland. . . .”102 Frazer had portrayed primitive magic nostalgically, but this 
passage suggests a hell slumbering below the “polite world” of upper- crust 
European society, ready to burst forth from below. The class dimension of 
this fear is all too clear, with its language of the subterranean, or we might say 
subaltern, threatening polite society. Another way to interpret this passage in 
context is that perhaps for Frazer, when magic returns in the elite world (high 
magic or science), it is a good thing; but when it resurges in the masses, it is 
dangerous. Thus, magic evokes the fear that within European society there is 
a slumbering kernel of savagery, ready to explode in violence, terrifying rites, 
and occult murders.
Again, passages like this seemingly go against the universality of his evo-
lutionary progression. Instead of an inevitable advancement from religion to 
science, Frazer worried that the world might slip back into a new Age of Magic. 
Given that for Frazer magic and science are doubles, the return of magic to 
combat science— and in that sense, to oppose itself— is deeply troubling. Thus 
Frazer was horrified by modern magic. In advocating his work as an antidote 
to this possible shift, we can see disenchantment as a political project, perhaps 
directed against popular or uneducated belief in magic. We might be tempted 
to imagine this project in terms of British imperialism or scientific subjugation, 
but that reading belies Frazer’s skepticism of scientific materialism.103 He was 
less of an arch- rationalist than the traditional reading of his oeuvre would 
suggest, as he argued: “We must remember that at bottom the generalisations 
of science or, in common parlance, the laws of nature are merely hypotheses 
devised to explain that ever- shifting phantasmagoria of thought. . . . In the last 
analysis magic, religion, and science are nothing but theories of thought; and 
as science has supplanted its predecessors, so it may hereafter be itself super-
seded by some more perfect hypothesis, perhaps by some totally different way 
of looking at the phenomena— of registering the shadows on the screen.”104 
The criticisms of empirical “phantasmagoria” could evidence a skepticism 
toward materialism or scientific completeness. More important, of the oft- 
repeated thumbnail sketch of Frazer’s schema as the movement from magic to 
religion to science, it is rarely remarked that he postulated a fourth position: 
there is something beyond science. But what did Frazer have in mind?
The reference to “shadows on the screen” is a clue. The evocation of the 

The Decline of Magic 
147
Platonic allegory of the cave is telling and is also no accident, given that Frazer 
started his academic career as a scholar of Plato.105 Hints of Neoplatonism 
also appear in other of Frazer’s published works; for example, in the short 
essay “Beyond the Shadows” (1895): “Communion with those higher powers, 
whatever they are, which existed before man began to be, and which will exist 
when the whole human race, as we are daily reminded by the cataclysms and 
convulsions of Nature, shall be swept out of existence for ever. It strengthens in 
us the blind conviction, or the trembling hope, that somewhere, beyond these 
earthly shadows, there is a world of light eternal, where the obstinate question-
ings of the mind will be answered and the heart find rest.”106 Although Frazer 
is often portrayed by contemporary scholars as reveling in the death of magic 
and the end of religion, Frazer’s actual vision was far from utopian. In these 
passages, he sounds like a mystical Neoplatonist or Hermeticist, alienated from 
the materiality of substance.
In summary, Frazer came to an evolutionary argument late. And if he wa-
vered between attacking and praising magic, that makes the evolutionism 
harder to decipher. While in my view Frazer’s anti- Christian bonafides are 
nearly beyond dispute, it is precisely the unsettled nature of his relationship to 
magic that contributed both to the uneasiness of his reception in sociological 
circles and to his quick recuperation by European pagan thinkers. Restated, 
the project of de- Christianization could be seen as either secularizing or pa-
ganizing, and Frazer seems at times to waver between the two options.
Th e Lo st T h e o ry: D e s p ir it ual i zi ng th e  Uni ve rs e
Every great advance in knowledge has extended the sphere of order and correspond-
ingly restricted the sphere of apparent disorder in the world.
 J a m e s F r a z e r , The Golden Bough (third edition), 1911
If one looks only at The Golden Bough, even the later editions, it would seem 
easy to refute Frazer’s grand trajectory. His conception of magic without spirits 
feels implausible and is hard to square with historical uses of the term. His 
notion of the religionless primitive seems conveniently close to British colonial 
ideology. And his idea of universal phases of thought sounds farfetched— 
all the more so when the supposed transitions between magic, religion, and 
science are complicated by the various returns of the repressed. There are 
many reasons why Frazer has so few contemporary followers.
Still, I’m a sucker for underdogs, and so I feel compelled to note that there 
is an overlooked account of disenchantment in Frazer’s later works that, while 

148 Chapter Five
not without its own flaws, is far more intriguing than what has come before. 
To see it, we need to examine one of Frazer’s less studied publications, The 
Worship of Nature (1926). As cited above, The Golden Bough had already sug-
gested that chaos and knowledge are opposed, to which Frazer added the 
observation that “a fuller knowledge would everywhere reduce the seeming 
chaos to cosmos.”107 At root for Frazer, the process of disenchantment is one 
of transforming apparent disorder into order, or we might say, reducing com-
plexity or transforming it into meaning.
Frazer expanded this claim in The Worship of Nature, arguing that there is 
a basic human inclination to search for “the Real” or for explanatory depth 
beyond the “phantasmagoria of this sensible world.”108 This is necessarily a 
simplifying process, as we want there to be unifying order behind the confu-
sion of sensory data. That humans postulate a coherence to the world (such 
as causation) that we must take as a given before we have an experience of 
the world as such is a realization that would have appealed to Hume. To put 
it in terms Fichte and other neo- Kantians would have found familiar, Frazer 
thought that we cannot help but posit that there is a thing- in- itself behind 
the phenomena, even when we have no reason to do. This is Frazer’s “Real.”
Frazer argued that this underlying structure of ultimate reality can be con-
ceived in either materialistic or spiritualistic terms.109 The first, common to 
the scientific project, imagines that ultimate reality is “dead, unconscious, in-
human.” The second, common to philosophical idealists and religionists of 
all stripes, imagines that mind (whether divine or human) is the fundament of 
experience; the core of reality is “living, conscious, and more or less analogous 
to human feeling and intelligence.”110
Regardless of whichever ultimate principle one adopts, the tendency 
toward simplification continues.111 In materialist terms, for example, one ini-
tially imagines that individual clouds, rocks, and trees are essentially different 
things, but which can all be placed in specific taxonomies (say cumulus, ig-
neous, pinaceae) and then represented as different combinations of the same 
physical elements. This is already an attempt to work out a simple system 
behind a welter of different entities. There is a trend toward a further simpli-
fication that reduces these fundamental types down to a single kind of sub-
stance, or to the movement of atoms and so on. If this has been the trajectory 
of modernity in the sciences, Frazer noted that it is also the course of the 
spiritual world:
This process of despiritualizing the universe, if I may be allowed to coin the 
phrase, has been a very slow and gradual one, lasting for ages. After men had 

The Decline of Magic 
149
peopled with a multitude of individual spirits every rock and hill . . . they be-
gan, in virtue of what we may call the economy of thought, to limit the number 
of the spiritual beings of whom their imagination at first had been so prodi-
gal. . . . To put it otherwise, the innumerable multitude of spirits or demons 
was generalized and reduced to a comparatively small number of deities; ani-
mism was replaced by polytheism. The world was now believed to be governed 
by a pantheon of gods and goddesses, each with his or her individual character, 
powers, and functions, in virtue of which they were entrusted with the control 
of particular departments of nature or of human life.112
Although this goes against his earlier conception of prehistoric spirit- free 
magic, here Frazer is arguing that in the primitive world, the essence of any 
given cloud or tree was a particular spirit. But over time, the human need for 
simplification has then led to the reduction of the plurality of local spirits 
to a limited pantheon of gods. The spirits of the grove become say, Apollo, 
who had other sacred sites throughout the Greco- Roman world. As one might 
guess, this trend ultimately leads toward monotheism or henotheism; a di-
versity of gods were increasingly assimilated to one another until they were 
all seen as emanating from one deity. Frazer wrote that “as the materialistic 
hypothesis has reduced the multitudinous forms of matter to one substance, 
hydrogen, so the spiritualistic hypothesis has reduced the multitude of spirits 
to one God.”113 This trajectory might seem to lead to an implicit monism (per-
haps qua Spinoza) in a synthesis that reduces mind and matter into modes of 
a common substance or results of a single distant cause.
For Frazer, however, this process does not stop with the construction of 
the Christian Deus out of the multifarious deos of the Roman world. The deity 
has become increasingly relieved “of his multifarious duties as the immediate 
agent of every event in the natural world.”114 Having become increasing ab-
stract or rationalized, God was gradually relegated to a “higher sphere in the 
supernatural world, as the [mere] creator or architect of the universe.”115 We 
are meant to imagine the Christian Trinity (or personal God) giving way to a 
deist non- Trinitarianism, whose central feature is that God set the world in 
motion and then vanished. Here we have a deus absconditus as the intersection 
of the simplifying tendencies of materialist and religious search for the Real. 
If God is not precisely dead, God seems to have been rendered functionally 
inert.116
The modern world is therefore characterized by what Frazer called the 
“despiritualizing of the universe.” If this sounds like Max Weber’s “disen-
chantment of the world,” it is no accident. As the distant inspiration for both 

150 Chapter Five
can likely be found in the “entgötterte Natur” of Schiller’s “Gods of Greece,” 
which Frazer explicitly cited here as inpsiration.117 While Weber’s accounts 
of disenchantment will be described in greater detail in chapter 10, it is impor-
tant to note here that for Frazer, despiritualization is the result of an almost 
inevitable evolution of human thought, rooted in our basic need to explain 
complexity. Frazer also argued that it is rooted in the perceived loss of mystery. 
It is also not the result of science eliminating religion or even magic, but the 
combined trajectories of religion and science alike.
It might be tempting to stop here and imagine Frazer reveling in the possi-
bility of a grand unified theory of everything that reduces the cosmos to a 
single principle. But that would ignore the thread of skepticism in his work. 
As he noted, “The apparent simplifications of science are probably illusory, 
concealing inner complexities which the progress of knowledge will later re-
veal.”118 Indeed, Frazer lamented the move toward simplification.
Taken to both registers, Frazer expressed a profound ambivalence about 
both scientific materialism and monotheism (or at least the deistic despiritual-
ization). Regardless of the implications of this statement for the spiritual realm, 
Frazer was pretty clear in stating that while psychologically tempting, he did 
not believe science would be able to embrace simplification indefinitely: “For 
we may suspect that the finality, which seems to crown the vast generalizations 
of science, is after all only illusory, and that the tempting unity and simplicity 
which they offer to the weary mind are not the goal but only halting- places 
in the unending march.”119 Recast, the vast simplifications of science are but 
illusions that may someday be supplanted by a return to complexity. Perhaps 
we might consider this to be the fourth epoch or a return of enchantment.
Co n c lu s i o n : A D ev i l ’s  Advocate
Without posing as the Devil’s Advocate or appearing before you in a blue flame and 
sulphureous fumes, I do profess to make out what the charitable might call a plausible 
plea for a very dubious client.
 J a m e s F r a z e r , Devil’s Advocate: A Plea for Superstition, 1927
It is tempting to imagine the narrative of disenchantment developing from 
the collective trauma of the Great War. It would be as if the death of nearly 
a generation on the battlefields had broken the spell of old nations and shat-
tered the illusions of a world rich with magical meanings. As Charles Edward 
Montague put it in Disenchantment (1922), “They have seen trenches full of 
gassed men, and the queue of their friends at the brothel- door in Bethune. At 

The Decline of Magic 
151
the heart of the magical rose was seated an earwig.”120 If theorists of religion 
and veterans like Montague had written apace, it would be easy to imagine 
a widespread loss of belief in magic caused by postwar nihilism. This is not 
merely a thought experiment, but might be an appealing argument if one mis-
takenly believed that Weber’s version of disenchantment was popularized in 
The Protestant Ethic (1920).121 If one were to read this as the parturition of  
disenchantment, it would seem to appear not just as the affective product of a 
broken Europe, but alongside the birth of radio and the rise of Ford’s assembly 
line, as though the triumph of the electric light over the gas lamp meant the 
demise of spirits and the end of belief in witchcraft.
Scholars of religious studies should already know different. Insofar as 
Frazer’s work holds on in some vestigial form in the field, we know that he 
described his progressive evolution of thought much earlier. But now that I 
have pinpointed disenchantment to the 1890s, this produces more problems, 
not fewer. Because while Frazer was putting pen to paper in 1897, the New 
York Times was reporting that theosophy and spiritualism were on the rise, 
and moreover that spiritualists in America and Europe already exceeded eight 
million followers, with no sign of slowing down.122 Meanwhile, in 1894 psychi-
cal research and séances came directly into Frazer’s world when his friend and 
fellow folklorist Andrew Lang publically called for a rapprochement between 
paranormal research and folklore, asking Frazer and his peers to take seriously 
the possibility of ghosts and psychical powers.123 It was also the period in 
which the Cleary case was making international headlines.
The disenchantment thesis has always been a source of controversy and 
even puzzlement. The process it names is putatively inexorable, which leaves 
observers scrambling to explain all manner of still- enchanted belief and be-
havior. This is also where religious studies can provide insights unavailable 
to a present- day sociologist. The twentieth century was teeming with magic, 
mysticism, and unreason, and one might be tempted to lament that Weber was 
not in a position to know better. What do we say, then, when we realize that the 
disenchantment thesis had its origins not in sociology but in folklore? And not 
in the twentieth century but the nineteenth?
The discipline of folklore was invested in showing the persistence of magi-
cal thinking even in the face of industrialization and urbanization. It had long 
tracked tales of the departure of the fairies (motif F388) and the cessation of 
miracles (motif F900.3). It knew many a just- so story explained the end of the 
age of myth or the twilight of the gods. It also should have known that many 
tales begin from the premise that once upon a time, “magic was once a mighty 
force in the world, but not anymore,” only to build its narrative by staging 

152 Chapter Five
some version of magic’s return.124 So if anyone, folklorists should have been 
in a position to uncover the myth of disenchantment.
Frazer did the reverse and that had lasting implications. He affirmed 
something that Tylor had suggested only tentatively— namely, the distinction 
between religion and magic. Crucially, Frazer located not superstition or reli-
gion, but magic at the dawn of history. This was tantamount to the assertion 
that magic was primeval. Occultists and fellow travelers had long spoken of 
magic at the start of history. But a key difference between these accounts is that 
for Lévi and company, the primordial was closer to the origins of the world 
and therefore closer to God, while for Frazer it was archaic and therefore less 
developed.
Knowing Frazer’s role helps recover the full oddness of the disenchantment 
thesis. Frazer described both magic and religion as in decline, destined to van-
ish in the age of science. This narrative itself was supposed to be disenchanting 
and even secularizing. Frazer intended The Golden Bough to both challenge 
institutional Christianity and prevent the return of magic from below. There 
are signs that Frazer himself imagined a future epoch beyond science that 
would pierce the false veil of empirical phenomena. But the real irony is that 
the death of magic was announced in a volume that testified on every page to 
magic’s survival.
Freud and Weber would read Frazer, and out of his work they would fash-
ion streamlined versions of the disenchantment thesis, stripped of its engage-
ment with “survivals” and “reinventions.” But Aleister Crowley and company 
would read the same author— and even the same text— and from it, stage the 
revival of modern magic.

C h a p t e r  S i x
The Revival of Magick:
Aleister Crowley
One has only to enter the magick path to find on all sides and in the most unexpected 
quarters, men and women whose whole life is secretly devoted to the attainment of the 
Royal and Sacerdotal Art. Already Magick is once more a World- Power . . . The is the 
Mother of the New Æon.
 A l e i s t e r C r ow l e y,  “The Revival of Magick,” 1917
During the summer of 1916, England’s most infamous magician undertook 
a mystical retreat in a cabin on the shores of Lake Pasquaney, New Hamp-
shire. His diaries suggest that he was preoccupied by vivid dreams of strange 
scriptures, orgies and murders, horrifying skeletons, and imagery of dying 
lions.1 Having fled the Great War that ravaged Europe and accelerated the 
decline of his once- significant wealth, Aleister Crowley— referred to in the 
popular press as “the Wickedest Man in the World” and by his followers as 
“the Great Beast”— felt depressed and powerless.2 Privately, he confessed to 
his friend and fellow occultist George Cecil Jones that he feared an end to 
civilization and dreaded the possibility that the mysteries of their magical 
order, the A∴A∴, might be lost in the depredations of war.3 Perhaps he was 
also troubled by the fate of his former lover and ex- disciple, the Anglo- Jewish 
poet and seer Victor Neuburg, who had recently joined the British army.4 
Regardless, Crowley maintained that the world was on the cusp of a new cos-
mic aeon and that he personally was destined to be the Magus (or Messiah) 
of the age to come. Yet despite periods of intense and restless energy, he felt 
that something was preventing him from assuming the full duties of this new 
role, and he worried it might require a complete transformation on his part, 
or even his death.5
On July 12, Crowley wrote in his diary that he hoped “that some supreme 
violation of all the laws of my being would break my karma, or dissolve the 
spell that seems to bind me.”6 Five days later, on July 17, at about 2 a.m., he 

154 Chapter Six
began the great ceremony that would allow him to completely assume the  
“curse” of the Magus.7 He looked for inspiration from one work he had at 
hand, the multivolume third edition of Frazer’s The Golden Bough (1906– 15), 
and from it crafted a magical rite that would add to his infamy.8
It is worth emphasizing that in his moment of crisis, the twentieth century’s 
most famous magus looked not to the writings of famous seers or sorcerers 
like Nostradamus or John Dee, but to a scholarly study on comparative re-
ligion. Indeed, The Golden Bough had long inspired Crowley’s grander at-
tempts to revive magic. It may strike some readers as outlandish that anyone 
was seriously practicing magic in the first world at the dawn of the twentieth 
century; it might seem bizarre to others that an avowed magician was reading 
academic scholarship. I am interested in a more fundamental enigma; namely, 
that Crowley was using the foundational text in the theory of disenchantment 
as a spellbook.
To recap, while the idea that modernity meant the death of magic is most 
associated with Max Weber, it was James Frazer who originally made the argu-
ment that “as religion grows, magic declines” and further contended that the 
modern age of science would be the end of both. Strikingly, Frazer laid out this 
argument in the very text that Crowley used to craft his ritual.
At the very moment when scholars began elaborating versions of the dis-
enchantment myth and entrenching the claim that modernity meant the de-
parture of the supernatural, Crowley’s project to reverse the decline of magic 
seems to have worked. By this I mean not that Crowley performed some spe-
cific miracle, but that he ultimately succeeded in sparking a popular magical 
revival. Crowley’s concept of magic, along with its debt to Frazer, can still be 
seen in the Ordo Templi Orientis, the Church of Satan, Wicca, the Chaos 
Magic movement, and a number of diverse neo- pagan organizations.
Crowley’s repurposing of disenchantment gives rise to a problem: we have 
become wary of broad- brush sociological explanations for disenchantment. 
Urbanism, industrialization, the spread of public education, the rise of insti-
tutionalized reason— none of these simply killed off enchantment. As we know 
from international case studies, magic can coexist with factories, cities, and 
schools. But if anything seems likely to dispense with enchantment, it would 
be the discourse of disenchantment, which after all has the character of a death 
certificate or coroner’s report. The seeming contradiction we have to make 
sense of here is the enchanting effects of disenchantment itself.
Historians in the Foucauldian vein have it worse, because we have come 
to expect that a discourse can constitute the very object it purports to de-

The Revival of Magick 
155
scribe. Perhaps the most famous example of this pattern is “female hysteria,” 
whose widespread symptoms— nervousness, sexual desire, heaviness in the 
abdomen— seemingly vanished as soon as the medical establishment decided 
that the condition no longer existed.9 The very notion of hysteria was appar-
ently contagious. Scholars’ known narratives can be self- fulfilling, producing 
what Karl Popper has referred to as the “Oedipus effect”: “the influence of 
the prediction upon the predicted event”10 (e.g., the prophecy that Oedipus 
would kill his father directly led to the estrangement that culminated the fa-
mous patricide; or the prediction that war between two countries is inevitable 
can ultimately make war a reality). A sociological prophecy that is self- fulfilling 
is no longer a surprise.
These theoretical models are what make the case of enchantment especially 
fascinating. As the following shows, Crowley made extensive references to 
Frazer in his letters and poems, plays, short stories, and novels, as well as in his 
magical writings, including spellbooks and ceremonies. Remarkably, Crowley 
even embedded a reference to Frazer in a letter he claimed was authored by 
his “Hidden Masters,” thus implying that the secret gurus of magical wisdom 
were up on their readings of Victorian folklore. Although The Golden Bough 
was not the only book Crowley cited in his quest to revive magic, Frazer cast a 
long shadow over Crowley and gave shape to various iterations of his project. 
Crowley was also not alone in drawing on the seminal text of disenchantment 
to produce modern magic. Frazer’s magical followers were legion. Hence we 
have the reverse of Foucault’s pattern: the narrative of disenchantment appears 
to be at least partially self- refuting, by reinvigorating the very magic it said was 
endangered.
While Crowley’s importance to the history of modern magic is widely rec-
ognized, he has been the subject of surprisingly little scholarly research. Refer-
ences to Crowley do appear in surveys of “Western esotericism,” and there are 
articles on his project.11 But the main scholarly monographs largely dedicated 
to Crowley can be counted on one hand: Marco Pasi, Aleister Crowley e la 
tentazione della politica (1999), Hugh Urban, Magia Sexualis (2006), Richard 
Kaczynski, Perdurabo: The Life of Aleister Crowley (2010), and Aleister Crowley 
and Western Esotericism (2012), edited by Henrik Bogdan and Martin Starr.12 
This chapter will explore Crowley’s appropriation of Frazer and the role of 
The Golden Bough in the history of European occultism more broadly. This 
in turn should permit us to see how in a kind of enantiodromia, the theory of 
disenchantment was capable of becoming its opposite.

156 Chapter Six
T h e Gr e at  Be ast : A Bi o g r aph i cal  S ke tch
Before I touched my teens, I was already aware that I was THE BEAST whose number 
is 666. I did not understand in the least what that implied; it was a passionately ecstatic 
sense of identity.
 A l e i s t e r C r ow l e y, Magick in Theory and Practice, 1929
An inveterate showman, Aleister Crowley actively cultivated controversy and 
cloaked himself in consciously manufactured myths.13 Born Edward Alex-
ander Crowley on October 12, 1875, in Warwickshire, England, Aleister was 
an heir to a family fortune that included a profitable brewing business, a set 
of alehouses, and significant railroad investments.14 While the family had his-
torically been Quakers, Aleister’s parents had embraced an ultraconservative 
subset of the Evangelical movement known as the Plymouth Brethren. His fa-
ther’s death from cancer when Aleister was eleven contributed to an increasing 
estrangement from his mother, who had turned even more deeply religious and 
started referring to Aleister as “the Beast.”15
After a youth spent rebelling at various boarding schools, in 1895, Aleister 
matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge. While there is no evidence that 
Aleister attended any of Frazer’s lectures, he certainly knew about Frazer and 
later would make much of the fact that they were at Trinity at the same time.16 
It was here that Aleister both took on the adult version of his name (from the 
Gaelic for Alexander) and began his study of comparative religion and phi-
losophy.17
Throughout his twenties, Crowley largely passed the time engaged in the 
hobbies of the British upper class of his era. He traveled widely and inter-
nationally, played competitive chess, had erotic encounters with women and 
men, did some significant mountain climbing and big- game hunting, and gen-
erally lived la vie de haute bohème. He also continued literary pursuits, publish-
ing, for example, a pseudonymous collection of queer poetry, White Stains, in 
1898. Crowley was often inspired by his interest in comparative religion and 
magic, but if he had died at twenty- nine like his idol Percy Bysshe Shelley, 
Crowley too would probably have been remembered largely as a poet.18
Two events interrupted Crowley’s artistic trajectory and came to define the 
course of his later life. The first of these was his encounter with the Hermetic 
Order of the Golden Dawn.19 The Golden Dawn had been founded in 1887, 
when the English coroner and Theosophist William Wynn Westcott claimed 
that he had discovered a set of ancient texts describing a lost Rosicrucian 

The Revival of Magick 
157
society. Conveniently, these archaic writings contained the name and Stuttgart 
address of a certain Fräulein Sprengel, and Westcott soon claimed to be in 
contact with her by post. Even more conveniently, the elderly German lady al-
legedly passed away in 1890, shortly after initiating Westcott and his cofound-
ers, S. L. MacGregor Mathers and William Robert Woodman, into the order. 
Although organized like a Masonic lodge, the Golden Dawn emphasized the 
practice of magic, including alchemy, spirit communication, and astrology.20 
The Golden Dawn expanded quickly, its membership coming to include in-
fluential persons, such as the Swiss artist Moina Mathers born Mina Bergson 
(sister of the philosopher Henri Bergson), the Irish feminist activist Maud 
Gonne, the author of weird tales Arthur Machen, the painter Isabelle de Stei-
ger, the scholar and popularizer of magic A. E. Waite, and its most famous 
member, the Irish poet W. B. Yeats, who eventually had a magical and artistic 
rivalry with Crowley. Crowley joined the Golden Dawn in 1898, and although 
he was probably drawn to the group as much for its artistic connections as its 
occult teachings, it left a lasting imprint on his version of the magical path.
Another event, however, looms largest in Aleister Crowley’s autobiog-
raphy.21 In March 1904, Aleister was on an extended honeymoon with his 
new wife, Rose Crowley (née Kelly), in Cairo. On the evening of March 16, 
he was entertaining her with a minor invocation when Rose entered a trance 
and started repeating, “They are waiting for you.”22 The couple swiftly identi-
fied the “they” as the Egyptian deity Horus. A few days later, on March 20, 
Crowley attempted a further ritual, during which Rose channeled what they 
considered to be a higher being that identified itself as Aiwass. “Aiwass” told 
them that “the Equinox of the Gods had come” and Crowley was needed to 
receive a new revelation.23
On April 8, Crowley sat down to prepare to receive a revelation in what he 
claims was an attitude of skepticism, when he was surprised by a disembod-
ied voice speaking over his left shoulder. As he described it years later in The 
Equinox of the Gods (1936):
The voice was of deep timbre, musical and expressive, its tones solemn, vo-
luptuous, tender, fierce or aught else as suited the moods of the message. . . . 
I had a strong impression that the speaker was actually in the corner where 
he seemed to be, in a body of “fine matter,” transparent as a veil of gauze, or a 
cloud of incense- smoke. He seemed to be a tall, dark man in his thirties, well- 
knit, active and strong, with the face of a savage king, and eyes veiled lest their 
gaze should destroy what they saw.24

158 Chapter Six
Later Crowley would vacillate about whether Aiwass was best understood as 
an Egyptian god, an elemental, a guardian angel, or merely the astral projection 
of a human representative of the Secret Chiefs of the Great White Brother-
hood. Nevertheless, over the span of three days, Aiwass disclosed to Crowley 
a scripture, Liber AL vel Legis or The Book of the Law. Its main theme was 
that Crowley was the messiah of a new aeon.25 The organizing term for this 
revelation was the Greek word for “will” (θέλημα, thelema) and its central com-
mandment was “Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the law.” Ultimately, 
Crowley published The Book of the Law with a series of commentaries and 
began to grow movements around them, including the A∴A∴ and the Abbey 
of Thelema.26
While Crowley would maintain throughout his life that Aiwass was some-
thing outside himself and that The Book of the Law was an authentic revela-
tion, it has not escaped scholarly notice that it had distinct precedents.27 For 
example, François Rabelais had famously described a quasi- utopian Abbaye 
de Thélème with the motto Faictz [sic] ce que vouldras (Do what you will). 
Crowley’s “do what thou wilt,” however, was not a pure libertinism, because 
he did not view the will as simply an account of volition but as the divine Logos, 
or Word of God.28 The will was to be understood as one’s true place in the 
divine cosmos and as the most fundamental impulse of one’s being. Thus, the 
main aim of his movement was a calling to discover one’s true will.
Previously Crowley had briefly been interested in Buddhism, but now 
changed course to renew his commitment to magic, as he stated in a letter to his 
brother- in- law, Gerald Kelly: “I say today to hell with Christianity, rationalism, 
Buddhism, all the lumber of the centuries. I bring you a positive and primaeval 
fact, magic by name; and with this I will build me a new Heaven and a new 
Earth. I want none of your faint approval or faint dispraise; I want blasphemy, 
murder, rape, revolution, anything, bad or good, but strong.”29 In the years 
that followed the Liber AL vel Legis, magic and Thelema came increasingly to 
define Crowley’s identity and focus.30 While he did not abandon poetry and 
fiction, Crowley also published explicitly magical works (discussed below).
Crowley’s reputation as a magician grew. In part this was because he de-
liberately courted controversy. Crowley gained more international notoriety 
when the British author W. Somerset Maugham modeled the villain of his 
popular novel The Magician (1908) on Crowley. He became even more infa-
mous after a series of legal struggles with S. L. Macgregor Mathers over the 
legacy of the Golden Dawn (1909– 10) and high- profile libel lawsuits (1911, 
1934).31 Meanwhile, Crowley’s scandalous reputation was amplified by his 
publication of sexually explicit poetry and fiction describing recreational drug 

The Revival of Magick 
159
use (e.g., The Diary of a Drug Fiend, 1923). By the time he died from myocar-
dial degeneration in 1947, Crowley had become infamous across the globe.32
Crowley had a significant impact on the history of modern magic. He 
founded the A∴A∴, succeeded Theodor Reuß (discussed in chapter 10) as 
leader of the Ordo Templi Orientis, and even launched a halfhearted attempt 
to takeover the Theosophical Society. Crowley also participated in the British 
Society for Psychical Research and their tests of various spirit mediums.33 He 
also exerted a significant influence on the following generation of magical so-
cieties and new religions. Some— like Gerald Gardner, the founder of Wicca; 
Jack Parsons, the rocket scientist and leader of the American branch of the 
Ordo Templi Orientis; and the influential occult revivalist Israel Regardie— 
were Crowley’s students.34 Others, like Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard, 
and Church of Satan founder Anton LaVey, read Crowley but did not know 
him personally.35 Moreover, Crowley was a key figure in the Euro- American 
construction of Tantra and the esoteric appropriation of Eastern traditions 
more broadly.36 Likewise, a fascination with Crowley lives on in international 
popular culture.37
Th e God -  E at e r  an d  t h e  G ol de n Bough
Thus under the Golden Bough in the moonlight was the host uplifted, and the Shep-
herd, and the Hangman, and the Sorceress broke the bread of Necromancy, and drank 
deep of the wine of witchcraft.
 A l e i s t e r C r ow l e y, “Temple of Solomon the King,” 1909
When we started the chapter, “the Great Beast” was alone in the darkness of 
the New Hampshire woods with The Golden Bough near at hand, planning 
to perform a miracle. In hyperbolic terms, we might say that Crowley was at-
tempting to immanentize the eschaton, or end the world. The ritual he chose 
was not intended to do this all at once, but was to empower him to carry out 
this mission. At the very least, Crowley imagined that he might accelerate the 
expiration of the aeon and assume his mantle as the age’s Magus.
Comparing his private diary and a magical text that described the relevant 
spell (Crowley, Liber LXX), it is easy to reconstruct his activities and their 
timing.38 At about two in the morning, Crowley hunted in the darkness until 
he had captured a frog and then trapped it in a chest. At dawn, he removed 
the frog and shortly thereafter baptized it with the name “Jesus of Nazareth.” 
Crowley then spent the day in meditation and worship. As night again fell, he 
placed the frog on trial, accusing it as follows:

160 Chapter Six
Jesus of Nazareth, how thou art taken in my snare. All my life long thou hast 
plagued me and affronted me. . . . Now, at last, I have thee; the Slave- God is 
in the power of the Lord of Freedom. Thine hour is come; as I blot thee out 
from this earth, so surely shall the eclipse pass; and the Light, Life, Love and 
Liberty be once more the Law of Earth. Give thou place to me, O, Jesus; thine 
aeon is passed; the Age of Horus is arisen by the Magick of the Master the 
Beast that is Man.39
Having condemned it to death in Jesus’s place, Crowley then crucified and 
killed the frog. Symbolically he seemed to be taking out his frustrations on the 
whole of the Christian age and willing it to pass. Crowley cooked the frog’s legs 
and ate them, ritually ingesting Christ’s power. He then burned the remain-
der of the animal’s body in order to consume the rest of the aeon. While this 
might sound like a particularly sadistic version of French cooking, given his 
overarching project, Crowley’s magical aims were fairly straightforward. As he 
later described it in The Confessions of Aleister Crowley: An Autohagiography: 
“In order to erect the temple of the New Aeon, it appeared necessary to make 
a thorough clearance of the rubbish of its ruined predecessors. I therefore 
planned and executed a Magical Operation to banish the ‘Dying God.’ ”40
If expelling the dying God was Crowley’s aim and magical ritual his method, 
this section will be an attempt to make sense of what The Golden Bough was 
doing in the hands of a magician. It is all the more important because this rite 
was not the beginning of Crowley’s engagement with Frazer but the result of a 
lifelong encounter. Tracing out the history of Crowley’s engagement with The 
Golden Bough will demonstrate more concretely how he drew on comparative 
religion and Frazer in particular to formulate his own project of enchantment. 
All told, it will show how and where the academic discipline of religious stud-
ies passes over into magic.
*
In July 1903, Crowley wrote a dramatic work, The God- Eater, described as 
a “play in which the Origin of Religion, as conceived by Spencer or Frazer, 
is dramatically shown forth.”41 To summarize its narrative: the protagonist, 
having read too much scholarship in comparative religion, decides to per-
form a pseudo- Egyptian ritual intended to deify his dearly beloved sister. With 
his sister’s consent, he ritually murders her, and in an ecstatic state feasts on 
her corpse, thereby becoming the God- Eater of the play’s title. The audience 

The Revival of Magick 
161
learns that the ritual was a success, and the woman’s mummified corpse will 
ultimately be worshipped as a goddess.42
I have never asked my undergraduates to write plays based on their course-
work, and Crowley’s effort demonstrates some of the trouble with such a 
prompt. The play imagines that new gods are born from the conjunction of 
primordial murder/cannibalism and the passion of altered states of conscious-
ness. The first rite of a new faith is a sacrifice or totemic meal in which the 
victim is partially devoured in order to become the new deity. Communion 
therefore would be the ritual repetition of this ancient act of violence.
As theory, The God- Eater anticipates an emphasis on a traumatic kernel at 
the origins of religion so important to Sigmund Freud and Georges Bataille 
(discussed in later chapters). But as Crowley acknowledged in his autobiog-
raphy, his main inspiration was Frazer’s The Golden Bough, which, after all, 
had a section on “Killing the God.”43 Crowley’s vision of religious studies 
more broadly can be found in a heavy- handed set of lines from the play in 
which the protagonist lays out his motivation:
The vastness of heavens and the earth
Created the idea of God.
So Levi once
Sarcastic in apostasy; à rebours.
So Müller, mythopoeic in his mood
Of the unmasking mythopoeia. Now
Profounder science, Spencer’s amplitude,
Allen’s too shallow erudition, Frazer’s
Research, find men have made— since men made aught— Their Gods, and slain, 
and eaten. Surface! I,
Criosda of the Mist, see truth in all
Rather than truth in one . . . 
So men who made their gods
Did make in very deed: so I will make
In uttermost truth a new god, since the old
Are dead, or drunk with wine.44
This passage from Crowley’s juvenilia captures two important themes. First, it 
constructs a genealogy for the study of religion that starts with Éliphas Lévi, in-
cludes Max Müller, Herbert Spencer, Grant Allen, and concludes with Frazer. 
That Éliphas is the Lévi being referred to here is clear from his importance 

162 Chapter Six
to Crowley. Crowley lists Frazer and Lévi’s works together in his curricu-
lum for the A∴A∴, translated Lévi writings, and even claimed to be Lévi’s 
reincarnation (despite a small problem with birth and death dates).45 That 
Crowley’s list of scholars includes the French occultist further demonstrates 
the entanglement of academic and esoteric worlds I have been charting over 
the course of this book.
Second, this passage is important because it locates both the study of reli-
gion and esotericism in the vacuum produced by the death of God. In effect, 
this monologue anticipates part of Crowley’s future project: the creation of a 
new god, replete with pseudo- Egyptian trappings, intended to reinvigorate 
humankind after the passing of Christianity. Although the idea that religious 
studies would inspire cannibalism is rather overwrought, the discipline surely 
has a direct effect on the phenomena that is purports to study. Its pursuit of a 
common essence behind all religions made it useful for figures like Crowley, 
who drew eclectically from different traditions to formulate their own idio-
syncratic faiths.
One can see, for example, how a faithful reader of Müller’s scholarship and 
Sacred Books of the East would be led toward a theosophical version of univer-
sal mysticism. Crowley was one such reader.46 His post- Cairo writings make 
this point explicit: “Religious folk have buried this fact under mountains of 
dogma; but the study of comparative religion has made it clear. One has merely 
to print parallel passages from the mystics of all ages and religions to see that 
they were talking of the same thing.”47 The reference to comparative religion is 
serving here to legitimate Crowley’s version of perennial mysticism— namely, 
that a common religious experience lies at the root of different religions. As 
Crowley continued, “The real strength of every religion lies, consequently, 
in its mystics.”48 Though religious leaders may use mysticism for inspiration, 
they have to translate it into their own terminology and dogma. Crowley also 
argued that this mystical experience, while profoundly spiritual, can also be 
physiologically triggered.
If this suggests William James’s The Varieties of Religious Experience— 
which also argued for the universality of mysticism and speculated about 
psychological parallels— that is no accident. Crowley was also an avid reader 
of James. In his autobiography, Crowley explicitly referred to James as the 
inspiration for both his turn toward yoga and his attempt to connect magic to 
mysticism.49 In his magical writings, however, Crowley emphasized a mystical 
evocation and union with a specific deity appropriate to a particular operation 
of magic.50 The religious impulse behind mysticism may be the same, but in 

The Revival of Magick 
163
Crowley’s version, there seem to be almost as many different gods as there are 
possible spells.51
Crowley also turned to Frazer when he wanted to formalize his own com-
parative project. Inspired by the Golden Dawn’s table of correspondences, 
Crowley’s Liber 777 (1909) was “an attempt to systematise alike the data of 
mysticism and the results of comparative religion.”52 Its organizing principle 
was explicitly Kabbalistic, and it was even rooted in the yosher schema of the 
sephirot. But what had been a mode for reading Jewish (and then Christian) 
scripture in terms of correspondences and divine emanations, Crowley ex-
panded to include non- European mythology. For example, Crowley asserted 
an identity between the number 1, the Hebrew (  ֶּכ ֶתרKether), the crown of God, 
the Egyptian deity Ptah, Scandinavian Wotan, the Greek Zeus, the Chinese 
Shangdi上帝, and the perfume of ambergris.53 This meant that Zeus, Ptah, 
and Shangdi were all emanations of the same aspect of God, which could be 
evoked by rites using ambergris.
Crowley was following a pattern exemplified by Lévi and Blavatsky (al-
though with plenty of Hermetic precedents), who had similarly investigated 
diverse religions, looking for symbolic equivalences.54 But he was also building 
on the work of scholars of religion, whose own basic operation meant looking 
for cross- cultural religious patterns. Crowley saw this method epitomized in 
The Golden Bough.55 Frazer’s functional equivalences between primitive myths 
became evidence for the true identity of different deities and symbols. If you’ll 
remember, Frazer had characterized “sympathetic magic” in terms of taking 
false resemblances or analogues to be real connections. In effect, Crowley was 
reading Frazer’s own comparative method for its own system of associations, 
or more properly, as a work of sympathetic magic in its own right. Restated, in 
Crowley’s hands, comparative religion was a way of researching new magical 
symbols and uncovering different aspects of the Godhead.
*
Though Crowley discovered Frazer before his Egyptian experience, The 
Golden Bough only increased in importance as Crowley systematized his pro-
phetic mission in The Book of the Law. He made this clear from the outset, 
saying, “I know now from the experience of others that The Book of the Law 
is veritably a Golden Bough.”56 But to understand Frazer’s true influence on 
Crowley’s larger theoretical schema, we have to untangle Crowley’s eschatol-
ogy— a curious mix of the premillennialism of his original Plymouth Brethren 

164 Chapter Six
faith, Johann Bachofen’s primordial matriarchy, Nietzsche’s criticism of Chris-
tianity, and the periodization of Frazer’s later editions of The Golden Bough.57
From Crowley’s upbringing among the Plymouth Brethren, he drew the 
idea that history was divided into different dispensations or ages in which 
humankind faced different tasks.58 Like some of their evangelical cousins in 
America, the Brethren believed that according to the Book of Revelation, the 
penultimate age was supposed to be the Rapture, when good Christians would 
be taken up into heaven, followed by a great tribulation during which the 
forces of Christ and Antichrist would do battle. In Crowley’s esoteric reading 
of Revelation, however, the Antichrist— or “Great Beast 666”— was not evil, 
but a prophetic figure who received a new dispensation, destined to end the 
Christian age and usher in a new millennia.
Crowley’s characterization of the various ages of humankind was also 
grounded in his period’s anthropological theory, if recast in Egyptian termi-
nology. From the Swiss scholar Johann Bachofen’s Das Mutterrecht (1861), 
Crowley had taken the idea that the oldest aeon was the age of the mother, a 
primordial matriarchy.59 As Crowley put it in “Liber Legis: The Comment” 
(1912):
The Hierarchy of the Egyptians gives us this genealogy: Isis, Osiris, Horus.
Now the “pagan” period is that of Isis; a pastoral, natural period of simple 
magic. Next with Buddha, Christ, and others there came in the Equinox of 
Osiris; when sorrow and death are the principal objects of man’s thought, and 
his magical formula is that of sacrifice.
Now, with Mohammed perhaps as its forerunner, comes in the Equinox 
of Horus, the young child who rises strong and conquering (with his twin 
Harpocrates) to avenge Osiris, and bring on the age of strength and splendour.
His formula is not yet fully understood.
Following him will arise the Equinox of Ma, the Goddess of Justice.60
In the age of Isis, civilization was pastoral, polyamorous, and ruled by women 
and the Goddess. This age was followed by that of Osiris, when the dying 
God displaced the world of the mothers with a patriarchy rooted in sacrifice, 
restrictive morality, and rituals rooted in the cycle of death and resurrection. 
Christianity was only one iteration of the dispensation of that age, which Crow-
ley associated with patriarchy.61 From Nietzsche, whom he described as “one 
of our prophets,” Crowley seems to have taken the idea that Christianity was a 
“slave morality” built on the repression of basic human needs and impulses.62
Following the age of Osiris, Crowley placed the tribulation of the age of 

The Revival of Magick 
165
Horus, in which the old rules would be reversed in a popular liberation of 
humankind. The patriarchy would be overturned and a new aeon of indi-
viduality would take hold. Instead of dominance by a particular gender, each 
person would come to embody both sexes.63 This new aeon would begin with 
war and conflict, during which Crowley claimed he had been personally called 
to destroy the old morality and introduce a new antinomianism. After this 
period of conflict, the world would enter a long aeon of Maat, associated with 
justice and peace.64
As noted at the start of this chapter, Crowley drew on Frazer in his iden-
tification of the “Dying God” as a combination of Osiris, Attis, Adonis, and 
Christ. In so doing, Crowley was activating the anti- Christian impulse found 
Frazer’s text, but with a twist. Frazer’s argument that Christianity rested on 
archaic fertility rituals was an attempt to discredit Christian exceptionalism 
and therefore imply that Christianity could be relegated to the dustbin of his-
tory. But Crowley read The Golden Bough to intimate an esoteric pagan ritual 
system at the core of Christianity. Instead of the classical Hermetic search 
for a concealed monotheism behind a plurality of “heathen” faiths, Crowley 
cited Frazer to assert that Christianity concealed a pagan fertility rite whose 
essence could be recovered through magical means. In effect, Crowley’s neo- 
pagan Christology was rooted in The Golden Bough.65 Moreover, Crowley 
repurposed Frazer’s detailed descriptions of the classical age into modern 
neo- pagan rites.
As contemporary scholar Henrik Bogdan has observed, Crowley also drew 
on Frazer in his later commentaries on The Book of the Law. In Crowley’s later 
explanation of the lines “Abrogate are all rituals, all ordeals, all words and 
signs,” Crowley wrote:
This verse declares that the old formula of Magick— the Osiris- Adonis- Jesus- 
Marsyus- Dionysus- Attis- et cetera formula of the Dying God— is no longer 
efficacious. It rested on the ignorant belief that the Sun died every day, and 
every year, and that its resurrection was a miracle. The Formula of the New 
Aeon recognizes Horus, the Child crowned and conquering, as God. We are 
all members of the Body of God . . . If you are “walking in darkness,” do not 
try to make the sun rise by self- sacrifice, but wait in confidence for the dawn, 
and enjoy the pleasures of the night meanwhile.66
Crowley was suggesting that the old myth structure of Christianity as rooted 
in the false miracle of the sun’s death and rebirth no longer works in a post- 
Copernican age.67 We can also see Crowley exploiting Frazer’s version of the 

166 Chapter Six
disenchantment narrative to explain the progression of dispensations. The 
progression of aeons maps easily onto Frazer’s periodization: the age of Isis 
was the period of ancient magic, Osiris that of religion; and we are now at 
the cusp of the age of Horus, nothing less than the dawn of scientific moder-
nity. Even Frazer’s fourth, or postmodern, stage seems to have its equivalent 
in Crowely’s final aeon of Maat. Nevertheless, this periodization provided as 
much a challenge for Crowley as it did for Frazer around exactly the same 
issue— the status of modern magic. After all, if magic was a holdover from a 
primitive age, then how did a contemporary magus like Crowley fit into the 
scheme?
Crowley argued that “magic” needs to be reformed into “magick.” To ex-
plain the thinking behind this idiosyncratic spelling shift, you should know 
that Crowley adopted the spelling magick in order to distinguish his own 
reinvigorated and ostensibly scientific project from stage magic and various 
forms of trickery.68 We might see this in terms of a Frazerian periodization 
read ontologically rather than culturally: the magic of previous aeons is no 
longer effective. Spells from the age of Isis, say, no longer work today. Although 
Crowley declined to explain why, he made it clear that in the age of Horus, one 
must have a scientific magick. This, the old magic has to be dispelled so that 
modern magic can be revived.69
The will be explored in greater detail in the next section, but by way of 
foreshadowing, Crowley mobilized a set of equivalences between magic and 
science he found in Frazer’s work. We can find these expressed in Crowley’s 
Magick in Theory and Practice (1929), which tellingly begins with two lengthy 
epigraphs from The Golden Bough. The first of these includes Frazer’s state-
ment that magic’s “fundamental conception is identical with that of modern 
science; underlying the whole system is a faith, implicit but real and firm, in 
the order and uniformity of nature.”70 By quoting these lines, Crowley was 
underscoring Frazer’s claim that the return of magic in opposition to religion 
could be positive (say, as alchemy). Crowley also embraced Frazer’s assertion 
of the fundamental similarity between the mentalities of the magician and the 
scientist. He disregarded, however, Frazer’s fear of resurgent superstition as 
a retreat from science back into the myths of unreason. Instead, for Crowley, 
magic takes on new importance, emancipating the world from repressive, mor-
alizing religion.
This is because while Crowley described his own project as the utopian 
intersection of all three discursive spheres— magic, science, and (pagan) re-
ligion— he was often antagonistic toward Christianity and other established 
religions. Indeed, Crowley often positioned magic and science as allies against 

The Revival of Magick 
167
religion (treated as a euphemism for Christianity). As Crowley put it in the set 
of letters which were posthumously published as Magick without Tears (1954): 
“There is the sense in which Frazer (and I) often use the word [religion]: as 
in opposition to ‘science’ or ‘Magic.’ Here the point is that religious people 
attribute phenomena to the will of some postulated Being or Beings, placable 
[sic] and moveable by virtue of sacrifice, devotion, or appeal. Against such, the 
scientific or magical mind believes in the Laws of Nature, asserts ‘If A, then 
B’— if you do so- and- so, the result will be so- and- so, aloof from arbitrary in-
terference.”71 Crowley seems to have inherited Frazer’s opposition of religion 
on the one side, and science and magic on the other, even as he himself else-
where worked to bridge these oppositions. Moreover, he picked up on Frazer’s 
equation of the mentality of savages and scientists and transformed that into 
a scholarly justification for magic. But this is not the extent of his borrowing 
from Frazer. More can be seen in Crowley’s second Frazer epigraph in Magick 
in Theory and Practice, drawn from the third edition of The Golden Bough, 
reading in full:
So far, therefore, as the public profession of magic has been one of the roads 
by which men have passed to supreme power, it has contributed to emancipate 
mankind from the thraldom of tradition and to elevate them into a larger, freer 
life, with a broader outlook on the world. This is no small service rendered to 
humanity. And when we remember further that in another direction magic 
has paved the way for science, we are forced to admit that if the black art has 
done much evil, it has also been the source of much good; that if it is the child 
of error, it has yet been the mother of freedom and truth.72
The emphasis above is Crowley’s , and it is striking that he has managed to cull 
the nostalgia from Frazer’s prose and marshal it for the sake of reinvigorating 
modern magic. In the original, this paragraph was part of a larger section about 
magic as an early stage of human cultural evolution; however, Crowley reads 
it as exposing Frazer’s own sympathies toward magic. Crowley delighted in 
the suggestion that magic did and could continue to give birth to freedom and 
truth.
*
The magical side of Frazer is even clearer in Crowley’s attempt to transform 
The Golden Bough into a spellbook. In so doing, Crowley built on Frazer’s 
logic of magic. Frazer had explained sympathetic magic in terms of two prin-

168 Chapter Six
ciples: contagion, the idea that once a link was created between two things 
the magician continued to act as though that link was still in effect, and home-
opathy (or mimesis), the idea that like effects like.73 In Magick in Theory and 
Practice, Crowley grounded his theory of magical consecration in Frazer’s 
model.74 This is significant because Wouter Hanegraaff has accurately criti-
cized Frazer, demonstrating how badly Frazer’s model of sympathetic magic 
maps onto actual magic traditions and how poorly it approximates the his-
torical European conceptions of divine correspondences.75 It might seem that 
Frazer got magic wrong.
The irony is that Crowley nevertheless used Frazer’s model as the founda-
tion of his own magical enterprise. Crowley prefaced a section on the magical 
link with this statement: “It is a strange circumstance that no Magical writer 
has hitherto treated the immensely important subject of the Magical Link. It 
might almost be called the Missing Link. It has apparently always been taken 
for granted, only lay writers on Magick like Dr. J. G. Frazer have accorded the 
subject its full importance.”76 Crowley next inverted Frazer’s reading of the 
magical link, asserting the reality of these conceptual linkages as the founda-
tion of a kind of magic that works. They are no longer, as Frazer had argued, 
arbitrary, superstitious associations of the savage mind. Elsewhere, Crowley 
summarized it thus: “It is described at no length whatever by Frazer in his 
book on sympathetic magic. For that most learned doctor, vir praeclarus et 
optimus, omits the single essential of his subject. It is not enough to pretend 
that your wax image is the person you want to bewitch; you must make a real 
connexion. That is the whole art of magic, to be able to do that; and it is the 
one point that Frazer omits.”77
To transform Frazer’s anthropology into a magical working, Crowley went 
to Éliphas Lévi’s conception of the astral light, which he describes as the 
operative force behind magick.78 Nevertheless, Crowley faulted Lévi for not 
fully explaining the operations of the magical link. In effect, Crowley brought 
both thinkers together, suggesting that Frazer’s description of sympathetic 
magic is indeed how one learns to harness the astral light to do one’s will. 
In Crowley’s example, a magician hoping to “evoke the spirits of the storm” 
and call down a tempest must identify those atmospheric or stormlike aspects 
of herself, unite her will and the storm (presumably via the astral light), and 
then learn to evoke them in connection with a physical talisman that must 
either effect precipitation or symbolically represent it.79 Although Crowley 
provided a complex typology of magical linkages in each case, they operate 
basically according to Frazer’s conception of sympathetic magic, informed 
by Lévi’s ontology.80

The Revival of Magick 
169
Magick in Theory and Practice was not the only place that Crowley drew 
Lévi and Frazer together. In Crowley’s final major project, The Book of Thoth 
(1945), he aimed to work out a new tarot deck pregnant with his magical sym-
bols. This meant both a new set of images for the cards— which were done in 
collaboration with the artist Frieda Harris— and a guide to their interpretation. 
As one might guess from its title, Crowley understood the tarot in Lévi’s terms 
as a kind of Egyptian Hermetic Bible. But Crowley also drew on Frazer (and 
others) to produce cross- cultural associations for each of its figures. Each of 
the major arcana was intended to be not just representative of the European or 
Egyptian magical tradition, but a repository for the symbols of the full pleroma 
of all religions. Accordingly, Crowley used The Golden Bough as a resource for 
cross- cultural parallels and linkages.81 His new tarot was intended to be the 
embodiment of “comparative religion.”82 In brief, Crowley’s last work was an 
attempt to provide the religious studies of his day with a magical pack of cards.
D is e n c h an t e d  M agi c
In the course of this Training, [a student of magick] will learn to explore the Hidden 
Mysteries of Nature, and to develop new senses and faculties in himself, whereby he 
may communicate with, and control, Beings and Forces pertaining to orders of exis-
tence which have been hitherto inaccessible to profane research, and available only to 
that unscientific and empirical MAGICK (of tradition) which I came to destroy in order 
that I might fulfill.
 A l e i s t e r C r ow l e y, Magick in Theory and Practice, 1929
The previous section has shown Crowley’s substantial debt to Frazer and re-
ligious studies more broadly. I have been aiming to illustrate how Crowley 
transformed an anthropological account of magic into spells, how he activated 
a latent perennial mysticism inherent in comparative religion, how he appro-
priated Frazer’s ambivalence into what amounted to a scholarly endorsement 
of magic, and how he tried to fuse Lévi’s, Müller’s, and Frazer’s works into 
a system of correspondences and even a magical tool for divination. Further-
more, we have seen how Frazer’s claims about the pagan core of Christian-
ity lent themselves to a neo- pagan rereading of the Christian tradition, and 
we have seen how Crowley transformed Frazer’s succession of epochs into a 
prophetic eschatology. But there has been a hanging issue that still needs to 
be confronted head on. What did Crowley do with the myth of disenchant-
ment itself? Put another way, what did Crowley do with Frazer’s contention 
that magic is an atavistic survival, mortally wounded in its confrontation with 

170 Chapter Six
religion and destined to vanish with the rise of science? How did a magician 
address the contention that magic was in decline?
Crowley’s response is significant not just because of his influence on later 
occultists, but also because it has implications for the scholarly reappraisal of 
disenchantment. Many historians still portray magic in terms of survival or 
the occult’s supposed “resistance to change.”83 But this position has recently 
come under fire.
In an important 2003 article, “How Magic Survived the Disenchantment of 
the World,” Wouter Hanegraaff argues that the world had indeed been disen-
chanted insofar as there was social pressure toward a “culturally established 
ideology according to which instrumental causality amounts to a worldview 
capable in principle of rationally explaining all aspects of reality.”84 To simplify 
slightly, Hanegraaff described the history of European thought in Weberian 
terms as the ascendance of a kind of instrumental reason that denies the in-
nate human sense of affective identity with the world (“ ‘real’ symbolism”) in 
favor of the contention that the world could be fully apprehended in terms of 
efficient, material causation. In the face of disenchantment, Hanegraaff argues, 
magic has managed to survive but was largely able to do by being redefined 
in terms of a separate magical world where the ordinary rules of science do 
not apply.85
I think Hanegraaff is right insofar as he suggests that references by both 
scholars and practitioners to an unchanging or atavistic occult tradition are 
misleading. Magic is constantly being redefined. But I think Hanegraaff over-
states the consistency of scientific ontologies and understates the diversity of 
responses to the rise of scientific authority by magicians and philosophers 
alike. In particular, as Egil Asprem has observed, Crowley’s turn toward rather 
than away from science does not accord well with Hanegraaff’s model.86 As-
prem is correct that Crowley’s magic is not a straightforward rebellion from 
science, but even Asprem’s otherwise excellent essay tends to underemphasize 
Crowley’s capacity to martial skeptical themes in philosophy and, in particular, 
Crowley’s attempt to interweave both disenchantment and re- enchantment. 
As Crowley argued in the passage quoted in the section epigraph, magick had 
to destroy magic in order to be revived. Restated, enchantment could only 
come from disenchantment.
*
A key point of disagreement between James Frazer and Aleister Crowley was 
as to the overall trajectory of magic in modernity. As one might expect, Crow-

The Revival of Magick 
171
ley did not think that the age of magic was over. More precisely, he thought 
that the superstitious magic of antiquity needed to be replaced by “magick” 
appropriate to a new dispensation. As evidenced in the quote above, this new 
form of magick would surpass “profane research” (aka modern science), but 
it would be fueled by the destruction of older forms of magic.
Crowley charted an alternative account of the history of magick in a 
four- part series of articles published in the International in 1917 (August– 
November), titled “The Revival of Magick.” His basic argument begins with 
the historic suppression of magic by the medieval Christian Church, forcing 
it underground.87 This is significant because Crowley granted the claim that 
religion— or at least, Christianity— had seen magic as a rival that needed to be 
abolished.88 Religion had indeed come to supplant magic, as Frazer suggested. 
He also acknowledged that established religion has been challenged by the rise 
of science.89 But otherwise Crowley parted ways with Frazer and the canonical 
account of disenchantment.
Crowley argued that with the arrival of “metaphysics,” magic experienced 
a revival, which he clarified thus: “Assuming that irrefutable form of idealism 
which contents itself with the demonstration that, knowledge being a function 
of the mind . . . the universe as we know it is equivalent to the contents of 
that mind; and assuming also that the mind contains a power able to control 
thought; then there is no absurdity in asserting that the mind may be master 
of matter.”90 Paraphrased, the opening for magick was made by philosophers 
like George Berkeley and worked out in the forms of philosophical idealism 
that described the world as the product of mental activity. Crowley’s reading 
of idealism is unusual, to be sure, but his main claim is that once we realize that 
the world is in some sense the product of minds, we can no longer think of it 
in either Christian terms or merely as a universe of dead matter.
One might imagine that Kant would be a pivotal figure in this historical 
trajectory (hold on to this point, as we will discuss Kantian enchantments in 
the next chapter). Elsewhere, Crowley would say as much: “Those laws which 
we call laws of nature . . . as Kant has shown, are really no more than the laws 
of our own minds. The universe is a phenomenon of love under will, a mystic 
and poetic creation, and the intellect only stands to it as mere scansion does to  
poetry.”91 Although a far from orthodox reading of Kant (and more like those 
of S. P. Langley), Crowley attributes to Kant the realization that natural laws 
are merely human generalizations. While philosophical skeptics might take 
this to mean that the universe is fundamentally unpredictable, in Crowley’s 
view this becomes evidence for recentering the human— or at least, conscious-
ness— at the heart of the cosmos.

172 Chapter Six
Magic, however, is not merely idealism. In Crowley’s account, philosophy 
was merely a preparatory step on the way toward a genuine revival. It took Éli-
phas Lévi and Bulwer- Lytton to properly restore magic.92 Lévi spearheaded 
the revival of magic by recovering the half- lost traditions of ancient magicians 
and translating them into modern terms. This is re- enchantment as intellectual 
history (rather than sociology), but Crowley gave particular weight to Lévi’s 
role in publishing popular and accessible writings on the subject.
After Lévi’s pioneering work, Crowley imagined there was a flourishing and 
renewal of magic.93 Outside of France, he claimed, the Theosophical Society 
and the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn— which he saw as the disci-
plinary formation of magical studies— picked up Lévi’s project, elaborating 
his science of magic. The foundation of these research institutions for the 
discovery of magic and the publication of magical materials and books were, in 
Crowley’s estimation, the key to the revival of magick. Unsurprisingly, Crowley 
portrayed his own work of purifying magick as the culmination of this trajec-
tory, with the result that “there is hardly a country in the world which has not 
dozens of members hard at work at magick.”94 I would not go so far as to en-
dorse Crowley’s model, but I want to elaborate its implications for his attempt 
to solve the problem of magic in the face of the rise of scientific authority.
Frazer and a host of others had imagined science as a scourge of supersti-
tion and magic. One reaction to this possible line of critique was to reject ra-
tionality or criticize science itself (see, for instance, the Munich Cosmic Circle, 
discussed in chapter 8). But that was not the angle Crowley took. If anything, 
he both granted the power of science— admittedly, while expressing the quasi- 
Kantian skepticism evidenced above— and sought to describe magick’s com-
patibility with science. But we might wonder, what did harmonizing modern 
sciences and magick look like?
*
Hints of Crowley’s solution appeared already in the first issue of the Equi-
nox, the sporadically published journal that Crowley launched as the official 
organ of the A∴ A∴ in March 1909. From the outset, it announced its goal as 
“Scientific Illuminism,” with the motto “The Method of Science— The Aim 
of Religion” emblazoned on its cover. It is worth underscoring that Crowley 
basically described magick as the reconciliation of science and religion.
The series opened with an editorial by Crowley clarifying his version of 
scientific magic as rooted in the empirical observation of repeatable exper-
iments.95 Mainly, this meant that aspiring magicians would share annotated 

The Revival of Magick 
173
diaries recording the effects and procedures of their magical practices. This 
was basically Francis Bacon’s model for the formation of the scientific method. 
Similarly, Crowley argued that this approach would strip the mystery and mir-
acle from magic while simultaneously granting its systematic practitioners ac-
cess to new powers— in effect, magic’s transformation into magick.
The first issue of the Equinox showcased a concrete example of this sort 
of investigation in an article by Crowley titled “Liber Exercitiorum” (Book 
of exercises). It provided a set of specific, and supposedly repeatable, tech-
niques (including, e.g., “Physical Clairvoyance,” which would be developed 
by shuffling a deck of tarot cards and then attempting to name a card without 
looking at its face).96 The article promised that through training and medita-
tive practice, one could gradually improve on chance. To Crowley this was 
not an amusing party trick, but the foundation for learning how to practice 
divination.
More significantly, Liber Exercitiorum is an example of Crowley’s broader 
attempt to disenchant magic by turning into magick. This did not mean the 
stripping away of magical efficacy or action at a distance, nor was this a com-
plete embrace of scientific naturalism (Crowley did imagine astral worlds and 
mysterious powers).97 Rather, this was an attempt to expel the jargon and 
dogma from magic and to base it in empirical observation. In effect, Crowley 
was positivizing magic. Auguste Comte would have been proud.
To make sense of this project, we have to recognize Crowley’s conception of 
magick, which he defined as “the Science and Art of causing Change to occur 
in conformity with Will.”98 Crowley added that “ANY required change may 
be effected by the application of the proper kind and degree of Force in the 
proper manner, through the proper medium to the proper object.”99 Crowley 
was forging a generously broad definition of magick as praxis or techne. His 
example is a chemist’s attempt to produce chloride of gold, which is premised 
on the conjunction of proper materials. For Crowley, the core commonality 
between magic and science is that both are grounded in goal- driven activity. 
Crowley also explained his definition of science as follows:
Science enables us to take advantage of the continuity of Nature by the empirical 
application of certain principles whose interplay involves different orders of idea 
connected with each other in a way beyond our present comprehension.
(Illustration: We are able to light cities by rule- of- thumb methods. We do 
not know what consciousness is, or how it is connected with muscular action; 
what electricity is or how it is connected with the machines that generate it; 
and our methods depend on calculations involving mathematical ideas which 

174 Chapter Six
have no correspondence in the Universe as we know it.) For instance “irratio-
nal,” “unreal” and “infinite” expressions.100
This passage is pure Crowley, but Frazer too had described magic and science 
as predicated on belief in the continuity of nature (hence the importance of 
repeatability). Crowley wanted to stress that the basic operations of science 
are rooted in mysterious phenomena. Fundamentally, he thought scientists are 
instrumentalists: they keep track of what works to produce certain effects, but 
work around black- box concepts even as they formulate scientific theories. 
For example, all the human sciences, from sociology to psychology, take for 
granted human decision- making, but do so without having worked out a fully 
formed theory of consciousness. This means that scientific truths are only 
perspectival or partial; as he put it, “Magick recognizes frankly (1) that truth is 
relative, subjective, and apparent.”101
Crowley’s skepticism was an attempt to dispel any perceived opposition 
between science as knowledge and magic as superstition. As he argued: “Man 
is ignorant of the nature of his own being and powers. Even his idea of his 
limitations is based on experience of the past, and every step in his progress 
extends his empire. . . . The question of Magick is a question of discovering 
and employing hitherto unknown forces in nature.”102 Magick is about dis-
covering forces, and here Crowley probably had in mind psychical powers, 
unknown or ignored by science. He argued elsewhere, once again evoking 
Frazer, that “what is magic today is science tomorrow.”103 He clarified this in 
Magick without Tears:
Magick investigates the laws of Nature with the idea of making use of them. It 
only differs from “profane” science by always keeping ahead of it. As Frazer 
has shown, Magick is science in the tentative stage; but it may be, and often 
is, more than this. It is science which, for one reason or another, cannot be 
declared to the profane.104
In the place of Frazer’s idea of magic as primitive protoscience (or modern 
magic as atavistic survival), Crowley made magick the cutting edge.105 Un-
like many other magicians who aspired to recover lost occult arts, Crowley’s 
magick was future oriented even as it purified older magical practices. Magick  
willfully rejects scientific presuppositions about human capabilities and 
pushes past previously assumed limits. From Crowley’s perspective, it is main-
stream scientists who tend to be too cautious to delve into truly novel areas. 
Magicians are the real pioneers capable of taking real intellectual risks. Magick 

The Revival of Magick 
175
is not threatened by modernity, but rather required. Science needs magic in 
order to push the boundaries of the possible.106
Co n clu s io n : Fro m T h e  G o l de n Bough  
to  t h e  G o l d e n  D aw n
The reader is earnestly recommended to study this Ritual again and again . . . for herein 
are highly important and significant formulae of mystical aspiration and practical magic. 
In it is exemplified the technical “Dying God” formula about which in The Golden 
Bough Frazer has written so eloquently.
 I s r a e l  R e g a r d i e , The Golden Dawn: A Complete Course  
in Ceremonial Magic, 1937
To emphasize the importance of Frazer to Crowley one last time, after the 
1914 ritual that has been the chapter’s leitmotif, Crowley wrote a set of short 
stories inspired by The Golden Bough. Although published independently in 
Crowley’s lifetime, shortly before his death, Crowley collected these stories 
and requested that they be issued under the heading Golden Twigs.107 In fic-
tionalizing the world of The Golden Bough, Crowley presented his readers with 
pre- Christian “pagan” perspectives and protagonists, including the priest of 
Nemi and the oracle of the Corycian Cave. Crowley also included tales set in 
the contemporary period focused on the discovery of various magical artifacts 
from Frazer’s archaic world. These allowed Crowley to depict modern pagan 
revivals and the return of magic. Together this collection of eight tales demon-
strates how widely Crowley read in The Golden Bough and how inspirational 
he found it.108
What I have attempted to do in this chapter is to show how effortlessly 
Crowley was able to combine Frazer’s folklore studies with William James’s 
pragmatic mysticism and Müller’s sacred books, and make them the basis for 
his own magical and religious projects. He was able to do so in part because 
the works themselves shared habits of thought that were common to the es-
oteric movements of the period. A perennial mysticism appeared just below 
the surface in James’s and Müller’s writings, while Frazer had (perhaps in-
advertently) placed magic on a level with science. The most important thing 
this shows is that religious studies has had ramifications and influences on the 
religious field, and it was far from disenchanting. If anything, it contributed to 
the birth of new religious movements and re- enchantment projects.
This chapter has also been making a broader point about the paradoxes 
of disenchantment discourse. Frazer’s very notion of a primitive epoch of 

176 Chapter Six
“magic” (rather than superstition) was easy to romanticize. Moreover, the lan-
guage of withdrawal carried with it a sense of bereavement. One of the issues 
with many dialectical accounts of the dis- /re- enchantment of the world is that 
they presume that magic had to be lost in order for someone to petition for its 
return. Instead, Crowley demonstrates that the myth of disenchantment alone 
was sufficient. He was a magician who spent his life surrounded by fellow 
occultists, but who nevertheless aspired to bring magic back. Crowley was 
not alone in this respect— many magicians claimed to recover lost magic. The 
fascinating thing is that Crowley’s route to the revival of magic was through 
its disenchantment. To do so, he attempted to martial the symbolic resources 
and methods of science. His was both a recovery of older magical traditions 
and a positivist magick aimed at the future (and indeed, later we’ll see how the 
Vienna School of positivists might have been envious).
Crowley had allies in the academy, and some of these are easy to guess. 
Jessie Weston, Margaret Alice Murray, and Gerald Gardner were inspired 
by The Golden Bough in their various attempts to recreate mystery cults of 
the Holy Grail or pagan witchcraft.109 Others are harder to anticipate. In the 
middle decades of the twentieth century, we find scholars in Europe sifting 
through the world’s non- Christian tales and myths in order to discover their 
universal and hidden forms— forms that, once reconstructed, could serve as 
preemptively de- civilizing alternatives to the various European rationalisms 
and positivisms. Here I am not speaking of thoroughgoing magicians or even 
excoriating the founders of religious studies, but alluding instead to the ances-
tors of post- structuralism, such as Claude Lévi- Strauss and Georges Bataille. 
Indeed, if you root your project through Nietzsche and the paganizing aspects 
of his work, or if you ally with an anticolonial defense of “Oriental” or indige-
nous peoples, it can be surprising how easily occult motifs worm their way 
into your discourse.
Frazer’s progeny were many: Crowley was his wicked son, the structural-
ists his cousins. When Crowley’s disciple Israel Regardie began a revival of 
The Golden Dawn in the United States, he too enshrined Frazer’s text in the 
most widely read publications of the magical Order. Thus, The Golden Bough 
became a scripture for the Golden Dawn.110

The Horrors of Metaphysics
Every phenomenon of nature, profoundly analyzed, draws us into the impenetrable 
darkness of metaphysics.
 C a r l  d u  P r e l , Die Philosophie der Mystik, 1885
In his horror of metaphysics, the founder of positivism excluded from his science every-
thing really universal and cosmic.
 J e a n -  M a r i e  G u y au, Irréligion de l’avenir, 1886
* Part II *


C h a p t e r  S e v e n
The Black Tide:
Mysticism, Rationality, and the 
German Occult Revival
Freud said to me, “My dear Jung, promise me never to abandon the sexual theory. That 
is the most essential thing of all. You see, we must make a dogma of it, an unshakable 
bulwark.” . . . In some astonishment I asked him, “A bulwark against what?” To which 
he replied, “Against the black tide of mud”— and here he hesitated for a moment, then 
added— “of occultism.”
 C . G .  J u n g , Erinnerungen, Träume, Gedanken, 1963
A meticulous reader of Sigmund Freud’s Die Traumdeutung (The Interpreta-
tion of Dreams) will note a subtle metamorphosis already at work in the fourth 
edition of that famous text (1914). The most obvious change from previous 
editions is the inclusion of two essays by Freud’s younger colleague Otto Rank 
relating the analysis of dreams to myth and poetry. Though by the eighth edi-
tion, these essays would be expunged, they show Freud and Rank extending 
psychoanalysis to an analysis of artistic and mythological symbolism.1
But there are other changes in the work that are more important for our pur-
poses. These modifications are subtle— a paragraph here, a footnote there— 
and are relatively modest compared to the mutations of subsequent editions. 
For those attentive to the return of the repressed, the most significant change 
in the 1914 edition is the appearance of six footnotes all referencing the same 
thinker, the otherwise obscure German philosopher Carl du Prel. This may 
sound trivial, but their appearance is significant. One clue as to their meaning 
is the first of these notes, where Freud remarked:
That brilliant mystic du Prel— one of the few authors for whose neglect in 
earlier editions of this book I would like to express my regret— suggests that 
the gateway to metaphysics, so far as [ordinary] men are concerned, is not 
wakefulness, but dreams.2

180 Chapter Seven
Who was this “brilliant mystic (geistreiche Mystiker)”? A later note increases 
the stakes; there, Freud cited passages from du Prel, Die Philosophie der Mys-
tik (1885; The Philosophy of Mysticism), including this line: “It is a truth that 
cannot be emphasized strongly enough that consciousness and the soul/mind 
(Seele) are not coextensive.”3 To which Freud commented, “I am pleased to 
be able to point to an author who has drawn from the study of dreams the 
same conclusion [as myself] about the relationship between conscious and 
unconscious activity.”4
This is important because Die Traumdeutung is the first monograph in 
which Freud articulated his theory of “the unconscious” (Das Unbewußte) and 
this very word had appeared as a term of analysis in du Prel, Die Philosophie 
der Mystik fifteen- years before Freud.5 In this footnote, Freud might seem to be 
attributing to du Prel nothing less than the discovery of the unconscious— or 
more precisely, the discovery that consciousness is only the surface of a sub-
merged and larger unconscious mind that expresses itself in dreams. Although 
Freud clearly drew from many sources in formulating his signature theories, 
at the very least it begins to look as if Freud owed something significant to the 
insights of a “mystic.”6
Taken together, these footnotes suggest a securely established Freud finally 
admitting to some of the inspirations for his most influential theories. There 
is more evidence for this interpretation. This was the same edition in which 
Freud also acknowledged the importance of Eduard von Hartmann; scholars 
have already spent some time demonstrating the influence of Hartmann on 
Freudian psychoanalysis and many of its master terms.7 While this might put 
pressure on arbitrary preconceptions of Freud’s originality, it does not seem 
particularly unsettling to know Freud read Hartmann. Despite Hartmann’s 
references to the Vedic wisdom and the theosophy of Jakob Böhme, Hartmann 
is remembered as respectable philosopher. Du Prel is categorically different; 
beyond just Freud’s reference to him as a “mystic,” there is also the fact that 
today scholars remember Du Prel as a spiritualist and psychical researcher 
who wrote about magic and the occult.8 Freud’s footnotes might seem tanta-
mount to a confession of serious interest in mysticism, spiritualism, or even 
magic.
Crucially, these changes to Die Traumdeutung were made after Freud dis-
covered Frazer’s Golden Bough; indeed, they appeared just after Freud had 
written the 1913 essay “Animismus, Magie und Allmacht der Gedanken” (“An-
imism, Magic and the Omnipotence of Thought”), which articulates his ver-
sion of the disenchantment myth and argues that myth and magic are products 

The Black Tide 
181
of the primitive mind. It is remarkable not just that Freud read an occultist, 
but that he admitted to doing so after having argued that magical thinking was 
degenerative or retrogressive. One might therefore expect Freud to have aban-
doned mysticism, but he and du Prel shared more than the classical narrative 
would admit. Indeed, I will explore how Freud ultimately projected his own 
taboo beliefs onto the figure of the “savage.”
Freud is important in our attempt to pinpoint the genesis of the regulative 
function of the myth of disenchantment. If you have been keeping score, many 
of the figures discussed thus far— from Francis Bacon to Friedrich Schiller to 
Max Müller— made little effort to conceal their interest in magic, theosophy, 
or the occult. To be sure, they often tried to distinguish their projects from 
diabolic or superstitious forms of the same, but they were generally open about 
them.9 If we have since forgotten their enchantments, the amnesia came later. 
Thus, the question becomes: When did scholars begin to suppress their occult 
interests?
My intuition is that they did so much later and more sporadically then is 
conventionally supposed and that much of the cleanup has been retroactive. 
Freud is fascinating for our purposes because he hesitated between both reve-
lation and concealment, making some of his occult interests public and con-
fining others to his personal life. Freud also embraced both a disenchantment 
narrative and belief in many of the things he described as endangered. Cru-
cially, Freud’s letters can be used to reconstruct his reasoning about the matter, 
and we can learn much about the mechanisms of occult repression from the 
master theorist of repression himself.
The second purpose of this chapter is to put pressure on a common reading 
of Weberian disenchantment— namely, the idea that a central feature of mo-
dernity is increasing epistemic confidence. Basically, disenchantment means 
a vanishing sense of mystery and a greater faith in the human capacity to use 
instrumental reason to master the world. The problem is that in addition to 
certain post- Kantian movements amplifying various forms of skepticism, en-
chantment found a home in the heart of philosophy itself, and then philosophy 
transmitted this magic to a scientific discipline: psychoanalysis.
The relationship between du Prel and Freud demonstrates the importance 
of “mysticism” as a vanishing mediator between two conceptual edifices: a 
philosophy haunted by the simultaneous power and limits of reason, and its 
double, a psychoanalysis drawn to explore the roots of irrationality. What 
lurked beyond reason’s limits? Was it divine consciousness or madness? Could 
philosophy explain magic? And what was the fate of mysticism in modernity? 

182 Chapter Seven
Could mysticism bridge religion and philosophy/science? I will first showcase 
an (equally suspect) alternative to the disenchantment myth, one that saw mo-
dernity as a decline into degeneration, mysticism, and the occult. The chapter 
then pursues the German occult revival in the most unlikely of places, the 
history of post- Kantian philosophical thought. I show that it was this haunted 
philosophy that bequeathed its ghosts to Freudian psycho analysis.
D e g e n e r at io n  an d  My sti ci s m:  
M ax  N o r dau
The old Northern faith contained the fearsome doctrine of the twilight of the gods (Göt-
terdämmerung). In our days there have arisen in more highly developed minds vague 
fears of a twilight of the masses (Völkerdämmerung), in which all suns and all stars are 
gradually waning, and humankind with all its institutions and creations is perishing in 
the midst of a dying world. . . . Ghost stories are very popular. . . . So are esoteric novels, 
in which the author hints that he could say a deal about magic, Kabbalah, fakirism, as-
trology, and other white and black arts.
 M a x N o r d au, Entartung, 1892
Thus far, I may have given the sense that the disenchantment myth was uni-
versally embraced. At the very least, I may have inadvertently produced the 
impression that those who did not equate modernization with alienation were 
mostly celebrating the wonders of progress. But here I want to introduce an 
alternate model, one that described modernity not as the death of magic or 
the despiritualization of nature, but as the rise of mysticism and the occult. Its 
proponent, the influential German- speaking Jewish physician and social critic 
Max Nordau (1849– 1923), was an early interlocutor with Freud. In this section, 
I will set out Nordau’s thesis, which he referred to as Entartung (degeneration, 
or literally “retardation”), and show how it provided a model against which 
other thinkers staged alternatives.10
Nordau did not invent the idea of degeneration; it had distant precedents 
in the biblical accounts of the Fall of Man and the Tower of Babel. But even 
acceptance of Darwin’s theory of evolution would not wholly dispel the argu-
ment that species or individuals might regress to an earlier stage in the evo-
lutionary progression. As a theory of culture, the degeneration thesis came 
into vogue in the later part of the nineteenth century, finding expression in 
everything from novels to philosophical and scientific works.11 Nordau was 
central to its currency. In the widely read 1892 Entartung, Nordau argued, 

The Black Tide 
183
“We stand now in the midst of a severe mental epidemic; of a sort of black 
death of degeneration and hysteria” in which the progress of civilization was 
in peril of being reversed.12
Crucially, Nordau started from the basic features of modernity granted by 
sociologists today, including urbanization, industrialization, societal differen-
tiation, and the advancement of science; but instead of portraying these as part 
of a grand process of rationalization, he argued that modernity is in danger of 
producing a psychologically sick underclass. Although pitched in apocalyp-
tic language, Nordau’s model is not far from the Mike Judge’s film Idiocracy 
(2006), which depicts a twenty- fifth- century world populated by insane and 
gullible morons. While Nordau was cautionary rather than completely pessi-
mistic, he agonized about a future in which humanity descends into stupidity, 
moral degeneration, and madness. To coin a term, this is modernization as 
irrationalization.
*
Nordau tellingly described mysticism as a symptom or “a cardinal mark of 
degeneration.”13 In his assessment, modernity was threatened by a rising tide 
of mysticism (Mysticismus), which he defined as following: “A state of mind in 
which the subject imagines that he perceives or divines unknown and inexpli-
cable relations amongst phenomena, discerns in things hints at mysteries, and 
regards them as symbols, by which a dark power seeks to unveil, or at least to 
indicate, all sorts of marvels that he endeavors to guess, though generally in 
vain.”14 Nordau’s definition of mysticism is significant because it suggests that 
modernity will produce more mysterious symbols, more religion, and more 
magic, even if only in a retarded or atavistic sense. So in place of disenchant-
ment, Nordau foresaw a re- enchantment, which he portrayed in terms of a 
socially stratified hierarchy where “degenerate” masses increasingly would 
take refuge in magic and mysticism.15 The modern world, therefore, is in the 
process of becoming more symbolically rich (if in a delusional way) rather 
than less.
Nordau’s linking of degeneration to spiritualism was also explicit. He 
argued, however, that spiritualism is special, not merely a superstition, but an 
insane modern superstition, emerging from mysticism and derangement. He 
seemed to take particular horror at the idea that it might make inroads into the 
world of “literary men” and described psychical research as a further, ominous 
sign of deterioration. Nordau described spiritualism as widespread in Great 

184 Chapter Seven
Britain and Germany, but he argued the real problem was elsewhere: “France 
is about to become the promised land of believers in ghosts.”16
France was particularly worrying for Nordau because of spiritualism’s rap-
prochement with medicine, and particularly with the hypnosis formulated by 
Freud’s teacher, Jean- Martin Charcot (1825– 93). Nordau stated his rebuttal in 
direct terms, arguing that in the hands of hypnotists, “possession, witch spells, 
second sight, healing by imposition of hands, prophecy, [and] mental com-
munication at the remotest distance without the intervention of words have 
received a new interpretation and have been recognized as possible.”17 Nordau 
dismissed hypnotism at the outset and argued that it is the contamination of 
medicine by mysticism. Basically, it is degenerate medicine that lends credi-
bility to superstitions. What is striking here is that Nordau was both condemn-
ing what would become the foundations of the discipline of psychoanalysis, 
and arguing that set the stage for further magic and mysticism.
For Nordau, mysticism was a harbinger of social collapse, should Europe 
not awaken to the signs of its own decay. At least insofar as we (more than a 
hundred years later) do not generally fear psychoanalysis or a flood of mysti-
cism, we might find it easy to look at Nordau today and laugh. His contention 
that evolution could be reversed by urbanization is hard to take seriously, and 
may even seem to be racializing the working class. In one significant respect, 
though, Nordau was right— not in his idea of degeneration, but in his simpler 
observation that Western Europe was in the midst of an occult revival. The pre-
vious chapters have shown that in late nineteenth- century England, full- blown 
spiritualist movements and occult revivals were in place; it comes as no surprise 
that the German- speaking world was tracing a similar pattern. This is a subject 
about which scholars have already had much to say.18 But as I will show, these 
revivals found a home in two unlikely places: philosophy and psychoanalysis.
K an t  as  N e c ro m ance r:  
Ca rl d u  P r e l  an d  Art h u r  S ch ope nh aue r
Kant’s philosophy is not only an absurdity, but a wickedness and a horror; the pious 
and peaceful sage of Konigsberg passes for a sort of Necromancer and Blackartist in 
Metaphysics; his doctrine is a region of boundless baleful gloom, too cunningly broken 
here and there by splendours of unholy fire; spectres and tempting demons people it.
 T h o m a s C a r ly l e , “The State of German Literature,” 1827
The initiate has already accustomed the untutored understanding, which clings to the 
outer sense, to higher concepts of an abstract character. He is now able to see spirit 

The Black Tide 
185
forms, stripped of their corporeal shell, in the half- light with which the dim torch of 
metaphysics reveals the realm of shades. Let us now, therefore, having completed our 
difficult preparation, embark on our perilous journey.
 I m m a n u e l  K a n t, Träume eines Geistersehers, 1766
Träume eines Geistersehers, erläutert durch Träume der Metaphysik (Dreams 
of a spirit seer, illustrated by dreams of metaphysics, 1766) is an oddity in Im-
manuel Kant’s oeuvre, and has often been an embarrassment for scholars. For 
readers accustomed to the dry prose of Kant’s more famous works, the tone of 
the text will seem downright strange, vacillating between hints at occult knowl-
edge (as above), abstract philosophical reflections, and occasional outbursts 
of sarcasm. As far as I know, it also includes Kant’s only attempt at a flatulence 
joke: “If a hypochondriacal wind should rage in the guts, what matters is the 
direction it takes: if downwards, then the result is a f[art]; if upwards, an ap-
parition or a heavenly inspiration.”19 Try that one out the next time someone 
you know claims to be divinely inspired.
But its playful tone is not the only thing unusual about Dreams of a Spirit 
Seer; its subject matter has also disconcerted many of Kant’s acolytes. The 
work is a sustained discussion of ghosts and of the Swedish mystic Emanuel 
Swedenborg (1688– 1772). Swedenborg had come to Kant’s attention because 
of his celebrated clairvoyant visions and spirit communications. Today, schol-
ars argue about whether the text demonstrates a Swedenborgian influence on 
Kant, or whether the whole thing is essentially an elaborate joke at the mystic’s 
expense.20 In this section, I would like to gesture at the centrality of spirits and 
magic to post- Kantian philosophy, and expose the roots of a tension between 
reason’s overwhelming power and fragility, which may still be hauntingly fa-
miliar today.
Philosophy has long been haunted by spirits.21 More than any other figure, 
Kant came to define nineteenth- century conceptions of rationality; but the 
enchantments of his legacy have been underappreciated. In Dreams of a Spirit 
Seer, Kant distanced himself from Swedenborg without fully foreclosing the 
possibility of spirits. Instead, perhaps revealingly, he defined spirits as immate-
rial beings possessed of reason (Vernunft).22 This might be restated to say that 
ghosts are pure reason. Kant then went on to suggest that immaterial spirits 
were fundamentally beyond the limits of human understanding. Given that 
Dreams of a Spirit Seer just precedes Kant’s critical turn, one cannot help but 
notice the parallels between its spirits and his Critique of Pure Reason (Kritik 
der reinen Vernunft, 1781).
For the uninitiated, the Critique of Pure Reason was an attempt to counter 

186 Chapter Seven
a quasi- Humean skepticism by surveying the grounds of possible experience. 
To do so, Kant conceded a version of the Humean appearance- essence breach 
and granted that we bring pure forms of sense experience or intuition (reine 
Anschauung, e.g., space, time) to our empirical world before they are properly  
earned. In fact, we only experience appearances, not the thing- in- itself (Ding- 
an- Sich). Reason then has a powerful and necessary function; but beyond its 
limits lies “a vast and stormy ocean” of the unknowable.23 This ocean outside 
possible experience and conceivable human knowledge is where Kant would 
locate God.24 Except for this gesture toward negative theology, Kant largely 
aimed to evacuate the region of positive content, but once he had defined a 
transcendent realm, others could not resist populating it. While Kant wanted 
to leave room for a rational faith, an inadvertent consequence of his philos-
ophy was to further alienate philosophy from a newly mysterious hidden 
world.
Kant also had a lasting impact on conceptions of the unconscious mind. 
René Descartes, having defined the mind in terms of self- awareness, seemingly 
excluded the possibility of unconscious mental processes.25 By contrast, in An-
thropologie in pragmatischer Hinsicht (1798; Anthropology from a Pragmatic 
Point of View), Kant reflected on “the [mental] representations that we have 
without being conscious of them,” arguing that we have indirect representa-
tions of things on the edge of our perceptions (e.g., recognizing a person when 
they are barely visible).26 Kant referred to these indirect perceptions as dunkel 
(dark or obscure) mental representations. He also argued that the majority of 
thought is made up of this dark content and that “only a few places on the vast 
map of our mind are illuminated” with clear and distinct representations.27 
This was only a minor part of Kant’s larger exploration of the limits of rea-
son, but the imagery of a vast dark map of the mind suggested a vast internal 
region.28
In the nineteenth century, philosophy would make itself over in Kant’s 
image, sanctifying both his emphasis on the powers of reason and his intu-
itions about the importance of reason’s limits. Thus his famous distinction 
between the phenomenal world of experiences and the noumenal world of the  
thing- in- itself would serve as the central line across which much of philosophy 
would stage its battles. Later theorists would also use this bifurcation (and a 
related Kantian formulation of the distinction between faith and reason) to 
enshrine religion and science in separate domains or nonoverlapping mag-
isteria. But the thing- in- itself would continue to haunt a range of disciplines, 
serving as a kind of Kantian monster that lurked outside the realms of reason 

The Black Tide 
187
and preyed on those who have strayed too far. We will touch on some of these 
beasts and their role in the uncanny legacy of post- Kantian thought.29
*
While some philosophers rejected Kant’s Ding- an- Sich, they often found it 
difficult to escape his other ghosts. Nowhere is this clearer than in Hegel. In 
the logic section of Enzyklopädie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grun-
drisse (often called the Encyclopaedia- Logic, 1817), Hegel even described his 
own project in terms of “mysticism.”
To explain Hegel’s mysticism, you should know that despite how dialec-
tics is commonly used, it was not Hegel’s preferred term for his philosophy. 
Dialectics is just the second of three stages of thought— namely, the negative 
moment (Adorno’s negative dialectics is redundant). The final stage for Hegel 
is often what he referred to as “speculation,” which describes how one cog-
nizes the unity of distinct terms. Tellingly, Hegel remarked that “speculative 
truth”— that is, his philosophy— “means very much the same as what used to 
be called mysticism.”30 That is, he thought that philosophy rigorously pursued 
should reach the same paradoxical endpoints that the old mysticism achieved 
via chin- stroking, top- of- the- mountain shortcuts: The man is the woman, the 
woman is the man. Life is death, and death is life. A rational philosophy will 
disclose “what lies beyond the compass of understanding” because der Ver-
stand is just one rather limited power of the mind.31 Hegel seemed to be sug-
gesting that his philosophy is nothing less than the vindication of mysticism 
by redoing it in fully argued, entirely nonmystical terms.32
But if Hegel was identifying his philosophy with a disenchanted mysticism, 
it fell to others to use Kant to theorize magic.
*
Arthur Schopenhauer articulated his own theory of magic in On the Will in 
Nature (Über den Willen in der Natur, 1836). In a chapter titled “Animalischer 
Magnetismus und Magie” (Animal magnetism and magic), Schopenhauer re-
ferred to animal magnetism as “practical metaphysics,” arguing that its effects 
are real, and that they “empirically confirm the possibility of a magical, as 
opposed to a physical effect, a possibility which the previous century had so 
peremptorily discarded because it did not want to give credence to any other 
effect than the physical, brought about in accord with the comprehensible  

188 Chapter Seven
causal nexus.”33 According to Schopenhauer, magic is real and efficacious. 
While ordinary events happen inside the categories of space, time, and ordi-
nary causation, magic is no less genuine, operating according to what he called 
a “metaphysical nexus.”34 In effect, magic represents trans- spatial causation 
because it happened at the level of the Ding- an- Sich.
In Schopenhauer’s scheme, not only was “white magic” real, there was 
actually reason to believe that black magic (maleficium) was also a description 
of actual phenomena.35 In effect, Schopenhauer was granting a basic distinc-
tion common to much of European esotericism, which was a subject he knew 
well, judging from the copious citations from magical texts that filled out his 
chapter. But the philosopher did not grant the whole of, say, Agrippa’s Occult 
Philosophy; he was suspicious of both the reality of demons and the necessity 
of ritual.
Schopenhauer argued instead that the essence of magic was the will, and 
that it was the human will that allowed one to effect magical transformations.36 
In this he seems to be anticipating Crowley (who did read Schopenhauer). 
Schopenhauer had long seen the exploration of the will as the fundamental 
contribution of his philosophy. In his masterwork, The World as Will and 
Representation (Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung, 1818), he had interpreted 
Kant’s critical philosophy to argue that we can only know the surface nature of 
phenomena, not their internal nature; to which Schopenhauer observed that 
there is an exception to this limitation, since the human body is presented to 
us in two ways. First, we experience it phenomenologically, as a kind of object 
of sensorial experience that is necessarily conditioned by the categories of 
space and time. But it also appears to us on the inside. In other words, we 
know what it is like to be a Ding- an- Sich because we have a body. Schopen-
hauer called this inward being at the root of all things the “will,” and he argued 
that our apprehension of it is both outside the categories of space and time 
and unconscious. Hence, by arguing that magic also originated from the will, 
Schopenhauer was actually enchanting the noumena and basically suggesting 
his whole philosophical system had magical powers.
Further, instead of imagining that magic would vanish with the advance-
ment of philosophy, Schopenhauer declared that his generation was witness-
ing the dawn of a new age of “magic” initiated by “by the transformation of 
philosophy brought about by Kant.” As Schopenhauer elaborated: “In order 
to ridicule all occult sympathy or even magical effect out of hand, one must 
find the world highly, indeed absolutely, intelligible. But this can be done only 
if the world is looked into with an extremely superficial gaze that allows no 

The Black Tide 
189
notion of the fact that we are awash in a sea of riddles and mysteries and that we 
neither know nor understand either things or ourselves immediately and thor-
oughly.”37 Paraphrased, it was a skeptical reading of Kant that had made way 
for the return of magic. Accordingly, Schopenhauer saw the task of philosophy 
(as the queen of metaphysics) to be making use of the practical metaphysics 
of magic. But it fell to du Prel to expand the enchantments of Schopenhauer’s 
project.
*
Kant haunts the work of Freud’s “brilliant mystic,” the German aristocrat, 
philosopher, and occultist Baron Carl du Prel (1839– 99).38 Following a career 
as a Bavarian army officer, du Prel completed a doctoral thesis in philosophy 
at the University of Tübingen, titled Oneirokritikon: Der Traum vom Stand-
punkt des Transzendentalen Idealismus (Oneiro- critique: The dream from 
the standpoint of transcendental idealism, 1868). But he built his scholarly 
reputation in the 1874 Der Kampf ums Dasein am Himmel: Die Darwinsche 
Formel nachgewiesen in der Mechanik der Sternenwelt (The struggle for exis-
tence in the heavens: The Darwinian model demonstrated in the mechanics of 
the cosmos). Der Kampf ums Dasein am Himmel was a passionate defense of 
Darwinism that attempted to relate it to the formation of consciousness, and 
even the universe.39
In the years that followed, du Prel’s writings took a spiritualist and indeed a 
“mystical” turn. He worked to square the experiences of psychic mediums and 
German mystics with a version of transcendental idealism rooted in Kant. His 
version of Kant was conditioned by his readings of Arthur Schopenhauer, Jo-
hann Gottlieb Fichte, and Eduard von Hartmann. In the work Freud cited, Die  
Philosophie der Mystik (1885), du Prel waded into a nineteenth- century con-
troversy about the meaning of the “mysticism.”
Although it might be tempting to imagine a continuous tradition of German 
mysticism stretching from Meister Eckhart to Ludwig Wittgenstein, Eckhart 
had not been much read following his condemnation by the Inquisition in 
1328.40 It was the Catholic theologian Franz von Baader (1765– 1841), an ac-
quaintance of Hegel, Schelling, and Jacobi, who recovered Eckhart from near 
obscurity and placed him alongside Böhme and others to suggest a mystical 
tradition, which Baader contrasted with what he saw as the destructive ratio-
nalism of enlightenment.41 In effect, mysticism was constructed to be a third 
term reconnecting humanity and God, or philosophy and nature.

190 Chapter Seven
Nineteenth- century conceptions of mysticism (Mystizismus or Mystik), 
however, were roughly split between two semi- overlapping semantic spheres. 
Mysticism either meant belief in mysterious spiritual powers and the efficacy 
of secret rituals, often epitomized by the initiates of the Greek Eleusinian Mys-
teries (basically, mysticism as occult magic); or it referred to a belief in truths 
attained through direct union with God by means of self- surrender. Accord-
ingly, thinkers like du Prel and William James were crucial to the process of 
redefining mysticism as a universal aspect of human experience.42
Die Philosophie der Mystik also used evidence from psychical research to 
argue for the existence of a spiritual transcendental subject of extraordinary 
depths. As du Prel put it:
If consciousness in even our highest ecstasies does not exhaust our whole 
being, leaving behind an immeasurable background of the Unconscious, which 
can furnish new divisions, then certainly man appears as a being of ground-
less depth, reaching with his individual roots into the metaphysical region. . . . 
Man [is] a double being, with one foot on the earth, the other in the realm of 
spirits.43
Our day- to- day subjectivity is only the partial manifestation of a soul (or pure 
ego) that really exists in the unconscious. Moreover, he argued that “individ-
uality extends its roots down into the thing- in- itself (Ding- an- Sich)”44 But 
rather than being a unfathomable remainder, du Prel thought that the Kantian 
thing- in- itself made itself available to us in mesmeric and somnambulistic 
states. In other words, we truly transcend space and time in dreams.
Du Prel also wanted to make the study of paranormal phenomena the main 
business of philosophy; in 1886, he became one of the founding members of 
the Münchener psychologische Gesellschaft (Munich Psychological Society), 
which was modeled on the British Society for Psychical Research. The re-
sults of du Prel’s research, combined with his ongoing philosophical musings, 
ushered in a fruitful era of writing that included the publication of both 1893 
Der Spiritismus (Spiritualism) and the two- volume Die Entdeckung der Seele 
durch die Geheimwissenschaften (The discovery of the soul through the occult 
sciences, 1894– 95). Shortly before his death in 1899, du Prel published the  
final two- volume Die Magie als Naturwissenschaft (Magic as natural science), in 
which he used evidence from magic to articulate a skepticism about conventional 
accounts of causation. At the same time, he argued in Die Magie that magic is 
only an unknown natural science, waiting for the proper systematization.
To counter the charge that Kant and the occult make poor bedfellows, du 

The Black Tide 
191
Prel published the first edition of Kant’s Vorlesungen über Psychologie (Lec-
tures on psychology), aiming to show that Kant had formulated his philosophy 
on the insights of Swedenborg. In so doing, du Prel hoped to prove that his 
own mysticism was orthodox Kantianism. It worked insofar as du Prel was 
read— albeit often critically— by influential thinkers like William James. In-
deed, there was also an extended series of public debates between du Prel and 
Eduard von Hartmann over a range of issues.45 Moreover, other philosophers 
and theologians like Karl Joel and Otto Pfleiderer followed du Prel in discuss-
ing the union of mysticism and philosophical thought.46 Meanwhile, an entire 
generation of spiritualists was more than happy to follow du Prel in populating 
the noumenal with ghosts.47 But this does not tell us what Freud was doing 
reading du Prel, even on the sly. To make sense of that, we need to return to 
the history of psychoanalysis and to locate Freud in the period’s occult milieu.
H i d d e n  D e p t h s :  
S i g mu n d  Fr eu d
Mysticism, occultism— what is meant by these words? . . . Occultism asserts that there 
are in fact “more things in heaven and earth than are dreamt of in our philosophy.” Well, 
we need not feel bound by the narrow- mindedness of academic philosophy.
 S i g m u n d  F r e u d, Neue Folge der Vorlesungen zur Einführung  
in die Psychoanalyse, 1933
If there is one received truism in the popular account of the history of psycho-
analysis, it is that the falling- out between Sigmund Freud and his disciple Carl 
Gustav Jung centered on their differences regarding religion and the occult. 
Although some scholars know different, in what was for a time a foundational 
myth of psychoanalysis, Jung played the role of either a deeply spiritual person 
or a credulous mystic (depending on one’s vantage point); regardless, Freud 
is usually cast as a skeptic.48
By way of illustration: the David Cronenberg film A Dangerous Method 
(2011) focuses on the triadic relationship between Jung, Freud, and their 
Austrian colleague (and Jung’s lover) Sabina Spielrein. The film, based on 
John Kerr’s nonfictional A Most Dangerous Method (1993), repeatedly depicts 
Jung and Freud’s spiritual differences. In particular, in a dramatic scene set in 
Freud’s office, Freud (played by Viggo Mortensen) cautions Jung (Michael 
Fassbender) that it is “dangerous to stray into any kind of mysticism,” warning 
him against “wallow[ing] in the black mud of superstition,” when a sudden 
noise, a loud crack, startles both men. Jung immediately remarks that he had a 

192 Chapter Seven
presentiment of the noise and that it was an example of a paranormal “catalytic 
exteriorisation phenomenon.” Freud scoffs. But Jung predicts that the event 
will occur again. Freud has just resumed his monologue when a second crash 
temporarily stuns him into silence. Jung looks self- assured, and the viewer is 
meant to feel that he has been vindicated in his occult pursuits. But the scene 
concludes with Freud saying, “We can’t afford to wander into these speculative 
areas, telepathy, singing bookcases, fairies at the bottom of the garden. It won’t 
do!” Throughout the film, Freud is generally depicted as a smug skeptic while 
Jung is portrayed as spiritually inclined.
This view of Freud and Jung’s relationship is not without precedent, not 
least of which is Jung’s autobiography Erinnerungen Träume Gedanken (1962; 
Memories, Dreams, Reflections), which is likely the ultimate source of the film’s 
account of the protagonists’ spiritual conflicts.49 As evidenced in this chapter’s 
epigraph, Jung repeatedly described his conflict with Freud as originating in 
Freud’s condemnation of “schwarzen Schlammflut des Okkultismus” (the black 
tide of occultism).50 But as Jung explained, “What Freud seemed to mean by 
‘occultism’ was virtually everything that philosophy and religion, including 
the rising contemporary science of parapsychology, had learned about the psy-
che.”51 Even the paranormal anecdote depicted in the film has a precedent in 
Jung’s account: in 1909, an uncanny and repeated noise described as a “kataly-
tisches Exteriorisationsphänomen” ironically disrupted Freud’s expression of 
doubts about the paranormal.52 The main differences between Jung’s account 
and that of the film is that Freud’s dialogue is not in the text.
The publication record supports Jung’s self- presentation as a spiritual 
seeker. Jung had a childhood encounter with spiritualism that culminated in 
his 1902 dissertation, which was a case study of a spirit medium. Later publi-
cations such as Seelenprobleme der gegenwart (1933; Modern Man in Search of 
a Soul), Psychologie und Alchemie (1944; Psychology and Alchemy), and Myste-
rium Coniunctionis (1956) reiterate his mystical religiosity; and his personal 
account of spiritual visions is recorded in Memories, Dreams, Reflections and 
the posthumously published The Red Book: Liber Novus (2009). Taken as a 
whole, Jung’s work leaves little doubt as to his engagement with magic, al-
chemy, spiritualism, mysticism, and theosophy. Even the main conceptual 
innovations of Jungian or analytic psychology— the collective unconscious, 
synchronicity, anima and animus— all can be seen as products of a cross- 
fertilization of psychology and esotericism.53 Accordingly, it is not hard to 
place Jung among the magicians.
*

The Black Tide 
193
A number of scholars have described Freud’s general skepticism and unbelief. 
As the historian Peter Gay puts it, “Freud’s unbelief stands out sharply. . . . 
It is certain . . . that if Freud had been a [religious] believer . . . he would not 
have developed psychoanalysis.”54 With significantly more nuance, Jean- Luc 
Nancy describes the importance of Freud’s “belief without belief” and later 
remarks: “Science’s value for Freud is as a defense against religious illusion.”55 
While Harold Bloom argues for the importance of Freud’s Jewishness, he 
nevertheless portrays Freud’s project as a kind of immanent or internal cri-
tique of Judaism projected onto a larger canvas.56 Not all scholars read Freud 
as antireligious, but Freud is often classed as one of the “three masters of 
suspicion” alongside Marx and Nietzsche.57
If this consensus were right, Freud might seem to be the least likely person 
to dabble with the occult, mysticism, or the paranormal. But the popular image 
of Freud gets it wrong— it imagines a greater distance between Freud and Jung 
than was actually the case. Before I get to Freud’s occultism, I want to discuss 
his skepticism.
At first pass, Freud’s oeuvre supports the reading of him as a skeptic. Al-
ready in Zur Psychopathologie des Alltagslebens (first edition, 1904; The Psy-
chopathology of Everyday Life), Freud discussed what he saw as the common 
psychological impulse to make meaning out of coincidences and to believe 
in “superstitions” like prophetic dreams. It is in the midst of this analysis of 
“superstition” that Freud tentatively outlined what would become his grand 
theory of religion. Freud wrote that “a large portion of the mythological con-
ception of the world which reaches far into the most modern religions is noth-
ing but psychology projected into the outer world.”58 As he explained, religious 
symbols are the projection of internal conflicts and insecurities, based in early 
attempts to “explain the outer world in an anthropomorphic sense.”59 Hav-
ing internalized a distinction between religion and science, Freud argued that 
religion is essentially superstition, embedded in infantile fantasy and anthro-
pological fallacy. This is a critique Freud repeated, and if anything amplified, 
elsewhere.60
Crucially, Freud also adopted the myth of disenchantment. In the essay 
“Animismus, Magie und Allmacht der Gedanken” (Animism, magic, and the 
omnipotence of thought, collected in Totem und Tabu, 1913), Freud begins 
to digest his reading of Tylor and Frazer to theorize a relationship between 
magic and religion. Freud, however, differentiated between magic and sor-
cery, arguing that “sorcery (Zauberei), then, is essentially the art of influenc-
ing spirits by treating them in the same way as one would treat men in like 
circumstances. . . . Magic (Magie), on the other hand, is something different: 

194 Chapter Seven
fundamentally, it disregards spirits and makes use of special procedures and 
not of everyday psychological methods. . . . Magic can be applied as well in 
cases where, as it seems to us, the process of spiritualizing Nature has not yet 
been carried out.”61 Basically, sorcery is based on spirits that it evokes by com-
municating with them as one would a person, while magic treats everything 
as a tool or symbol to be manipulated, such that while it can compel spirits, it 
does so in an instrumentalist manner.
Freud also provided a definition of magic (intended to cover sorcery as 
well) as the belief that that “relations which hold between the ideas of things 
are assumed to hold equally between the things themselves.”62 This should 
now be a familiar version of magic as savage semiotics rooted in the confusion  
between representations and the things they represent. Hence one mistakenly 
believes that stabbing an image, say, has the capacity to harm the person it 
depicts. Just as the association of ideas is unrestrained spatially, so too magic 
functions at a distance. It is invested in what Freud called “the omnipotence 
of thought.” It therefore assumes that communication at a distance is also pos-
sible. As Freud put it, “Telepathy is taken for granted.” By way of a method-
ological parenthetical, it is worth noting that Freud here classed “telepathy” 
as an occult superstition.63 Keep that in mind for later.
Significantly, in this essay Freud described the by- now familiar account of 
cultural evolution as both disenchantment and secularization, arguing that civ-
ilizations move through “an animistic phase followed by a religious phase and 
this in turn by a scientific one.”64 Here we can see Freud running Tylor and 
Frazer’s models together. Freud argued that “animism” is the first major phase 
of human thought, but he denied that it is properly speaking religious and 
went on to associate it with myth and magic.65 Freud’s additional contribution 
to the conversation is that he mapped this progression onto the development 
of the individual, associating animism with infancy, religion with the object- 
choice stage of childhood, and science with maturity.66 This is roughly a cul-
tural version of Ernst Haeckel’s claim that ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny, 
with science representing individual/cultural maturity while magic represents 
childhood/primitivism.67 In sum, mature scientific civilization should outgrow 
childish magic.
Freud also included a case study of a “neurotic” with magical delusions, 
thus associating magic with a trifecta of Victorian derision— primitives, chil-
dren, and the insane. This text might suggest a disenchanted Freud arguing 
that those benighted individuals who engage in magical thinking are psycho-
logically juvenile, whereas the psychoanalyst is truly mature and hence myth-

The Black Tide 
195
less. To be fair to the subtlety in Freud’s analysis, he noted that we all have 
some temptation to indulge in magical thinking; he also argued that religion 
might have a useful role in restraining violent instincts.
The Future of an Illusion (Die Zukunft einer Illusion, 1927) is perhaps even 
more pessimistic. This often- misread work uses illusion as a technical term to 
describe a belief that is not necessarily false, but deeply aspirational in char-
acter.68 If a “delusion” is holding to an incorrect belief (like insisting that 1 + 
1 = 7), then an “illusion” is something that might happen but about which we 
have no guarantee (like this book will eventually win a major book award). 
The “American dream,” the idea that success should be possible for everyone, 
would be an example of an “illusion” in this sense.
Religion is also such an illusion for Freud, as it is connected to wish fulfill-
ment and future aspirations, whether messianic or based in the afterlife. Freud 
argued that religion is effectively a vestigial trait, left over from humankind’s 
early development, and one we may need to outgrow. As he noted: “If this view 
is right, it is to be supposed that a turning- away from religion is bound to occur 
with the fatal inevitability of a process of growth, and that we find ourselves at 
this very juncture.”69 Although he cautioned of the instability that might result 
should the religious restrictions on immorality be lifted, we might say that The 
Future of an Illusion is based in Freud’s own “illusion,” or deeply felt wish, 
that humankind would awaken and reject at least the false illusions of religion. 
To be sure, this was a wish whose aspirational character he acknowledged with 
a great degree of self- reflectiveness.70 Nevertheless, Freud has moved from 
disenchantment as an objective model to disenchantment (or at least secu-
larization) as a therapeutic agenda; he has moved from observer to advocate.
After reading The Future of an Illusion, the French Nobel laureate and 
avowed mystic Romain Rolland contacted Freud, asking him to address the 
idea that a perennial mystical experience was the common foundation of the 
world’s religions.71 This was topical because, as noted above, the concept of 
“mysticism” and mystical experience had been a subject of debate in psy-
chology and philosophical circles. In Unbehagen in der Kultur (1930; Civili-
zation and Its Discontents), Freud responded, dismissing Rolland’s mystical 
“oceanic feeling” as a “restoration of limitless narcissism.”72 Moreover, Freud 
rejected the claim that a mystical experience could be the real foundation of 
religion, and then seemingly closed the door on mysticism all together.
Freud’s sense of the stakes of belief in the occult are clear in this excerpt 
from Neue Folge der Vorlesungen zur Einführung in die Psychoanalyse (1933; 
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho- Analysis):

196 Chapter Seven
If we accept the truth of what, according to the occultists’ information, still 
occurs today, we must also believe in the authenticity of the reports which have 
come down to us from ancient times. And we must then reflect that the tradi-
tion and sacred books of all peoples are brimful of similar marvelous tales. . . . 
That being so, it will be hard for us to avoid a suspicion that . . . one of the 
secret motives of the occultist movement is to come to the help of religion, 
threatened as it is by the advance of scientific thought. And with the discovery 
of this motive our distrust must increase and our disinclination to embark on 
the examination of these supposedly occult phenomena.73
Here it would seem the “black tide of occultism” is nothing less than a reli-
gious foray into the conflict between religion and science, the ghost of religion 
in the modern era, the last gasp of dying faiths clinging to illusions: that our 
world reflects the human mind; that the association between ideas parallels the 
associations between things; that wish fulfillment is possible; that the soul is 
immortal; that religious metaphysics is more than mere collective psychopa-
thology. Here Freud might be understood as claiming that we are at the edge  
of a slippery slope. If too much credence is given to any occult contentions, 
we might regress to the animist infancy of humankind rather than scientifically 
liberate ourselves from religion.
From this angle, psychoanalysis looks like the ultimate antireligion or antis-
piritualism, or perhaps as a secular embodiment of a post- religious form. The 
parallels between the Catholic confessional and the psychiatric session have 
been widely remarked on (not least by Freud himself), and it is telling that he 
often described the unconscious in terms of the devil and psychoanalysis as 
a kind of exorcism.74 But more important, we can also see the psychoanalyst 
as the inversion of the fortune- teller. You describe your dreams, your coinci-
dences, your (psychological) demons to the analyst, who, instead of telling you 
what they all mean, informs you that they are vestiges of childhood traumas, 
that all these things are not in the world, but so to speak, “all in your head.” 
Freud would then seem to be the ultimate disenchanter.
*
But there is something I have omitted from the above narrative. Indeed, there 
is something suppressed within our recent memory of the history of psycho-
analysis. Or more properly, there is something that has the status of an open 
secret, often buried in euphemistic references to Freud’s “open- mindedness.” 
To recover it, we have only to go back to Freud’s account of the encounter 

The Black Tide 
197
with Jung in 1909, depicted in Jung’s autobiography and Cronenberg’s film 
alike. If we look at a letter Freud wrote to Jung on April 16, 1909, discussing 
the paranormal incident a different image begins to emerge. Freud remarked:
I don’t deny that your stories and your experiment made a deep impression 
on me. I decided to continue my observations after you left. . . . At first I was 
inclined to accept this as proof [of the paranormal]. . . . My credulity, or at least 
my willingness to believe, vanished with the magic (Zauber) of your personal 
presence; once again, for some inward reasons that I can’t put my finger on, 
it strikes me as quite unlikely that such a phenomena should exist; I confront 
the despiritualized (entgeisterte) furniture as the poet confronted de- deified 
(entgötterte) Nature after the gods of Greece had passed away.75
In this letter, Freud is initially open to the possibility of poltergeist activity. 
Then when he finds himself doubting, Freud apologizes for his failure to be-
lieve in spirits by way of a reference to our repeated Schiller poem “Die Götter 
Griechenlands.” By referencing Schiller, Freud is identifying his outlook with 
the disenchanted or de- deified nature in the poem.
This alone is not a grand shift in the narrative, but this was not the end 
of the letter. Freud went on to describe the “specifically Jewish nature of my 
mysticism.”76 He explained that he had always been sensitive toward seeing 
patterns of numbers as significant and for a long time had been harboring a 
suspicion of his eventual death at the age of sixty- one or sixty- two for numer-
ological reasons. Freud concluded, however, with a self- deprecating remark 
that implied that he understood Jung’s occult obsession, even if he did not 
share it fully.
This letter is only part of the story. Freud’s friend and biographer Ernest 
Jones— himself much more skeptical than Freud— wrote about his mentor’s 
engagement with the occult, noting that at various points Freud was prone 
to the very magical thinking he generally dismissed in his scholarly publica-
tions.77 In personal conversation Freud was also more than willing to venture 
into occult territory, as Jones recounted:
In the years before the Great War, I had several talks with Freud on occult-
ism and kindred topics. He was fond, especially after midnight, of regaling 
me with strange or uncanny experiences with patients, characteristically about 
misfortunes or deaths supervening many years after a wish or prediction. He 
had a particular relish for such stories and was evident impressed by their 
more mysterious aspects. When I would protest at some of the taller stories 

198 Chapter Seven
Freud was wont to reply with his favorite quotation: “There are more things 
in heaven and earth then are dreamed of in your philosophy.” . . . When they 
were concerned with clairvoyant visions of episodes at a distance, or visitations 
from departed spirits, I ventured to reprove him for his inclination to accept 
occult beliefs on flimsy evidence. His reply was: “I don’t like it at all myself, 
but there is some truth in it.78
If Jones is taken at his word, Freud could be found recounting various anec-
dotes about ghosts and visions, clairvoyance and precognition. Among close 
friends, Freud could share his fascination with the occult, suggesting that it 
contained some “truth.” This is pretty far from the clichéd image of Freud as 
narrow- minded scientist.
But this is just the tip of the iceberg, as Freud’s engagement with spiritual-
ism was deep and long lasting.79 A few months after the poltergeist incident in 
1909, Freud and another of his colleagues, the Hungarian psychoanalyst Sán-
dor Ferenczi, could be found in Vienna consulting with a psychic medium— an 
encounter that left Freud impressed, although not completely convinced.80 
According to the minutes of the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society, the following 
year, Freud held a discussion about spiritualism with the society.81 Ferenczi 
even brought a psychic medium to a meeting, and the Psychoanalytic Society 
spent the session attempting to verify the medium’s telepathic powers.82 Al-
though the experiment was a failure, their paranormal research continued.
In 1911, Freud joined the British Society for Psychical Research.83 That 
same year, Freud attended another set of more successful séances with Fer-
enczi. Afterward Freud sent Jung a letter about them dated June 15, 1911:
In matters of occultism I have grown humble since the great lessons Ferenczi’s 
experiences gave me. I promise to believe anything that can be made to look 
reasonable. . . . My hubris has been shattered. I should be glad to know that 
you are in harmony with [Ferenczi], when one of you decides to take the dan-
gerous step into publication.84
Freud had sent a similar letter to Ferenczi in the same period: “Jung writes that 
we must also conquer occultism and requests permission to undertake a cam-
paign in the realm of mysticism. . . . You should at least proceed in harmony 
with each other; these are dangerous expeditions, and I can’t go along there.”85 
Again, while not volunteering himself, Freud seemed to be far from dissuading 
his colleagues from their occult pursuits. He mainly wanted them to work 
together. The proposed collaboration never happened, however. When rela-

The Black Tide 
199
tions between Jung and Freud fell apart, Ferenczi took Freud’s side, and Jung 
went ahead with his version of the occult research project. Nevertheless, Fer-
enczi and Freud continued their investigations of spiritualism; and remarkably, 
Freud even took a turn as spirit medium himself.86
Although Freud was convinced that many of the spirit mediums he en-
countered were frauds, he still came to believe that there was some truth in 
the phenomena. After an extensive period of research, Freud believed that he 
had found evidence for telepathy. As Freud recounted in a letter to another 
colleague, Karl Abraham, on July 9, 1925, he had been conducting telepathy 
experiments with Ferenczi and his daughter Anna, and was convinced that she 
had “telepathic sensitivity.”87 A further group of letters exchanged between 
Freud and his close friend the Austrian psychoanalyst Otto Rank discussed 
the possibility of clairvoyant dreams (Freud for, Rank against).88 Indeed, in a 
July 24, 1921, letter to the British psychical researcher Hereward Carrington, 
Freud admitted that if he had it all to do over again, he might choose the inves-
tigation of “occult psychic phenomena” instead of psychology.89
*
Freud also wrote extensively about the occult, although many of these writings 
were unpublished during his lifetime. He first began to explore these themes 
in “Eine erfüllte Traumahnung” (A fulfilled dream premonition, 1899), dated 
just six days after the publication of the first edition of The Interpretation of 
Dreams, but not published until 1941. In this fragment, Freud toyed with the 
idea of prophetic dreams before dismissing them with a naturalistic explana-
tion.90 If anything, Freud got less skeptical over time.91
In 1920, at a meeting of the inner core of the International Psycho- Analytic 
Association in the Harz Mountains, Freud gave a talk addressing the question 
“If we had to accept the phenomena summarized under the term ‘telepathy,’ 
how would it influence the theory and practice of psychoanalysis?”92 Under 
Jones’s encouragement, when it came time to write up the talk, Freud toned 
down his commitment to the paranormal.93 The material from this talk appears 
in two publications, “Traum und Telepathie” (Dreams and telepathy, 1922), 
which appeared in Freud’s lifetime, and then more directly in “Psychoanal-
yse und Telepaphie” (Psychoanalysis and telepathy, published in 1941, after 
Freud’s death). In the latter work, Freud tentatively put forth the notion of 
thought transference as the core mechanism behind other occult phenomena, 
noting: “Perhaps the problem of thought transference may seem very trivial 
to you in comparison with the great magical world of the occult. But consider 

200 Chapter Seven
what a momentous step beyond what we have hitherto believed would be 
involved in this hypothesis alone.”94 In so doing, he was arguing that perhaps 
thought transference should be taken seriously, as it might be preferable to 
other magical phenomena that seemingly denied mechanistic causation. But 
Freud grew bolder still.
Freud’s changing views are illustrated in the 1924 edition of The Psychopa-
thology of Everyday Life. While in earlier editions he had described telepathy 
as a superstition, in the new addition he added the lines: “I must however 
confess that in the last few years I have had a few remarkable experiences which 
might easily have been explained on the hypothesis of telepathic thought- 
transference.”95 This edit largely passed without controversy, but in 1925, 
Freud issued Einige Nachträge zum Ganzen der Traumdeutung (Some Addi-
tional Notes on Dream- Interpretation as a Whole), which included a whole 
section on “The Occult Significance of Dreams.” In this section, Freud provi-
sionally concluded that “telepathy really exists and that it provides the kernel of 
truth in many other [occult] hypotheses that would otherwise be incredible.”96
This statement attracted the attention of the English press, and Jones wrote 
a circulated letter to Freud bemoaning the encouragement Freud was giving to 
“the mystics” and expressing concern about the potential impact this would 
have on the psychoanalytic movement more broadly.97 Freud responded in 
another public letter to his inner circle:
Our friend Jones seems to me to be too unhappy about the sensation that my 
conversion to telepathy has made in the English periodicals. He will recollect 
how near to such a conversion I came in the communication I had the occasion 
to make during our Harz travels. Considerations of external policy since that 
time held me back long enough, but finally one must show one’s colors.98
This was not the answer Jones sought, and it sparked a conversation on the 
stakes of occultism.”
*
The discussion between Freud and Jones is important because it gives us 
a window on why thinkers like Freud would want to suppress their occult 
beliefs. In a follow- up letter, Jones argued that part of the issue was the dif-
ferent cultural contexts, telling Freud, “You are lucky to live in a country where 
‘Christian Science’ together with all forms of so- called ‘psychical research’ 
mingled with hocus- pocus and palmistry to do not prevail as they do here.”99 

The Black Tide 
201
Despite the formula that presents 1920s Germany as more occult, Jones’s argu-
ment is the opposite: that the Anglophone world has many different hybrid 
religious- occult- sciences (namely, Christian Science and disreputable forms of 
psychical research). Hence, he feared psychoanalysis would be seen as another 
of these pseudosciences.
This echoes something Freud himself put in writing in several places. In his 
letter to Carrington mentioned above, Freud described “skeptical materialistic 
prejudices” as the bane of occult study, and emphasized the importance of “de-
marcating psychoanalysis” from “this yet unexplored sphere of knowledge.”100 
Similarly, in “Psychoanalysis and Telepathy,” Freud argued that there was a 
“reciprocal sympathy” between psychoanalysis and the occult, because “they 
have both experienced the same contemptuous and arrogant treatment by offi-
cial science. To this day psycho- analysis is regarded as savouring of mysticism, 
and its unconscious is looked upon as one of the things between heaven and 
earth which philosophy refuses to dream of.”101 In the allusion to Shakespeare, 
Freud was repeating a line he would elsewhere use to characterize occultism 
and mysticism (see the section epigraph), but this time including psychoanal-
ysis and the unconscious. I want to underscore the connections because it re-
peats a theme I have been emphasizing in this chapter: that mysticism doubles 
psychoanalysis, and some European intellectuals in the period thought that 
the unconscious is mysterious.
Freud’s main argument here, however, is that orthodox science has a justi-
fied tendency to dismiss out of hand anything that seems to be a repudiation of 
the scientific worldview. Elsewhere Freud would criticize the scientific preju-
dice that rocks could not possibly fall from the sky, which impeded the discov-
ery of meteorites.102 Implicit in Freud’s discussion is that official science sees 
itself as an heir to a paradigm of empiricism and some variety of mechanistic 
reductionism. Basically, to be a science is to embrace a materialist worldview 
that a priori rejects the possibility of nonphysical causation. It would seem that 
aspiring sciences like psychoanalysis could not embrace ghosts (or nonphys-
ical forms of telepathy) without coming into conflict with this image of what 
the scientific worldview was presumed to entail.
For Freud, orthodox science also rests on an assumption about the funda-
mental rationality of the human mind— presumably, the ability to collate evi-
dence, formulate reasonable conclusions and argue for them, and so on. But 
psychoanalysis is the science of the irrational. As such, Freud would seem to 
want to have it both ways: on the one hand, benefiting from the prestige and 
methodology of science; but on the other hand, functioning as an internal cri-
tique of the science and the limits of rationality. According to this latter move, 

202 Chapter Seven
Freud describes psychoanalysis as an antiauthoritarian project opposed to the 
negative prejudices of orthodox science. This is clear in a striking paragraph 
in “Psychoanalysis and Telepathy”:
Nor . . . has psycho- analysis any interest in going out of its way to defend that 
authority, for it itself stands in opposition to everything that is convention-
ally restricted, well- established and generally accepted. Not for the first time 
would it be offering its help to the obscure but indestructible surmises of the 
common people against the obscurantism of educated opinion. Alliance and 
co- operation between analysts and occultists might thus appear both plausible 
and promising.103
Here Freud is celebrating psychoanalysis as revolutionary or critical theory, 
directed at challenging the intellectual status quo. Moreover, he suggested that 
this is a quality that his emerging discipline shares with occultism. Crowley 
would have agreed with the sentiment of magic as vanguard to science. But one 
can imagine why even Freud’s tentative suggestion of an “alliance” between 
analysts and occultists might have been upsetting to Jones, who was particu-
larly anxious to defend the reputation of psychoanalysis.
To return to the debate between Freud and Jones, in the letter mentioned 
above, Jones reminded his mentor that “psycho- analysis is Freud” and that 
his personal beliefs were treated as characteristic of the whole movement. 
Therefore, if Freud were open about his occult beliefs, people would think 
that psychoanalysis logically led toward the occult. Jones concluded his letter 
with a plea that whatever Freud believed about telepathy, he should confine it 
to his personal life, just like his politics.104 This seems to have been persuasive.
In a reply letter dated March 11, 1926, Freud reaffirmed his conviction that 
telepathy was a real phenomena but concluded that he had not considered the 
way it would impact public opinion of psychoanalysis. Freud suggested that 
“when anyone adduces my fall into sin, just answer him calmly that conversion 
to telepathy is my private affair like my Jewishness . . . and that the theme of 
telepathy is in essence alien to psychoanalysis.”105 Freud is also deploying a 
bifurcation between a private religion and a public science, and here the occult 
(or at least telepathy) is functioning as a kind of secret or internal religion of 
psychoanalysis. Although Freud did not agree to keep his belief in telepathy 
completely private, Jones had succeeded in dissuading Freud from making fully 
public his occult interests. Regardless, until the end of his life, Freud continued 
to believe in the “fact” of telepathy; he asserted that belief at various points in 
his letters, even if he was generally more cautious in published writings.106

The Black Tide 
203
This did not stop Freud from dedicating one lecture of the New Introductory 
Lectures on Psycho- Analysis (1932) to the topic of “Traum und Okkultismus” 
(Dream and occultism). In this lecture, Freud speculated that telepathy might 
have been the original, archaic method of communication between humans.107 
It is also worth noting that in this essay, Freud barely distinguished occultism 
and mysticism, suggesting that they both represent challenges to narrow ver-
sions of the scientific worldview. Strikingly, Freud described a change in his 
view of the occult, remarking:
When they first came into my range of vision more than ten years ago, I too felt 
a dread of a threat against our scientific Weltanschauung, which, I feared, was 
bound to give place to spiritualism or mysticism if portions of occultism were 
proved true. To- day I think otherwise. In my opinion it shows no great confi-
dence in science if one does not think it capable of assimilating and working 
over whatever may perhaps turn out to be true in the assertions of occultists.108
Although less optimistic than the grand occult- psychiatric alliance proposed 
in “Psychoanalysis and Telepathy,” it is hard to see Freud as an anti- occultist. 
Instead he seems open to assimilating aspects of the occult into the conceptual 
terrain of psychoanalysis. Moreover, he was granting that there is something 
in the occult terrain that may “turn out to be true.” Hence it evokes his private 
remarks to Jones.
All told, Freud had a much more ambivalent relationship to the “black 
tide” of occultism than is generally believed to be the case. To be clear, it 
seems unlikely Freud ever came to believe in spirits, but he took on other 
beliefs that he himself suggested were occult in nature. Strikingly, between 
1913 and 1914— the very period of Freud’s first writings on disenchantment 
in Totem und Tabu (and his first public acknowledgement of any connection 
to du Prel)— Freud was immersed in spiritualist experiments with Ferenczi. 
Indeed, the very magical thinking and “telepathy” that Freud attributed to the 
childhood of humanity was something that he seemingly shared. How, then, 
are we to make sense of Freud’s projection of his own taboo beliefs onto the 
figure of the savage?
*
In keeping with the chapter, I’d like to imagine a psychoanalytic theory of 
the regulative function of the myth of disenchantment or the logic of occult 
disavowal (not to be confused with Freud’s Verleugnung). To do so, I’d like to 

204 Chapter Seven
think with (or more accurately, against) the grain of Freud’s theory of animism 
for what it can tell us about Freud and his peers, not for what his theory says 
about its putative “primitive” subjects.
In the broadest of brushstrokes in Totem und Tabu, Freud described primi-
tive religion in terms of two intertwined mechanisms— basically, introjection 
and projection. Using childhood development as his starting point, Freud 
argues that when an instinct or desire is “met by an external prohibition,” then 
usually “the prohibition does not succeed in abolishing” the desire. Instead 
the desire and the prohibition are both internalized.109 The desire is repressed 
into the unconscious. The prohibition is internalized by means of what later 
psychoanalysts would call “introjection” (expanding on Ferenczi’s Introjek-
tion), which for our purposes is when a subject internalizes an attitude from 
another subject while misplacing attribution as to the attitude’s source.110 This 
could result in a neurotic or unstable psychological constellation (a love- hate 
ambivalence) that perpetuates an internal “conflict between the prohibition 
and the instinct,” which instead of being resolved is displaced onto substitute 
objects.111
Freud also claimed that the “emotional life of primitive peoples” is par-
ticularly fraught and is full of psychological ambivalence.112 This results in a 
“defensive procedure” that Freud called “projection,” in which the subject 
attributes or transfers his or her own conflicted feelings onto another.113 This 
broader psychological process is for Freud the mechanism by which “ani-
mism” populates the world with spirits (transforming, say, a resentment toward 
the dead into the idea that the departed has become a resentful spirit).114 Al-
though it is easy to overlook, a key piece of this process is that both desires 
and prohibitions can be projected onto external entities.115
To provide an example of what Freud has in mind: Encountering a parental 
prohibition against masturbation, a teenager might introject the notion that 
masturbation is wrong and thus feel bad about masturbating, while forget-
ting the original source of the prohibition. Then the teen might project the 
masturbatory desire onto the devil (“It is the devil that wants me or makes me 
masturbate”) while also projecting the prohibition onto God (“The voice in 
my head that is telling me not to masturbate is God,” or “God will punish me 
if I masturbate”). This is not the sum total of Freud’s explanation of animism, 
which for Freud is centered on the “omnipotence of thought”; but it is the 
feature that will be useful in our explanation of Freud’s own occult psychology.
It is now possible to hazard a guess about what on a psychological level 
motivated Freud’s abiding interest in the occult. In the 1909 letter to Jung 
mentioned earlier, Freud described superstitious fear of his own death as the 

The Black Tide 
205
source of his “Jewish mysticism.”116 We can see why Freud might have been 
drawn toward du Prel’s notion of the eternal mystical unconscious.
Jones observed that Freud had an intense preoccupation with death and 
even “repeated attacks of what [Freud] called Todesangst (dread of death).” 
Moreover, Jones also suspected that Freud’s preoccupation with his own mor-
tality led him toward “occultism.”117 Moreover, Jones recounted instances in 
which Freud feared or hoped that his thoughts would have an impact on the 
world.118 One can find Freud therefore exhibiting deep ambivalence toward 
the very “omnipotence of thought” he had connected to primitive magic and 
animism.
Furthermore, as discussed above, Freud believed that the modern scientific 
worldview prohibited belief in the occult. In a telling remark in Totem and 
Taboo, Freud stated: “The scientific view of the universe no longer affords 
any room for human omnipotence [as understood by animists]; men have ac-
knowledged their smallness and submitted resignedly to death and to the other 
necessities of nature.”119 But Freud would be the first to admit that he had an 
intense fear of death and insignificance, and here it seems that the contrasting 
category to this mortal impotence is the animist’s omnipotence.
To conclude our adventures with a psychoanalytic reading, if Freud had 
introjected the scientific prohibition against the occult while simultaneously 
repressing the instinct or desire that occultism evoked, then his own theory 
might suggest a projection of these impulses onto others. The twist is that in 
Freud’s humanistic imagination, it is “official science” that functions as “the 
other who does not let me believe,” while it is the so- called primitive that is 
given the belief that has become taboo for Freud.
*
Freud’s interest in the occult persists as an open secret, known but rarely re-
marked upon these days.120 In part, this is a recent phenomena that has ap-
peared because Freud has fewer defenders than he once had. By and large, 
clinical psychology has now spent several decades refashioning itself and re-
pudiating Freud.121 A talking cure seems out of place in an era of diagnostic 
manuals and increasing pharmaceutical interventions. For this group, Freud’s 
interest in telepathy would be no problem since it has already rejected his 
legacy, but for the fact that psychology and paranormal investigation have long 
had uncomfortable resonances. Generations of psychologists, from William 
James down to the present day, have been tempted to imagine a kind of “om-
nipotence of thought,” or at the very least, a mind with hidden capabilities.122 

206 Chapter Seven
While parapsychology has been relegated to the margins, it has not vanished, 
and arguments for psi powers have appeared in well- respected psychology 
journals as recently as 2011.123
Freud’s main hold these days is in the humanities. But those of us who teach 
his work are often relating less his particular theoretical constructions than his 
critical Hermeneutics. It matters little from this perspective whether, say, the 
Oedipal complex is scientifically verifiable. But precisely because Freud is 
equated with “suspicion,” his dalliance with “superstition” might seem more 
of a difficulty. Yet, as I have argued, this is a false opposition rooted in our own 
highly skewed conception of rationality and the worldview it entails.
C o n c lu s io n : T h e  C o s m i c Ni gh t
The more the world is emptied of an objective meaning and the more it becomes thor-
oughly absorbed by our own categories and thus becomes our world, then the more we 
find meaning eradicated from the world; and the more we find ourselves immersed in 
something like a cosmic night— to express it in a modern way. The demystification (En-
tmagisierung) or disenchantment of the world— to use an expression borrowed from 
Max Weber— is identical with a consciousness of being barred out, of a darkness in 
which we all move.
 T h e o d o r A d o r n o, Kants Kritik der reinen Vernunft, 1959
Narrating together the history of post- Kantian philosophy and psychoanal-
ysis and their respective entanglements with the German occult revival has 
allowed us to see the way that all parties were animated by tantalizing possi-
bilities of unseen depths. While mystics narrated the “dark night of the soul,” 
specters of shadowy noumena plagued both philosophy and psychoanalysis. 
Indeed, what Freud’s reading of Carl du Prel suggests is an equation between 
the thing- in- itself and the psychological unconscious that we might instead as-
sociate with Jacques Lacan or Slavoj Žižek. That Freud already had this intu-
ition is also hinted at in discussions that Freud had with Ludwig Binswanger, 
who gave this remark in 1910: “[Freud] thought just as Kant postulated the 
thing- in- itself behind the phenomenal world, so he himself postulated the 
unconscious behind the conscious[ness] that is accessible to our experience, 
but that can never be directly experienced.”124 Taken together, we can see that 
what haunts psychoanalysis is the ghost of idealist metaphysics. This is not 
all they had in common.
Through the nineteenth century, post- Kantian philosophers and psycho-
analysts shared concerns about reason’s limits. Both camps also often hinted 

The Black Tide 
207
at an ambivalence taken so far that it becomes an antinomy: reason was seen 
as terrible both for being too weak and too strong. Accordingly, it was both 
desired and feared. From one vantage point, reason itself was thought to con-
tain the potential for monstrosity. Indeed, one might see these monsters of 
reason embodied in the leviathans of commerce, the titans of industry, the 
manacles of the asylum, or the disciplining processes of bio- politics. It is easy 
to fear a reason that has given itself over the rationalization or justification of 
unconscious desires. Even more tellingly, reason often appeared to menace 
the last vestiges of faith.
From the opposite perspective, however, it would appear as though there 
were dangers lurking outside the boundaries of reason, sabotaging the closure 
of its categories and signaling its vulnerabilities, like the (probably hyperbolic) 
map legends that marked out terra incognita with the phrase “Here be drag-
ons.” The more the limits of reason came into view, the more it seemed that 
reason could be overwhelmed by something arising from hidden depths. For 
some, this was a holy terror: God and mystical communion met at the dark 
heart of things beyond the categories of space and time. For others, lurking 
below reason was merely the monstrous instinct of a savage mind.
Freud, the master of repression, has given us both a developmental account 
of disenchantment and clues as to the mechanism of occult disavowal, sug-
gesting how introjecting an image of scientific reductionism produces a semi- 
scientific superego, and encourages the projection of beliefs onto others. 
Philosophers ascribe their hidden self to primitives while projecting occult 
prohibitions onto a similarly imaginary scientific hegemon to justify confor-
mity or rebellion.
*
In more specific terms, I have been gesturing at the dark side of the history of 
post- Kantian thought. Kant attempted to preserve philosophy from skepti-
cism and to restore metaphysics to its role as the queen of the sciences. But a 
significant number of post- Kantian philosophers have dedicated their lives to 
arguing that philosophy is finished, impossible, or unnecessary.125 A long list 
of thinkers have given expression to this self- alienation of philosophy— from 
Kant’s “frenemy” J. G. Hamann to Ludwig Wittgenstein, from the logical pos-
itivists to the American pragmatists, Jacques Derrida to Richard Rorty. One 
might become convinced that at heart, philosophy has long been an antidote 
to itself— a fitting trajectory for a discipline whose mythic progenitor Socrates 
was himself an antiphilosopher. To be fair, many of the human sciences have 

208 Chapter Seven
been plagued by similar antagonisms toward their central objects. Neverthe-
less, attempts to ground philosophy have been both dynamic and terrifyingly 
self- refuting.
In sum, it was easy to invest the Kantian system with haunting specters and 
occult powers, as though the sage of Königsberg were a necromancer. The 
source of the mysticism Nordau feared was not to be found in urban degenera-
tion, but threatened to appear in philosophy itself. Indeed, if one takes a Webe-
rian approach to enchantment and identifies magic with a sense of mystery, one 
cannot help but notice that much of post- Kantian philosophy, by inadvertently 
extending the shores of the unknown, produced more enchantments then it 
dispelled. Philosophy itself was involuntarily underwriting the occult revival.
In some ways, I have been following Theodor Adorno’s dialectical and 
Weberian reading of Kant’s system. As quoted above, Adorno argued that the 
more that philosophers come to see the phenomenal world as being structured 
by subjectivity, the more it becomes disenchanted, while simultaneously the 
noumenal world becomes the repository for the mysteries from which we are 
barred.126 It is as though we are in exile from value and meaning, trapped in a 
cosmic night of the soul. Increased rationality amplifies the alienation we feel 
toward a world that now comes to stand over and against us, and yet is also 
the subject of longing.
But what this reading of Kantian philosophy misses is that Freud’s project 
suggested further fissures in the most basic level of our consciousness. Draw-
ing on thinkers like du Prel and Schopenhauer, Freud, like Kant, had perpet-
uated an alienating split, but he had located it within human subjectively. Un-
like the noumena— which often function as mere remainders or unreachable 
depths— the unconscious sent forth signs and troubling symbols. It showed 
evidence that it controls the more sober intellect. The mind’s core is poten-
tially irrational and capable of using rationality to justify its own appetitive 
desires. Reason risks being subverted from both within and without.
For all his brilliance, Kant produced a curious and inadvertent doubling 
of worlds, where a mysterious realm of alien things shadows the phenomenal 
realm. Freud exposed the neuroses at the heart of the Kantian system and 
internalized its anxieties into the core of modern subjectivity. What had re-
assured Schopenhauer about our connection to a timeless will was for Freud 
a troubling darkness, which like a black tide threatened to overwhelm the 
conscious mind. Unless, that is, one could erect some bulwark against it— or 
alternately master the darkness.

C h a p t e r  E i g h t
Dialectic of Darkness:
The Magical Foundations  
of Critical Theory
Philosophical dialectic springs from the impulse to overcome conceptual thinking.
 L u dw i g  K l a g e s , Rhythmen und Runen, 1944
Continental philosophy’s main role in the American academy is to serve as 
the home for certain kinds of skepticism, particularly those directed toward 
stable conceptions of knowledge and meaning. Nonspecialists use the words 
deconstruction and critical theory to evoke critical insight, cynical wisdom, or 
the speaking of truth to power. Meanwhile, those of us who teach or write on 
poststructuralism, postmodernism, or critical theory often do so in reference 
to linguistic or antifoundationalist skepticism, critiques of modernity and rea-
son, or the “Romantic counter- Enlightenment.”
In what follows, I aim to upend the commonly received view. I locate the 
origins of much of critical theory in the occult milieu of fin- de- siècle France 
and Germany, where an alternative to modernity arose that presented itself first 
and foremost in reference to spiritualism, paganism, Hermeticism, mysticism, 
and magic. Focusing on the controversial German poet and neo- pagan mystic 
Ludwig Klages and what he referred to as “magical philosophy” (magische 
philosophie), I will explore Klages’s influence on key critical theorists and in 
particular the German- Jewish philosopher Walter Benjamin.
At the outset, I want to make it clear that I am not trying to rehabilitate 
Klages as a thinker, nor am I trying to condemn critical theory by recovering 
its associations with European esotericism. Instead, I aim to retrieve a version 
of critical theory that was not primarily a critique of knowledge, but rather a 
vehicle to deliver esoteric wisdom. Along the way I expose the metaphysical 
underpinnings of poststructuralist antimetaphysics, unearth the buried ontol-
ogies of the antifoundationalists, and recoup hints of a vanished utopia that lies 

210 Chapter Eight
only half- submerged in this most dystopian of contemporary philosophical 
terrains.
T h e  C o s m i c  C ircl e
The Cosmic Circle: There was no natural community that connected the three 
eccentrics— the blond Viking, the tanned Roman, and the dark Oriental— it was more 
an alliance of three individual wizards (Einzelzauberer) for the collective purpose of 
conjuring up the [powers] of Life.
 F r i e d r i c h  W olt e r s , Stefan George und Die Blätter für die Kunst, 1930
The collection of Munich- based poets, mystics, and neo- pagans known as 
the Cosmic Circle (Kosmikerkreis, Kosmische Runde, or Kosmiker) had many 
similarities to other fin- de- siècle esoteric groups: they were originally led by 
a charismatic medium who saw spirits; they performed arcane rituals and en-
gaged in psychical research; they celebrated a mother goddess and the pagan 
past; they wrote poetry and visionary tracts; they criticized their contempo-
rary world as sick with materialism; and they read and debated with other 
occult thinkers.1 One feature that made the movement distinctive— but not 
unique— in the late nineteenth- century occult milieu was that they shared an 
intense reverence for Friedrich Nietzsche, whom they described as one of 
the great “pagan martyrs: whose soul fought and died for the ardor of Life.”2 
But the crucial thing about the Kosmikers is that they followed Nietzsche by 
authoring an influential antiphilosophical philosophy. This occult philosophy 
will be the main subject of the chapter, but first I will describe the particular-
ities of their occultism.
The Cosmic Circle began to coalesce in 1893 when Ludwig Klages moved 
to Munich to work on a dissertation in chemistry. There, he encountered the 
visionary and mystic Alfred Schuler. They were soon joined by the neo- pagan 
German- Jewish poet and translator Karl Wolfskehl, who introduced the others 
to Johann Bachofen’s Das Mutterrecht with its depiction of primordial matriar-
chy (a text whose influence on Aleister Crowley has already been examined).3 
Schuler and Klages will be discussed in detail momentarily, but in brief, Wolf-
skehl was initially attempting to articulate a non- monotheistic form of Judaism 
that could resist the rationalization process of modernity.4 Klages, Schuler, and 
Wolfskehl formed the core of the Cosmic Circle (they are the trio of wizards 
referred to in racialized terms by Friedrich Wolters above); but its periphery 
included the mystic and writer Ludwig Derleth and the famous German poet, 
mystic, and prophet Stefan George (discussed in chapter 10).5 Ultimately, a 

Dialectic of Darkness 
211
personality conflict between George and Klages, combined with Wolfskehl’s 
increasing alienation from the group in the face of rising anti- Semitism, re-
sulted in its disintegration in 1904.6
Many of the Cosmic Circle’s particular features came from the influence of 
the group’s leader, Alfred Schuler (1865– 1923). Born in Mainz, Schuler had 
moved to Munich, where he intended to study archeology before deciding that 
his mystical insights were more real than anything that could be discovered 
in dry academic writings.7 Schuler claimed that he was the reincarnation of 
a pre- Christian Roman leader and that he received clairvoyant visions and 
direct communications from pagan gods.8 Although Schuler published little 
during his lifetime, he became infamous for ecstatic lectures he gave about his 
revelations. In the most influential of these, Vom Wesen der ewigen Stadt (On 
the essence of the eternal city, originally 1917), Schuler shared not only his idio-
syncratic understanding of paganism, but also his insights into an eternal realm 
of the dead (Totenreich) beyond the veil of ordinary space and time.9 This was 
Schuler’s twist on a claim common to Swedenborg and later spiritualists that 
there is a timeless spirit world parallel to our own.
Like other spiritualists, Schuler had his own necro- vitalism. When he 
peered within, he claimed to be aware of a mystical force of throbbing pure 
life and light.10 When this “telesmatic” force is connected with the general 
and maternal “cosmic radiance,” it results in the erotic explosion of an inner 
glow, or what he called the Blutleuchte (literally “blood- light”).11 Later Klages 
described this blood- light poetically as “a continuously deepening shudder, a 
dark strangeness, which throbs and ferments in hidden places. A wild woeful 
shout mixed with the crashing of storms. . . . In it the mysteries of the maternal 
cosmos are revealed.”12 As this quote illustrates, the blood- light and telesma 
energy was part of an effort to recover the lost power of maternal, pagan an-
tiquity.
The Kosmikers’ neo- paganism was also partially a gesture toward sexual 
revolution. Schuler and George were both homosexuals, and they rejected 
the Christian sexual morality of their day. While not all the members of the 
Cosmic Circle were queer, they shared a common enemy in monogamy and 
the period’s restrictive gender norms.13 They often embraced the figure of 
the divine Androgyne as a countermodel to the traditional male and female 
binary.14 Hence, as a way to sacralize a new sexuality, Schuler and company 
promoted an eroticized pansexual paganism.15
The Kosmikers saw themselves as re- enchanters, but we can be more spe-
cific about their philosophy of magic. After spending several years with the 
group, Countess Franziska zu Reventlow wrote Herrn Dames Aufzeichnungen 

212 Chapter Eight
(Notes of Mr. Lady, 1913), a thinly fictionalized novel describing her experi-
ences. Crucially for our purposes, she summarized the core of their project 
as follows:
They claim to have discovered secrets of immeasurable importance and 
thereby have gone so far as to achieve mastery of certain inner powers. Hence 
sooner or later they will be in a position to work magic (zaubern). . . . They 
explained it to me like this: one succeeds by means of a mystical procedure— I 
believe by absolute self- absorption in the primordial cosmic principle (kos-
mische Urprinzip). . . . When this is successful, one’s essence is completely 
permeated by the primordial cosmic substance, which is in itself all- powerful. 
Then one is made just as powerful, and those who are all- powerful can work 
magic (zaubern).16
This passage illustrates a key point. The Kosmikers claimed access to extra-
ordinary powers, and they explained their magic by reference to a particular 
vibrant ontology. Indeed, as Reventlow also noted, they saw the “cosmic” as 
the primordial life force or organizing principle behind being.17 Accordingly, 
cosmic magic was a communion with the lively principle in matter. New mate-
rialists should take note because put in a contemporary idiom, the Kosmikers 
are firstly granting nonhuman agency, or “thing- power”; and secondly, sug-
gesting that union with this agency is the basis for magic.18 A host of current 
thinkers would grant the first, but, while a non- magical vitalism is certainly 
possible, it might be trickier to exclude the second because such an account 
of agency seems tailor made for enchantment. Indeed, one might get the sense 
that the Kosmikers were working backward, adopting a particular ontology in 
order to justify or explain the reality of sorcery. This is even clearer in the more 
expansive form elaborated by the movement’s primary theoretician, Ludwig 
Klages.
*
Ludwig Klages was born into a “carefully constrained middle- class world” in 
Hannover in 1872.19 Already as a young man, Klages had dreams and visions of 
the “dark abysses of past eons,” but he initially ignored these interests to take a 
more conventional path.20 In 1893, he came to Munich to write a dissertation 
on the synthesis of menthone (completed in 1901). But he also met Schuler, 
who reawakened his youthful interest in poetry and esotericism. Soon Klages 
left chemistry behind— first for graphology and then philosophy. During the 

Dialectic of Darkness 
213
First World War, Klages was a pacifist and immigrated to Switzerland, where 
he wrote most of his important works. In 1932, he was awarded the Goethe 
Medal for Art and Science by German President Hindenburg. Although 
Klages was not without supporters among the Nazis, in 1936, he was pub-
lically criticized by Nazi ideologues like Alfred Rosenberg, and the Gestapo 
dissolved his Leipzig research institute.21 Klages remained largely based in 
Switzerland until his death in 1956.
What is important for our purposes is that Klages attempted to render 
the Cosmic project into philosophy; basically, he sought to define magic in a 
way that— while it might not work in a philosophy department today— was 
thought through and fully argued. This is how he summarized it in Rhythmen 
und Runen (Rhythms and runes, 1944): “Magic is the practice of our phi-
losophy and our philosophy is the theory of magic. . . . Magical philosophy 
(magische philosophie) works with images and symbols, and its method is the 
method of analogy. The most important terms it uses are: element, substance, 
principle, demon, cosmos, microcosm, macrocosm, essence, image, primal 
image, vortex, tangle, and fire. Its final formulas are spells that have magical 
power.”22 What did this magical philosophy look like? The following section 
will explicate.
M agi ca l P h il o s o p h y  an d  D is e nch antme nt:  
L u dw ig  K l ag e s
The philosophy of the academy is mechanistic theory, and their practice is mechanical. 
Magical philosophy rejects the [Aristotelian] law of identity [in favor of flux]; hence it 
denies unity, objects, duration, recurrence, and mathematics; it denies concepts and 
causality, because causality is the functional parallel to the logical correlation.
 L u dw i g  K l a g e s , Rhythmen und Runen, 1944
The best way to introduce Ludwig Klages’s magical philosophy is to paint 
a recognizable pastiche figure so we have something to compare it to. If we 
threw everything we teach in American “continental philosophy” or “theory” 
courses into a blender, what would it look like? Put differently, I think if one 
were to assemble a Franco- Frankfurt- Frankenstein’s monster out of oft- taught 
fragments from German critical theory, French poststructuralism, a dash of 
feminism, and more than a hint of Heidegger, it might have the following 
 qualities.
Despite writing philosophy, our monster would be resolutely antiphilos-
ophy and especially antimetaphysics.23 It would position itself as a critic of 

214 Chapter Eight
modernity, instrumental rationality, and enlightenment.24 It would challenge 
the value of the binary opposition between civilized and primitive.25 Our mon-
ster would argue that the myth of “progress” is rooted in “the domination of 
nature”;26 that science and technology are nothing less than an abuse of the 
natural world, an attempt to render it lifeless in order to extract energy that 
can be exploited to further human goals.27
It would accuse us of holding on to an absurd faith in technology while 
nature has lost its mystery, becoming “disenchanted” and “reified.”28 In com-
pensation for our alienation from the natural world, it would suggest, we have 
seen the rise of a meaningless cult of reason that despite its criticisms of fantasy 
and myth, has replaced the old myths with new cults.29 Our monster would 
characterize this process in terms of the privileging of the logos and instru-
mental or calculable reason, for which it would coin the term “logocentrism.”30
The Franco- Frankfurt- Frankenstein’s monster would also observe that this 
same process of rationalization has been connected to the rise of the patri-
archy.31 That logocentrism has been rooted in the domination of men over 
women and the suppression of feminine ways of knowing and being.32 That 
modern heteronormative sexuality is fragmented into artificially rigid hetero-
sexual norms and embodies a distorted form of the universality of human love 
and desire.33 It would argue that the contemporary world is fundamentally 
opposed to the natural flows of desire.34 To round out the picture, our monster 
would be harshly critical of Hegel’s Geist and would draw on Nietzsche as its 
progenitor, while at the same time distancing its project from Nietzsche’s “will 
to power.”35 To these claims, it would add a criticism of the globalization of 
the modes of American capitalism (or we might say today, neoliberalism) and 
draw our attention to the violence of colonization.36 Ultimately, in opposition 
to logocentrism, the monster would remind us of the importance of the body.37 
It would emphasize the primacy of writing, and call for a renewal of our con-
nection to a vitalized nature and the unleashing of the productive force of an 
orgasmic or unbounded desire.38
The monster I’ve just described might sound like I am patching together 
Derrida’s criticisms of logocentrism, Adorno and Horkheimer’s account of 
enlightenment, alongside Heidegger’s interrogation of technology and rejec-
tion of philosophy, Deleuze and Guattari’s celebration of productive desire, 
and Hélène Cixous’s challenge to the patriarchy and call for feminine embodi-
ment, and perhaps even echoes of deep ecology or Jane Bennett’s new vitalism, 
among a dozen other fashionable philosophers. It is easy to imagine teaching 
this pastiche at a contemporary American college, but we would be unlikely to 
take it too seriously. The project just sounds excessively derivative.

Dialectic of Darkness 
215
*
But I misled you when I claimed to be presenting a mixture of other think-
ers. The problem is that just such a monster once walked. As you may have 
guessed, I’ve just surreptitiously summarized the writings of Ludwig Klages. 
The footnotes above locate the claims in his collected works. Take a moment 
to reread those paragraphs, because if they reflect some version of what you 
have been writing or teaching, you have in some sense been doing “magical 
philosophy.”
It should also be emphasized that Klages’s most important writings date 
from the 1910s and ’20s and thus preceded Horkheimer’s leadership of the 
Frankfurt School (1930),39 Heidegger’s “Question on Technology” (1954), 
and necessarily the birth of poststructuralism. The likeness between Klages 
and critical theory is unlikely to be a complete coincidence. To tip my hand  
a little: Adorno, Benjamin, Cassirer, Habermas, Heidegger, Horkheimer, 
Löwith, and Lukács;40 and even so- called post- structuralist thinkers Agam-
ben, Bataille, Foucault, Guattari, Lacan, and de Man all read and cited Klages’s 
work.41 So why haven’t more people heard of Klages? He is found in many 
footnotes and is frequently referenced in works on Walter Benjamin or in the 
context of German irrationalism,42 or Lebensphilosophie, but Klages’s major 
monographs have never been translated into English, and he is rarely studied 
on his own terms.43
*
The heart of magical philosophy’s uncanny resemblance to critical theory can 
be found in the critique of modernity Klages inherited from the occult milieu 
and subsequently elaborated. Already Alfred Schuler had described the rise 
of Judeo- Christian rationality producing alienation from the sacred maternal 
cosmos.44 Like some other neo- pagans, Schuler believed that Christianity and 
“exoteric science” had expelled the gods and severed the connection to the 
natural world.45 Moreover, he described modernity as characterized by various 
forms of estrangement from both the world and one’s fellows, as though a 
positive Gemeinschaft had been sacrificed to a dehumanizing Gesellschaft.46 
Succinctly put, the Kosmikers, like many similar groups, characterized mod-
ernization in terms of disenchantment even as they proposed to supply the 
missing magic.
The core of Klages’s philosophical work was an attempt to diagnose the 
causes and consequences of this “disenchantment.” Tellingly, in his critique 

216 Chapter Eight
of modernity, Klages occasionally deployed the very terminology Max Weber 
would make famous— not just “Entzauberung,” but later even the expression 
“the disenchantment of the world” (die Entzauberung der Welt).47 Weber and 
his relationship to Klages will be discussed in chapter 10, but note now that for 
Klages, this meant not a sober sociological theory but an ontological estrange-
ment from nature and magic.
Klages’s project appears in embryonic form in his first major philosophical 
work, Mensch und Erde (Man and earth), originally a lecture for Free German 
Youth Day in 1913 and later expanded for publication.48 Klages opened by 
interrogating what he saw as the central ideology of his age: the celebration 
of “progress” (Fortschritt).49 While older civilizations often had a collective 
project that they were working toward, Klages thought his contemporaries 
merely embraced progress for its own sake.50 No longer in aid of any par-
ticular objective, technological advancement and cultural change had run wild 
and have come to mean largely the ability to remake the natural landscape, 
to slaughter animals, and to strip away local culture.51 For this reason Klages 
argued that the rhetoric of “progress” is really just the public face of the domi-
nation of nature and the exploitation of indigenous peoples. The heart of prog-
ress is the lust for power.52
Instead of the positivistic celebration of scientific advancement and enlight-
enment, Klages provided a counternarrative— that of rationalization as tragedy 
and alienation from Mother Earth. In his version of this narrative, the ancients 
knew the earth to be a “living being” and that “forest and spring, boulder and 
grotto were filled with sacred life; from the summits of their lofty mountains 
blew the storm- winds of the gods.”53 Primitive humans were in harmony with 
nature, which they sought to safeguard by means of rituals and prohibitions.54 
But then Christianity suppressed the old gods and stripped nature of animat-
ing forces. Modern Europeans, he went on to argue, see the earth instead as 
nothing but “an unfeeling lump of ‘dead matter.’ ”55 Thus there is nothing to 
stop them from plundering and polluting until all that remains is desolation.56
At first pass, this might remind you of Schiller; and indeed, Klages even 
quoted from “The Gods of Greece” at a key moment in the speech.57 Klages’s 
narrative is like Schiller’s account, with the neo- pagan and ecological elements 
thrust to the fore and the criticisms of Christianity amplified. Klages argued 
that it is only Christendom that gave birth to the “ruthless expansive- impulse 
(Erweiterungsdrang) to enslave non- Christian races” and that “capitalism, 
along with its pioneer, science, is in actuality the fulfillment of Christianity.”58 
Christianity had not only killed the gods and exploited nature, but it had also 
given the world slavery, imperialism, science, and capitalism.59 In sum, as a 

Dialectic of Darkness 
217
committed neo- pagan philosopher, Klages had no problem identifying Chris-
tianity as the ultimate source of alienation, but this was a position he would 
later nuance.
The striking feature of Klages’s project is that already in 1913, he had begun 
to formulate an account of phenomenological alienation. Modernity meant not 
just environmental exploitation, but also a new way of thinking. Klages argued,
He who imagines enriching himself— when he stomps earth’s blossoms into 
dust— is man as the bearer of calculating reason (rechenverständigen) and 
the will to appropriation, and the gods whom [modern man] has shorn from 
the tree of the life are the ever changing souls of the phenomenal world, from 
which he has separated himself.60
This poetic passage would be easy to mistake for a pagan account of the loss 
of divinities. But Klages elaborated the theme further in his most important 
project, “Geist und Seele” (Mind and soul, 1916 expanded into three volumes 
as Der Geist als Widersacher der Seele, The mind as enemy of the soul, 1929– 
32; hereafter GWS).
The best entrée into GWS is to see it as an inversion of the Hegelian dialec-
tic. As any student of philosophy will remember, Hegel’s main thesis was that 
world history is nothing less than the self- actualization of the absolute Spirit 
(Geist). We might vulgarize Hegel’s narrative by describing it as an account of 
the dialectical history of the mind articulating itself via matter, during which 
the whole of the world would gradually be made to accord with reason. Hence 
one could read Hegel’s philosophy as the master narrative for the ideology of 
progress that underwrote modern technological advancement and imperialism 
alike.
The surprise is that in GWS, Klages largely grants Hegel’s description of 
world history, of Geist working itself out in the world, as mind has increasingly 
asserted dominance over matter, forcing it to submit to reason. As Klages put it, 
“The [grand] trajectory of ‘world history’ is in fact what Hegel suggested, the 
self- actualization of the absolute Geist, but in a destructive counterposition to 
life and with the foreseeable result of its extermination.”61 Klages reversed the 
Hegelian dialectic to make the narrative a travesty instead of a triumph. He saw 
the en- minding of the world in terms of the destruction of the natural environ-
ment, the expansion of colonialism, the disintegration of life, and the alienation 
from Being itself.62 If for Hegel the Geist was in some sense God, for Klages it 
is the Demiurge (or devil) that has shattered the harmony of existence.
To make sense of this, I need to place Klages’s critique of Geist in his own 

218 Chapter Eight
ontology. As he observed, the ongoing philosophical debates of his era gener-
ally presumed a Cartesian split between mind and body even as philosophers 
worked to resolve this dualism by granting one term or the other primacy 
or collapsing the two into one bimodal substance. For Klages, these debates 
overlooked both (1) the part of the mind that escapes conscious understanding 
(aka the unconscious), and (2) more important, the animating principle behind 
living and even nonliving things. Neither the unconscious nor this animating 
force fit well into the categories of body or mind. Hence Klages attempted 
to sidestep contemporary debates by reviving the classical triad: body, Geist 
(hereafter translated “mind”), and Seele (soul).
The key thing about Klages’s trinary is that the Seele is the foundation, and 
both body and mind emerge from the more fundamental basis of the soul. The 
soul for Klages is not the individual spirit or personality; nor is it some kind 
of eternally present shadow person. Rather, it is the fundamental force of life 
itself. I want to head off at the outset the most widespread misunderstanding 
of his project. It is often asserted in passing that Klages was a vitalist.63 But in 
GWS, Klages attacked “vitalists,” and he did so because either he thinks that 
they covertly see mind as a conscious organizing principle behind all matter, or 
because they see life force only in humans, animals, and plants.64 By contrast, 
Klages’s “soul” is not just a feature of living beings. For him, a fundamental 
level of the soul (Die Elementarseelen) is behind the whole of the sensible cos-
mos; it is rooted in the ever- proliferating, ever- changing foundation of nature 
itself.65 The whole cosmos is en- souled.
That we do not feel at one with the cosmos is evidence that we have be-
come estranged from Being. Klages identified the source of this ontological 
alienation as resulting from an in- break of Geist that appears like a “wedge” 
inserted between body and soul, such that it has begun to “de- soul the body 
and disembody the soul, and in this way finally to deaden all life.”66 Before 
Geist, beings were at harmony with Being. Humans did not see themselves as 
separate from the natural world. We had no need to dominate or dematerialize 
the world with thought.
One can see Klages’s basic paganism peeking out here because he claims 
that prehistorical humanity was matriarchal. Women ruled the timeless world. 
Before the imbalance of Geist, natural humans saw nature and the cycle of 
life and death as a Great Mother Goddess (Die Magna Mater). That is to say, 
the ancients worshipped the Earth Mother.67 While based in an essentialized 
gender binary that contemporary feminism would reject, Klages was progres-
sive for his day insofar as he was privileging the power of the feminine. The 

Dialectic of Darkness 
219
rise of the logos or Geist was therefore first and foremost a displacement of 
this older way of looking at the world, a kind of matricide against primordial 
women rulers and the earth.68 By objectifying and abstracting Mother Nature, 
humanity made her exploitation and violation inevitable.
Klages argued that at its basic level, “actuality” (Wirklichkeit) is constantly 
unfolding vibrancy, a stuttering, shifting chaos of activity. This is a kind of pro-
cess ontology that we might associate today with thinkers like Alfred North 
Whitehead or Gilles Deleuze, but Klages’s reference is to Heraclitus, arguing: 
“Heraclitus discovered actuality, which he described with the famous phrase: 
Panta Rhei. Everything is flux. The flux itself is the very essence of the world; 
or, in other words, the world is events without a substrate.”69 At its most funda-
mental, actuality is continual flux and change. It should not be a surprise that 
even today European practitioners often ground their understanding of magic 
in similar ontologies. As Tanya Luhrmann generalized from her ethnography 
of magicians in 1980s London: “The idea of magic emerges naturally from a 
philosophy of a world in interacting flux. . . . One could forge a magical theory 
solely from that account of flux.”70
As illustrated in the section epigraph, Klages too understood flux as the 
foundation of a philosophy of magic, but it was also the core of his phenom-
enological account of reification. As he contended: “The thought cosmos is 
a mechanical confusion of things; the living cosmos, on the other hand, to 
which our languages can only allude, cannot be conceptually grasped, for it 
only reveals itself in the instantaneous flash of its here and now appearance.”71 
Klages maintained that we are all animists at heart. His evidence is the ability 
of poetry to capture the particularity of a specific moment: the sudden curl 
of a woman’s lips just before she breaks into a full smile, the dappled light of 
one particular May afternoon, or the ferocious beauty of an oncoming storm. 
As Klages would argue, these flashes of beauty are outside our rational mind 
and the closest we come to experiencing bare life. For that reason they are 
pleasurable and necessarily erotic.
The Geist, however, needs to render the world comprehensible, which 
means that it must abstract from the world. As Klages put it elsewhere, “The 
will to rational truth is the will to deactualize the world.”72 Accordingly, Klages 
described the transformation from a phenomenological “world of images” 
(Bilderwelt), which is the flicker of raw experiences into its fundamental oppo-
site, a “world of objects” (Dingwelt), rooted in false abstractions (Phantoms). 
The world of images is mysterious and dreamlike, full of surprises, but the 
Geist renders the world lifeless and comprehensible, a taxidermy butterfly. 

220 Chapter Eight
In his words: “Whatever is touched by the ray of Geist is instantly changed 
into a mere thing, a quantifiable object that is afterward connected to other 
objects only ‘mechanically.’ ”73 This is Klages’s version of something Marxists 
have long critiqued— namely, the process of reification, which, after all, literally 
means “thing- ification.”74
To summarize, Klages argued that the thinking subject tends to objectify 
sense experience. The human mind creates static mental objects from the un-
folding diversity of actuality. This is an exploitive process that transforms the 
living vibrant chaos of being into a world of tools or things, apprehended 
instrumentally and rendered functionally inanimate. We do not see the flour-
ishing and individual character of a particular tree in a particular instant of 
space and time; we see a specimen of the genus Quercus, or we see a club 
with which we can beat our donkey into submission. Rather than being free 
to experience the world, we internalize the abyss of abstraction that requires 
that we make comprehensible objects from our sense experience. This might 
strike the reader as evocative of Adorno or Heidegger, but the difference is that 
Klages is explicit about the ontology that undergirds the critique of reification.
Finally, it is worth emphasizing that Klages’s master narrative in GWS is that 
a progressively hyper- potentiated mind (Geist) or quantifying reason became 
yoked to the domination of nature, leading to the domination of humanity, and 
which unchecked could lead to the potential annihilation of all life on earth.75
If Klages’s narrative reminds you of Dialectic of Enlightenment with 
Aufklärung standing in for Geist, it is no accident, as the work cites Klages’s 
GWS in the footnotes.76 Tellingly, Horkheimer and Adorno admit that
Klages [and company] recognized the nameless stupidity which is the result of 
progress. But they drew the wrong conclusion. . . . The rejection of mechani-
zation became an embellishment of industrial mass culture, which cannot do 
without the noble gesture. Against their will, artists reworked the lost image of 
the unity of body and mind for the advertising industry.77
In other words, Klages and his fellows understood the problem with enlighten-
ment, but their solution was wrong. As Horkheimer and Adorno added, “The 
body cannot be turned back into the envelope of the soul.”78
For Adorno in particular, the problem was that the rejection of disenchant-
ment has been commercialized, leading to everything from homeopathy to 
astrology.79 It would seem that Klages and the occultists were right to identify 
disenchantment as a problem, but their attempt to resupply the missing magic 

Dialectic of Darkness 
221
was doomed to failure insofar as it was trapped within the horizon of capi-
talism. Succinctly put, while the Frankfurt School was suspicious of magical 
revivals, they inherited Klages’s apocalypticism.80
*
It is not just the Frankfurt School’s critical theory that shows Klages’s finger-
prints. Almost from the beginning of his philosophical turn, Klages had begun 
to search for a dystopian term to characterize all that was wrong with hyper- 
intellection. Although he briefly tried out anthropocentric (anthropozentrische) 
by about 1900 he had begun to settle on logocentric (logozentrischen) later ren-
dered “logocentrism” (Logozentrismus).81 Here we can see Klages working out 
the jargon that Derrida will make famous about half a century later.82
In the late article “Über Wahrheit und Wirklichkeit” (On truth and actual-
ity, 1931), Klages specified the meaning of logocentric with greater precision. In 
a key passage, he argued that philosophy can be parsed into a rivalry between 
idealists and materialist, but “both parties— the idealists intentionally and the 
materialists unintentionally— endorse belief in the creative or formative power 
of the (human) mind. Therefore, we name this camp of the majority the logo-
centric school. In contrast, we call the minority camp the biocentric school.”83 
The term logocentrism in its original formulation, therefore, is a way to connect 
two supposedly oppositional camps of philosophy (idealism and materialism).
Klages’s main point is that idealists believe that reality is fundamentally 
mental, but even their materialist rivals argue that the human mind can ac-
curately apprehend the world. Both groups grant that the universe rationally 
intelligible.84 Moreover, both schools work to formulate criteria of generalized 
truths by means of an abstraction from the phenomena of raw sense experi-
ence. Accordingly, they are both expressions of what he would characterize 
elsewhere as “the cult of reason,” which Klages saw as a dangerous faith in the 
power of rationality to master the world.85 The core error of logocentrism is 
the assumption that there is nothing truly mysterious or incomprehensible and 
hence that the human mind can apprehend or dominate nature. We might say 
that logocentrism is the thought mode of disenchantment.
The Vanished Utopia of Cosmic Eros
If Klages’s work often resembles a kind of poststructuralism or critical theory 
before its time, there is also much that would strike a contemporary theorist as 

222 Chapter Eight
strange— and I’m not just referring to the magic. Klages’s critique of logocen-
trism was not a pure decentering; he had a utopian term: biocentrism.86 The 
appearance of the utopian is part of what makes Klages’s project so different 
from poststructuralism and the like. Derrida famously attacked logocentrism, 
but he (perhaps admirably) refused to offer a positive alternative. To be sure, 
Derrida valorized various modes such as deconstruction, dissemination, and 
the free play of sign, but generally he resisted the allure of utopia.
Klages’s position in the genealogy of logocentrism helps to explain one of 
contemporary poststructuralism’s most disconcerting features. It is easy to see 
that on sheer linguistic grounds, logocentrism has built into its basic formula-
tion the implication of a double, an alternate center. Klages called his alterna-
tive “biocentrism,” which he understood as a philosophy of life as opposed to 
mind. But how might one take life into one’s philosophy without slipping into 
the world of logos and abstraction?
Part of Klages’s answer is that unlike the caricature that represents him as 
completely against all thought, his aimed at balance. His response to the war 
between mind and life was not the death of mind. Instead, he described what 
he called “the vivification of the mind” (Verlebendigung des Geistes).87 This was 
an attempt to discover a greater harmony between mind and life- body/soul. 
It is basically a kind of unlearning that allows a person to resist the reification 
of concepts and discover the living world around him or her. It is also rooted 
in an interpretation of phenomena as fundamentally meaningful, and what he 
saw as the recovery of a primitive mentality. Biocentrism’s function, therefore, 
would be a retreat from the dissecting and classifying mentality of logocen-
trism and an implicit reversal of the meaninglessness of modern existence.
To be sure, Klages did not have consistent faith in utopia. Sometimes he 
expressed the fear that humanity had already crossed the point of no return 
and that it was only a matter of time before we too became extinct.88 As he 
prophesized in Mensch und Erde, “We are in the age of the downfall of the 
soul” and “No teaching can return us to that which has once been lost.”89 But 
this did not stop him from trying.
Klages’s utopian impulse appears in Vom Kosmogonischen Eros (On the 
Cosmogonic Eros, 1922), the work that goes the farthest to suggest his answer 
to disenchantment. Indeed, this is the text that includes Weber’s patented 
phrase, die Entzauberung der Welt, as Klages put it:
The disenchantment of the world rests on the eradication of difference. Human 
instincts are blessed by Eros to the extent that they participate in the cosmic 

Dialectic of Darkness 
223
Eros; and cosmic Eros is always: Eros of the difference [of the Other]. Hence, 
whoever seeks to negate difference is characterized by a possessiveness that is 
deadly to Eros, to the glowing aura of the world, and, ultimately, to actuality 
itself. But this is the mystery and blissful knowledge of the mystics: the holy 
image is revealed only from afar, although it merges with the mystic. He alone 
sees “the sun shining at midnight.”90
At first pass it would seem that mystical union is the way to escape the iron 
cage of modernity— something we will also see in Weber. But the rest of this 
passage, with its reference to eros and the midnight sun, will take some ex-
plaining.
The first thing you need to know is that “the Cosmogonic Eros” is not 
merely self- preservation or sexual desire; nor is it merely a species of Platonic 
love or Christian charity.91 The Cosmogonic Eros is the original, prehistoric 
consciousness of humankind, the way of relating to nature before the tyranny 
of Geist.92 It represents a lost way of looking at the world outside the reach of 
logocentrism, a way of relating to things that takes nature as alive. Klages also 
thought it is phenomenologically grounded in moments of union or sympa-
thetic resonance with the Other that could be described as flashes of connec-
tion that suspend conceptual thinking. Klages also seemed to have in mind 
something like an experience of the Kantian sublime. Unlike the negatively 
valenced in- break of the mind, this is a positively valenced in- break of the soul 
or life. Klages seems to be playing implicitly on the near homophony of the 
German lieben (loving) and leben (living); as one might guess, his fundamental 
model is something like a mystical union with the cosmos.93 The root experi-
ence of Cosmogonic Eros is “ecstasy.”94
According to Klages, this is also what Greek mystics meant by the state of 
being “Entheos” (ἔνθεος) by a god or demon.95 What is it, Klages asked, that 
sets us beside ourselves? What is it that inhabits the mystic and the medium? 
Klages’s answer, with palpable echoes of Nietzsche, is that these are all cases of 
ecstasy, what he called the “cosmic rush” (Der kosmische Rausch). It is in these 
moments that Klages thought we really and truly become more than ourselves.
Klages divided the cosmic rush into three forms. In his account, these are 
the heroic, the magic (magische), and the erotic.96 The heroic- tragic form of 
ecstasy is associated with the epoch poetry of “the age of heroes.” Its most 
striking feature is that the death of the personal ego occurs with the warrior’s 
resolve to die, leading to a beautiful tragic impulse through which the warrior 
plunges consciously into oblivion.97 He described the magic type of ecstasy 

224 Chapter Eight
as follows: “In the magical form, ecstasy manifests its nature in a doubled rela-
tionship to the nocturnal firmament and to the realm of the dead. Its historical 
high point was reached in the Median ‘Magism’ and in the ancient Egyptian 
funerary cult, and perhaps its strongest conceptual expression is to be found 
in Chaldean astrology.”98 We will return to this magical ecstasy momentarily, 
but for the moment, the most important thing to note is that it is a kind of pri-
mordial spiritualism connected to the dead and the night sky. Moreover, like 
the heroic, magic is associated with death and darkness.
Unlike the others, the erotic is fully an expression of life. It is therefore the 
superior form of ecstasy, and the only truly cosmic one. In Klages’s vocabulary, 
the erotic is not just sex, but is also a part of pregnancy and birth. It manifests 
itself in the creative inspiration through which poets give birth to new forms. 
Erotic ecstasy, though, is fundamentally Dionysian, appearing in orgies, danc-
ing, and nighttime revelries.99
If we wonder where Klages personally fell on the path to ecstasy, the answer 
is easy to find. Elsewhere in his literary remains, he confessed: “There are 
three archetypical perspectives (Bilderwerdung): the erotic, the heroic, and the 
magical. In the world of images these types are manifest as: the beloved, the 
hero, and the wizard. My own path was magical (to a chaotic extreme); it was 
the Gorgon and the horror of universal night. Even though I tried to approach 
Eros through love.”100 Klages would have preferred to be a lover, but he was 
cursed to be a magician.
In Vom Kosmogonischen Eros Klages argued for something that sounds like 
the kenosis of Christian mysticism, declaring that to achieve each of these 
forms of ecstasy, one needs to embrace a kind of self- surrender or passivity. 
But for Klages, this is a hollowing- out not for God, but for the primordial play 
of images or gods that represent the actuality of the cosmos. Now we have 
returned to the paragraph cited at the top of the section: mystical union is a 
way of collapsing the ego and uniting with the cosmos and in so doing heal-
ing ontological alienation. This was something Klages described in slightly 
different terms in Mensch und Erde: “Estranged from the planetary currents, 
modern man sees only childish superstition. He forgets that interpreting ap-
paritions was a way of scattering blooms around the tree of an inner life, which 
shelters a deeper knowledge than all of science: the knowledge of the world- 
weaving power of all- embracing love. Only when this love has been renewed 
in humanity will the wounds inflicted by the matricidal spirit be healed.”101 
So in effect, Klages’s solution to Weber’s Entzauberung is a mystical orgy of 
matriarchal love intended to magically bring us back into communion with 
Mother Nature.

Dialectic of Darkness 
225
I do not find this particularly convincing, but it should have been appealing 
to the same generation of intellectuals in the 1960s and 1970s who gave us post-
structuralism and its cousins. Why wasn’t it? Why don’t we read Klages today?
Klages was likely excluded from the canon for several reasons. Conservative 
thinkers are unlikely to have been sympathetic to his pacifism, his embrace of 
sexual fluidity, his feminism, or his anti- Christianity, and progressives were 
probably thrown by his traditionalism and his attacks on progress and science; 
but it is probably mainly Klages’s explicit anti- Semitism that prevented his 
canonization.
Already in his Munich days, Klages and the Kosmikers had expressed 
something akin to anti- Semitism. But they tended to divorce the word Jewish 
from race and described it instead as a kind of attitude.102 This looks like 
the kind of anti- Judaism of a Nietzsche or Voltaire, where the real target is 
often Christianity. Further, many of Klages’s most significant friends (The-
odor Lessing, Wolfskehl, and Menyhért Palágyi) were Jews, but racists often 
defend themselves with tokenized friendships. Tragically, in Klages’s work of 
the figure of the Jew— in particular, the American Jew— came to appear as the 
personification of all that is wrong with Geist/Logos. We can easily imagine 
the anti- Semitic tropes in play: the Jew is rootless, calculating, inauthentic, 
disconnected from life, moralizing, and capitalistic. Increasingly, Klages also 
described “the Jew” as the enemy of life.103 Appallingly, Klages did not tone 
down this language as the Nazi rise to power threatened the lives of real Jews; 
if anything, he ramped up his anti- Semitism.104 As an American Jew who lost 
extended family in the Shoah, I personally find this the most disgusting and 
odious part of Klages’s oeuvre. Scholars who try to ignore this are making a 
grave error.
Having said that, one might be inclined to think of Klages as just another 
Nazi, but it is important to note that he was a pacifist and feminist opposed to 
their militarized or fascist state. And sadly, if we were going to exclude philos-
ophers because of anti- Semitism or other forms of racism, we would have to 
reject both analytic (Gottlob Frege) and continental (Martin Heidegger, Paul 
de Man) philosophy and probably even Kant. Hence, we are left with a Klages 
who made some fascinating contributions, but whose project we would have 
to be very careful about embracing wholesale.
In summary, Klages was omitted from the canon, but it cannot have been 
because of his interest in enchantment. Indeed, if we use Klages as a starting 
point and go back to those thinkers— both German and French— whom we 
did enshrine in American critical theory, we find magic there too. The follow-
ing section will demonstrate.

226 Chapter Eight
The Esoteric Constellations of Critical Theory:  
W alt e r  B e njami n
The perceptual world (Merkwelt) of modern man seems to contain much less magical 
correspondences than the world of the ancients or even that of primitives. The only 
question is: Is this a case of the mimetic faculty withering away? Or is it an example of 
a transformation that has occurred within it? Some aspect of astrology could indicate, 
albeit indirectly, the direction of the transformation. As researchers of ancient traditions, 
we must take into account the possibility that manifest arrangements with the character 
of mimetic objects once existed where we are no longer capable of suspecting it today.
 Wa lt e r B e n j a m i n, “Die Lehre vom Ähnlichen,” 1933
Walter Benjamin, having fled Paris ahead of the German invasion, died trag-
ically and largely unknown at the French- Spanish border in 1940.105 Fortu-
nately, before leaving Paris, Benjamin entrusted some of his most important 
unfinished writings to Georges Bataille who hid them in the library where he 
worked. In the decades since his death, Benjamin’s impact has grown astro-
nomically. His writings are widely cited, especially in the context of literary 
theory, continental philosophy, and art history. It is only a slight exaggeration 
to say that Benjamin’s fingerprints can be seen on the analytical edifice of 
postmodernity, from critical theory to deconstruction.
Despite Benjamin’s significance, there is a real debate about how to inter-
pret his oeuvre and especially the tension between theological and communist 
registers. Some scholars have imagined Benjamin to be a Marxist in metaphor-
ical garb; others suggest that Jewish theology is the core and historical mate-
rialism only its external trappings; while a third camp argues that Benjamin’s 
attempt to reconcile both impulses was ambivalent or contradictory from the 
beginning and doomed to failure.106 Terry Eagleton epitomizes this latter 
mode when he suggests, “There is no way in which the apocalyptic aspects of 
Benjamin’s historical imagination may be neatly harmonized with his Marx-
ism.”107 To these we might add a fourth and increasingly popular “dialectical” 
camp, which attempts to reconcile Benjamin’s Judaism and his Marxism often 
by either emphasizing his embrace of contradictions or by contextualize it in 
leftwing Jewish thought in the period.108 While I’m most sympathetic toward 
the dialectical reading, I think it still misses the main tension Benjamin was 
trying to solve and the precedents he had for this solution.
A key to reconciling these apparent contradictions is to see Benjamin’s 
work in the context of European esotericism. Indeed, much of the vocabulary 
that seems so peculiar to Benjamin— the aura, angels, constellations, corre-

Dialectic of Darkness 
227
spondences, and even primal images— all had a place in contemporary German 
esoteric circles.109 Moreover, Benjamin, like Klages, described his project in 
terms of magic. Accordingly, while he was far from the only critical theorist 
interested in magic, Benjamin’s canonization has smuggled an occult vocab-
ulary into the writings of those who would never admit to reading a grimoire. 
In sum, Benjamin is partially responsible for what makes critical theory in all 
its varieties a little bit magical today.
In the following pages, I will locate Benjamin in the esoteric milieu of the 
period, and then focus on how specific esoteric concepts appear in his project.
*
Benjamin’s engagement with alchemy, mysticism, and the occult is striking 
even on a cursory read, but it is often explained by reference to “Jewish mys-
ticism” and the Kabbalah.110 This has the inadvertent effect of racializing or 
ghettoizing his project, as though his magic and his Judaism were cotermi-
nous. But Benjamin grew up in an assimilated family, and scholars have argued 
that his knowledge of the Jewish tradition— both exoteric and esoteric— was 
heavily influenced by Christian mystical literature.111 While that might be 
overstating it, at the very least Benjamin’s knowledge of the Kabbalah came 
first from Gentile esoteric circles. He was introduced to Jewish mysticism by 
the Swiss esotericist Max Pulver, who recommended the writings of Chris-
tian theosophists Franz von Baader and Baader’s student Franz Joseph Mo-
litor.112 Benjamin’s main source for the Kabbalah was Molitor’s Philosophie 
der Geschichte oder über die Tradition (Philosophy of history or the tradition, 
1824– 53).113 Far from a work of dry academic scholarship, this was an ex-
plicitly esoteric text that claimed to unlock the hidden meaning of the Torah 
by means of Christian theosophy. At the very least, while Benjamin became 
increasingly attentive to his Jewish heritage (and even more so alongside rising 
anti- Semitism), he had a deep and abiding fascination with the full spectrum 
of European esotericism.
*
Not only did Walter Benjamin read Ludwig Klages and meet him in person, 
Benjamin moved to Munich intending to study with Klages, and they kept 
up a lifelong correspondence.114 Benjamin described Klages’s Der Geist als 
Widersacher der Seele as “a great philosophical work,” and he sparred with 
Klages’s other students to stake out an interpretation of Klages’s project.115 

228 Chapter Eight
Indeed, Benjamin wrote so much about Klages that there is hardly a volume 
of Benjamin’s collected works lacking a reference to Klages or his writings.116
Strikingly, Benjamin wanted to write even more about Klages, but Adorno 
and Horkheimer dissuaded him.117 Yet, in the very December 5, 1934, let-
ter in which Adorno does so, Adorno admitted that Klages’s “doctrine of 
‘phantoms’ in the section ‘The Actuality of Images’ from his ‘Der Geist als 
Widersacher der Seele’ lies closest of all, relatively speaking, to our own con-
cerns.”118 The anxiety of influence seems clear and tellingly Adorno even 
tried to keep the letters Benjamin and Klages exchanged out of Benjamin’s 
collected works.119
Benjamin’s relationship to Klages is no secret and usually gets a passing 
mention in biographical accounts. But generally, when the subject is given 
sustained attention, it has been contextualized with reference to Benjamin’s 
interest in thinkers on the right such as Carl Schmitt and Leo Strauss.120 
There are exceptions: in a 1992 article, Georg Stauth and Bryan S. Turner 
gesture at the importance of Klages for the history of critical theory and call 
for more work to be done on the subject.121 But other Anglophone scholars 
have dismissed the whole idea of Klages’s influence on critical theory as mis-
guided, and in the intervening twenty years there has been little follow- up.122 
Moreover, as valuable as this scholarship has been, it tends to misconstrue the 
context by underestimating Benjamin’s larger engagement with esotericism. 
Indeed, Klages was not the only member of the occult milieu that Benjamin 
socialized with.
Benjamin spent a good deal of time with other Kosmikers. He befriended 
Felix Noeggerath, a peripheral member of the circle, whom Benjamin de-
scribed as a “universal genius.”123 Noeggerath in turn introduced Benjamin to 
Wolfskehl, and the two also became friends. Benjamin even wrote a dedication 
to Wolfskehl for his sixtieth birthday.124 In his letters to Scholem, Benjamin 
mentions tracking down and reading fragments of Schuler’s work.125 Finally, 
Benjamin admitted that his distinctive prose style was inspired by Stefan 
George’s Denkbild (thought images), which he greatly admired; and indeed, 
the influence of George on Benjamin’s work was sufficiently pronounced that 
Adorno had to mention (and apologize for it) in the introduction to Benjamin’s 
correspondence.126
Even beyond this particular group, Benjamin had a number of other friends 
in Western esoteric circles. The most obvious is Gershom Scholem, today fa-
mous as the founder of the historical study of Jewish mysticism. That Scholem 
was embedded in an esoteric milieu is uncontroversial. Steven Wasserstrom 
has explored Scholem’s position at the heart of the Eranos Circle, which was 

Dialectic of Darkness 
229
connected to a kind of perennial mysticism.127 Plus, Scholem was quite open 
about reading widely in occult literature and referred to thinkers including 
Franz Joseph Molitor, Aleister Crowley, Éliphas Lévi, and Arthur Edward 
Waite (albeit often critically) in his writings.128
Benjamin also socialized with a group of Jewish intellectuals he referred to 
as the “sorcerer Jews (Zauberjuden).” Formed around the eccentric German- 
Jewish physician and scholar of comparative religion Oskar Goldberg, the 
sorcerer Jews shared the aim of producing a desecularized or enchanted 
Judaism.129 In Die Wirklichkeit der Hebräer (The reality of the Hebrews, 1925), 
Goldberg interpreted the Torah as evidence for the reality of gods, which, 
while inferior to the true God of Israel, were nevertheless real beings or powers 
that functioned as the biological centers of various peoples.130 Benjamin found 
Goldberg’s “aura” repellent, but he did not have the same response to other 
members of the group.131 He struck up a friendship with Goldberg’s disciple, 
the religious philosopher Erich Unger, who had set out to render his master’s 
work into philosophical form.132
For our purposes the most important member of this circle was a thinker 
at its periphery, the Jewish- German intellectual Erich Gutkind, who became 
Benjamin’s friend and Hebrew teacher, and who often hosted Benjamin and 
his wife whenever the couple would visit Berlin.133 Beyond discussing his 
friendship with Benjamin, there is little scholarship on Gutkind except for a 
brief reference in Scholem’s On Jews and Judaism in Crisis, which describes 
Gutkind’s project as a dead end, “doomed to failure.”134 But Gutkind is a 
fascinating figure in his own right, and his trajectory from acclaimed New 
Age messiah to unknown adjunct professor is reminiscent of a Philip Roth 
novel. More important, Gutkind’s writings anticipated Benjamin’s later fusion 
of messianism, mysticism, and communism.
Before encountering Goldberg, Gutkind had already developed a repu-
tation in New Age circles based on the popularity of his first major work, 
Siderische Geburt: Seraphische Wanderung vom Tode der Welt zur Taufe der 
Tat (Sidereal birth: Seraphic wanderings from the death of the world to the 
baptism of the act, 1910), the first in a series of attempts to reconcile communist 
utopia with a kind of mystic Gnosticism. Written with an apocalyptic intensity, 
Siderische Geburt describes European civilization in a state of crisis, remote 
from a God exiled by the simultaneous rise of private property and the materi-
alism of contemporary science.135 Modernity has fallen into an “abyss of matter 
and death” from which it cannot escape, and “we can no longer be satisfied by 
the [modern] world picture, but only the end of the world.”136
Siderische Geburt describes its goal in terms of the pleroma of Christian 

230 Chapter Eight
Gnosticism.137 Following Jakob Böhme and parts of the Jewish (Lurianic) Kab-
balistic tradition, the work describes a creatio ex deo— a world formed inside 
God and made from divine materials.138 Matter in this schema is a kind of de- 
god- ed God. Fragments or sparks of divine holiness are scattered throughout 
the world, waiting to be discovered and reassembled. The future pleroma of 
world communion is therefore the re- creation of God himself. The rejection 
of private property would result in liberation from the mechanical world of 
matter and a celestial rebirth from the ashes of the old order.
Before the Second World War, Gutkind was on his way to becoming the 
prophet or messiah of a left- wing New Age movement. Indeed, the Serbian 
mystic Dimitrije Mitrinović celebrated Siderische Geburt in the pages of the 
New Age (June 23 and July 21, 1921), describing the book as “seraphic scripture” 
of “world importance” and comparing Gutkind to Saint Paul.139 Mitrinović 
also helped organize a movement or brotherhood (Blutband) around Gutkind 
that drew together such luminaries as Martin Buber, Theodor Däubler, Was-
sily Kandinsky, Gustav Landauer, and Florens Christian Rang.140 But when 
Hitler came to power, Gutkind fled from Germany to the United States. The 
new country was hostile to his particular brand of New Age teachings as well. 
It was all Gutkind could do to find work as an adjunct professor, and the one- 
time prophet died in relative anonymity.141
Critical Magic
Walter Benjamin did not just run in occult circles; although it would be a mis-
take to reduce the creativity of Benjamin’s thought to any unitary influence, 
his own project can be seen in relation to these interests. Not only did Gutkind 
anticipate Benjamin’s fusion of messianism and Marxism, but also it is easy to 
trace the terminology most closely associated with Benjamin to the esoteric 
milieu. To be sure, Benjamin was no straightforward importer of esotericism, 
but rather his writings suggest a sophisticated secularization or repurposing 
of occult themes, and my hunch is that he was drawn to these themes precisely 
because of his larger concern with the persistence of myth in modernity. Al-
though there is not space to address the issue in full, here I will briefly outline 
the traces of esotericism legible in the texture of Benjamin’s thought. This will 
also make it possible to say with some degree of precision where Benjamin 
borrowed from Klages and where he broke from him.
Constellations and correspondences. Scholars readily admit that Adorno’s 
concept of the “constellation” (Konstellation) came from Benjamin.142 The 

Dialectic of Darkness 
231
central model for a constellation might seem to be an artistic collage or as-
semblage, perhaps inspired by Brechtian theater or Marxist “exhibition.”143 A 
little knowledge of German makes it easier to maintain this impression because 
today German uses two different terms to translate the English constellation: 
Konstellation, which evokes a more neutral arrangement, and Sternbild (lit-
erally “star picture”), which evokes astrology. Hence one might assume that 
with Konstellation, Benjamin meant the former rather than the latter, but that 
would be a mistake. Benjamin connected astrology with Konstellations, and 
he used the formulation Konstellationen der Sterne when he did so.144 Indeed, 
Benjamin conceptualized constellation alongside both astrology and the idea 
of correspondences so crucial to esotericism.
Benjamin basically said as much in a fragment from 1933, posthumously 
titled “Lehre vom Ähnlichen” (“Doctrine of the Similar”). Benjamin noted 
that the perception of similarities or correspondences is often the foundation 
for “occult knowledge,” and he described this ability to perceive similarities 
as a “mimetic faculty” (mimetisches Vermögen).145 As quoted in the lines from 
this fragment that I translated in the section epigraph, Benjamin argued that 
“the perceptual world (Merkwelt) of modern man seems to contain much less 
magical correspondences than the world of the ancients.” Here we have Benja-
min beginning to formulate a disenchantment narrative, but instead, it takes an 
odd swerve: “If, this reading from stars, entrails, and coincidences was reading 
as such for primitive humanity, and if there were mediating forms to the newer 
kind of reading, such as runes, it would be easy to assume that the mimetic 
faculty which was earlier the source of clairvoyance, quite gradually over the 
course of thousands of years found its way into language and writing.”146 Our 
ability to perceive correspondences has shifted from the stars to texts, but our 
mimetic faculty has not vanished.
Critical theorists will be struck by the reference here to “mimesis,” the uto-
pian term in the Dialectic of Enlightenment, but which Benjamin identifies as 
the psychical foundation for clairvoyance and astrology. Nor was clairvoyance 
mere metaphor, because as well as we can reconstruct, Benjamin was an ac-
tive believer in telepathy and other psychical powers (and like Klages, he saw 
graphology as key to unlocking these).147 But it is also telling that in another 
fragment from roughly the same period “Zur Astrologie” (On astrology, likely 
1932), Benjamin imagined writing “a prolegomenon to every rational astrol-
ogy” that would allow modern thinkers to unlock their mimetic faculties and 
see similarities where they might otherwise be missed.148 Accordingly, there 
seems to be a clear connection between Benjamin’s occult astrology and his 
notion of the constellation as way of revealing hidden correspondences.

232 Chapter Eight
The aura. Those who have read only Benjamin’s most famous essay Das 
Kunstwerk im Zeitalter seiner technischen Reproduzierbarkeit (1936; The Work 
of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction) might think that the aura is a 
purely aesthetic category. But in Über Haschisch (1927– 34; On Hashish), Ben-
jamin explicitly contrasts his version of the “aura” with that of “theosophists,” 
“spiritualists” and “vulgar mystics.”149 While this shows that Benjamin was 
conversant with occult ideas of the aura, it also demonstrates his attempt to 
repurpose the term toward a new meaning, whose key point of difference from 
the occult aura is that it appears in not just people but also objects. But this is 
not the sum of it.
Even scholars who otherwise take otherwise no notice of Klages tend to 
suggest that “Benjamin’s theory of ‘aura’ was taken directly from Klages.”150 
This is close: the aura is not really a Klages master category— it occurs in 
the writings of other members of the Cosmic Circle. It was Schuler who first 
began to describe the decay of the aura, although arguing that it vanished not 
with the modernity but with the decline of Rome. As Schuler put it, “Es ist die 
Aura, die schwindet”— “it is the aura that is vanishing.”151 Moreover, in terms 
of his inspiration, Benjamin himself referred to an article by Wolfskehl, “Leb-
ensluft” (Breath of life, 1929), which also repurposed the aura.152 Moreover, 
Wolfskehl’s essay anticipated a further theme of Benjamin’s aura; namely, that 
it encompasses both people and objects. So it would seem Benjamin acquired 
the concept of the aura from occultists/Kosmikers and transformed it into a 
term of aesthetic theory.
Dialectical images. The concept of the dialectical image did not come directly 
from the broader esoteric milieu, but Benjamin saw it explicitly in relationship 
to Klages. Examining Benjamin’s discussion of the dialectical image is thus the 
clearest way to show where they differed. As Benjamin explained in the essay 
“Johann Jakob Bachofen” (1934– 35):
With Klages, these theories emerged from the esoteric realm to claim a place in 
philosophy. . . . By giving substance to the mythical elements of life, by snatch-
ing them from the oblivion in which they are sunk, says Klages, the philoso-
pher gains access to “primal images” [Urbilder].153
As Benjamin went on to note, one of Klages’s central contributions to philos-
ophy is this the idea of the primal image.154 The primal image was connected 
to Klages’s claim that the material world of flux is apprehended only through 
flashes of intermediate experience or dreams, which are amenable to allegori-

Dialectic of Darkness 
233
cal reading, and in turn handed down as expressions of the souls of the past.155 
Accordingly, Klages’s influence can be seen in one of Benjamin’s most dis-
tinctive philosophical concepts, the “dialectical image” (dialektischen Bilder).
While many Benjamin scholars agree that the dialectical image is the meth-
odological heart of Benjamin’s Arcades Project, they differ widely regarding 
both the expression’s meaning and Benjamin’s primary inspiration.156 In part, 
they have missed the meaning of Benjamin’s cryptic remarks in that text, that 
the “dialectical image is an image that emerges suddenly, in a flash. What has 
been is to be held fast as an image flashing up in the now of its recognizabil-
ity.”157 This already connects Benjamin’s dialectic image to Klages’s primal 
image. Adorno also acknowledged as much in the December 5, 1934, letter 
cited above where Adorno requested Benjamin make a further “distinction 
between [Klages’] archaic and [Benjamin’s own] dialectical images.”158
Insofar as these images are the core of The Arcades Project, it seems to be 
Klages with a sharp difference— a difference that can be pinpointed in Benja-
min’s review of Johann Jacob Bachofen und das Natursymbol: “This enterprise 
is all the more productive since it simultaneously attempts to grapple with 
Klages and his doomed attempt to reject the existing ‘technical,’ ‘mechanized’ 
state of the modern world. In his discussion, he does not evade the challenge 
represented by the philosophical— or rather, theological— center from which 
Klages directs his prophecy of doom with a force that forever puts the efforts 
of other critics of our culture in the shade, including those produced by the 
George circle.”159 Paraphrased, the key problem with Klages was his resolutely 
Luddite rejection of the technological world of modernity. As is well known, 
Benjamin was fascinated by the dreamlike quality of manmade artifacts. He 
was critical of the archaism of Klages’s doctrine of the images and Klages’s 
accompanying traditionalism. Benjamin was also far from a proto- ecologist; if 
anything, he felt a “dread of nature.”160 Thus, he was quite willing to criticize 
modernity, but did not believe in idealizing an archaic past. Benjamin would 
seem to be Klages without the disenchantment thesis; in other words, with 
sensitivity to the way that everyday modern objects, like archaic symbols, are 
equally the embodiment of the dream consciousness of myth.161
The cosmic rush. In Einbahnstraße (One- way street, 1928), Benjamin came 
the closest in his published writings to declaring himself a Kosmiker in the 
same breath that he made his departures from the majority of that movement 
known. As he began the relevant section: “If one had to expound the teach-
ings of antiquity with utmost brevity while standing on one leg, as did Hillel 
that of the Jews, it could only be in this sentence: ‘They alone shall possess the 

234 Chapter Eight
earth who live from the powers of the cosmos.’ ”162 He further clarified, “The 
ancients’ intercourse with the cosmos had been different: the ecstatic trance 
[Rausch]. . . . This means, however, that man can be in ecstatic contact with 
the cosmos only communally. It is the dangerous error of modern men to re-
gard this experience as unimportant and avoidable.”163 Between the Rausch 
of the encounter with the cosmos, the idea of communal ecstasy, and modern 
alienation from an archaic past, this quote might as well be Klages. In this 
passage, Benjamin also recounted one inversion of the modern progress narra-
tive that should be familiar: “Technology betrayed man and turned the bridal 
bed into a bloodbath. The mastery of nature (so the imperialists teach) is the 
purpose of all technology.”164
At first pass, Benjamin would seem to have inherited Klages’s critique of 
technology as the domination of nature, but Benjamin disagreed with the ide-
alized nature this critique implied. Benjamin was no tree hugger: he argued 
that what has been lost was not an experience of some kind of pristine or pre-
civilization nature, but a kind of collectivity. Importantly, Benjamin associated 
this collectivity with the proletariat, not a group of pagan mystics.165 Thus, we 
might see the flashes of cosmic energy not in bonfire celebrations in the woods, 
but in the Russian revolution of 1917.
Magic. In a 1916 letter to his boyhood friend Herbert Belmore (née Blumen-
thal, 1893– 1978), Benjamin sketched out his vision of authentic criticism as 
follows:
True criticism does not attack its object: it is like a chemical substance that at-
tacks another only in the sense that, decomposing it, it exposes its inner nature, 
but does not destroy it. The chemical substance that attacks spiritual things 
in this way (diathetically) is the light. . . . Criticism of spiritual things is to dis-
tinguish between the genuine and the nongenuine. . . . The particular critical 
magic (kritische Magie) then appears, so that the counterfeit substance comes 
into contact with the light; it disintegrates.166
True criticism does not destroy so much as dissolve its object, exposing its in-
ner nature and bringing it to life. As Benjamin elaborated in Goethes Wahlver-
wandtschaften (Goethe’s Elective Affinities, 1922), “Criticism seeks the veracity 
(Wahrheitsgehalt) of a work of art.”167 Criticism is like a solvent that dissolves 
away impurities to expose the pure form of a substance. More properly, criti-
cism is a refining or distilling apparatus, like an alchemist’s alembic, which 
separates the true and the false. Having separated the genuine from the artifi-

Dialectic of Darkness 
235
cial, one exercises a “critical magic” to bring the counterfeit to light and cause 
it to disintegrate, while enlivening the purer aspects.
Benjamin fully intended the alchemical imagery:
If one wants a parable, the growing work can be seen as a burning funeral 
pyre, before which stands the commentator as the chemist, the critic as the 
alchemist. Whereas for the chemist the wood and ash alone are the objects 
of analysis, for the alchemist only the flame preserves an enigma: that of life. 
Hence the critic asks after the truth, whose living flame continues to burn over 
the weighty driftwood (Scheitern) of the past and the light ashes of that which 
was experienced.168
A critical theorist is like an alchemist who burns a work to reveal the living 
truth it embodies. Although functioning primarily at the level of metaphor, 
Benjamin was modeling the work of critical theory on that of the esotericists.
In “Der Surrealismus” (Surrealism, 1929), Benjamin provides his most suc-
cinct description of his relationship to the occult milieu:
Any serious exploration of occult, surrealistic, phantasmagoric gifts and phe-
nomena presupposes a dialectical intertwinement. . . . We penetrate the mys-
tery only to the degree that we recognize it in the everyday world, by virtue of 
dialectical optic that perceives the everyday as impenetrable, the impenetrable 
as everyday. The most passionate investigation of telepathic phenomena, for 
example, will not teach us half as much about reading (which is an eminently 
telepathic process) as the profane illumination of reading will teach us about 
telepathic phenomena.169
As evidenced in this passage, Benjamin advocated a serious exploration of 
the mysterious and occult via their embodiment in the everyday. This is not 
a rejection of occult exploration (much less a rejection of telepathy). Indeed, 
Benjamin was claiming the reverse, that the best way to understand telepathy 
is not in the psychical laboratory, but in its written expression. We can still 
understand the phantasmagoric, but not in the moments of the miraculous: we 
should explore these phenomena “dialectically,” through the interrogation of 
everyday objects. For Benjamin, the problem with many occultists is that they 
mystify the wrong things.
We should now be in a position to make sense of the essay in which Benja-
min is most critical of the occult, “Erleuchtung durch Dunkelmänner” (Light 
from obscurantists, 1932), which is nominally a review of “Die Geheimwissen-

236 Chapter Eight
schaften im Lichte unserer Zeit” (The occult sciences in the light of our age) 
by the Austrian journalist Hans Liebstöckl. In this essay, Benjamin was highly 
critical of the commercialization of the occult sciences, which he described as 
benefiting from the decline in general education. The problem with these sci-
ences is that they claim to provide shortcuts to happiness and hidden knowl-
edge without the penetrating study that would unlock the truth.170 In effect, 
these penny occult works and the posturing of anthroposophists only serve to 
cheapen or even disenchant the supernatural. By contrast, Benjamin wanted 
to unlock the hidden magic or dream images of the everyday.171 By decoding 
the meaning of works of art, toys, or arcades, the critical theorist is engaging 
in a kind of re- enchantment, or at the very least, revivification. Benjamin was 
suggesting that the most mundane figures, the reader and the loiterer, have 
hidden essences that can be revealed by the tools of critical theory.
The final observation I want to make in this section is that Benjamin’s 
version of critical theory meant he was engaged in a very similar academic 
enterprise to the one that I am employing in this book. Throughout his writ-
ings Benjamin explicitly uncovered the esoteric entanglements of many of the 
figures he studied.172 We might see his magical critical theory in terms of its 
attempt to mystify or complicate its subjects by unmasking their dialectical 
contradictions and their unconscious or hidden ideological commitments. 
Accordingly, the everyday contains profound secrets every bit as illuminating 
as that of the ecstatic.
In summary, Benjamin was more than merely the vector for Klages, Gold-
berg, and Gutkind; he also transformed the counter- enlightenment cri-
tique worked out by magicians into the proper business of a philosopher. 
Critical theory in Benjamin’s legacy would therefore function as kind of re- 
enchantment or magic; or at the very least, as quoted above, would permit a 
“serious exploration of occult, surrealistic, phantasmagoric gifts and phenom-
ena” as a path toward “profane illumination.”
Co n c lu s io n : T h e  M ag ic of Th e ory
In 1936, a small group of French artists, literary theorists, and students formed 
a secret society centered on “a ceremony of initiation, rites, and the acceptance 
of a changed way of life destined to separate adepts . . . from a world that would 
henceforth be considered as profane.”173 They performed clandestine rituals 
in the Place de la Concorde (where Louis XVI had been beheaded) and trav-
eled covertly to forest groves in pursuit of “the chthonic character of mythical 

Dialectic of Darkness 
237
reality.”174 Although we know almost nothing of the details of their rituals, the 
heart of their project was a voluntary human sacrifice intended to recapitulate 
the death of God and king alike. A sacred murder was to be the spark that 
would begin the “destruction of the world that exists” and would open eyes 
“to the world that will be.”175 They hoped that the violent transgression of 
ritual decapitation would give birth to a new mythology appropriate to an era 
associated with divine death and misplaced political sovereignty. Yet, despite 
having a willing victim, an executioner was lacking and the sacrifice was never 
performed.176
When I tell you that the name of this secret society was Acéphale, or the 
Headless, scholars of French social theory will instantly recognize their leader 
as Georges Bataille (1897– 1962), who is known for his obsession with the image 
of a headless man.177 Today Bataille is mainly regarded as the kooky uncle of 
French theory: scandalous for authoring erotic novels and equally provocative 
works on violence, the sacred, and political economy; and recognized as a 
decisive influence on a generation of theorists including, Baudrillard, Barthes, 
Blanchot, Derrida, Foucault, Kristeva, and Lyotard.178
Scholars know that Bataille embraced mysticism, and it is common knowl-
edge that he was fascinated by Hermetic and occult texts, and profoundly 
interested in at least the symbolic power of magic.179 He also read and cited 
Ludwig Klages.180 For our purposes, it is particularly telling that in the journal 
intended to be the public face of the Acéphale secret society, Bataille praised 
Klages and noted in passing that the term acéphale had first appeared in a 
French review of Klages’s work.181 Hence, while Klages’s influence on Bataille 
is comparatively minor, his “Headless” at least partially symbolized Klages’s 
attack on Geist and logocentrism, evoking reason decapitated in order to open 
up a cosmic eros of beauty and terror.
I mention Bataille not primarily to give another example of Klages’s influ-
ence, but to suggest that the esoteric keeps appearing in thinkers we have 
canonized in critical theory.
*
Critical theory’s self- image is of vigilance and hyper- intellection. If you are 
routing it through Kant, Hegel, and Marx, you can make that boast. If you stick 
with Marx, then you can even call yourself materialist. If you put European 
mysticism at the center, however, then all those claims become suspect. Noting 
Klages’s similarity to American versions of “continental philosophy” upends 

238 Chapter Eight
the conventional view of both critical theory and poststructuralism, not only 
because multiple theorist in the tradition read Klages, but also because in some 
respects Klages was repeating things common to other esotericists.
Indeed, except for the addition of Nietzsche, many of Klages’s ideas had di-
rect precedents in the occult milieu of the period. Although, as I demonstrated 
above, a suprising number of the new cannon of theorists— from Adorno to 
Lacan— read Klages, it is not that I think every poststructuralist or critical the-
orist was dominantly inspired by Klages either directly or by way of Benjamin 
or Bataille. Nor do I think they were all a bunch of closeted magicians. Rather, 
I see important engagements with occult themes and thinkers by multiple the-
orists in our tradition.
Perhaps later I’ll write a whole book on the subject, but there are plenty of 
examples: Ferdinand de Saussure’s attendance at spiritualist séances and writ-
ing about theosophy in the very moment he was giving his famous lectures.182 
Gilles Deleuze’s first publication, which was the introduction to a work of 
occult magic.183 Giorgio Agamben’s interest in Paracelsus as a solution to the 
semiotic rupture.184 Peter Sloterdijk’s investment in Osho as a spiritual and 
philosophical precursor.185 Roy Bhaskar’s debt to theosophy.186 Luce Iriga-
ray’s interest in yoga and mysticism.187 Even Derrida expressed an interest 
in telepathy and attempted to ally the pharmakeus (magician), writing, and 
magic against speech and logos.188 Not to mention thinkers like Michel de 
Certeau and Ernst Bloch, whose connections to mysticism are well known. I 
could go on.
Given the ongoing ruptures in and rewritings of structuralism, people are 
sifting through the rubble. If you think structuralism was mostly about lin-
guistic skepticism, you are likely to push Benjamin and Bataille to the mar-
gins. Homing in on Klages has allowed us to begin to retrieve a version of 
critical theory or poststructuralism that was not first and foremost a critique 
of knowledge, but rather a vehicle for esoteric wisdom. With a few exceptions, 
poststructuralist skepticism turns out not to be a complete rejection of knowl-
edge, but rather an attempt to work out knowledge’s occult or hidden side. 
The recovery of continental philosophy’s own secrets in no way diminishes 
its value, but should go some distance in recuperating its cultural context.
Klages allows us to see that beneath the critique of stable meanings, there 
was a buried ontology— that of a Heracletean kind of flux, which was sup-
posed to be a positively valenced life itself. This allows us to see a critique 
of reification that is not primarily Marxist. We must destroy the totality of 
language not primarily to silence speech, but to revivify our world— in other 
words, to re- enchant it. We can see that the critique of logocentrism has a re-

Dialectic of Darkness 
239
verse side, a buried utopian term that was a kind of biocentrism. The critique 
of patriarchy and the centralized state also suggested a matriarchal community, 
which however much it resembled a hippie commune, was for a brief moment 
a possibility before being crushed by world wars. It would seem that at least 
fleetingly, critical theory bore the signs of a utopia.
*
This has also furthered our efforts to provide a genealogy of Dialectic of En-
lightenment. All told, it would appear that critical theory’s proximate other 
was the occult, with the esoteric and key thinkers of the period sharing both 
a critique of modernity and a vocabulary. The persistence of esotericism in 
Walter Benjamin’s writings helps make sense of Adorno’s repeated criticisms 
of magic and astrology and his efforts to get Benjamin to distance himself from 
Ludwig Klages— although, as we have seen, even Adorno and Horkheimer 
were willing to admit that they found something compelling in Klages’s cri-
tique of enlightenment. Indeed, Adorno frequently engaged with Klages and 
other esotericists, albeit often critically.189 Accordingly, Adorno’s immanent 
critique of enchantment poses a problem for the self- understanding of critical 
theory today.
As noted above, critical theory is one of the central places in the academy 
for a left- Weberian critique of modernity. We look to critical theorists to be 
reminded that disenchantment has meant the domination of nature, the de-
humanization of humanity, the end of wonder, and the destruction of myth. 
But having read Klages, we can see that important aspects of this line of cri-
tique originated in the fin- de- siècle occult milieu. So on these grounds, all the 
various left- Weberian attempts to overcome instrumental rationality or the 
iron cage by way of re- enchantment might now seem suspect.
But if the main thing we have learned from critical theory— and the Di-
alectic of Enlightenment in particular— is that disenchantment has negative 
consequences, then we are presented with a further problem. It would seem 
that in his rejection of occultism, Adorno has placed himself on the side of the 
disenchanters. He attacks both magic and the loss of magic. He might seem 
therefore to be amplifying the very disenchantment he has so strongly criti-
cized. A further complexity, as I’ll show in the next chapter, is that from this 
vantage, it looks as though the Frankfurt School’s archnemesis, the Vienna 
Positivists, here seem to play the role of magicians.

C h a p t e r  N i n e
The Ghosts of Metaphysics:
Logical Positivism and 
Disenchantment
It has fallen to many to exorcise Metaphysics from Philosophy, but it has been left for 
the Logical Positivists, as they are sometimes called, to behave as if they had succeeded.
 M a x  B l a c k , introduction to The Unity of Science, by Rudolph Carnap, 1934
To begin with the finale, the Vienna Circle ended with a philosophical mur-
der. On Monday, June 22, 1936, an unemployed Austrian academic, Johann 
Nelböck ambushed his former thesis advisor, Professor Moritz Schlick, out-
side his office and shot him fatally in the heart.1 Both men were philosophers. 
Schlick— known to many as the father of logical positivism— was the author 
of multiple influential works on the philosophy of science, epistemology, and 
ethics.2 Nelböck had written a thesis in philosophy, and he attempted to justify 
his atrocity in philosophical terms.3 Although admitting his personal griev-
ances with Schlick, who he felt had prevented him from getting a job, Nelböck 
also maintained that the murder could be seen in terms of opposed world-
views (Weltanschauungen) between religious faith and atheistic positivism. 
The murderer was basically arguing that he had become unhinged because 
Schlick’s positivist assault on metaphysics had stripped life of its meaning.4
While today no one is seriously calling for a violent purge, “positivism” is 
often characterized as “the hegemonic epistemology in scientific discourse,” 
and it is criticized for believing that “subjectivity is an obstacle to knowledge” 
or for espousing a misguided “faith in reason.”5 Accordingly, positivists might 
seem to be ideal missionaries for the myth of disenchantment. In this chapter 
I will show why this account of the logical positivists is wrong.
I start by sketching the critique of positivism in our current academic mo-
ment and touching on the attack on positivism in the writings of the Frankfurt 
School. Then I explore the self- image of the Vienna Circle of logical posi-
tivism. It will turn out that some of the critique is well directed: the logical 

The Ghosts of Metaphysics 
241
positivists did position themselves as the inheritors of “the Enlightenment” 
and as the apex of a trajectory of disenchantment. Later sections of the chapter 
complicate this picture by showing how many positivists expressed an abiding 
interest in the paranormal and described their project in terms of magic.
The previous chapter may have left the reader with the sense that critical 
theory was the only philosophical movement entangled with esoteric knowl-
edge. But, as I argue, positivism also looks like the emergence of a counter-
tradition or counterculture, working out its own criticisms of modernity, for-
mulating new utopias, and radical ontotheologies. The irony is that exposing 
these allegiances reveals magic precisely in those philosophers who are often 
described as the hegemonic enemies of enchantment.
Ph i l o s o p h ical  T e c h n ocracy:  
T h eo d o r  Ad o r n o  an d  Max  H orkh e i me r
Our prognosis regarding the associated lapse from enlightenment into positivism . . . 
has been overwhelmingly confirmed.
 M a x H o r k h e i m e r a n d  T h e o d o r  A d o r n o,  
Dialektik der Aufklärung (new edition), 1969
In many academic circles, the word positivism functions as an invective.6 
Beyond the memory of a specific philosophical movement, a broadly con-
strued “positivist paradigm” has been charged with fetishizing facts, uncrit-
ically eliding text with reality, enacting patriarchal sexism and imperialism, 
and worse.7 In many critiques it is unclear whether the intended targets are 
any self- identified positivists, such as the followers of Auguste Comte or Ernst 
Mach; quantitative scientific thinking as such; or more likely, a general schol-
arly mentality. Historians accuse “positivism” of being unhistorical; econo-
mists fault it for being uncritical; ethicists reproach positivists for attempting 
to exile values; and English professors reprimand positivists for having an 
excessively limited view of meaning.8
Even when a specific philosophical camp is fixed squarely in view, logi-
cal positivism still often appears as a hegemonic nemesis. One common way 
to stage the continental divide is in terms of an opposition between Anglo- 
Austrian logical positivism (Vienna Circle) and the German antipositivisms of 
Heidegger or the Frankfurt School.9 As Jean- François Lyotard has described 
it: “Carnap on the one hand and Heidegger on the other cut Western philos-
ophy in two.”10 Sometimes “postmodernism” is supposed to be nothing more 
than a rejection of positivism.11 Indeed, both French and German philosophers 

242 Chapter Nine
of all kinds— from phenomenologists to existentialists to poststructuralists— 
often define their rupture with analytic philosophy by reference to a critique 
of positivism.12
Those of us trained in continental philosophy may find it surprising to 
learn that there is a deeply entrenched critique of positivism in analytic phi-
losophy as well. Analytic philosophers do emphasize logical positivism’s his-
torical importance.13 But as Robert Scharff has summarized it: “As hard as it is 
nowadays to get agreement on what analytic philosophers could still possibly 
have in common, at least it seems safe to say that there is something they are 
universally against, namely, positivism.”14 Contemporary analytic philosophy 
is also often taken to originate in a criticism of logical positivism. While citing a 
different cast of critics (say, Hilary Putnam and W. V. O. Quine instead of Lyo-
tard and Heidegger), the analytic critique is similar insofar as the positivists 
are often accused of a flawed repudiation of metaphysics based on a simplistic 
conception of science.
From these criticisms it would be easy to think that some form of positiv-
ism is both universally dominant and universally reviled. I will touch on this 
discursive structure in the chapter’s conclusion. But in this section, I want to 
gesture toward the roots of a particular critique of positivism that has been so 
widely repeated it has become unthinking— namely, that the positivists repre-
sented the Enlightenment gone bad and scientism trying to devour philos-
ophy, and that they tragically de- politicized theory by making a supreme value 
out of value neutrality. This line of critique is important because it serves as 
one of the central foci for the disenchantment narrative.
One important source for this image of positivism is the critique found in 
the Frankfurt School, particularly in the writings of Max Horkheimer and 
Theodor Adorno. In the previous chapter I located the Frankfurt School in 
the occult milieu— and indeed, I’ve been shadowboxing with Dialectic of En-
lightenment throughout (often explicitly but sometimes only implicitly)— and 
the next few pages will gesture at Horkheimer and Adorno’s confrontation 
with positivism.
*
Both Adorno and Horkheimer frequently criticized positivism, sometimes ad-
dressing a general attitude but often attacking the Vienna Circle directly. This 
culminated in the well- known positivism dispute (Positivismusstreit) in Ger-
man sociological circles in the 1960s, but that conflict was only the last act of a 
long- running disagreement.15 Horkheimer had already contrasted positivism 

The Ghosts of Metaphysics 
243
and enlightenment in his 1927 lectures on the history of modern philosophy.16 
He even rebuked positivist social philosophy in his 1931 inaugural address to 
the Institute for Social Research, suggesting that the Frankfurt School needed 
to embody a different form of social theory.17 To be sure, Horkheimer did not 
yet have the Vienna Circle in view and was criticizing broader philosophical 
trends.
In “The Latest Attack on Metaphysics” (“Der neueste Angriff auf die 
Metaphysik,” 1937), Horkheimer began focusing his critique on the philos-
ophy of the Vienna Circle, calling out thinkers who will be discussed below 
(Rudolf Carnap, Hans Hahn, and Otto Neurath). Horkheimer’s main line of 
argument is that there is an opposition between the worldview of science and 
that of metaphysics that leads toward a split between two main philosophical 
camps: science- oriented positivists trying to expunge metaphysics, and antisci-
entific metaphysicians clinging to “romantic spiritualism” and life philosophy 
(Lebensphilosophie). While identifying problems with this new metaphysics, 
the brunt of the essay counterattacks the positivist critique of metaphysics. In 
brief, the positivists are accused of confusing “calculating thought with reason 
as such,” and Horkheimer rejected the equation of knowledge with the logical 
analysis of sense data.18 Insofar as critical theory is supposed to be a third 
alternative to both positivism and new metaphysics, it might seem that one of 
its central purposes is to confound positivists.19
This was a mandate that Adorno accepted. One can find criticisms of the 
positivists throughout his philosophical oeuvre.20 In Eingriffe: Neun kritische 
Modelle (1968; Critical Models), Adorno asserted: “Especially in the Anglo- 
Saxon countries logical positivism, originally inaugurated by the Vienna 
Circle, has gained ground to the point of becoming a virtual monopoly.”21 
Adorno argued elsewhere that “Positivism is the puritanism of knowledge,” 
by which he meant that it aims to force knowledge to submit to set of norms 
about its own limitations.22
As contemporary scholar Michael LeMahieu has observed, one of the 
idiosyncrasies of Adorno’s assault on positivism was his interpretation of 
Ludwig Wittgenstein as an arch- positivist.23 For instance, in Drei Studien zu 
Hegel (1963; Hegel: Three Studies), Adorno describes “Wittgenstein’s maxim, 
Whereof one cannot speak, thereof one must be silent,” as the moment “in which 
the extreme of positivism spills over into the gesture of reverent authoritarian 
authenticity.”24 Although today Wittgenstein is not typically thought of as a 
positivist (especially after Philosophical Investigations, 1953), Adorno’s asser-
tion in Negative Dialektik (1966; Negative Dialectics) that the aim of philosophy 
is “to counter Wittgenstein by uttering the unutterable” makes sense in light 

244 Chapter Nine
of Adorno’s reading of Wittgenstein as a positivist.25 Thus the “negative” in 
negative dialectics is partially a repudiation of the “positive” of the positivist.26
The Frankfurt School’s most thoroughgoing offensive against positivism is 
in Horkheimer’s The Eclipse of Reason (1947). His argument, in a nutshell, is 
that modern thought has undergone a process of “formalization” or “subjec-
tivization,” by which Horkheimer meant that an older conception of reason 
as having both subjective and objective components has become dominated 
by “subjective reason,” defined as “the ability to calculate probabilities and 
thereby to co- ordinate the right means with a given end.”27 This instrumental 
form of rationality (to give the left- Weberian term) has exiled objective reason 
from the world, resulting in “an empty nature degraded to mere material, mere 
stuff to be dominated, without any other purpose than that of this very domi-
nation.”28 Basically, value rationality has been displaced in favor of dehuman-
izing instrumental rationality.
Although Horkheimer did not exclusively blame the positivists, he de-
scribed them as epitomizing this process in modern philosophy. As he sum-
marized, positivism “is as fallacious as other glorifications of technology. Eco-
nomic technocracy expects everything from the emancipation of the material 
means of production. . . . Positivism is philosophical technocracy.”29 Restated, 
positivism has a naïve faith in scientific progress and its potential to transform 
the world. It has lost the power to politicize philosophy for productive change 
and merely apes technological advancement. As Horkheimer put it elsewhere: 
“[Positivism] removed thought from philosophy and reduced the latter to the 
technique of organizing, by reproduction and abridgment, the matters of fact 
given in the world of sense. In positivism reason sustains itself through self- 
liquidation.”30 Positivism is therefore reason devouring itself and has become 
unable to prevent a “relapse into mythology.”31 Here we have the bare bones 
of the attack on positivism that will be articulated more fully in Dialectic of 
Enlightenment, which was written in the same period.
Even a cursory reading of Dialectic of the Enlightenment exposes “posi-
tivism” as the work’s main dystopian term, representing enlightenment gone 
wrong. As Horkheimer and Adorno argued “Enlightenment is mythical fear 
radicalized. The pure immanence of positivism, its ultimate product.”32 They 
added later that “for positivism, which has assumed the judicial office of en-
lightened reason, to speculate about intelligible worlds is no longer merely 
forbidden but senseless prattle.”33 Enlightenment crystalized in positivism, 
where thought became nothing more than clarifying the grammar of logical 
language, and everything else was bracketed out as meaningless and meta-
physical: “For the Enlightenment, anything which cannot be resolved into 

The Ghosts of Metaphysics 
245
numbers, and ultimately into one, is illusion; modern positivism consigns it to 
poetry. . . . All gods and qualities must be destroyed.”34 All told, Horkheimer 
and Adorno charged the positivists with radicalizing demythologization so 
far that enlightenment has been crippled. By instrumentalizing reason, the 
positivists have turned nature into something to be mastered, and have opened 
the gateway to the violent return of the repressed.35 Thus, the positivists might  
appear to be the epitome of disenchantment— disenchantment personified.
This was not merely the view of the Frankfurt School. Something similar 
could be found on the other side of the political spectrum. Heidegger, in the 
draft of his lecture course Einführung in die Metaphysik (delivered 1935; In-
troduction to Metaphysics), argued:
[In Carnap’s writings] the last consequences of a mode of thinking which be-
gan with Descartes are brought to a conclusion: a mode of thinking according 
to which truth is no longer disclosedness of what is and thus accommodation 
and grounding of Dasein in the disclosing being, but truth is rather diverted 
into certainty— to the mere securing of thought, and in fact the securing of 
mathematical thought against all that is not thinkable by it. The conception of 
truth as the securing of thought led to the definitive de- divination of the world 
(Entgötterung der Welt).36
Here Heidegger is laying the de- divination of the world at Carnap’s feet. In the 
pages that follow, we’ll see where this image of the positivists holds and where 
it turns out to be mere caricature.
Revo lu t i o nary  An t i me taph y s i cs :  
Po si t i v i st D i s e n c h an t m e n t  an d Re -  e nch antme nt; 
Rud o l f  C ar nap  an d  O t to  Neurath
Most philosophers did not even suspect the revolutionary importance of modern logic.
 R u d ol p h  C a r n a p, Der logische Aufbau der Welt (second edition), 1967
Above all, the fight against metaphysics and theology means the destruction of bour-
geois ideology.
 O t t o N e u r a t h , Empirische Soziologie, 1931
The Vienna Circle announced itself to the world in a manifesto titled “Wis-
senschaftliche Weltauffassung: Der Wiener Kreis” (The scientific conception 
of the world: The Vienna Circle), presented to Moritz Schlick in 1929. Schlick 

246 Chapter Nine
did not fully agree with the manifesto, however, which had been written by 
the political economist Otto Neurath (1882– 1945), with input from the phi-
losopher Rudolf Carnap (1891– 1970) and the mathematician Hans Hahn 
(1879– 1934).37 Though Schlick found much he liked in the text, he disagreed 
with some of its argument and philosophical tone.38 Even its title was not of 
Schlick’s devising, and it was his student Herbert Feigl who took credit for 
promoting the movement as “Logical Positivism.”39
Instead of tracing out the evolving positions of the fourteen members of 
the Vienna Circle, I focus on the primary authors of the manifesto: Neurath, 
Carnap, and later in the chapter, Hahn. This was a group Carnap referred to as 
“the left wing of the Vienna Circle,” which he contrasted with the more conser-
vative wing associated with Schlick and Friedrich Waismann.40 How left wing 
was this portion of the Vienna Circle? The first lesson to those who taught that 
logical positivism was a bland philosophy directed at “just the facts” is that 
the core of the Vienna Circle had a politics. They were socialists or Marxists, 
and at various times, actively revolutionary. If we focus on these three and their 
initial shared philosophical, cultural, and political project, a different picture of 
the Vienna Circle emerges. In general, I want to bring the positivists “home” to 
Continental Europe and show that they were less different from the Frankfurt 
School than they have generally been portrayed.
There are three elements of the common critique of the logical positivists 
that are basically accurate: the Vienna Circle did align itself with enlighten-
ment, it was trying to refashion philosophy in scientific terms, and it did dedi-
cate itself to the elimination of metaphysics. Each of these critiques, however, 
needs to be qualified.
First, the Vienna Circle manifesto contained repeated invocations of the 
“Spirit of Enlightenment” (Geist der Aufklärung); and Carnap and Neurath 
had their own project— the International Encyclopedia of Unified Science— 
that they described as a successor to Diderot and d’Alembert’s Encyclopédie.41 
Their conception of enlightenment, however, does not fit the caricatured op-
position between modernism and postmodernism. This is because the Vienna 
Circle identified enlightenment with not just the philosophes, but also tellingly 
with Marx and Nietzsche.42 This was enlightenment as politics and radical 
critique.
Second, the Vienna Circle did claim to embody the “scientific world- 
conception” and saw logical analysis as way to unify the sciences. As they 
imagined it, philosophy’s primary task would be both to understand what 
worked about the special sciences and to formalize a mathematically informed 
logic that would give new rigor to all forms of empirical inquiry. But Neurath 

The Ghosts of Metaphysics 
247
had a more sophisticated conception of science than his critics usually give 
him credit for. He famously described the starting point of the sciences as: 
“We are like sailors who have to rebuild their ship on the open sea, without 
ever being able to dismantle it in drydock.”43 Indeed, as his writings make 
clear, Neurath— far from espousing a scientific status quo— imagined a hum-
bler science that he saw as antifoundationalist, potentially fallible, relativistic, 
and historical conditioned.44 Moreover, as we’ll see, it was a politicized and 
revolutionary science.
Third, and most important, the logical positivists are often criticized for at-
tempting to banish metaphysics. In this they are guilty as charged. Arguments 
against metaphysics occur throughout the Vienna Circle’s philosophical texts, 
and they are given succinct formulation in Carnap’s article “Überwindung der 
Metaphysik durch Logische Analyse der Sprache” (The overcoming of meta-
physics through logical analysis of language, 1931), which explicitly called for 
the “radical elimination of metaphysics.”45 Tracing Carnaps’s argument will 
help clarify what the positivists intended with this gesture.
The essay is rooted in a verificationist theory of meaning often attributed to 
early Wittgenstein. According to this view, in order for a philosophical prop-
osition to have meaning, it has to be subject to logical or potential empirical 
verification. So the proposition, “2 + 2 = 7” is a meaningful statement even if 
false because it has a logical meaning. Similarly, the proposition “I have a raven 
skull in my closet” is either true or false and hence meaningful, insofar as it is 
possible to open the closet and identify the aforementioned skull.
Metaphysical propositions are meaningless on this account because either 
they rely on grammatically malformed statements or on concepts that are 
beyond possible verification. As an example of the first issue, the statement 
“7 is red” rests on a category error— a number cannot have a color— so the 
statement is neither true nor false and therefore meaningless.46 For an example 
of the second- type of meaningless statement, Carnap quoted from Heidegger’s 
“What Is Metaphysics?” and focused on a passage that end with the phrase 
“The Nothing itself nothings” (Das Nichts selbst nichtet). Carnap contended 
that on grammatical grounds, this statement makes no sense. “Nothing” can-
not function as a substantive noun, nor does “nothing” make sense here as a 
verb; moreover, the whole thing is both empirically and logically unverifiable. 
We would not be able to recognize nothing nothing- ing if it landed on our 
shoe. Therefore, the whole statement is meaningless.47
Carnap was not just holding up Heidegger for ridicule. He argued that most 
of the key terms in Western philosophy— from Descartes’s cogito to Kant’s 
Ding- an- Sich— are meaningless because they are unverifiable metaphysical 

248 Chapter Nine
concepts. Carnap knew that these were fighting words, and he anticipated 
being questioned about why so many people have historically spent so much 
time writing metaphysics.48 His answer was that “metaphysics originated from 
mythology” as a kind of emotive expression of one’s relationship to the world 
and that— like poetry and other aesthetic pursuits— metaphysics is an expres-
sion of a general attitude toward life (Lebenseinstellung, Lebensgefühl), not 
a serious description of facts.49 Hence, the appeal of Plato or Heidegger is 
mostly aesthetic, like a good piece of music.50 But then, Carnap concluded that 
most “metaphysicians are musicians without musical ability.”51 In effect, he 
wanted metaphysicians to either write poetry or retire, but regardless, to stop 
pretending they do philosophy. He imagined that the exorcism of metaphysics 
would then purge philosophy of its meaningless propositions and terms.
This assault on metaphysics is part of what gives “positivism” its name. The 
attempt to expunge metaphysics was indirectly modeled on Auguste Comte. 
Comte’s “law of three stages” describes the movement of thought from theol-
ogy to metaphysics to the scientific or positive. As a name for a philosophical 
movement, “positivism” therefore embodies the progressive demystification of 
the world, implying the elimination of both religion and abstraction. But there 
is a certain paradox in the basic formulation of “positivist philosophy” because 
in Comte’s original system, the term metaphysics was itself synonymous with 
philosophy. Hence his positivism meant not only the death of God, but also 
a death of philosophy. Philosophy as such was an intermediate stage to be 
replaced by science. Accordingly, a positivist philosophy would appear to be 
a contradiction in terms, or perhaps an antiphilosophy.
To the degree that the Vienna Circle came to their positivism in the wake 
of thinkers like Frazer, Freud, and Max Weber, it might also suggest a com-
mitment to the end of magic. Logical positivism’s founding figures did plot 
history in terms suggestive of a disenchantment narrative. Otto Neurath de-
scribed the transition “from magic to unified science,” while Herbert Feigl 
gestured at “the history of thought from magic to science.”52 Moreover, when 
the Vienna Circle emphasized the urgency of their philosophical mission, they 
sometimes played on a different meaning of the word metaphysics.
One of the flyers that promoted the movement in 1929 included the follow-
ing: “To All Friends of the scientific World- Conception! We live in a critical 
spiritual (geistigen) situation! Metaphysical and theological thought is taking 
hold in certain groups; astrology, anthroposophy, and similar movements are 
spreading.”53 As this illustrates, “metaphysics” was often identified with as-
trology and anthroposophy— in other words, as magic or occultism. Indeed, 
the Metaphysische Rundschau (Metaphysical review) was one of the more 

The Ghosts of Metaphysics 
249
popular German occult magazines in Carnap’s day.54 When the Vienna Circle 
referred to the recent rise of “metaphysical thought” in their manifesto and 
other writings, they partially evoked also the widespread occult revival of the 
period as the enemy of their own movement.55 In that, they seemed interested in 
exorcizing magic from the culture at large, not just philosophy, and the logical 
positivists seem to be the worst candidates for being any sort of magicians. I 
problematize positivist disenchantment bellow.
The related charge is that the logical positivists’ crusade against metaphys-
ics was essentially a secularization project.56 There is also justification for this 
view. The positivists generally assumed that religion and science were in binary 
opposition, and they often took the side of science against religion. Carnap, for 
example, lists “God” as an example of a potentially meaningless metaphysical 
concept.57 Neurath also frequently equated “theologians” and “metaphysi-
cians” in his writings. But the attack on metaphysics was not merely an attempt 
to banish God’s shadow. It had a politics that contemporary commentators 
generally seem to overlook.
*
Because Carnap tried to de- emphasize his previous political commitments 
after relocating to the United States, it is easy to forget that his significant early 
positivist writings took place in a political context. While the least political of 
the left wing of the Vienna Circle, Carnap became actively political after World 
War I and as a youth saw himself as a socialist with Marxist allegiances.58 In-
deed, in a diary entry from 1932, Carnap enthused about a Marxist reading 
of “Überwindung der Metaphysik.”59 It was partially on political grounds 
that Carnap fled the Nazis in 1935 and came to America.60 Still, Carnap was 
rarely public with his political views and seems to have worked to obscure 
the political implications of his own writing. Later in life, however, Carnap 
remarked to a friend: “If you want to find out what my political views were in 
the twenties and thirties, read Otto Neurath’s books and articles of that time; 
his views were also mine.”61 That is what we will do. Indeed, it was Neurath— 
Carnap’s collaborator in forming the Vienna Circle— who took Carnap’s poli-
tics to the next level.
To explain Neurath’s political theory, we also have to look back to the end 
of the First World War. In 1918, as the war turned decisively against Germany, 
the Jewish socialist politician Kurt Eisner mobilized antiwar protestors and 
then members of the army against the government, and in so doing managed 
to effectively force the abdication of King Ludwig III of Bavaria.62 Ultimately, 

250 Chapter Nine
under Eisner’s leadership, the Bavarian Soviet Republic (Bayerische Rätere-
publik) was declared a free state.
Otto Neurath had a doctorate in economic history and had received his 
habilitation in 1917. The son of the Jewish economist Wilhelm Neurath, Otto 
had begun to follow broadly in his father’s footsteps after several intellectual 
detours. After teaching at Neue Wiener Handelsakademie (the New Vienna 
School of Business) and directing the Deutschen Kriegswirtschaftsmuseum 
(the German War Economy Museum), Otto Neurath was awarded a lecture-
ship at the University of Heidelberg.63 But in 1919, given a chance to pitch his 
economic ideas to an actual socialist government, Neurath traveled to a still- 
turbulent Munich to meet with Eisner and his political party. Eisner was trag-
ically assassinated less than a month later by Anton Graf von Arco auf Valley, 
a self- loathing, right- wing anti- Semite who had been rejected from the occult 
Thule Society.64 Nevertheless, that March, Neurath was appointed president 
of the Central Planning Office by Eisner’s successor.65
Over the three months following Eisner’s assassination, the Bavarian Soviet 
Republic went through three different governments and a number of internal 
clashes. In the end, German troops were sent into Munich and deposed the 
Soviet government after a brief conflict. The free state was abolished, and its 
leaders arrested or executed. Neurath was charged with treason and sentenced 
to eighteen months of confinement. (Interestingly, Max Weber appeared as a 
character witness for Neurath.) Once Neurath had served a brief period of 
imprisonment, the sentence was commuted to exile, and he was banned from 
Germany until 1926.66 Though Neurath was able to return to his home in 
Vienna, his professorial career in Germany was over.
In the years that followed, Neurath continued his connection to Socialist 
movements, becoming general secretary of the socialist Forschungsinstitut für 
Gemeinwirtschaft (Research Institute for Social Economy).67 Later, he would 
establish a museum project in relationship to Red Vienna in order to bring 
philosophy to the working class. Ironically, given the tenor of later critiques, 
Neurath was a key figure in the left- wing politics of his era. Positivists have 
often been criticized for being apolitical, but Neurath, at least, put his politics 
into practice in a way unmatched by any of the major thinkers in the Frankfurt 
School.
Antimetaphysics as Ideology Critique
Neurath made explicit the political motivations for the revolt against meta-
physics in Lebensgestaltung und Klassenkampf (Lifestyle and class struggle, 

The Ghosts of Metaphysics 
251
1928). As a whole, the monograph is largely an attempt to emphasize that 
“Scientific attitude and solidarity go together.”68 Neurath’s main argument is 
that science is a natural complement to the lifestyle of the proletariat; members 
of the working class are naturally grounded in a commonsense scientific out-
look because they are interested in concrete and practical matters like working 
conditions, safety, access to safe food, and clean drinking water. In a similar 
fashion, he argued, they are also unencumbered by the intellectual traditions 
that govern the life of the bourgeois class.69
Crucially, Neurath argued that “it is precisely the proletariat that is the 
bearer of science without metaphysics.”70 This is not science as elite techno-
cratic project, but commonsense, practical thought. In Neurath’s hands, the 
broader aim of positivism was to liberate the working classes, and establish 
common cause among engineers, scientists, and union leaders. As he put it 
elsewhere, logical positivists “want to show people that what physicists and 
astronomers do is only on a grand scale what Charles and Jane are doing 
every day in the garden and the kitchen.”71 The Vienna Circle manifesto 
strikes a similar note when it remarks that “we have to fashion intellectual 
tools for everyday life, for the daily life of the scholar but also for the daily life 
of all those who in some way join in working at the conscious re- shaping of  
life.”72
Neurath argued that it was the ruling classes’ vested interest in maintaining 
the status quo that keeps metaphysics alive. Though members of these classes 
are often not themselves especially religious or patriotic, he suggested, the 
bourgeois promotes religious values and nationalisms as a way to keep the 
workers in line.73 As he elaborated:
Many men are religious so long as they feel themselves helplessly at the mercy 
of unknown social forces. . . . The stubborn fighter in the class struggle makes 
the ruling social order responsible for all this, the order which he sees pro-
tected above all by those groups that cultivate religiosity and belief in God or 
metaphysics.74
This passage begins with a fairly conventional Marxist critique of religion, 
but it ends with a reference to metaphysics. This is because Neurath thinks 
that one of the ways that the masses are suppressed is by use of metaphysical 
concepts and rhetoric (e.g., appeals to patriotism, the holy, or Being- as- 
such). Religious and “metaphysical” ideas impede the consolidation of an 
international working- class movement, because they become ways to fracture 
the movement— pitting, say, Turkish and German workers or Muslims and 

252 Chapter Nine
Christians against each other instead of helping them find common ground 
in their shared humanity and labor conditions.75 Class ideologues promote 
metaphysical ideas because it keeps the workers divided and the ruling class 
in power.
Class revolution, it would seem, requires overthrowing both theology and 
metaphysics. His antimetaphysics is Marxist, and Neurath said as much: “The 
cultivation of scientific, unmetaphysical thought, its application above all to 
social occurrences, is quite Marxist.”76 The critique of metaphysics therefore 
functions crucially as a critique of ideology. This is clear in the passage cited 
in the section epigraph, in which Neurath says, “Above all, the fight against 
metaphysics and theology means the destruction of bourgeois ideology.”77
Nor were Neurath and Carnap alone in their socialist- informed antimeta-
physics. Hans Hahn— the third coauthor of the Vienna Circle’s manifesto— 
was also an outspoken socialist. While Hahn’s specialty was mathematics, 
when his attention turned to philosophy, he also attempted to align the revolt 
against metaphysics with a class revolution. This is most explicit in Überflüs-
sige Wesenheiten, Occams Rasiermesser (Superfluous entities, Occam’s razor, 
1930), which if anything suggests merciless disenchantment. In this work, 
Hahn granted the poetic beauty of a god- filled world, remarking:
It may be that the world was very beautiful when a god or demon could be 
scented on every path; it may be that it was a very poetic time when all sorts of 
higher beings had to be constantly kept in a reasonably good mood by prayer 
and sacrifice, and all sorts of evil spirits had to be kept in check by magic 
spells.78
But Hahn expresses little public sympathy for this kind of poetic fancy (his 
private life will be discussed in the next section). In this essay, he turns the 
principle of Occam’s Razor (do not multiply entities more than is necessary) 
into a political weapon, arguing that it can be used to separate practical this- 
worldly philosophies from impractical metaphysical ideologies. He argues:
[It is] no accident that the land that saw the beheading of a king also wit-
nessed the execution of metaphysics. For all those other- worldly entities of 
metaphysics— Plato’s ideas, the Eleatics’ One, Aristotle’s pure form and first 
mover, the gods and demons of the religions, and the kings and princes of the 
earth— all share a common fate, and when the emperor falls the duke must 
follow suit.79

The Ghosts of Metaphysics 
253
This looks like a kind of Jacobin impulse: Occam’s Razor as the guillotine of 
the revolution. In Hahn’s conceit, the logical positivist insurrection against 
metaphysics is intended to ax political and metaphysical tyranny, killing kings 
as well as gods.
In sum, the positivist emphasis on empiricism, verification, and the sciences 
was often aimed at undercutting bourgeois ideology, disabling the rhetoric of 
nationalism, and providing a common forum for the proletariat. Rather than 
wilting at the appearance of fascism, the Vienna Circle also condemned not 
only totalitarianism, but also totalitarian ideology. Neurath made this explicit 
in a later essay: “Logical Empiricism is fighting ‘metaphysical idealism’ along 
the whole line. It is just this set of phantasmagoria, allowing terrible means to 
lofty ends, which very often reduces the preparedness of people to object to the 
mercilessness of totalitarianism. Think of Plato’s Republic, for example, where 
the Nazis found fine arguments for persecution.”80 Thus, it would seem that 
the inheritors of the totalitarian Enlightenment (in Adorno and Horkheimer’s 
terms) were themselves working against totalitarianism. As Neurath empha-
sized, their project was “anti- totalitarian through and through,” although this 
may represent a bit of overcompensation.81
All told, the political philosophy of the left wing of the Vienna Circle actu-
ally overlapped significantly with the Frankfurt School, and as such, it would 
not have been farfetched to imagine a Frankfurt- Vienna alliance against fas-
cism and traditional philosophy. As contemporary scholar Hans- Joachim 
Dahms has demonstrated in Positivismusstreit (The positivism dispute, 1994), 
in 1936, Neurath actively sought out the Frankfurt School and tried to get the 
positivists and the critical theorists to join forces.82 The Frankfurt School ini-
tially considered the idea. But ultimately, Horkheimer rejected Neurath’s over-
tures and instead in 1937 wrote the scathing critique of positivism discussed 
above. Neurath attempted to make amends, but Horkheimer refused to print 
his rebuttal in the Frankfurt School’s journal. Although this was not the final 
exchange between the two movements, it effectively foreclosed the possibility 
of real collaboration.
Nevertheless, having a handle on the Vienna Circle’s politics will allow us 
to make sense of how and why positivists described their project in terms of 
magic and allied themselves with sorcerers. In fact, it was precisely because 
of Neurath’s desire to forge an alliance between the “man in the street” and 
the “scientific expert” that he turned the narrative of disenchantment on its 
head.83

254 Chapter Nine
Positivist Magic
Gnosticism was not only characterized by realistic ideas pertaining to astrology and 
magic but was also full of ideas dealing with angel- like “emanations.”
 O t t o N e u r a t h , “Unified Science as Encyclopedic Integration,” 1938
A particular passage in the Vienna Circle’s manifesto will stand out to a reader 
attentive to the terminology of enchantment:
The representatives of the scientific world- conception resolutely stand on the 
ground of simple human experience. They confidently approach the task of 
removing the metaphysical and theological debris of millennia. Or, as some 
have it: returning, after a metaphysical interlude, to a unified picture of this 
world free from theology, which had, in a sense, been the basis of magical beliefs 
(Zauberglauben) in early times.84
While the emphasis is mine, the passage is equating the scientific world- 
conception and magical beliefs, and locating both at the dawn of humanity. 
Given that “the scientific world- conception” was shorthand for the logical 
positivists’ project, the manifesto suggestively allies magic and positivism 
against theology and metaphysics.
If this were the only place the Vienna Circle made such a gesture, it would 
be easy to ignore. But positivists often made versions of this argument. We see 
it, for example, in notes held by the Carnap archive in which Carnap contrasts 
metaphysics and magic, suggesting that that magic, while false, is cognitive, 
and so fundamental that even an animal might exhibit magical thinking.85 Al-
though the importance of magic was occasionally emphasized by Carnap and 
other members of the movement (e.g., Richard von Mises), the identification 
of magic as ordinary thinking was central to Neurath’s project.86
This is a claim Neurath repeated in many places, but it is elaborated in a 
commentary on the Vienna Circle manifesto titled Wege der wissenschaftlichen 
Weltauffassung (Ways of the scientific world conception, 1930):
Following Comte, many people think of the transformation of human thinking 
like this: it starts with a religious- theological period, followed by a metaphysical- 
philosophical period, until this is replaced by a scientific- positivist one. But 
there are reasons for a different notion of historical change, and this is rele-
vant from the educational and psychological point of view. If basic elements 
of the scientific world- conception were already present in the springtime of 

The Ghosts of Metaphysics 
255
humanity (Frühzeit des Menschen), then we have a greater chance of being able 
to revitalize them.87
Neurath’s reference to Auguste Comte’s three stages (theology to philosophy 
to science) are not a surprise. But it comes with a significant modification: 
Neurath located positivist thought itself at the primal stage. His is implying 
that deep down, people are commonsensically scientific. Neurath’s rationale 
for doing so is explicit: if the scientific world conception is inherent to primitive 
humanity, then it should be easier to revive. By making this connection, he was 
rejecting the notion that positivism is the alienation of human thought (reason), 
and suggesting instead that it is natural, or at least cognitively fundamental.
As can be seen above, Neurath had a vested interest in positioning positiv-
ism in “the springtime” of humanity. But he could have identified this proto-
science with different cultural phenomena; for example, he could have sug-
gested that religion (or mythology) had a rational core, or just directly referred 
to primitive science. Instead, as we know from the manifesto, he identified  
magic with primordial human thought, which is basically Frazer’s position 
as well. This is no accident, as when Neurath continued, he described the 
early age when “religion [was] accompanied by a powerful magic (Magie) (see 
Frazer and others),” when “sorcerers (Zauberer) with their practices exerted 
immense influence.”88 Given the Marxist politics discussed above, this sug-
gests that in order to embrace magic against metaphysics, Neurath was making 
common cause with the proletariat and the “primitive.”
Though accompanied by religion, the springtime of humanity was the age 
of magic. It was the sorcerers who, like skilled technocrats, provided practical 
guidance for humanity until their place was usurped by the Godhead, with 
the priest as intermediary.89 Although this essay locates magic and religion 
alongside each other, in Empirische Soziologie: Der wissenschaftliche Gehalt 
der Geschichte und Nationalökonomie (1931; Empirical Sociology: The Scien-
tific Content of History and National Economy), Neurath reasserted that the 
original mode of thought is a magical mentality:
Man of the magical form of life has no special mode of thinking (Lévy- Bruhl), 
we are of his flesh and blood (Frazer). In particular, pre- animistic magic, prob-
ably the oldest, is akin to our behavior. But animistic magic too is like modern 
behavior, directed toward finite, earthly ends. Of course the men of magical 
times expected more than we do from words and other evocative measures 
of a fairly simple kind, whereas we tend to expect effects to be carried out by 
complicated machines or by specifically set- up organisms.90

256 Chapter Nine
Restated, we share our basic cognitive processes with the humanity of the 
magical age. Neurath speculated— following Frazer— that pre- animistic magic 
is the oldest stage of human thought, but hedges his bets by suggesting that 
even animistic magic resembles modern thinking. When we moderns want 
something, we still try to command it into being; but unlike ancient humanity, 
who used magical phrases, we do it by getting machines or other living beings 
to do it for us. This is as though ordering a beer from the bartender were 
equivalent to asking a spirit to make it rain.
Returning to the Wege essay, Neurath dwelled on the relationship between 
magical and scientific thought in greater detail:
Magic may seem alien to us at first glance; still, in a certain respect, it is closer to 
modern physics or biology than theological thinking. In general, the magician 
works finite changes, determined by tradition, which can be perceived and 
therefore checked by everybody. . . . In this respect the modern physicist is close 
to the magician.91
Again we can hear echoes of Frazer: magic is basically primitive science. But 
as a type of science, Neurath continued, “magic has to do with the finite, the 
empirical, just as the modern engineer or physician does. The magician is 
judged according to his effectiveness. If his sorcery is bad, his prophecies 
wrong, he is dismissed or even killed.”92 Hence the magician is basically a 
scientific empiricist (logical empiricism was the alternate name of the Vienna 
Circle) whose credibility relies on accurate prediction and the ability to effect 
changes in the world. Magic in this account is not irrational, but “one often 
deliberately presents magical action as being stranger than it is. If we formu-
late the recorded magical statements more precisely, we certainly encounter 
strange contents but also familiar relations: a definite observable event is seen 
as a condition for another.”93 To put this in blunt terms, magic is not weird. 
Neurath wanted his reader to recognize that magic is instrumentalist in the 
same way as modern technology. It works not via the miraculous or the super-
natural, but by discovering underlying regularities.
Neurath provided a range of examples to illustrate the extent to which 
“the magical way of thinking is related to that of the modern scientific world- 
conception.”94 In many ways, he argues, magicians anticipate the conclusions 
of modern scientists, although often on faulty theoretical grounds:
From the fact that we reject hypotheses and general statements of the magical 
views— assuming they are formulated— it does not follow at all that the con-

The Ghosts of Metaphysics 
257
clusions that can be drawn from them are incorrect and that they can always 
be checked by crude experience. . . . Frequently it is the case that an indi-
vidual magical statement, which can be acknowledged by modern science, was 
founded on a doctrine that we have to reject.95
Magicians often had accurate ideas about cause and effect, but failed to put 
them into a proper systematic framework. For example, the magician may have 
been right that touching corpses makes people sick, but they attributed the 
cause to evil spirits rather than bacteria. Moreover, there are some correla-
tions that the magician got right, but which matter science is only beginning 
to understand or explain.96
Neurath was at pains to argue against the assumption that technology and 
magic are antithetical, referring to the conceptualized difference as largely a 
prejudice: “If an old woman casts spells on warts, we call it superstition; when 
university professors do the same thing, we speak of suggestion therapy and 
science.”97 Neurath wanted to remind the reader that it is a mistake to judge the 
superstitious nature of magic based on contemporary conceptions of science. 
As he argued in Empirische Soziologie, “What we regard as useless, we mostly 
call ‘magic,’ and what we approve we call ‘science.’ ”98 It might seem that the 
distinction between magic and science is mostly polemical.
Having run magic and science together, Neurath was compelled to articu-
late their differences, arguing that magic is just a less orderly form of empirical 
research, or the science minus the system.99 Hence, as he argued, magical 
theories are especially elastic and in that sense harder to discredit.100 He went 
on to suggest that this prevents disenchantment: “Usually [magic] never van-
ishes completely. Thus even today we still meet magic everywhere in our own 
cultural area. Often it goes directly into technology and science, without pass-
ing first through theology.”101 Perhaps contra Weber, whom Neurath knew 
and whose work he read, disenchantment is fundamentally incomplete. Magic 
lingers on to be potentially recouped by science and technology. Here we can 
see Neurath nearly extracting from Frazer what is actually Crowley’s position, 
that magic and science are two sides of the same habit of thought, and that 
magic is the vanguard of science.
Neurath argued that the really alien thought mode is not magic, but the 
metaphysical or theological. His narrative, though, is of a theology that de-
vours itself: “the conscious reasoning of Christian theology” had destroyed 
empirical magic, but in doing so it was also “reducing the power of priests.”102 
His argument resembles a Weberian account of rationalization insofar as it is 
Protestantism that completes the rejection of magic, as theology’s destruction 

258 Chapter Nine
“came to completion in Protestantism.” But Neurath believed when Christian-
ity in turn declined, enchantment came out of hiding: “The decrease of church 
power and the simultaneous advance of scientific empiricism” have brought 
back magic. Thus, he gave a re- enchanted account of the modern worldview:
Thus it is perhaps understandable that at the beginning of modern times . . . 
witchcraft plays a larger role than before: the earthly causality of old magic 
re- emerges. . . . The revitalized sense for earthly things reveals itself to some 
extent in science, in connection with technology and rationalized action, as 
well as in sorcery.103
For Neurath, instead of science as the culmination of disenchanting Protestant 
thought, modernity is the return of sorcery. In effect, magic must reappear in 
order to challenge theology and empty metaphysics. Occult revivals and scien-
tific revolutions would seem to come together.
In sum, Neurath was positioning positivism and its unified science as a 
return, and in that sense as a completion or fulfillment of primitive magic. As 
he put it elsewhere: “Unified science is the substitute for magic which also once 
encompassed the whole of life.”104 As seen in the section of the manifesto cited 
above, positivism is a recovery— or we might say, a higher- order synthesis— of 
magic. The rest of the chapter shows what other enchantments were appearing 
along with the positivist project. In so doing, it demonstrates that magic was 
more than a metaphor, and that far from being dedicated to de- animating the 
world, the Vienna Circle often explored the possibility of ghosts and haunting 
spirits.
Po s it iv ist s  in  P ar an o r mal  Vi e nna:  
R u d o l f C ar nap  an d  Hans  H ah n
Many friends of [Hans Hahn’s] and admirers of his intellect found this [paranormal] 
interest of his very odd and wondered how the topic of parapsychology could even be 
broached in a group as strictly scientific in its orientation as the Vienna Circle.
 K a r l M e n g e r , introduction to Empiricism, Logic, and Mathematics,  
by Hans Hahn, 1980
Once upon a time, an eleven- year- old girl accompanied by an older cousin set 
out on foot through a large forest headed toward their grandmother’s house 
in the town of Buhai (today in Pădureni, Romania). At some point along the 
route, Eleonora Zugun— for that was the girl’s name— looked down and saw a 

The Ghosts of Metaphysics 
259
small coin wrapped in a handkerchief.105 Her cousin cautioned her that it was 
“devil’s money” and told her to leave it alone. She ignored him and took the 
coin to buy sweets in town. When they arrived at her grandmother’s house, 
Eleonora refused to share with anyone, eating the sweets against her cousin’s 
protests. In the ensuing argument, the two made enough noise to disturb their 
grandmother’s slumber.
The old woman was alleged to be 105 years old, and though blind, she had 
a reputation in the family— indeed, the whole village— for being a witch. She 
was not the kind of person anyone wanted to make angry. On being woken 
by the children fighting over the devil’s sweets, the old lady was enraged. She 
cursed Eleonora, telling her that as she had eaten candies paid for with the 
devil’s coin, the devil was now inside her.
In the days that followed, Eleonora became the center of a series of unusual 
events. Witnesses reported that they saw objects shudder and levitate in the 
girl’s presence. Soon, Eleonora developed a bad reputation in the village; as 
the locals would later tell a visiting researcher, “The grandmother could not 
die because some evil spirits would not permit her, and thus she had sent for 
the child, in order, by means of witchcraft, to transfer them to her.”106 Pres-
ently Eleonora herself became convinced that she was suffering from demonic 
possession.
Eleonora’s father and a group of concerned villagers took her to the house 
of an old priest. No sooner had they arrived than an iron vessel exploded into 
pieces. Jugs cracked, heavy objects began to shift around, and the windows 
suddenly shattered. The priest attempted an exorcism, but the phenomena 
continued. Fearing Eleonora was still cursed, her family deposited her at the 
monastery and convent of Gorovei (Mănăstirea Gorovei) in Talpa. Even there, 
she seemed to be at the mercy of invisible powers that smashed and moved 
things. The monks became frightened and wanted to expel Eleonora, but were 
prevented from doing so by the prior of the monastery.
This was no fairy tale, and it was at this point that Eleonora’s story enters 
the historical record. Kubi Klein, a reporter for the Jewish German- language 
newspaper Czernowitzer Allgemeine Zeitung, came across Eleonora and pub-
lished his account of her case on April 18, 1925, under the title “Das verhexte 
Dorf” (The bewitched village).107 News about the cursed girl spread through 
the region. Soon journalists and paranormal investigators were all clamoring 
to study Eleonora in greater detail. Fearing the impact of this attention, her 
family committed to her to a mental asylum, where she was kept in isolation.
Fortunately, Eleanora came to the attention of the international parapsy-
chology community, and she was rescued from the asylum and brought to 

260 Chapter Nine
Vienna. There she met the famous mathematician and founding member of the 
Vienna Circle, Hans Hahn. Hahn was also part of an elite team of paranormal 
researchers that tested Eleanora’s psychical powers, and he later testified to 
their authenticity.108
By way of biographical background, Hans Hahn was born in 1879 in Vi-
enna. His father, Ludwig, a Jewish convert to Catholicism, was one of the 
highest- ranking governmental officials in the Austro- Hungarian Empire.109 
Hans completed a doctorate in mathematics at the University of Vienna in 
1902. Hahn’s published papers covered a range of issues in mathematics and 
philosophy, from set theory to philosophy of science, but he is today largely 
remembered for the Hahn– Banach theorem in functional analysis and for 
being the dissertation advisor to Kurt Gödel (whom we will encounter again 
below).110 He was also one of the core members of the Vienna Circle and a 
significant influence on its basic orientation.111 Indeed, along with Carnap and 
Neurath, Hahn was the third coauthor of the Vienna Circle manifesto.
As a socialist, positivist mathematician, Hans Hahn might seem to be the 
most unlikely of psychical investigators, let alone one who would ultimately 
argue for the reality of some paranormal phenomena. The rest of this sec-
tion will explain what Hahn was doing investigating demonic possession and 
poltergeist activities, particularly given that this was not an exception, but a 
significant hobby that Hahn shared with other positivists.
*
In the nineteenth century, the Austro- Hungarian Empire was not without 
its mesmerists, magicians, spiritualists, and psychical researchers, but there 
was little in the way of formal paranormal investigation societies.112 That is, 
until 1919, in the early days of the Austrian Republic, when the brothers Willi 
(1903– 71) and Rudi (1908– 57) Schneider developed a reputation in the small 
Austrian town of Braunau am Inn, where they impressed visitors with physical 
manifestations such as levitating, emitting a glowing fog, and moving objects 
from a distance.113 The Schneiders ultimately attracted the attention of a 
noted psychical researcher, Baron Albert von Schrenck- Notzing (1862– 1929). 
Schrenck- Notzing was trained as a medical doctor and had begun a career as 
a neurologist before encountering Carl du Prel (discussed in chapter seven) 
and shifting his attentions to psychical research.
Schrenck- Notzing brought the Schneider brothers to Munich for testing, 
and in 1921 and 1922 the brothers demonstrated their powers for a range of 
international visitors and occult investigators, including Ludwig Klages, Al-

The Ghosts of Metaphysics 
261
fred Schuler, and the British ghost hunter Harry Price.114 One of the most 
famous participants in these experiments was the novelist Thomas Mann, 
who published a short monograph testifying to the reality of Willi’s telekinetic 
phenomena, while suggesting that the spirit was a product of the medium’s 
unconscious.115
Against this backdrop, Rudi Schneider was invited to Vienna to demon-
strate his powers in a series of high- profile séances. A pair of physicists— 
Stefan Meyer, director of the Institute for Radium Research, and his assistant 
Karl Przibram— attended several of these sessions in early 1924. Likely they 
were drawn there because of speculation at the time that telekinesis might 
be produced by some hitherto undiscovered form of radiation. According to 
Meyer and Przibram’s later account, they witnessed Rudi levitating objects 
into the air, but became convinced that it was the result of some kind of trick-
ery. They concluded that Rudi must have been somehow slipping his hands 
or his feet out of the restraints and then surreptitiously moving things about.
Unable to catch Rudi in the act of cheating, Meyer and Przibram decided 
to see if they could produce similar effects. They invited a group of their col-
leagues to Meyer’s apartment for a spiritualist séance where Przibram played 
the role of the medium. Meyer and Przibram claimed they were able to fool the 
audience and convincingly reproduce all the levitations and other materializa-
tions made famous by the Schneider brothers. They concluded that Rudi was 
a fake and gave interviews to Viennese newspapers attesting to that effect.116
Not everyone was convinced. Karl Menger (1902– 85), Hans Hahn’s grad-
uate student and one of the younger members of the Vienna Circle, later re-
counted that a number of those in attendance were not fooled into thinking 
physicists had psychical powers so much as amused that “the tall Professor 
Przibram” had under cover of darkness “managed to cover himself with a 
bed sheet and to climb on a chair.”117 As amusing as this might have been, to 
Menger’s peers it seemed to be far from a convincing reproduction of a spir-
itualist séance, much less proof that Rudi Schneider was a fraud. Moreover, 
on scientific grounds, even if Meyer and Przibram had been able to replicate 
the visual effects of levitation, it far from disproved the counterhypothesis that 
psychical powers were real. Indeed, a number of Viennese scientists concluded 
instead that paranormal phenomena needed real research, not silly pranks.
Ultimately, the controversy around the Schneider brothers led toward the 
formation of a paranormal investigation society drawn from the upper ranks 
of the Austrian scientific establishment. This group included the Nobel Prize– 
winning physiologist Julius Wagner- Jauregg; the pioneering theoretical phys-
icist and professor at the University of Vienna Hans Thirring; and two influ-

262 Chapter Nine
ential positivists, Moritz Schlick and Hans Hahn.118 As Menger recalled, they 
were “not convinced that any of the phenomena produced by the mediums 
were genuine; but they were even less sure that all of them were not. They 
believed, rather, that some parapsychological claims might well be justified.”119
In 1927, Thirring and Hahn joined forces with two members of the 
peerage— the parapsychologist and astrologer Zoë, Countess Wassilko von 
Serecki, and the psychoanalyst Alfred, Baron von Winterstein— and together 
they formed the nucleus around which the Austrian Society for Psychical Re-
search (Österreichische Gesellschaft für Psychische Forschung, ASPR) was 
constituted. Thirring was its first president. Although it eventually came to 
include more researchers and paranormal aficionados from across Austria, 
the ASPR did not merely rubber- stamp spirit mediums, but mixed exposing 
frauds with discoveries that they thought provided evidence for real paranor-
mal phenomena.120 In a letter Thirring wrote to Max Eissler in 1964 (cur-
rently in the archives of the University of Vienna), Thirring provided both an 
account of the impetus for the society’s formation and a list of its founders, 
noting that Hans Hahn was a core member of the executive board.121
The investigation of Eleonora Zugun was one of their first cases, and when 
she was brought to Vienna, Eleonora was housed with Countess Wassilko.122 
The paranormal phenomena persisted, and worse, Eleonora began to expe-
rience a new symptom, the appearance of spontaneous abrasions on her skin 
resembling scratches or bite marks. Eleonora claimed that these were caused 
by an invisible devil (Dracu) that also communicated with her via automatic 
writing.123
Wassilko thought the culprit was likely Eleonora’s unconscious and not 
the devil, but she exhaustively documented her experiences with the girl 
and became convinced that real paranormal phenomena were taking place. 
Wassilko suggested, for example, that the movement of objects was a kind of 
telekinesis, produced by what appeared to a “hole in the world,” which she 
proposed might indicate that Eleonora was somehow causing objects to pass 
in and out of “hyperspace.”124 As farfetched as this might sound, the countess 
was thorough in her investigations; she brought Eleonora to be examined in 
clinical settings in Austria, Germany, and England by a range of authorities. 
Eleonora went on to become a famous medium (a silent film of her from 1927 
can even be seen on YouTube today125). Wassilko published her colleagues’ 
observations of the poltergeist alongside her own; in turn, Hahn went on the 
record to confirm the countess’s observations.126 This was not the last case 
they would take on together.

The Ghosts of Metaphysics 
263
*
Given that paranormal research crossed over into the social sphere of the Vi-
enna Circle, it should come as no surprise that several positivists were involved 
in psychical research, and the subject makes a frequent appearance in their 
lectures and published writings. The next few pages will provide some more 
examples of how this issue informed their thinking.
While Moritz Schlick never wrote about his involvement in psychical re-
search, Hans Hahn made little secret of his interest in the paranormal. In-
deed, according to his former students, Hahn often brought the subject up 
in lectures and argued that “in many cases one is dealing with a genuine phe-
nomenon of some kind.”127 Hahn was also intrigued by the possibility that 
extrasensory perception (ESP) might be a real phenomena.128 He continued to 
take part in séances and even encouraged his graduate students to participate 
in paranormal research with him.129 Karl Menger recounted one occasion on 
which Hahn asked him to report on a séance he was unable to attend: the in-
vestigation of a female medium from Graz (perhaps Frieda Weissl). Although 
the details of the session are not relevant to our current concerns, Menger 
recounted her ability to produce a strange, inexplicable knocking and noted 
that his failure to explain it made him uncomfortable.130
Another positivist who was interested in the paranormal was Schlick’s stu-
dent, the junior Vienna Circle member Herbert Feigl, who today is remem-
bered for his contributions to the analysis of probability and to the mind- body 
problem. In “Physicalism, Unity of Science and the Foundations of Psychol-
ogy” (1963), Feigl articulated his version of verification theory, and in it he 
tellingly used the example of someone who claimed “telepathic or clairvoyant 
intuition of distant events which are inaccessible to him through the normal 
channels of sense perception.”131 As Feigl argued, we would be inclined to take 
a clairvoyant’s statements as validated only if they were confirmed via normal 
perceptual channels.
This might seem like an incidental example except for the fact that the 
paranormal crops up later in the same essay, when Feigl acknowledged:
I am inclined to think that the scientific attitude should be very different (and 
perhaps will be very different in the near future) with respect to the phenomena 
of parapsychology. If it were fully established that the phenomena of extrasen-
sory perception, i.e., clairvoyance and telepathy, and perhaps even precogni-
tion and psychokinesis, do not result from experimental or statistical errors . . . 

264 Chapter Nine
then our conception of the basic laws of nature may well have to be revised at 
least in some essential aspects.132
This paragraph gives us a clue as to why the positivists might have been par-
ticularly interested in the paranormal. It was not just to catch frauds, but rather 
came from the realization that if even one parapsychological case were to be 
proved real, it would force a revision of the scientific understanding of the laws 
of nature. Here we might be reminded of the William James, who justified his 
own psychical research by remarking: “If you wish to upset the law that all 
crows are black, you mustn’t seek to show that no crows are; it is enough if 
you prove one single crow to be white.”133
The Austrian- Jewish mathematician Richard von Mises was an additional 
member of the Vienna Circle with a connection to the paranormal. Von Mises 
frequently referred to paranormal phenomena in his writings, and justified 
his interest by noting: “I do not want to defend the occult sciences; I am, 
however, convinced that further unbiased investigation of these phenomena 
by collection and evaluation of old and new evidence, in the usual scientific 
manner, will lead us sooner or later to the discovery of new and important 
relations of which we have as yet no knowledge.”134 As this quote illustrates, 
von Mises, who after fleeing the Nazis became a professor of mathematics at 
Harvard, used his position to advocate on behalf of further research into the 
occult sciences. Similarly, in 1949, von Mises also addressed the American 
Association for the Advancement of Science on the subject of extrasensory 
perception, about whose existence he was cautiously optimistic, but believed 
required more rigorous research.135
One of Hahn’s graduate students developed a significant affinity for para-
normal research: Kurt Gödel, the Austrian mathematician and logician, who 
is famous today for the incompleteness theorem that bears his name. Gödel 
did not attend all the meetings of the Vienna Circle, but he was listed in the 
manifesto as one of its members. As a baptized Lutheran who still identified as 
a theist, Gödel was a bit of an outlier in the group.136 Nevertheless, he shared 
an interest in the occult. According to his friend Georg Kreisel, ghosts and 
demons fascinated Gödel, and his notebooks were full of research into demon-
ology.137 Another friend, Oskar Morgenstern, recorded in his diary in 1940 
his own surprise at Gödel’s belief in “ghosts.”138 Moreover, by the time of his 
death, Gödel’s personal library was filled with books on theosophy, spiritu-
alism, and similar subjects.139 Although I was not able to access the Gödel 
archives, contemporary scholar John Dawson states that Gödel once wrote a 

The Ghosts of Metaphysics 
265
letter to his mother suggesting that the problem with the occult was to “disen-
tangle genuine phenomena” from the fraudulent.140 Dawson also asserts that 
Gödel’s letters reference his belief in precognition and telepathy.141 Finally, 
Dawson claims to have found Gödel’s record of his attendance at a spiritualist 
séance among his papers.142
In sum, we can at least add Gödel to our list of positivists interested in the 
paranormal alongside Hahn, Schlick, von Mises, and Feigl. The last major 
positivist I want to connect to psychical research is Carnap himself.
*
There is a phase of Carnap’s life generally omitted from shorthand biogra-
phies of the philosopher— namely, his participation in a quasi- pagan branch 
of the German Youth Movement (Jugendbewegung).143 In general, the Youth 
Movement— a distant cousin of the American Boy Scouts— was a bourgeois 
back- to- nature movement associated with folk festivals and hiking. Carnap’s 
particular branch of the Youth Movement was a group called the Sera Circle 
(Serakreis), led by the publisher Eugen Diederichs. Although today the pub-
lishing company Diederichs founded is an imprint of Random House, at 
the time it was an important outlet for works about German mysticism and 
Eastern religions. Diederichs was also an avid devotee of Nietzsche, and he 
saw the Youth Movement producing a new culture for the Nietzschean Über-
mensch.144 Under Diederichs’s leadership, the Sera Circle engaged in pagan 
celebrations that included traditional costumes, dancing, leaping over bon-
fires, and ritual hymns.145
Participating in this movement was a formative experience for Carnap. In 
an early draft of his autobiography, Carnap wrote about the Sera Circle; al-
though he ultimately decided to expunge it from the text, it is still available at 
the Carnap archive. In the excised pages, Carnap remarked: “The spirit that 
lived in this movement, which was like a religion without dogmas, remained 
a precious inheritance.”146 It seems Carnap situated his personal spirituality 
in the Sera Circle’s poetic neo- paganism, and as he elaborated, “I often felt 
as perhaps a man might feel who has lived in a strongly religious inspired 
community and then suddenly finds himself isolated in the Diaspora and 
feels himself not strong enough to convert the heathen.”147 Although famous 
as an atheist, Carnap nevertheless held to a kind of secularized paganism of 
his youth to such an extent that he felt it marked him out like a member of a 
diasporic faith.

266 Chapter Nine
Perhaps it was this background that initially drew Carnap to the occult and 
then the paranormal. In a May 11, 1926, entry in Carnap’s unpublished diary, 
he mentioned discussing “occultism” with Thirring and Hahn.148 In his intel-
lectual autobiography, Carnap remarked that this interest in the paranormal 
was one of the things that set him and Hahn apart from Neurath, who (as 
discussed above) described positivism in terms of magic. As Carnap remem-
bered:
[Neurath] reproached Hahn because he was not only theoretically interested, 
as I was, in parapsychological investigations, but took active part in séances. . . . 
Neurath pointed out that such séances served chiefly to strengthen supernat-
uralism and thereby to weaken political progress. We in turn defended the 
right to examine objectively and scientifically all processes or alleged processes 
without regard for the question of whether other people use or misuse the 
results.149
This was not the only person who had issues with Carnap’s investigation of 
the paranormal. According to another of Schlick’s graduate students, Heinrich 
Neider, it was Carnap’s interest in the paranormal that caused his falling- out 
with the world- famous Austrian philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein. As Neider 
remembered: “Wittgenstein and Carnap had just engaged in a very lively dis-
cussion, and Carnap stepped out to make some tea. When Carnap returned he 
found Wittgenstein stomping about visibly angry, saying: ‘Why do you have 
this rubbish?’ Carnap: ‘That is the Schrenck- Notzing.’ Wittgenstein: ‘This 
is the kind of book you have in your library? Do you think I would associate 
with a person who has such books in his library?’ He departed quickly and 
was never seen [around those parts] again.”150 We also have Carnap’s version 
of events from his autobiography:
Another time we touched the topic of parapsychology, and [Wittgenstein] ex-
pressed himself strongly against it. The alleged messages produced in spiritu-
alistic séances, he said, were extremely trivial and silly. I agreed with this, but 
I remarked that nevertheless the question of the existence and explanation of 
the alleged parapsychological phenomena was an important scientific prob-
lem. He was shocked that any reasonable man could have any interest in such 
rubbish.151
This basically accords with Neider’s account, but for Carnap the rejection 
went both ways. There was something about Wittgenstein that bothered him.

The Ghosts of Metaphysics 
267
Earlier, when we were reading Wittgenstein’s book in the Circle, I had errone-
ously believed that his attitude toward metaphysics was similar to ours. I had 
not paid sufficient attention to the statements in his book about the mystical, 
because his feelings and thoughts in this area were too divergent from mine.152
It would appear that Wittgenstein dismissed Carnap as a spiritualist while 
Carnap rejected Wittgenstein for being a mystic. This is another example of 
the interchange of enchantments I have already discussed, in which one para-
normal belief comes at the expense of others.
For the record, Carnap was not the only one who saw Wittgenstein as a 
mystic. Bertrand Russell remarked in a 1919 letter that Wittgenstein “has pene-
trated deep into mystical ways of thought.”153 Russell also described Witt-
genstein as a mystic in the obituary he wrote for his former pupil roughly 
thirty- years later.154 But this should come as no surprise, as in the Tractatus 
Logico- philosophicus, Wittgenstein frequently referred to the mystical, remark-
ing, for example, that “there are, indeed, things that cannot be put into words. 
They make themselves manifest. They are what is mystical.”155
The falling- out between Carnap and Wittgenstein is emblematic of many 
of the conflicts we have seen throughout the book, as each fails to respect 
the other’s interest in the esoteric. This curious doubling in many ways par-
allels the relationship between the Vienna Circle and the Frankfurt School, 
whose antagonisms might appear to be proximate animosity rather than dis-
tant antagonism. On simple demographic grounds, most members of both the 
Frankfurt School and the Vienna Circle were left- leaning, German- speaking 
Jews.156 Hence what later generations have been brought up thinking was an 
epochal conflict between diametrically opposed positivism and critical theory 
looks more like one of the left’s endless internal conflicts.
Although the positivist dispute in German sociology is often remembered 
as a clash between the Frankfurt School and Vienna positivism (with Popper 
standing in the for the positivists), Ralf Dahrendorf has observed that nobody 
in this debate would admit to being positivists; indeed, both sides claimed to 
be overcoming positivism. This led Dahrendorf to suggest that positivism was 
a spectral “third- man” that all sides attacked in absentia.157 Anthony Giddens 
goes a step further, describing the debate as being “like Hamlet without a 
prince.”158 This would seem to suggest a haunting by a specter of positiv-
ist hegemony that never existed or perhaps was rendered hegemonic only 
through sheer absence.

268 Chapter Nine
Co n clu s i o n : T h e  M ag ic  o f  Di s e nch antme nt
I now believe that it would be right to begin my book with remarks about metaphysics 
as a kind of magic (Magie). But in doing this I must not make a case for magic, nor may 
I make fun of it. The depth of magic should be preserved. Indeed, here the elimination 
of magic has itself the character of magic.
 L u dw i g W i t t g e n s t e i n, “Bemerkungen über Frazers Golden Bough,” 1931
In this chapter, I have been arguing against the popular criticisms of the log-
ical positivists, repeated today by both sides of the continental philosophical 
divide. It turns out that the positivist project is more complicated than many 
of us would have thought. One can find in the left wing of the Vienna Circle 
Marxist- inflected political theory, ideological critique, phenomenology, and 
even ethics.159 Likewise, one can find an openness to the possibility of spirits 
and magical knowledge that is hard to square with the way the group has been 
traditionally portrayed.
This chapter has also been aiming to demonstrate what Wittgenstein ob-
served in his private notes on Frazer’s Golden Bough, that “the elimination of 
magic has itself the character of magic.”160 To put this insight into my own 
terms, disenchantment taken to its extreme is hard to distinguish from en-
chantment. Neurath attempted to suggest that magic and positivism share a 
common core, while Carnap and Hahn took spirits and the paranormal se-
riously enough to investigate them— perhaps working to dispel them, but 
perhaps being spellbound all the same. At the very least, this all complicates 
the placement of positivism and mechanism on one side of a divide, and con-
temporary vitalism or neo- Spinozism on the other.
In sum, the Vienna Circle of positivists, despite their subsequent repu-
tation, were profoundly entranced by the paranormal. To be clear, I am not 
arguing that this interest was irrational. Instead, I have been trying to put pres-
sure on the presumed boundaries between rational and irrational, science and 
magic. Moreover, one could also argue that “psychical research” is itself disen-
chanting, but I tend to see it as a bimodal concept like the philosophes’ notion 
of natural magic: both disenchanting and enchanting in different registers. 
The positivists certainly did both. As I have shown, some logical positivists 
had a political commitment to magic. Let this sink in for a second, because 
positivists are not generally supposed to have much of a political project, much 
less magic. All told, the positivists’ project might seem to be crystalized disen-
chantment, but they were haunted by magic and the ghosts of the very meta-
physics they were working to exclude.

C h a p t e r  T e n
The World of Enchantment;  
or, Max Weber at the End of History
While numberless societies, associations, orders, groups, etc., have been founded 
during the last thirty years in all parts of the civilized world, all following some line of 
occult study, yet there is but ONE ancient organization of genuine Mystics. . . . The 
Hermetic Brotherhood of Light. It is a Modern School of Magic.
 T h e o d o r R e u s s , Ordo Templi Orientis Constitution, revised edition, 1917
In August 1917, Theosophists, Freemasons, mystics, and magicians from all 
over Europe made their way to the Monte Verità commune in Ascona, Swit-
zerland, the headquarters of the Hermetic Brotherhood of Light (also known 
as the Ordo Templi Orientis).1 They had been summoned by the order’s 
leader, the Anglo- German opera singer turned sex magician Theodor Reuß 
(1855– 1923), who had organized a ten- day antinationalist occult congress of 
like- minded fellow travelers— one that aimed to heal the ravages of war by 
reaffirming a spiritual community that knew no national distinctions.2 This 
well- attended conference included lectures on theosophy and magic, Masonic 
rituals, performance art, readings of Aleister Crowley’s mystical poetry, and 
even a Gnostic mass.3
Max Weber (1864– 1920) might seem to have lived in a totally different 
world. After all, the pioneering sociologist is famous for his pronouncement: 
“The fate of our times is characterized by rationalization and intellectualiza-
tion and, above all, by the ‘disenchantment of the world.’ ”4 That Weber uttered 
this statement on November 7, 1917, less than three months after the occult 
congress, might imply a deep fissure between academic and magical milieus.
Weber, however, was no stranger to Monte Verità. He knew Ascona well. 
Indeed, he likely came to his famous concept of disenchantment while vaca-
tioning at the neo- pagan commune and after socializing with some of  Reuß’s 
fellow occultists. Weber was at the apex of many of the trends discussed thus 
far in the monograph; he socialized with Kosmikers and was drawn to Chris-
tian mysticism. Hence, the contemporary mytheme of alienation from magic— 

270 Chapter Ten
“the disenchantment of the world”— was likely born of an excess of enchant-
ment, not of its absence. The business of this chapter is to make sense of this 
connection.
*
Weber is generally recognized as one of the master theorists of modernity. 
Even so, there are remarkably diverse interpretations of the central problem-
atic of his project. Was Weber primarily a sober- minded comparative sociol-
ogist aiming to put the human sciences on a sounder footing?5 Was he first 
and foremost a pragmatic political theorist trying to solve the problems of 
democracy and liberalism in modernizing Germany?6 Or was he principally a 
historian of capitalism, mapping its affective registers and social resonances?7 
Was he basically an apologist for nationalism and empire?8 Or was he a quasi- 
outsider intellectual in the model of Nietzsche, Kafka, or Foucault, focused on 
diagnosing the disorders of Western modernity?9 Was Weber predominantly 
a Protestant thinker grappling with the implications of modernization for his 
faith?10 Or was he an abstract philosopher of history, aiming to discover the 
meaning of rationality and rationalization?11 This list is not exhaustive, and 
given the multiplicity of readings, it might seem that Weber’s unfinished and 
often fragmentary corpus is a Rorschach test designed to reflect the reader’s 
own presuppositions.
In this chapter, I wade into the thorny world of Weberian scholarship to 
make a pair of targeted interventions. First, I problematize popular misread-
ings of Weber, and locate “the disenchantment of the world” in the multiple 
forms of rationality that make up his implicit system. Having complicated the 
picture of magic and its relationship to his broader theory of rationalization, 
the open question then involves both the history of disenchantment and the 
inevitability of its trajectory. Did Weber envision himself as standing at the end 
of history? Did he see re- enchantment as a possibility?
The second part of the chapter will answer these questions by exploring 
how Weber came to the myth of disenchantment in the middle of an occult 
revival and what it means that he did so. It will also attempt to make sense of 
his complex, and perhaps ambivalent, relationship to mysticism.
Th e  D i s e n c h an t m e n t  o f  th e  W orl d
The complete disenchantment of the world has only been carried out to its full conclu-
sion [in Puritanism]. But that did not mean freedom from what we are today accustomed 

The World of Enchantment 
271
to call “superstition.” Witch trials also flourished in New England. . . . [The Puritans] 
came to believe all magic to be diabolical.
 M a x W e b e r , Die Wirtschaftsethik der Weltreligionen, 1916
Magic, for example, has been just as systematically “rationalized” as physics.
 M a x  W e b e r ,  Der Sinn der “Wertfreiheit,” 1917
If you come to the “disenchantment of the world” with the presuppositions of 
most contemporary theorists, the quotes above are going to bother you. The 
problem is that for many nonspecialists, disenchantment is understood either 
as a poetical synonym for secularization or modern rationalization; even most 
Weber scholars take the phrase at face value (Die Entzauberung der Welt means 
literally “the de- magic- ing of the world”) and assume that a disenchanted 
world has absolutely no magic in it. The quotes above begin to put pressure 
on these views, because it would seem that disenchantment culminates not in 
the end of religion, but rather within Protestantism (even if it will later come 
to capture religion in turn). Disenchantment also persists alongside belief in 
magic. Witchcraft has been condemned but not eliminated. Moreover, those 
used to seeing rationality and enchantment as opposites will have trouble reck-
oning with how magic can itself be rationalized.
The pages that follow will aim to clarify misunderstandings by rereading 
Weberian disenchantment in the context of his notions of magic and rational-
ization. But first there is another minor confusion I must address. Both special-
ists and nonspecialists often assert that the expression “the disenchantment of 
the world” came to Weber from Friedrich Schiller.12 Weber did indeed read 
Schiller.13 Weber also refers to a “godless mechanism of the world” (entgotteten 
Mechanismus der Welt), which is likely an allusion to Schiller’s “de- deified 
nature.”14 Thus, one can see Weber as a broad inheritor of Schiller’s original 
lament. But “Die Entzauberung der Welt” is not one of Schiller’s phrases. Nei-
ther was Weber the first to use the phrase. It first occurs in 1837 in the writings 
of the neo- Kantian philosopher Jakob Friedrich Fries. Fries suggestively uses 
Entzauberung dieser Welt (disenchantment of this world) in a discussion of 
Balthasar Bekker, De Betoverde Weereld (The bewitched world, 1691). Bekker’s 
title is rendered in German as Bezauberte Welt (literally “enchanted world”), 
and Fries uses disenchantment to describe Bekker’s repudiation of ghosts and 
witches.15 But while the influence of neo- Kantian thought on Weber is well 
known, there is no evidence that he read this particular work.16 Hence, while 
Weber was the lineage of the Schiller’s notion of de- divination, Weber’s dis-
enchantment is doing a different kind of work.

272 Chapter Ten
*
Disenchantment is often mistakenly identified with rationalization as a whole. 
Nonetheless, Weber’s writings suggest that while disenchantment and ratio-
nalization are related, they are not in fact identical.17 Our first step is to clarify 
their relationship. The root of the problem is that for Weber, rationalization 
was a multifaceted process: he once remarked that he aspired to “bring out 
the complexity (Vielseitigkeit) of the only superficially simple concept of the 
‘rational.’ ”18 Weber was particularly interested in disaggregating rationality 
and exploring the quite different modes of thought and action that go under 
that broad heading. Accordingly, he described multiple types of rationality, 
operating in diverse value spheres, according to different cultural logics and 
over the course of multiple historical phases. Although he left some intima-
tions of what he had in mind, he died before he could complete the work of 
systematically relating these components together.
Later scholars have proposed radically divergent readings of Weber’s sys-
tem of rationalization, suggesting everything from sixteen versions of ratio-
nality to arguing that Weber essentially thought rationalization could mean 
anything.19 For our purposes, I adapt the schema put forward by Stephan 
Kalberg, which, while incomplete, has the advantage that it convincingly ex-
trapolates Weber’s typology of social action into a plausible larger system of 
rationality.20 Kalberg divides Weber’s conception of social action into four 
ideal types of rationality and two ideal types of irrationality.21 I will largely  
adapt Kalberg’s broad reconstruction, but not his terminology (see note 
23). I parse Weber’s notion of social orientations into instrumental, value,  
theoretical, and formalized rationality, versus habitual and affectual irratio-
nality.
Weber defined instrumental rationality (Zweckrationalität) in the fol-
lowing: “Action is instrumentally rational (zweckrational) when the end, the 
means, and the secondary results are all rationally taken into account and 
weighed.”22 Although not identical with current rational choice theory, this 
is basically practical ends- means rationality. Weber’s second type of rational 
orientation is what he referred to as value rationality (Wertrationalität), or 
rationality vis- à- vis a particular value or conviction. He stated that the ex-
ample “of pure value- rational orientation would be the actions of persons 
who, regardless of possible cost to themselves, act to put into practice their 
convictions.”23 This is the kind of rational orientation we might associate with 
religious or political convictions.
Theoretical rationality (generally referred to as “intellectual rationality” 

The World of Enchantment 
273
or “intellectualization”) describes a type of rationality directed toward “in-
creasing theoretical mastery of reality by means of increasingly precise and 
abstract concepts.”24 Theoretical rationality is rooted in a “natural rationalistic 
need to conceive of the world as a meaningful cosmos.”25 Accordingly, Weber 
described this type of rationality as originating within religion.26 The core of 
the difference between theoretical and instrumental rationality is that theo-
retical rationality is rooted in an intellectualization process that aims toward 
increasing abstraction, while instrumental rationality is based in pragmatic 
decision- making.
Weber also described the institutionalization of various forms of rationality 
and their incarnation in courts, markets, and other bureaucratic organizations. 
Although Weber did not have a master category for institutional rationality as 
such, we will employ formalized rationality to refer to this general type, which 
he suggested shared a common attempt to determine action based on previous 
procedures and precedents.27 In his discussion of law courts and economic  
markets, Weber specified two subtypes of institutionalized rationality (or origi-
nally rationally oriented actions): formal ( formale) and substantive (materiale)  
rationality.28 Formal rationality is a “quantitative calculation” in terms of profit, 
which when institutionalized leads toward greater uniformity and exchange-
ability. Substantive rationality is an institutionalized incentive toward a par-
ticular value criteria, and in that respect it is an institutionalized form of value 
rationality.29 One might think of substantive rationality as the codification of 
norms that have taken on a logic of their own.
In general, Weber associated formalized rationality with the empty formal-
ism of ritual (perhaps echoing older anti- Catholic or anti-Jewish rhetoric), 
but he also connects it to the calculating thinking of modern bureaucracies 
and markets. Basically, a bureaucrat acts not according to what is morally right 
or pragmatically good, but according to the rulebook or the norm of the in-
stitution. Modern economic markets are similar in Weber’s account because 
they are based on formalized procures and, as within big bureaucracies, the 
individual is insignificant.
Weber argued that forms of rationality can come into conflict. A particular 
course of action might be irrational on instrumentalist grounds, but might 
be perfectly rational from the perspective of an actor’s value orientation. For 
example, it might make sense to lie down in front of a military tank based on 
your convictions, even if it might cost you your life.
Alongside these types of rationality, Weber also referred to two different 
forms of irrationally directed actions. He described habitual irrationality 
as when an “almost automatic reaction to habitual stimuli guide[s] behavior 

274 Chapter Ten
in a course which has been repeatedly followed,” and he noted it slides over 
into various forms of rationality to the degree that it becomes self- reflexive.30 
Moreover, formalized rationality comes closest to habitual irrationality the 
less reflexive it becomes. Finally, Weber mentioned in passing a second type 
of affectual (affektuell) irrationality that refers to emotional reactions that 
are not themselves rooted in a conscious or rational decision.31 Here he is 
deploying an old opposition between emotion and reason that we might dis-
pute today.
Additionally, Weber’s writings suggest some undergirding notions about 
rationalization in general. He described the rationalization of six different 
value spheres— religious, economic, political, aesthetic, erotic, intellectual— in 
terms of their coming increasingly into accord with their own particular ulti-
mate values, means, and ends.32 As a general pattern, rationalization has led 
toward value spheres becoming increasingly autonomous and therefore frag-
mented. He also suggested that different disciplines, professions, and so on 
can be rationalized according to their own internal logics.33 Further, Weber’s 
use of rationalization suggested that it is in general a trend toward standardiza-
tion, consistency, and decreased complexity (or decreased entropy).34 More-
over, Weber implied that all forms of rationality tend to absorb irrationality, in 
that respect liquidating habit, tradition, and emotion into rationalized (or we 
might say, repressed) norms of behavior.
Finally, Weber sometimes described the rationalization of whole cultures, 
famously asking: “Why did not the scientific, the artistic, the political, or the 
economic development [in China] enter upon that path of rationalization 
which is peculiar to the Occident?”35 We’ll discuss the specifically Occidental- 
modern trajectory of rationalization below, but our primary question becomes, 
how do magic and disenchantment fit into this schema?
*
For a variety of reasons, specialists and nonspecialists alike have had difficulty 
getting a handle on Weber’s conception of disenchantment. Part of the issue 
is that they have often taken as given an anachronistic opposition between 
rationality and magic. Although there are some exceptions, as recently as 2014, 
even leading Weber scholars like Peter Ghosh could argue that
for Weber, by contrast, the defining feature of “magic” (if such a thing existed 
at all) was that it formed a conceptual antithesis to rational conduct. . . . We-

The World of Enchantment 
275
ber had no developed idea of magic as such, except as the miscellany of non- 
rational behaviour.36
This is far from the only thinker who has treated Weber’s conception of magic 
in these terms. Much of the discourse around the disenchantment of the world 
assumes an opposition between rationalization and magic. Even Stephen Kal-
berg, whose typology of Weberian rationality has set the gold standard, has 
suggested that Weber saw severing “the bonds of primitive magic” as key to 
the growth of instrumental rationality.37
Nevertheless, the contemporary German sociologist Stefan Breuer has 
demonstrated that magic was not a major category for Weber until late in his 
intellectual career.38 References to magic in the first edition of the Protestant 
Ethic (1904/05) are scant, and it is not until Weber turned his attention to 
researching Asian religions shortly before the First World War that he became 
seriously interested in theorizing enchantment. Moreover, as Johannes Winck-
elmann has observed, Weber began using “disenchantment” as an interpretive 
category for the first time in 1913.39 Taken together, this means that Weber’s 
interest in enchantment and disenchantment roughly coincided. Moreover, 
the timing is important because it broadly overlaps with Weber’s visits to the 
Monte Verità commune. Hence, before we turn to the disenchantment of the 
world, we need to understand Monte Verità.
*
Max Weber spent two significant periods (1913 and 1914) with the Mountain 
of Truth (Monte Verità) community in Ascona, Switzerland. The Mountain 
of Truth was an early prototype for a hippie commune, full of nature people 
(Naturmenschen), and complete with nudity, free love, and vegetarianism. It 
also billed itself as a “nature cure.” In contemporary terms, we might call it 
a holistic spa. It was organized around two charismatic figures, the radical 
psychoanalyst Otto Gross and the poet and nature prophet Gusto Gräser. 
According to one account, “Ascona itself was always full of people experiment-
ing with everything between palm reading and tea- leaf reading to spells and 
séances and Ouija boards.”40 Moreover, Gräser was drawn to Asian religions 
(in particular, Taoism), and other members of the community were practicing 
theosophists who focused their attention on India. Thus, this group may have 
inspired Max Weber’s own attitude toward Eastern religions. Weber spent two 
springs there looking for relaxation and an improvement in his health. From 

276 Chapter Ten
his letters, we know that Weber was not fully taken in by the community, but he 
also respected its idealistic spirit and became friends with various community 
members, including Countess Franziska zu Reventlow.41
Crucially for our purposes, in a letter dating April 4, 1913, Weber told his 
wife, Marianne, that he had just finished Reventlow’s new novel, which he 
praised as “well- written.”42 What is important is not his literary taste, but 
that he had just read Herrn Dames Aufzeichnungen (Notes of Mr. Lady, 1913), 
which if you’ll remember was an exposé of Ludwig Klages and the neo- pagan 
Munich Cosmic Circle (discussed in chapter 8). Strikingly, Herrn Dames often 
referred to the Kosmikers’ belief in magic, even going so far as to give their 
philosophical account of enchantment; specifically, that when “one’s essence 
is completely permeated by the primordial cosmic substance . . . then one is 
made just as powerful and those who are all- powerful can work magic (zau-
bern)”; it also recounted the Kosmikers’ version of disenchantment— namely, 
that Protestant anti- paganism and “the light of reason” had extinguished the 
maternal “blood- light” (Blutleuchte) of magic.43
Weber recognized Herrn Dames a thinly veiled roman à clef depicting real 
people in the Schwabing district of Munich, some of whom he knew (such as 
Stefan George, discussed below).44 This is significant because it would have 
suggested to the sociologist that some contemporary Germans continued to 
believe in magic, and yet saw it challenged by the rationalization of modernity. 
Indeed, Weber began writing about disenchantment at the end of that year, and 
this novelistic depiction of occult Munich was likely an influence.
Although it is unclear if Weber and Klages were acquainted by 1913, Weber 
began reading Klages’s works sometime in that period as well. It is possible 
that Max came to know about Klages through his brother Alfred Weber, be-
cause in 1913 Alfred and Klages were both involved in the Free German Youth 
movement.45 But Max and Klages had many friends in common.46 Later Weber 
even had his handwriting analyzed by Klages, whose readings he thought were 
accurate.47 Above all, they read each other’s work. As noted in a previous  
chapter, the Neo-Pagan philosopher adopted Weber’s “disenchantment of the 
world.” But the conversation went both ways; Weber cited Klages on several 
occasions.48 Weber observed, for example, that Klages’s writings contained 
“very good remarks” on “the peculiar contraction and repression of natural 
life- impulses” brought about by rationalization.49
All told, Monte Verità seems to have left a strong impression on Weber. 
Returning to the community on April 9, 1914, Weber remarked in a letter to 
Marianne:

The World of Enchantment 
277
Now it is time to return ‘home’ [to Ascona], if one can refer so to this world 
full of enchantresses, charm, peril, and the yearning for happiness (Glücks-
begier) . . . I must say: between this beautiful but in that sense “human” world 
based on superficial sensations, [Ascona] was a sort of oasis of purity.50
Here Weber is using “enchantresses” (Zauberweiber) to talk about Ascona 
in words that hint at the inversion of his famous “disenchantment” (Entzau-
berung). Perhaps having been confronted with a community that had turned 
its back on the iron cage of modernity to take refuge in enchantment and mys-
ticism, Weber was struck by it as in some ways a viable alternative. Moreover, it 
may have been this group Weber was discussing in the “Science as Vocation” 
lecture when he said: “It is, however, no humbug but rather something very 
sincere and genuine if some of the youth groups who during recent years have 
quietly grown together give their human community the interpretation of a 
religious, cosmic, or mystical relation, although occasionally perhaps such 
interpretation rests on misunderstanding of self.”51 To be fair, earlier in the 
same lecture, Weber criticized inauthentic religious eclecticism, but in these 
lines at least, he seems to be describing a positive, if somewhat naïve, model of 
utopian enchantment. At the very least, it shows that Weber was no stranger 
to his period’s occult revival.
*
Weber’s “disenchantment of the world” first appeared in print in the article 
“Ueber einige Kategorien der verstehenden Soziologie” (Some categories of 
interpretive sociology, 1913).52 His initial tantalizing reference to disenchant-
ment came as an example of the differences between psychology and sociology. 
Weber was in the process of arguing that actions can be rational for a given 
actor even if they are directed toward an aim that sociologists might not grant 
as rational. As he went on to note:
For instance, action that is oriented to magical notions is subjectively of an 
often much more instrumentally rational character than any non- magical “re-
ligious” conduct, since as the disenchantment of the world increases, religiosity 
is compelled increasingly to adopt subjectively, instrumentally irrational mean-
ings (Sinnbezogenheiten) (for example, of a “conscientious” [Gesinnungshaft] 
or mystical kind).53

278 Chapter Ten
Restated, for Weber, magic is subjectively instrumentally rational. People cast 
spells for specific pragmatic purposes. In an increasingly disenchanted world, 
by contrast, Weber thinks that having foreclosed meaning in nature, religiously 
motivated actors often perform actions that are instrumentally irrational: in 
other words, actions that are directed against their seemingly rational interests, 
but instead invested with subjective meaning rooted in their specific convic-
tion or mystical experiences.
To really understand Weber’s conception of disenchantment, we also need 
to clarify what he meant by magic. He frequently referred to magic and en-
chantment in the context of his later writings on religion, but the closest he 
came to making an explicit definition is in a footnote in the section of Die 
Wirtschaftsethik der Weltreligionen (The economic ethics of the world reli-
gions) dealing with the religions of China. In the relevant section of the text, 
Weber remarks:
A strict separation between what is “enchantment” (Zauber) and what is not is 
impossible in the world of pre- animististic and animistic ideas. Even plowing 
and other everyday achievement- oriented activities were “enchantment” in the 
sense of employing specific “forces” and later “spirits.”54
It appears that enchantment or magic (the German Zauber could mean  
either) was initially rational. Indeed, Weber elsewhere associates magical 
powers with “world- mastery” or “world- domination” (Weltbeherrschung).55 
At the very least, early magic was not different from practical technologies 
except insofar as it was connected to the notion of spirits and pre- animistic 
occult forces.56 That Weber saw a connection between (at least early) enchant-
ment and technology is worth underscoring because multitudes of contempo-
rary theorists think they are contravening Weber when they point to enchant-
ing technology.57 But Weber would not have been surprised by this, especially 
as this passage was not the only place where he theorized the coincidence of 
magic and technology.58
Significantly, Weber provides both his most systematic theorization of 
magic and even charts a whole trajectory of the history of enchantment in 
his incomplete final work, Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft (1922; Economy and 
Society). In brief, here Weber reiterated that magic was originally this- worldly 
instrumentally rational, focused on producing particular ends like starting fires 
and calling rain.59 He cautioned his readers against anachronistically viewing 
the past from the standpoint of the modern view of nature and thereby as-
suming that we “can objectively distinguish in such behaviors those which 

The World of Enchantment 
279
are ‘correct’ from those which are ‘incorrect,’ and then designate the [false] 
attributions of causality as irrational, and the corresponding actions as ‘magic’ 
(Zauberei).”60
Weber thought that early magic was founded on neither irrationality, nor 
a belief in the ability to violate the laws of nature. Instead, as he elaborated, 
belief in magic was rooted in the sense that some objects and people pos-
sesses “extraordinary powers,” often referred to as “ ‘mana,’ ‘orenda,’ and the 
Iranian ‘maga’ (which became ‘magic’), and which we will henceforth call 
‘charisma.’ ”61 Crucially, magic and charisma are equivalent. Charisma, as We-
ber elaborated, can be an attribute of both people and objects, and is either 
claimed for one’s self or bestowed, such as in an act of consecration.62 Given 
that Weber is famous for importing a theory of charisma into sociology, it is 
striking that in this usage, it is primarily a synonym for magic.
The important thing about the reference to “mana” is that this allows We-
ber to describe magic as prior to any notion of spirits or gods.63 Although 
Weber read James Frazer and was likely influenced by his notion of magic, 
this was not a Frazerian point about magic as a cultural practice before the 
appearance of religion.64 Rather, Weber believed that religion and magic both 
initially existed in a pre- animistic phase and that an early process of abstrac-
tion causes people to believe “that there are certain beings concealed ‘behind’ 
the charismatically endowed natural objects, artifacts, animals, or persons, that 
give them their powers. This is belief in spirits. The ‘spirit’ is initially neither 
soul, nor demon, nor god, but something indeterminate, material yet invisible, 
impersonal and yet it is something thought to be possessed of volition.”65 Ac-
cording to Weber, this early idea of spirits then eventually tends to differentiate 
into separate notions of souls, gods, demons, and supernatural powers.66 This 
is a key shift for Weber:
Once the notion of a realm of souls, demons, and gods emerged, which is not 
tangible in the everyday sense, but regularly accessible only through symbols 
and meanings [seen] behind worldly existence . . . this reflected back on the 
meaning of the magical arts. . . . It was assumed that behind objects and events 
there was another more real, spiritual [realm] of which [ordinary life] was only 
a symptom or symbol [and then new types of professionals tried to influence or 
control this in symbolic ways]. . . . Thus a tidal wave of symbolic action buries 
primitive naturalism, with far- reaching consequences.67
To paraphrase, a crucial turning point in history is when humanity begins to 
produce a concept of a spiritual realm full of gods, demons, and dead souls. 

280 Chapter Ten
This transforms the basic orientation toward the natural world, making it sym-
bolic. The magical arts then come to occupy the position of interpretation 
(divination) and manipulation (spells) of this invisible, symbolic world. Later 
magicians and priests will professionalize partially according to whether they 
compel gods or worship them, although Weber noted that this differentiation 
is incomplete.68 But the important thing is that humanity has come to read 
this world as symbolically significant by producing a contrasting other world.
Human cultures eventually then encounter a fork in the road. They can, as 
Weber elaborated elsewhere, cling to their notion of magic as he thinks hap-
pened in China and India. This preserves the culture’s image of the world as a 
meaningful “enchanted garden” (Zaubergarten) but it comes at a cost.69 In part 
this is because Weber thought that over time, magic/charisma gets invested in 
particular institutions (like the Brahmans or the Chinese emperor), which then 
exert a conservative function on the culture that delays its growth.
According to Weber, however, the Occident took a different route— namely 
disenchantment. The history of the West’s rejection of magic is a story that 
Weber sketched many times, but never finished elaborating. One version 
occurs in a famous passage from the second edition of The Protestant Ethic: 
“That great historic process in the development of religions, the disenchant-
ment of the world, which had begun with the old Hebrew prophets and, in 
conjunction with Hellenistic scientific thought, had repudiated all magical 
means to salvation as superstition and sin, came here to its logical conclusion. 
The genuine Puritan even rejected all signs of religious ceremony at the grave 
and buried his nearest and dearest without song or ritual in order that no 
superstition, no trust in the effects of magical and sacramental forces on sal-
vation, should creep in.”70 Paraphrased, instead of producing an entrenched 
magical caste in the Occident, the Hebrew prophets’ demonization of magic 
culminated in the Protestant— and especially Puritan— disenchantment of the 
world.
The claim that Protestants were against magic and superstitious rituals 
seems straightforward enough, but is worth remembering that Weber asserted 
elsewhere that Puritans and Jews did not doubt “the reality of magic,” and 
repeatedly reminded his readers that “witches were also burned in New En-
gland.”71 Moreover, Protestants continued to believe in angels and demons.72 
So it is important to underscore what the “disenchantment of the world” is 
not. It is not the end of belief in magic. It is not the end of belief in some types 
of animating spirits. It is not a new pessimistic mood, nor is it the fragmenta-
tion of social cohesion. It is not the rise of instrumental reason, because magic 
is itself instrumental. It is not yet secularization insofar as disenchantment hap-

The World of Enchantment 
281
pens earlier and is first and foremost internal to religion. It is not the evolution 
of magic into religion, and religion in turn, into science à la Frazer, because 
Weber repeatedly reminds his readers that magic and religion often coincide.73
Many scholars, even sophisticated Weberians, mistake disenchantment 
for the various things I have dismissed above.74 Having rejected these, the 
question becomes: What, then, is disenchantment? Keeping in mind Weber’s 
multiplicities of rationality and his grand history of magic, I will now turn to 
Weber’s more famous passages about disenchantment and give them a fresh 
look.
*
Weber’s main clue in The Protestant Ethic is the reference to the repudia-
tion of the “magical means to salvation.” He continued the above by arguing, 
“There was not only no magical means of attaining the grace of God for those 
to whom God had decided to deny it, but no means whatever.”75 Succinctly 
put, it would seem that alongside the demonization of magic, what ultimately 
disenchanted the world was the Protestant conception of grace— that salvation 
is solely due to the sovereign grace of God (sola gratia). We might think espe-
cially of Calvinist notions of predestination, which suggest that salvation has 
nothing to do with the individual’s “free” will, much less other rituals or sym-
bolic performances. In this account, there is nothing a person can do to change 
God’s mind. The oddity is that Weber reads irresistible grace as the epitome of 
disenchantment. But this was not his only word on disenchantment.
To return to “Science as Vocation” (Wissenschaft als Beruf, 1917) men-
tioned above, Weber’s original topic was career opportunities for students who 
study the sciences; but by the end of his lecture he has strayed rather far from 
this theme. The key passage for our purposes is a moment in the talk when 
Weber began reflecting on the nature of scientific progress and what we have 
been calling intellectual or theoretical rationalization: “Let us first clarify what 
this intellectualist rationalization, created by science and by scientifically ori-
ented technology, means practically. Does it mean that we, today, for instance, 
everyone sitting in this hall, have a greater knowledge of the conditions of life 
under which we exist than has an American Indian or a Hottentot? Hardly. . . . 
The savage knows incomparably more about his tools.”76
Paraphrased, “savages” may not know much about the grand scheme of 
things, but an individual “savage” understands the functioning of all his or 
her culture’s technologies and has mastered all that culture’s knowledge. In a 
parallel passage in the 1913 “Kategorien” essay discussed above, Weber also 

282 Chapter Ten
contrasted savage and civilized knowledge, and argues that civilized people 
are no more subjectively “instrumentally rational” than savages.77 By contrast, 
Western modernity is at the end of a long process of theoretical rationaliza-
tion, meaning that it is impossible for a modern individual to master all our 
culture’s knowledge and technology. Sociologists have long argued that one 
of the central features of modernization has been an increasing differentiation 
of labor. In both his speech and the “Kategorien” essay, Weber amplified this 
theme to describe modernization as a kind of hyper- specialization in which 
we each know proportionally less about the world around us.78
Crucially, “civilized people” have a different attitude toward ignorance 
than Weber’s hypothetical “savage.” Even when they lack knowledge, civilized 
people believe that they could know everything. As Weber put it in his lecture: 
“Unless he is a physicist, one who rides on the streetcar has no idea how the 
car happened to get into motion. And he does not need to know. He is satisfied 
that he may ‘count’ on the behavior of the streetcar, and he orients his conduct 
according to this expectation; but he knows nothing about what it takes to 
produce such a car so that it can move.”79 Modern people may be oblivious to 
even the most basic technology they interact with every day (e.g., how a com-
puter monitor works), but they believe “that if one but wished one could learn 
it at any time.”80 The consequence of this presumption of knowledge is that 
in principle, “there are no mysterious (geheimnisvollen) unpredictable powers 
that come into play, but rather that one can, in principle, master all things by 
calculation. This means that the world is disenchanted.”81
Weber’s main argument about the ascent of theoretical rationality can be 
described dialectically. First, the more society knows, the less the individual 
knows; second, the less the modern individual knows, the more he or she 
thinks someone else knows. In this account we have banished occult forces not 
because the average American knows significantly more about the nature of, 
say, sunspots than people did five hundred years ago. But we are less likely to 
imagine that it is mysterious or magical and more likely to assume that there is a 
scientific explanation, even if we do not know what it is. Basically, moderns are 
less skeptical than primitive “savages,” or perhaps we are more likely to assume 
that the world can be apprehended according to our subjective rationality.
A certain amount of the secondary literature promotes the idea that disen-
chantment means banishing the “mysterious” or a sense of wonder. But the 
parallel passage in the “Kategorien” essay makes no mention of mystery in 
reference to “savage” belief. Instead, Weber referred to the functionally unpre-
dictable “powers that the savage wants to influence through his magician.”82 
The main argument of the essay is also that it is not actual knowledge of the 

The World of Enchantment 
283
world that strips it of its hidden powers, but a subjective sense that the world 
is predictable or rational.
Taken to its fullest extension, intellectualization/theoretical rationalization 
produces a particular conundrum. Weber described this impasse in two key 
passages from different points of his corpus. In Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft, 
Weber argued: “[Theoretical rationality] conceives of the ‘world’ as a prob-
lem of ‘meaning.’ The more intellectualism suppresses the belief in magic and 
hence ‘disenchants’ the operations of the world— so that they lose their mag-
ical meaning and only ‘are’ and ‘happen’ but no longer signify anything— the 
more urgently the demand grows for the world and ‘the orientation toward 
life’ (Lebensführung) to appear ordered in a meaningful and significant way.”83 
Theoretical rationalization is based in the need to make sense of the world, 
and it starts in religion, but having come to apprehend the world as rational, 
it has stripped the world of incalculable magic and thus meaning. This leads 
toward an impasse in which reason is unable to provide an orientation to life. 
As Weber argued in “Zwischenbetrachtung: Stufen und Richtungen der re-
ligiösen Weltablehnung” (Intermediate analysis: Levels and directions in the 
religious rejection of the world, 1916):
Wherever rational, empirical knowledge has effected the disenchantment of the 
world and consequently transformed it into a causal mechanism, it comes into 
tension with the demands of the ethical postulate— that the world is divinely 
ordered, and so somehow an ethically and meaningfully oriented cosmos. For 
the empirical and completely mathematically oriented worldview rejects in 
principle any approach which asks for “meaning” from inner- worldly events. 
With every increase of empirical scientific rationalism, religion is increasingly 
pushed from the rational into the irrational realm.84
In effect, the advance of theoretical rationalization has become grounded in 
the assumption that the world is not directed by God, but is merely a causal 
mechanism. Moreover, Weber long argued against the idea that one could 
draw ethical value from a scientific or calculating enterprise. The result of 
the advancement of the Occidental search for meaning is a sense that ethical 
values are no longer located in the world, and the various areas of society are 
left to their own logics, leading toward a “polytheism” or fragmentation of 
value spheres. Although it might be tempting to see Weber’s complaint as an 
example of a conflict between religion and science, it is worth remembering 
that the Puritans also disenchanted the world by taking the theology of grace 
to its fullest logical extension.

284 Chapter Ten
Strikingly, Weber did not think this direction of Occidental rationality was 
a foregone conclusion. In Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft, he suggested that Asian 
religions and Occidental religions parted ways because Asian thinkers “never 
abandoned the ‘meaningfulness’ of the empirical world.” Instead they saw 
“karmic causality” as a “path toward illumination (Erleuchtung) and accord-
ingly as a unity of ‘knowledge’ and [ethical] action.” By contrast, this route 
was closed to monotheistic religions that encountered the “absolute paradox” 
of “an imperfect world created by a perfect God.”85 Accordingly, for this sort 
of religion, the intellectual attempt to find meaning in the world “led away 
from God, not toward him.” However, Weber concluded this passage not by 
suggesting conversion to Buddhism, but by noting that the closest thing to 
this sort of orientation in the Occidental tradition is “philosophical” forms of 
“Occidental mysticism.”86
*
We will turn to Weber’s notion of mysticism in the next section, but before 
concluding I want to refer to another of Weber’s criticisms of the hypertrophy 
of Western rationalization. If the disenchantment of the world is primarily 
a problem of theoretical rationality, Weber also spent a lot of time thinking 
about the negative consequences of the bureaucratization or overextension of 
formalized rationality.
Weber’s famous condemnation of the “Iron Cage” (stahlhartes Gehäuse, 
literally “steel- hard shell”) is often conflated with his discussion of the dis-
enchantment of the world. One can see why these two concepts have been 
discussed together, especially given passages like this:
No one knows who will live in this cage in the future, or whether at the end of 
this tremendous development entirely new prophets will arise, or there will 
be a great rebirth of old ideas and ideals, or, if neither, mechanized petrifica-
tion, embellished with a sort of convulsive self- importance. For of the last stage 
of this cultural development, it might well be truly said: “Specialists without 
spirit, sensualists without heart; this nullity imagines that it has attained a level 
of civilization never before achieved.”87
Scholars have spent a long time searching for the source of the reference in the 
conclusion to this passage.88 Although Weber is often assumed to be quoting 
Goethe or Nietzsche, I have found an alternate and more plausible source in 
the writings of the economic historian Gustav von Schmoller, who is largely 

The World of Enchantment 
285
remembered today for being on the losing side of the famous Methodenstreit.89 
In Grundriss der allgemeinen volkswirtschaftslehre (Outline of general eco-
nomics, 1900), Schmoller remarked,
For some years, a great technocrat could characterize our haughty time not 
untruthfully by saying: “Sensualists without love and specialists without spirit, 
this nothingness imagines it stands on a height unequaled in the history of 
humanity.” To which it is always possible to answer, all true human happiness 
lies in the balance between drives and ideals, between hopes and the practical 
possibility of satisfaction.90
To be sure, Weber reverses the expression, and there is a slight difference 
in wording.91 Nevertheless, he made reference to this work in Die Stadt 
portion of Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft.92 In the work as a whole, Schmoller 
argued for the capacity of the state to harmonize or balance these competing 
impulses. This quote from Schmoller suggests that Weber was also character-
izing contemporary civilization in terms of an imbalance of drives and ideals, 
although Weber was significantly more pessimistic about the capabilities of 
the state.
Weber’s iron cage would seem to reflect the suppression of irrational life 
impulses. As he discussed elsewhere in The Protestant Ethic: “The great his-
torical significance of Western monasticism . . . [is that it] developed a sys-
tematic method of rational conduct with the purpose of overcoming the status 
naturæ, to free man from the power of irrational impulses and his dependence 
on the world and on nature. It attempted to subject man to the supremacy of a 
purposeful will, to bring his actions under constant self- control with a careful 
consideration of their ethical consequences.”93
Weber described the Puritans channeling this repression of irrational im-
pulses into their daily lives, which became a kind of asceticism in the world, 
expressed in constant toil and labor. He observed that “when asceticism was 
carried out of monastic cells into everyday life, and began to dominate worldly 
morality, it did its part in building the tremendous cosmos of the modern 
economic order.”94 If this sounds familiar, it is probably because Weber 
thought Klages was right: that modern society has alienated humanity from 
our basic life impulses. Moreover, the modern world focuses various forces 
of restraint into conflicting cultural norms and institutionalized in law and 
economic policy. This has resulted in constant, if often unexamined, value 
conflict between individual ethical orientations, norms that have been legally 
formalized, and the various competing demands of the capitalist economy.

286 Chapter Ten
*
In conclusion, it is worth reiterating that Weber described magic as based in the 
pre- animistic belief that some objects and people have special powers. Webe-
rian disenchantment describes a world without ethical foundation, produced 
by the hypertrophy of theoretical rationality that has stripped everything in the 
world of its meaningful specialness. Again, it is worth emphasizing that this 
is a logic that emerges from within religion as a basic impulse to understand 
the world as meaningful. But in the hands of Occidental monotheisms, it runs 
into trouble. On the one side is a predestination that renders ethical action in 
the world irrelevant, and on the other is a scientific reduction of the world to 
causal mechanism that similarly undercuts the grounding for ethical action. 
In both cases, the world is no longer symbolic and nothing is truly special.
To put this in more systematic terms, Weber’s disenchantment of the world, 
as a characterization of popular mentality, had four levels:
1. Metaphysical realism (the belief that the world is and does not represent)
2. Ontological homogeneity (the belief that there are no truly extramundane 
objects or people)
3. Ethical predeterminism (that God has already decided each individual’s 
soteriological fate) or value nihilism (the excision of value from the world 
of fact)
4. Epistemic overconfidence (the belief that everything can be known by means 
of intellectualization/theoretical rationality)95
Weber also described a related conundrum: the iron cage of modernity. As 
mentioned above, this too had religious roots, representing the transforma-
tion of Puritan toil into capitalist labor. Nonetheless, the iron cage would not 
necessarily be shattered by a return of magic.96 For instance, in his writings 
on China, Weber described Confucian governance as magical, but no less bu-
reaucratic.97
I discuss what I think Weber imagined as a solution in the next section, but 
the majority of scholars do not think that Weber had much of a positive coun-
terproject.98 To be sure, a few old- fashioned Whig Weberians may think of him 
reveling in the triumph of rationalization, but it seems like quite a stretch to im-
pose on a thinker whose characterization of modernity is so evocative of loss. 
Also, some scholars have read into Weber a cyclical return of re- enchantment, 
but there is scant evidence in his writings (discussed below). From the vantage 

The World of Enchantment 
287
of the Jena Romantics, the oddity of Weberian disenchantment is that it is an 
incomplete spiral. There are intimations of a return that Weber never com-
pletely articulated, leaving it to others to fill in the gaps. It is here that a turn 
toward Weber’s unrecognized engagement with mysticism is in order.
Web e r  t h e  M y st i c  an d  t he  Re turn  
f ro m  t h e  G o d  E c l i ps e
The unity of the primitive world image in which everything was concrete magic, has 
tended to split— on one side, into a rational cognition and rational mastery of nature; 
on the other, into “mystical” experiences. The ineffable content of such experiences is 
the only possible “otherworld” alongside the de- deified (entgotteten) mechanism of the 
world.
 M a x W e b e r ,  Die Wirtschaftsethik der Weltreligionen, 1916
Scholars of religion are used to thinking of Max Weber as a secular sociologist 
with next to no personal faith. The quote that best exemplifies this aspect of 
Weber is taken from a letter Weber sent to Ferdinand Tönnies on February 19, 
1909: “It is true that I am absolutely unmusical religiously and have no need 
or ability to erect any psychic edifices of a religious character within me. But 
a thorough self- examination has told me that I am neither antireligious nor 
irreligious.”99 Reading this quote, you might imagine Weber to be a man tone- 
deaf to religion, who nevertheless is not antireligious. This is the restrained 
and sensible Weber promoted by Talcott Parsons and a whole senior gener-
ation of sociologists. It is a portrait that has its roots in the biography written 
by Max’s widow, Marianne Weber (1870– 1954), Max Weber: Ein Lebensbild 
(1926), which has until recently been the single overriding source for Weber’s 
life, and which quoted the letter above. While a number of intellectual and 
political biographies have been written since, Max Weber’s personal life until 
recently had been largely unexplored.100 This is primarily because Weber’s 
archive has been closely guarded by the family trust, which only slowly allowed 
the publication of edited versions of Weber’s works, lectures, and letters— a 
project that is still incomplete.
In this section, I aim to revise the old portrait of Max Weber. This is pos-
sible because we have now have to access sources outside of Marianne’s biog-
raphy: the reminiscences of his friends and family; a new biography Joachim 
Radkau’s Max Weber: Die Leidenschaft des Denkens (Max Weber: The passion 
of thought), based on unprecedented access to Weber’s archives; and more 

288 Chapter Ten
important, in 2012 the Max Weber- Gesamtausgabe finally finished publishing 
its edition of Weber’s letters.101 The Weber that appears in these sources was 
far from a value- free scientist- ascetic, and we can now recover his intense grap-
pling with religious issues and even his flirtations with mysticism.
*
Returning to the oft- quoted letter addressing Weber’s religious “unmusical-
ity” will help us begin unraveling the classical portrayal. The very next sen-
tence of his letter to Tönnies— omitted from Marianne’s Max Weber— Weber 
added, “In this respect I see myself as a cripple, as a mutilated man whose 
inner destiny is to have to confess this [unmusicality] honestly.”102 Here he 
is expressing not a restrained neutrality toward all things religious, but an 
internal conflict. This is even clearer in the follow- up letter Weber wrote to 
Tönnies less than two weeks later (March 2, 1909):
Numerous problems of cultural history an outsider cannot [fathom], no matter 
their amount of detailed knowledge, especially once you get to the problems 
of the historical meaning of mysticism. There, and only there, do I have the 
impression that . . . I must experience these psychological states to understand 
their consequences. I have to confess this even thought I myself am religiously 
“unmusical.”103
It seems that what Weber meant by his unmusicality is that he has never had a 
mystical experience, but he also feels that this makes him spiritually “crippled” 
because he would like to have such an experience if only to understand the 
internal meaning of mysticism. Weber later wrote about mystical experiences 
and did so in detail.104 Indeed, most of Weber’s writings on mysticism postdate 
this letter. This has led Joachim Radkau to argue that Weber must have had a 
mystical experience himself.105
I address what Weber meant by “mysticism” below, but first I will examine 
evidence that he later saw himself as a mystic. Even Marianne reproduced a 
note in which Weber wrote to a young colleague, “To me the limit of ‘con-
fessing’ is where things are involved that are ‘sacred,’ ” they belong “within 
a circle of people who are personally very close to one another,” and adding 
that “only a prophet or saint . . . is allowed to act differently.”106 Although 
Marianne located this quote alongside Max’s rejection of any attempt to publi-
cally “awaken feelings of religious community,” this suggests that he saw some 

The World of Enchantment 
289
things as sacred and believed that they needed to be kept inside the circle of 
close friends and family.
It is from these circles that we have the most evidence of Weber’s mysticism. 
Max Weber’s friend and colleague Karl Jaspers described Weber’s series of 
emotional breakdowns had from 1897 to 1900 that ultimately let to his resig-
nation from his teaching post. While many scholars suggest that this emotional 
crisis was triggered by the death of Weber’s father, it was Jaspers’s impression 
that Weber had undergone a profound spiritual crisis, following an illness 
during which he came to obsess on the existence of God.107
In later reminiscences, Weber’s nephew Eduard Baumgarten described his 
uncle’s religious life in terms of a grand sense of heroic destiny or fate (Schick-
sal).108 Even more important, Baumgarten reported a conversation between 
Max and Marianne, which ran as follows:
[Max]: Tell me, can you imagine yourself as a mystic?
[Marianne]: That is certainly the last thing I could imagine of myself. Can 
you imagine it of yourself, then?
[Max]: It might be that I am one. . . . It is as if I could (and would) just as well 
withdraw myself entirely from everything.109
This dialogue is telling because throughout his work, Max Weber would de-
scribe mysticism in terms of a contemplative withdrawal from the world. But 
it is also far from conclusive.
In another set of reminiscences, first published in 1963, however, Weber’s 
friend and colleague Paul Honigsheim recalled that Weber’s personal religion 
was rooted in his ongoing conversation with God.110 As befitting this proxim-
ity to the divine, Honigsheim thought that Weber considered himself to be a 
mystic and thus he “had a feel for mysticism” and was infuriated by what he 
saw as sham or inauthentic mysticism.111 This is far from the unmusicality 
suggested by the original letter to Tönnies.
These scattered reminiscences are not conclusive evidence that Weber 
thought of himself as a mystic, but they suggest that he at least flirted with 
the idea. This is important because the frequent references to “mysticism” in 
Weber’s published corpus are generally read as pejorative, but if he himself 
was even somewhat sympathetic to mysticism, they suggest instead (as I argue 
below) that he saw mysticism as a potential way out of disenchantment. Nor 
was his time in Ascona his only encounter with mystics firsthand, as the next 
pages will explore.

290 Chapter Ten
Weber in Occult Germany: 
Stefan George
We are still very much under the spell of [Stefan George,] who conceives of his poetic 
profession as a prophet’s office.
 M a r i a n n e  W e b e r , Max Weber: Ein Lebensbild, 1926
A people is dead when its gods are dead.
 S t e fa n G e o r g e , “Der Krieg,” 1917
We have already encountered the German poet, mystic, and prophet Stefan 
George (1868– 1933) in chapter 8 as one of the Kosmikers. Indeed, he is today 
the most famous member of that group. George is remembered as an influential 
poet who had a role in the Conservative Revolutionary movement that sprang 
up in Germany in the wake of the First World War.112 In his own day, George 
was a significant cultural force, developing a tight inner circle of followers who 
revered him as a master and even as a prophet. This George Circle was drawn 
from the German academic and artistic elite, including the historian Friedrich 
Wilhelm Wolters, the wealthy industrialist Robert Boehringer, and influential 
German- Jewish scholars and artists such as Friedrich Gundolf, Karl Wolf-
skehl, and Ernst Kantorowicz.113 For a time, George was a member of Klages’s 
Cosmic Circle, or perhaps more accurately, their circles merged for a while 
until struggles over vision and leadership ultimately caused them to separate.
The George Circle is relevant to our concerns because, as contempo-
rary sociologist Wolf Lepenies has elaborated, it had an outsized influence 
on the early history of German sociology. For instance, Georg Simmel often 
described his own work as a sociological parallel to George’s poetry.114 In-
deed, according to contemporaries, Simmel was sufficiently enthralled by the 
movement that he even adopted George’s distinctive style of dress.115 When 
Talcott Parsons was in Germany, he also studied sociology under a member of 
the George Circle.116 Not to mention George’s influence on less well- known 
social scientists (e.g.. Kurt Breysig and Edgar Salin).117 Given that these were 
Max Weber’s friends and colleagues, it is no surprise that Weber and George 
eventually came into contact.
One clue to the George Circle can be found in their references to their 
project as “Geheimes Deutschland” (Occult or Secret Germany).118 For George 
and company, “Occult Germany” was a visionary and mystical political order, 
which lay hidden beneath the surface of mundane Germany.119 Succinctly put, 
they were trying to blend artistic, political, and religious registers to imagine 

The World of Enchantment 
291
an alternate “German spirit” heavily tinged with a language of mystical com-
munion and their version of neo- paganism. Although perhaps more artistic 
and less magical than the Munich Kosmikers, it is clear that the George Circle 
represented a similar nexus of enchantment.
An example of the group’s project can be seen in George’s eulogy for 
Hölderlin, in which he might just have easily been describing his vision of him-
self: “Those to whom the era of enlightenment had bequeathed a feeling for 
nature and a love of reason, called him a stranger on earth, forgetting that their 
much vaunted experience is vain and superfluous for one who has a covenant 
with the gods and with Destiny. . . . Not that his mystic and volcanic rhythms 
are intended as a model for the apprentice to poetry— more is at stake! . . . His 
unambiguous predictions which cannot be pried apart make him the pivot of 
Germany’s immediate future and the prophet of a new god.”120 The themes 
in this passage— a suspicion of reason and embrace of destiny, mysticism, and 
a polytheistic sense of prophecy— were all central to George’s project. It was 
a re- enchantment of the sort that might have appealed to Hölderlin and his 
fellows. Indeed, the idea that aestheticism could serve as a fortification against 
modernity was a common theme in the George Circle.121
In Marianne’s biography, she discussed Weber’s encounter with George in 
some detail. He had originally encountered George’s poetry in the 1890s, but 
it had not left much of an impression on him. But later, after his nervous break-
down and ensuing depression, Marianne recounted that he “opened secret 
chambers of his soul that had previously been closed,” which led to an ap-
preciation of George’s poetry.122 In 1909, Weber met Gundolf, George’s main 
disciple, and the two quickly became friends.123 Weber became fascinated with 
the figure of George and avidly devoured his writings. From his side, Gundolf 
often described Max (and his brother Alfred) Weber as fellow travelers, writing 
to George in a letter: “Of all the professors, the two Webers seem to me to have 
felt most a sense of the deeper life.”124 Moreover, George’s disciples praised 
Weber’s Protestant Ethic for providing “evidence for the mechanizing effects 
of Protestantism,” and suggested both movements had common cause in their 
opposition to “rationalism, Protestantism, and capitalism.”125
But Weber was not without his criticisms of George’s project and, accord-
ing to Marianne, remarked in 1910:
It is not easy to stop discussing a phenomenon that has aspects of real great-
ness like that of Stefan George. . . . And it seems to me that the only remain-
ing positive goal is the striving for self- deification (Selbstvergottung), for the 
immediate enjoyment of the divine in his own soul. The path to this is either 

292 Chapter Ten
through ecstatic rapture or through contemplative mysticism. George and his 
school has, it seems to me, chosen the first path . . . but this path— and this is 
fatality— never leads to a mystical experience.126
Weber was admitting his fascination with George’s “real greatness,” even as 
he was not without his criticism. This passage is important for our purposes 
because Weber referred to a mystical experience of being filled with divinity, 
and then at the same time rejected “ecstatic rapture” as a route to it, suggesting 
that “contemplative mysticism” is a better path. Moreover, this was all before 
having encountered George in person.
According to Marianne, when Max Weber and Stefan George finally met 
later that year, Max found that his reservations were largely unwarranted, and 
while uninterested in becoming a follower, he found George to be a kindred 
spirit.127 They met several more times over the following two years, and while 
they disagreed about many things— including the First World War— they 
seemed to have much in common.128 Although Marianne noted that they lost 
touch with George, it seems that Weber kept up with George’s poetry, and even 
years later he liked to recite it to guests.129
We also have another version of the encounter from George’s disciple Frie-
drich Wolters. According to this account, George thought that Weber had 
a “great force” of character and praised his intelligence.130 In the occultists’ 
interpretation:
The main oppositional forces, which Max Weber saw in effect in human 
history, were magic and knowledge. The realm of magic and charismatic en-
chantment (Bezauberung) achieved its aim through the means of illumination 
(Erleuchtung). . . . In contrast the realm of mental cognition achieved its aims 
through the means of [superficial] understanding (Verstand). . . . [But these 
two realms had become separated] because mankind had followed the path of 
logical disenchantment of the world (Entzauberung der Welt) through science 
and transformed [the world] into a causal mechanism.131
While they agreed with this sentiment, according to Wolters, the end result 
was that while the Weber was trapped, unable to reconcile these competing 
historical forces, his master George had found the way out. He was unable 
to lead Weber there because Weber had rejected George’s charisma and ul-
timately was too much of a Protestant to understand George’s paganism.132
But Weber may have been closer to this understanding than George and 
Wolters imagined. Indeed, it was in Weber’s encounter with George that he 

The World of Enchantment 
293
first began to theorize charisma and its connection to magic and mysticism. 
Weber first wrote about “charisma” in a letter about George to his student Dora 
Jellinek.133 Even in his published writings about charisma, Weber later made 
reference to George and his circle.134 Moreover, there are hints that Weber 
had something in mind as a way to reconcile these contradictory impulses— 
namely, mysticism.
Even if Max Weber’s personal religiosity is discounted, by attending to 
references to “mysticism,” one can find another thread through Weber’s work 
that connects a number of his major conceptual formations. Mysticism will 
turn out to be not an archaism for Weber, but one of the remaining possibilities 
for religion in the face of the disenchantment of modernity.
Mysticism against Mechanism
References to “mysticism” appear in Max Weber’s earliest writings on religion. 
Mysticism is already present in the first edition of The Protestant Ethic and 
the Spirit of Capitalism, which was published initially as articles in 1904 and 
1905. This text was influenced in part by a regular discussion group called 
the Eranos Circle, founded in Heidelberg in February 1904 by the Protestant 
theologian Gustav Adolf Deissmann. This group is not to be confused with the 
later Eranos Circle established in the 1930s at the Mountain of Truth in Ascona 
(frequented by C. G. Jung and Gershom Scholem), but it may be its distant 
ancestor.135 The earlier group had also focused on the study of religious peren-
nialism, including a positively valenced mysticism and Eastern religion, and 
among its regular participants were Ernst Troeltsch, Max Weber, and Weber’s 
brother Alfred Weber.136 Incidentally, Troeltsch was another scholar of religion 
who not only wrote on mysticism, but— as he confessed to his student Gertrud 
von Le Fort— was also himself a mystic in the model of Jakob Böhme.137 Given 
that most of Weber’s work prior to this discussion group was focused on eco-
nomic history, it is no surprise that like Troeltsch and company, Weber came 
to understand mysticism as cross- cultural phenomenon based in a common 
human experience.138
The main problematic of The Protestant Ethic was an attempt to figure 
out how modern capitalism came to have its particular character or spirit. 
To do so, Weber traced the influence of the “religious forces” unleashed by 
the Protestant Reformation on particular “concrete aspects of capitalist cul-
ture,” which were born in the Occident and later extended over the globe.139 
Importantly, the first edition lacked the discussion of “the disenchantment of 
the world,” which was inserted later and has come to dominate subsequent 

294 Chapter Ten
readings of the work in terms of Protestant (and particularly Calvinist) ra-
tionalization. Compressing some of the nuance out of Weber’s sophisticated 
argument, the main thrust of the first edition was that the character of modern  
capitalism emerged in two moments: with the birth of a notion of a calling 
or vocation, and its subsequent transformation by Calvinists into a kind of 
worldly asceticism. In brief, for the contemporary version of capitalism to take 
hold, people had to be convinced to dedicate their lives to a profession and to 
practice salvation by way of savings.
For our purposes, The Protestant Ethic is relevant because Weber read the 
early Protestant Reformation and the notion of the calling in terms of mysti-
cism. As he put it in the text:
The highest religious experience which the Lutheran faith strives to attain, 
especially as it developed in the course of the seventeenth century, is the unio 
mystica with the deity. As the name itself, which is unknown to the Reformed 
faith in this form, suggests, it is a feeling of actual absorption in the deity, that 
of a real entrance of the divine into the soul of the believer. It is qualitatively 
similar to the aim of the contemplation of the German mystics and is character-
ized by its passive search for the fulfillment of the yearning for rest in God.140
This passage gives us a sense of what Weber meant by “mysticism,” or at least, 
mystical union: an experience of “the divine entering into the soul of the be-
liever.” While granting that the terminology of mystical union is unknown 
to the Lutheran confession, Weber nevertheless argued that by this period 
in Protestant history, it has become the highest experience of God possible. 
Moreover, as he argued elsewhere in the text, “mystical” experience is the pin-
nacle of religious experience.141
In a footnote to this passage in the first edition, Weber noted that “mystic 
contemplation and a rational attitude toward the calling are not in themselves 
mutually contradictory.”142 The compatibility between mysticism and rational 
attitudes is a theme Weber amplified in the second edition. We’ll discuss that 
momentarily, but the point Weber subsequently elaborated is that the “calling” 
had its true origins in German mysticism. One of the typical criticisms of The 
Protestant Ethic is that Weber gives too much weight to Luther. But this is only 
on the surface level of the text, the argument at its most superficial reading. If 
we examine the asides and especially the footnotes, we find that the author of 
the calling was not Luther but a particular mystic of great personal interest to 
Weber, Johannes Tauler (1300– 61).
To explain, “the calling” (Beruf) went from meaning “a task set by God” 

The World of Enchantment 
295
to being the standard name for one’s profession or livelihood.143 The term is 
therefore a key notion in Weber’s works, occurring for instance in his famous 
vocation (Beruf) lectures. In The Protestant Ethic, Weber largely argued for the 
importance of Luther for popularizing the notion of a this- worldly calling. But 
as Weber put it in an important footnote: “The idea [of the calling] is found 
before Luther in Tauler, who holds the spiritual and the worldly Ruf (call) 
to be in principle of equal value.”144 This notion of worldly (as opposed to 
other- worldly or inner- worldly) mysticism is one that will come to be of par-
ticular interest to Weber, and here he is associating it with the mystic Tauler. 
The closest that Weber came to making this point in the body of the text is 
when he stated:
In this Lutheran form the idea of a calling had to a considerable extent been 
anticipated by the German mystics. Especially in Tauler’s equalization of the 
values of religious and worldly occupations, and the decline in valuation of the 
traditional forms of ascetic practices on account of the decisive significance 
of the ecstatic- contemplative absorption of the divine spirit by the soul. To a 
certain extent Lutheranism means a step backward from the mystics, in so far 
as Luther, and still more his Church, had, as compared with the mystics, partly 
undermined the psychological foundations for a rational ethics.145
Here Weber is describing Luther as a step back from the mystics’ calling.146 We-
ber was likely alluding to the concept of salvation by grace (discussed above), 
which he thought in some respect renders action in this world meaningless. 
What fits much better is Tauler’s concept of “vocation,” which encourages 
one to dedicate one’s heart toward God and engage in a “poverty” of the soul, 
instead of a literal poverty of the flesh.147 Nevertheless, Weber went to some 
length in the pages to follow to discuss how, having given birth to the notion 
of a calling, the mysticism (of Luther or Tauler) was effectively suppressed by 
a Calvinism that allowed for a practical, this- worldly religiosity to come to the 
fore. Although this argument is never made explicitly, we might see the whole 
narrative of The Protestant Ethic as charting the gradual domestication and 
eventual rationalization of the original spirit of mysticism.
It might appear that after providing the model of unio mystica as the calling, 
the mystic no longer has any place in the modern world and is fated to vanish 
like the magician or archaic prophet. But in Weber’s later works, there are 
signs that mysticism began to emerge as both source and paradoxical counter 
weight to rationalization.
At the very least, as Hans Kippenberg has argued, when Weber returned to 

296 Chapter Ten
rewriting The Protestant Ethic with his concept of disenchantment in hand, 
he was led to reevaluate his understanding toward mysticism, shifting it from 
a mere “residual category” to a living possibility comparable to asceticism.148 
Indeed, the reading of Protestantism in mystical terms is further reinforced 
in the second edition, when Weber built on his previous observation to point 
out that the mystical and rational impulses are not fully opposed: “Now the 
history of philosophy shows that religious belief which is primarily mystical 
may very well be compatible with a pronounced sense of reality in the field of 
empirical fact. . . . Furthermore, mysticism may indirectly even further the in-
terests of rational conduct.”149 Here we can see Weber working to suture magic 
and rationality; or in Wolters’s conception, it might suggest that the realms of 
magic and knowledge intersect in the realm of mysticism. There are clues to 
the redemptive function of mysticism in other moments in Weber’s writings.
In one of the most systematic reconstructions of Weber’s concept of mys-
ticism, the contemporary sociologist Volkhard Krech has demonstrated the 
importance of this concept in Weber’s religious system.150 Krech notes that 
mysticism functions in different ways in Weber’s sociological typology and in 
his historical description of the development of religion.151 In sociological sec-
tions of Weber’s Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft (1922), the mystic is a contrasting 
type to the ascetic, but while the ascetic is inner- worldly or world- denying, 
the mystic is world- fleeing.152 Mysticism is described as a kind of passive es-
capism, directed toward inner illumination (Erleuchtung).153
In the same text’s account of religious history, however, Weber described 
the mystic as a cousin of the mystagogue (the leader of initiatory rites and ec-
static rituals). Both traditions, for Weber, are based in the idea of salvation as 
a union with the Godhead and hence are rooted in the individual intellectual 
need for redemption.154 But while these are distinct figures with regard to their 
focus on contemplation and asceticism, for Weber the mystic can be possessed 
by the deity in such a way as to become the medium of revelation and in that 
sense take on the functions of a magician, mystagogue, or prophet.155 Likewise, 
the mystic might seem to be a fulcrum figure capable of reviving a sense of con-
nection to the divine and moving from passivity into action.156 In sum, if self- 
deification is the ideal, then the mystagogue is the paramount type of mystic.
We can see evidence for this throughout Weber’s corpus where disenchant-
ment and mysticism are often juxtaposed; for example, in the passage from Die 
Wirtschaftsethik der Weltreligionen used as an epigraph: “The unity of the 
primitive world image in which everything was concrete magic, has tended 
to split— on one side, into a rational cognition and rational mastery of nature; 
on the other, into ‘mystical’ experiences. The ineffable content of such expe-

The World of Enchantment 
297
riences is the only possible ‘otherworld’ alongside the de- deified (entgotteten) 
mechanism of the world.”157 Here it would seem the otherworld of mystical ex-
perience is the only site for values that have not been stripped from this world. 
In the famous lines of his Munich speech: “Precisely the ultimate and most 
sublime values have retreated from public life either into the transcendental 
realm of mystic life or into the brotherliness of direct and personal human 
relations.”158 Although it would take a whole monograph to finish elaborating 
the full structure of Weber’s project, if one grants that some forms of mysticism 
are positive for Weber, one can see him working toward a set of oppositions: 
on one side, the alienation produced by bureaucracy, routinization, intellectual 
hyper- specialization; and on the other side, the potentially (but not neces-
sarily) redemptive charisma, mysticism, and authentic prophecy. This Weber 
sounds more like Ludwig Klages than readers of either thinker would expect.
*
Weber argued that science did not produce values and that social scientists 
should steer toward value neutrality themselves. Building on Hume’s famous 
is– ought distinction, Weber showed that the more we know of is, the less room 
there is for the ought. Put differently, greater knowledge of being means there 
is less room for us to locate ethics. It might seem therefore that there is no 
way to return value to a mechanized cosmos. It is clear that Weber believed 
that ethical ends cannot be determined on the basis of rationality. This might 
suggest a certain fatalism, as though he were looking at the end of history itself 
and imagining an inescapable unfolding of rationalization. But I think this is 
a mistaken reading.
I suggest instead that Weber sometimes imagined a way out of this impasse 
via a kind mystical experience that allows for a retrieval of values outside the 
frame of the purely rational. The route back from a world that has been de- 
deified might appear to be self- deification. But this is a seemingly lost path 
in the Occident, as Weber argued: “The redemptive method that was thus 
the path of self- deification and genuine mystical experience of the divine was 
foreclosed as blasphemous deification of the creaturely, and accordingly the 
final pantheistic consequences [of this genuine mysticism] were declared het-
erodox.”159 In effect, by way of self- deification or a nonordinary experience of 
oneness with the divine, it might appear that one could forge a new pantheistic 
prophecy. The world might be made meaningful and divine again. Weber was 
critical of those who went falsely in search of mystical experience, but he did 
seem to think that one might still find them. Furthermore, with mystical ex-

298 Chapter Ten
perience as the key, a leader could tap into charisma (think gift of charismata) 
and prophecy and in so doing escape the chains of bureaucracy and rational-
ization (at least before routinization set in).
Mysticism seems to be both the distant progenitor of capitalist modernity 
and perhaps one of its last remaining options. A person can still choose the 
contemplative life of transcendence pursued individually and on a mystical 
level. The mystic does not seem to be vanishing in modernity; if anything, 
it seems to be one of the positions suggested by the current age. We might 
imagine that for Weber, mysticism is the last route to access the transcendent 
God expelled by reason.
In my reading, this is not about cycles of disenchantment and re- 
enchantment. Weber never uses the term re- enchantment. He does remark 
in the “Science as Vocation” lecture that “only the bearing of man has been 
disenchanted” and that “we live as did the ancients when their world was not 
yet disenchanted of its gods and demons, only we live in a different sense. . . . 
As everybody sacrificed to the gods of his city, so do we still nowadays.”160 But 
in the parallel writings to this speech (such as the Kategorien essay that largely 
covers the same ground), these disenchanted gods are not mentioned. Indeed, 
the most straightforward interpretation of them is in the context of the First 
World War, unfolding at that moment. These gods are just the nation- states 
warring with each other, calling on us to sacrifice ourselves for nations instead 
of cities. So it might look as though the old unities and mysteries of primitive 
magic are gone for good. But if we read Weber as a Romantic in the mode of 
Schiller, what he was looking for was a higher- order synthesis, a return of 
enchantment or value in a higher key.161 This would be nothing less than the 
birth of a new religion.162
Co n clus io n : D is e n c h an t m e nt Di s e nch ante d
Max Weber knew that many of his contemporaries believed in magic. Even if 
he had never met Stefan George, read Reventlow’s novel, or gone to Ascona, 
Weber would have had only to open a German newspaper to see evidence of 
popular belief in bibliomancy (“Zauberbibel und Wünschelrute,” February 9, 
1913), witches (“Die Hexe im Backofen,” June 26, 1913), spiritualism and angels 
(“Die Engel von Mons,” August 15, 1916).163 It would have been hard for him 
to imagine that in Europe belief in magic had vanished completely.
Many scholars have argued that what Weber had in mind with “the dis-
enchantment of the world” was a culture in which a sense of mystery and 
wonder had vanished. This interpretation is plausible insofar as Weber made 

The World of Enchantment 
299
one statement to that effect in his most oft- quoted lecture (even if it is not 
emphasized in those terms in the essay that parallels the lecture). This version 
of disenchantment might still allow for the claim that it emerges from the very 
logic of religious impulses and that banishing a sense of mystery is not the 
same thing as understanding. As an account of popular epistemology, this may 
be plausible but has obvious shortcomings.
This reading of Weber does not square well with what we know of Euro-
pean history. As far as we can reconstruct, medieval European peasants did 
not generally think of the world as mysterious. They understood their trades 
and tools, and insofar as they needed an explanation, they could turn to their 
priests for reassurance that the cosmos functioned according to God’s plan 
and any seeming mystery was his will. Moreover, when we look toward ex-
tant European texts of magic, they often provide explanations for the way the 
world works and techniques for the control of the world. So it is rather hard to 
imagine “magic” in these sources as either irrational or steeped in mystery.164
One would also think that according to the model, as things became less 
comprehensible, they would become more magical. If Weberian magic stood 
for the unknown, the mysterious, the unpredictable, then we seem to have 
sidestepped disenchantment, since it would seem that the more complex our 
common theoretical knowledge gets, the more abstract and more disenchanted 
things get. Read another way, we might take it to mean that magic is really 
equivalent to skepticism (Agrippa would make a fine illustration). But if so, 
then we might have Hume, Derrida, or even Kant (see chapter 7) to blame for 
inadvertently providing philosophical justifications for regarding the world as 
fundamentally unknowable and therefore mysterious.
Again I want to underscore that this is not what Weber mainly meant by 
magic or disenchantment. Weber described magic as instrumentally rational 
and directed toward world mastery. The “magic garden” was not a state of 
complete harmony with nature, and recovering magic would not heal nature. 
Indeed, the whole line of critique that reads the disenchantment of the world 
as the domination of nature is left- Klages, not left- Weber (Adorno and com-
pany notwithstanding).
Weber’s image of a disenchanted cultural sphere is one in which meaning 
has been pushed out of existence, rendering it no longer symbolic and ethical 
action meaningless. This was an impasse that could be arrived at by either de-
nying the existence of God or by imagining a transcendent God who had pre-
ordained all things. It resulted in a state where mana/charisma/specialness no 
longer marked out specific individuals, rites, and objects with the same power. 
Crucially, disenchantment arose from a hypertrophy of theoretical rationality. 

300 Chapter Ten
The basic need for a rationally meaningful cosmos had stripped the world of 
all irrationalities, and in so doing located ethics in a transcendent realm, which 
increasingly receded from sight. Nevertheless, the same basic needs remained.
Above I divided Weberian disenchantment into metaphysical realism, onto-
logical homogeneity, ethical predeterminism/value nihilism, and epistemic 
overconfidence. There is counterevidence for these forms of disenchantment 
as well. Religious believers and philosophical skeptics often reject meta-
physical realism. Moreover, charisma and even extramundane objects/people 
have far from vanished in contemporary Euro- American culture, where we 
have everything from fetishized celebrity artifacts to haunted houses. In the 
United States, epistemic overconfidence has withered in the face of right-  and 
left- wing skepticism (against climate change and vaccines and so on). The 
popular faith in technology remains largely unchecked, but science is routinely 
attacked in the public sphere. I am more sympathetic to the issue of value nihil-
ism, but it would be a mistake to think that it characterizes even most sectors 
of society. On a more sympathetic reading of Weber’s model, one could argue 
that instead of a culture- wide “disenchantment of the world,” the result has 
rather been a drive toward the disenchantment of the intellectual value sphere 
or specific disciplines. But there is more fundamental intervention I want to 
make in the standard interpretation of Weberian disenchantment.
Popular interpretations of Weber tend to assume that he was describing a 
world without magic. This reading is easy to dismiss both in terms of Weber’s 
own understanding of the Puritan witch trials and knowledge of magical reviv-
als. Indeed, I cannot emphasis this enough— the disenchantment of the world 
does not mean there is no magic. We understand Weber better if we read him 
as also theorizing the persistence of magic into modernity. What Weber envi-
sioned can be further clarified on basic philological grounds. Entzauberung in 
German signals something that is in process. One of the most straightforward 
implications of this chapter would be to translate Weber’s famous phrase not 
as “the disenchantment of the world” but instead as “the disenchanting of the 
world.” “Disenchantment” suggests an accomplished state of affairs. But what 
Weber has in mind is not just a process, but also a program. All he’s doing is 
identifying that this program is in place, not that it is completed. For there to 
be an active, ongoing disenchanting of the world, magic has to be intact— 
somewhere, among some groups. There must therefore be pockets, entire 
regions, groups or classes where magic remains. If anything, disenchanting 
the world might seem destined to produce a “magic sphere” with a new host 
of professionals, subject to its own internal rationalization process.
Moreover, it is important to emphasize that for Weber to be right, the dis-

The World of Enchantment 
301
enchanters do not have to be denying the existence of magic. They merely 
have to demonize it. The disenchanting of the world is in place once there 
are some elites who want to cut off magic as a path to salvation. In the first 
instance, disenchanting does not strip the earth of supernatural beings, so 
much as it depicts the world as demon haunted. This allows us also to see that 
“the disenchanting of the world” is not identical to the (putatively) anonymous 
process of rationalization. Yet, it is still alienating.
When Weber theorized rationalization, he argued that in the modern Oc-
cident, theoretical rationalization has if anything been further subsumed by 
the onset of formalized/institutionalized rationality, resulting in an iron cage. 
Weber spent time discussing the many forms of domination and violence en-
shrined in the modern state. To these we could add the ideas of Marx and a 
host of different condemnations of the contemporary capitalist world order. 
I mention this here because the iron cage and disenchantment are often en-
tangled. Framed this way, however, it seems unlikely that re- enchantment 
(either a naïve revival of magic or even a recovery of ethics) would solve any of 
these issues. Leaving aside his Orientalist binary between a magical Asia and 
a magicless West, Weber himself seems to have both believed that Asia had not 
yet been disenchanted, and yet also been pessimistic about it.
Weber suggested that what the world needed was a new prophet. But he 
gave few clues as to where such could be found. Mysticism might be a po-
tential way to bring God back into a godless world, mystical union as the 
path to re- deifying the cosmos. A charismatic magician could overturn the 
laws of bureaucracy and institute a new world- affirming ethical code, perhaps, 
but even this charisma would ultimately become routinized yet again. In my 
reading, Weber toyed with the idea of mysticism as a solution, but never fully 
committed to it, perhaps for good reason. Instead, Weber hinted at a messianic 
expectation or a longing for “genuine prophecy” in a prophetless age.

C o n c l u s i o n
The Myth of Modernity
From Max Weber to the theorists of deconstruction, the link between modernity, ratio-
nalism, and western culture was not seen as simply contingent. It was seen as equally 
constitutive of one or the other so that it is precisely this interweaving [of modernity, 
rationalism, and western culture] that was seen as “the property of the West,” the feature 
that distinguished it from the rest of world.
 A c h i l l e  M b e m b e , De la postcolonie, 2000
Every morning my grandmother used to rise at dawn, look out over the San-
gre de Cristo Mountains, and scatter ground cornmeal (masa harina) for the 
spirits. To those outside the family, she was known as Felicitas Goodman, a 
professor of anthropology and the author of several well- regarded scholarly 
monographs on glossolalia, Mexican Pentecostal Christianity, and the anthro-
pology of religion.1 After her retirement, she went public with her belief in 
spirits and ecstatic trances; scholars, scientists, and artists came from Europe, 
Mexico, and the United States to participate in “shamanic” trance workshops 
under her leadership. While my grandmother inspired me to become a scholar 
of religion, I was always skeptical about the existence of the spirits. I was also 
skeptical of a theme I often heard repeated in her community, that Western 
modernity had lost its magic. That a notion of the loss of magic often went 
hand in hand with belief in magic was an irony only amplified by the people I 
have encountered since who expressed similar sentiments.
My grandmother’s version of this formulation occurred in the first major 
work to announce her spiritual experiences to the world, published in English 
as Where the Spirits Ride the Wind: Trance Journeys and Other Ecstatic Expe-
riences (1990).2 In it, she gives an abbreviated spiritual biography— including 
an account of her vision of the Virgin of Guadalupe that inspired her to at-
tempt to contact the spirits— combined with an anthropological theory of ec-
static trance as a gateway to the alternate reality. At several points in the text, 
she testifies to the existence of the spirits and provides concrete techniques by 
means of which readers can enter into an ecstatic trance and experience the 

The Myth of Modernity 
303
alternate reality for themselves. Moreover, elsewhere she provides her own 
philosophy of magic, arguing that the alternate reality is
an other- than- ordinary dimension of reality, in which the so- called laws of 
nature, discovered by Western science for ordinary reality, do not obtain. Es-
pecially the limits of time and space are invalid. The absence of these makes 
divination possible. Switching into the religious altered state also endows the 
subject with the ability to affect indeterminate systems, as well as a number of 
determinate ones, in a manner some Western observers have termed magical.3
My grandmother is hedging the language here because she was skeptical of the 
distinction between the categories religion and magic, but by and large she saw 
the alternate reality as the source of divination, spirits, and magical powers.
Tellingly, my grandmother concludes Where the Spirits Ride the Wind with 
a chapter titled “The Twilight of the Spirits,” which attempted to explain why 
the spirits vanished and access to the alternate reality became no longer a 
commonplace. She examines the myths that she believes preserved signs of 
the originary loss, arguing, “In the Nordic myths we hear of Ragnarok, the 
doom of the gods, of their struggle against enemy forces, and of the eventual 
destruction of the earth. The Popol Vuh equally tells of murder committed 
against such men as Seven Makaw, a stand- in for the independent horticultur-
alists, by the new gods, who then create docile humans entirely of cornmeal, 
whom they even deprive of the gift of ‘seeing.’ ”4 Instead of leading her to 
interrogate the myth of modernity as rupture, she concludes that “agriculture 
ushered in the unbounded exploitation of our earth,” which ultimately led to 
the twilight of the spirits, as the archaic bond between humanity and nature— 
and access to the alternate reality— had been largely foreclosed.5 Fortunately, 
for the moment, “tribal” societies preserve these spiritual techniques that have 
been endangered by “the modern age.”6
This text exhibits what should now be a familiar pattern. The moment 
of rupture is different inasmuch as it is in the transition from horticulture to 
agriculture— not the Protestant Reformation, or even the birth of monotheism. 
But we can see my grandmother pronouncing a myth of disenchantment that 
simultaneously explains the absence and presence of the spirits and magic. 
It also operates by postulating an opposition between modern and archaic, 
Europe and “tribal,” which her neo- shamanic practices claim to bridge. I have 
introduced this familial example not to claim the heritage of the myth of dis-
enchantment, but to reflect on the personal connections that were productive 

304 Conclusion
of my own interest in the subject. It is also telling that my grandmother came 
to this narrative not through occult research or magical texts but through the 
very human sciences I have been discussing here.7
In the introduction, I expressed three Foucauldian doubts about the myth 
of disenchantment or “modernity paradigm” that have been animating this 
work as a whole: the historical doubt (is the disenchantment of the world truly 
an established historical pattern?), the critical- historical doubt (how, in the face 
of vibrant spiritualist and magical movements, did European societies come to 
think of themselves as disenchanted?), and the politico- theoretical doubt (have 
the workings of domination in Euro- American societies really belonged primar-
ily to the mode of disenchantment?). Here I will devote a section to addressing 
each of these doubts, and in so doing tie together some of the threads that have 
been woven throughout this book.
Th e  M y t h s  o f ( P o st )  M ode rni ty
Scholars— modernizers and postmodernists alike— often contend that what 
most makes the modern world modern is that people no longer believe in 
magic and spirits. The age of myth is allegedly over, the gods have died, vi-
brant nature has been subjugated, and instrumental rationality and mecha-
nistic materialism rule in their place. When pressed on the specifics, there is 
little consensus as to when this disenchantment set in, but scholars often admit 
that it only applies to a constrained geography (namely, Western Europe and 
North America). The primary aim of this work has been to push back against 
this narrative.
Disenchantment is a myth. The majority of people in the heartland of dis-
enchantment believe in magic or spirits today, and it appears that they did 
so at the high point of modernity. Education does not directly result in dis-
enchantment. Indeed, one might hazard the guess that education allows one 
to maintain more cognitive dissonance rather than less. Secularization and 
disenchantment are not correlated. Moreover, it is easy to show that, almost 
no matter how you define the terms, there are few figures in the history of the 
academic disciplines that cannot be shown to have had some relation or en-
gagement with what their own epoch saw as magic or animating forces. This 
monograph has shown how different magic and spiritualist revivals entered  
the lives of modernity’s main theorists, from Max Müller to Theodor Adorno 
to Rudolf Carnap. But it is not only theorists of disenchantment who were 
entangled with enchantment.

The Myth of Modernity 
305
At this point we might expect counter- hegemonic disciplines to be engaged 
with the occult. For example, the influence of theosophy, witchcraft (Wicca), 
and neo- paganism on all three waves of the feminist movements has been well 
studied.8 That artistic and literary movements often went together with magi-
cal rituals and spirit summoning should also be no surprise: the occult can be 
found from the Harlem Renaissance to the Surrealists, from Wassily Kandin-
sky to Victor Hugo to W. B. Yeats.9
What we might think of as the orthodox or establishment disciplines have 
been hardly less magically inclined. Spiritualism and theosophy have appealed 
to biologists like Alfred Russel Wallace and inventors like Thomas Edison. 
Nobel Prize– winning physicists from Marie Curie to Jean Baptiste Perrin to 
Brian Josephson have often been interested in parapsychology. Even computer 
scientists like Alan Turing believed in psychical powers. Moreover, despite the 
laments of the new materialists, panpsychism has been a persistent counter-
current in philosophical circles as well-known thinkers—including Spinoza, 
Leibniz, Goethe, Schopenhauer, Margaret Cavendish, Julien La Mettrie, 
 Gustav Fechner, Ernst Mach, Henry David Thoreau, C. S. Peirce, William 
James, Josiah Royce, John Dewey, Henri Bergson, Samuel Alexander, Charles 
Strong, Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, Alfred North Whitehead, Charles Harts-
horne, Albert Schweitzer, Arthur Koestler, and Gregory Bateson—all argued 
that the material universe should be thought of as thoroughly animated or 
possessed of mind and awareness. Mechanism has long had establishment 
enemies.10 This list barely scratches the surface. When combined with survey 
after survey that suggests popular belief in the supernatural, miracles, witch-
craft, spirits, and the mysterious (see chapter 1), it makes it hard to counte-
nance the idea that disenchantment is the central feature of the history of the 
industrialized “West.” As I interpret Max Weber, we live in a disenchanting 
world in which magic is embattled and intermittently contained within its own 
cultural sphere, but not a disenchanted one in which magic is gone. Restated, 
magic never truly vanished.
*
Disenchantment and enchantment were often brought together into a unity, 
such that their putative opposition fails to correspond. By way of illustration, 
I’d like to introduce another kind of figure— an ideal type, if you will: namely, 
the disenchanting magician. This manuscript has explored theorist of disen-
chantment obsessed with magic. But history also furnishes instances of the op-

306 Conclusion
posite case: magicians committed to what they thought of as disenchantment. 
For instance, the Jewish- American escape artist Harry Houdini (born Erik 
Weisz) was not only a stage magician, but he was also interested in the occult 
and spiritualist phenomena. Nevertheless, he dedicated almost twenty- five 
years of his life to exposing fraudulent spirit mediums. The famous magician 
therefore seemingly outdid nearly all his contemporaries in his efforts to dispel 
spirits from early twentieth- century America, even as he was busy dazzling 
the public with his own magical spectacles.11 By way of another example, one 
might think of the French esotericist René Guénon, who attacked theosophy 
and spiritism in his writings while promoting his own “sacred science” and 
primordial Eastern wisdom. Magicians with incompatible visions aimed at 
both expunging one another’s superstitions and recovering magic.
In addition to these magicians of disenchantment, one might think of the 
many bimodal concepts this book has explored, such as the paranormal, psy-
chic powers, natural magic— concepts that are both enchanting and disen-
chanting. Indeed, as we have seen, the very terminology of disenchantment 
itself has been partially self- refuting, giving birth to numerous magical and 
spiritualist revivals. These examples make it hard to continence a straightfor-
ward opposition between enchantment and disenchantment.
*
Modernity is a myth. The term modernity is itself vague. There can be value in 
vagueness, but “modernity” rests on an extraordinarily elastic temporality that 
can be extended heterogeneously and in value- laden ways to different regions 
and periods. It also picks out different processes such as urbanization, in-
dustrialization, rationalization, globalization, capitalism, or various particular 
artistic, scientific, philosophical, or technological movements. To speak of 
“modernity” or “modernization” is always to select from within these and to 
surreptitiously bundle them together as symptoms of a larger master process. 
It often makes an actor out of the very thing that needs to be explained. Hence, 
modernity is not just vague; it is doing a lot of covert work, and its main feature 
is its capacity to signal a rupture or breach, which it marks as the expression 
of a single horizon of temporality. Moreover, when described in terms of the 
de- animation of the world, the end of superstition, the decay of myth, or even 
the dominance of instrumental reason, modernity signals a societal fissure that 
never occurred.
*

The Myth of Modernity 
307
Postmodernity is a myth. This might seem to be a simple corollary to the earlier 
claims about modernity, but it is worth explaining in greater detail. Let me 
start with an example. In Die Krisis der europäischen Kultur (The crisis of 
European culture), the German philosopher Rudolf Pannwitz described what 
he saw as a calamity in European intellectual and cultural life, arguing that 
capitalism, shallow materialism, and conflicting nationalisms have produced 
an ethical vacuum. Strikingly, Pannwitz suggested that this collective zeitgeist 
has spawned a new type of person: “The postmodern man is an encrusted 
mollusk, a happy medium of decadent and barbarian swarming out from the 
natal whirlpool of the grand decadence of the radical revolution of European 
nihilism.”12 While the prose is rather florid, Pannwitz might seem to be de-
scribing our contemporary epoch, especially by connecting the postmodern 
with nihilism and a pervasive ethical disaster. It is not hard to find thinkers 
today who use similar terms to describe our current “postmodern crisis.” But 
Pannwitz wrote this account in 1917, not 1987, much less 2017. The appearance 
of this text and even its term postmodern a century ago allows us to see that 
the postmodern condition is far from new. Nor was Pannwitz alone. Like the 
almost imperceptible tremors that anticipate a major earthquake, tantalizing 
references to the “postmodern” or “postmodernists” (Sp. postmodernista) be-
gan appearing more than a half century before the term would attain common 
currency.13
On a concrete level, what these examples show is that the term postmodern 
became lexically available shortly after 1901, when variants on the term pre- 
modern appeared and came into common usage in a number of European 
linguistic repertoires. No sooner had “modernity” become the quintessential 
periodization than it was possible to imagine its future eclipse. Postmodern-
ism is often presented as a second rift after the rift that defined modernity. 
Postmodernism is often seen as a counterreaction to modernism, but the two 
movements largely coincided. Indeed, postmodernism and modernism would 
seem to have the same meaning insofar as they both aim to transcend the 
current moment, often by looking forward. Accordingly, both periodizations 
rest on the idea of a fundamental rupture from the past, which, while inflected 
differently, often rests on the very disenchantment narrative I have been work-
ing to dispel.
In sum, I have been arguing that in the hands of both proponents and crit-
ics, modernity is a philosopheme that comes with a rudimentary narrative 
structure attached. Every time something specific is termed “modern,” that 
implies a story: “First there was x, and then everything changed.” The word 
modernity always communicates myth, and it turns out that disenchantment 

308 Conclusion
is one of the stories we most like having told to us. Here I have been exploring 
our attraction to this particular tale and trying to put an end to it, along with 
all similar accounts of modernity.
T h e  M y t h  o f D i s e n c hantme nt  
as  R e g u l at i v e  I de al
By identifying modernity as myth, I join a small group of dissenters who have 
already come to call into question the term’s utility. Postcolonialists and other 
social theorists have been working to fracture the reflexive linkage between 
Westernization and modernization, while historians of enchantment have 
demonstrated the importance of magic and spirits in American and European 
history. Taken together, this presents a puzzle: Europe appears not to have fit 
with central features of European modernization and indeed looks more like 
the rest of the world than the model would usually suggest. In this respect, 
Europe is not Europe.
In one of the most famous critiques of modernity, Nous n’avons jamais été 
modernes (1991; We Have Never Been Modern), Bruno Latour argues that the 
notion of modernity is predicated on the false claim that it is possible to sepa-
rate fact from value, nature from culture. Therefore, modernity as a project 
historically aimed to maintain the difference between two distinct ontological 
zones— a nonhuman sphere of nature and a human sphere of culture— and 
then engaging in “purification” to get nature out of culture and culture out of 
nature. For Latour, this project was doomed to failure insofar as the moderns 
kept producing nature- culture hybrids even as they denied these hybrids are 
possible; hence his assertion that “we have never been modern.” Although not 
incompatible with the argument I have been making here, the human sciences 
(including Latour’s own sociology) were always an uncomfortable fit for this 
narrative precisely because they seem to be hybrids first and purifiers second, 
only inadvertently. They rest on the constant temptation to center the human- 
subject at the heart of nature while exploring the nature of the human. But 
perhaps this is a matter of emphasis.
My larger departure from Latour is that I argue that the human sciences 
have internalized the modern project not primarily in terms of a false nature- 
culture binary, but in the notion of “modernity” itself as the sign of a pure rup-
ture or difference. In this way modernity has functioned as a master paradigm 
or episteme— what I have been calling a myth. In this project as a whole I have 
been largely working to disrupt this myth in genealogical terms, by tracing the 
layers of conceptual sedimentation that contributed to the most important 

The Myth of Modernity 
309
subtype of the myth of modernity; namely, the myth of disenchantment. Put 
differently, instead of describing disenchantment itself, I have been chronicling 
the formation of the myth of disenchantment as a multifaceted regulative ideal.
First and foremost, I have provided an account of how this myth came into 
being. In brief, many of the figures we associate with the “scientific revolution” 
saw themselves as magicians, and the early enlightenment project was a quest 
for a divine science. Nevertheless, because of these attempts to de- demonize 
magic and enchant natural philosophy, “superstition” began shifting from 
being a Christian term (associated with misdirected worship or demonic cov-
enants) to being a reference to beliefs in direct conflict with the newly forming 
image of a “philosophical,” then “scientific” worldview. One of the first inflec-
tion points in the history of disenchantment as a regulative ideal turns out to 
be a shift in the oppositional structure of a religion- superstition binary to a 
science- superstition binary. It is no coincidence that the previous legacies of 
superstition— divination, magic, myth, and spirits— continued to be the foil 
of even scientific tracts that provided new rationales for old targets. Moreover, 
as the notion of a conflict between reason and faith, then science and religion 
began to take hold, the rejected terms remained as signs of where the categories 
intersected. This gave these terms a certain allure (as sites for the critique 
of modernity or scientific materialism, or ways to repair the science- religion 
divide), but it also made their suppression key to claims to scientific status.
In the process of early disciplinary formation, the human sciences all 
tended to assume modernity as a paradigm— that there was something dis-
tinctive and original in “modern” European thought and culture— even as 
they articulated different versions of this rupture within their respective fields.  
Moreover, they inherited a conception of archaic “superstition” formulated 
in the legacy of anti- paganism. This often led to the bias that a core feature 
of European modernity was to be found in the dismissal of magic, myth, ir-
rationality, and spirits. There were inevitably vested interests— colonial, dis-
ciplinary, and occult— in maintaining this claim to uniqueness even as they 
interpreted it differently. European modernity was either a triumph or a trag-
edy. It either needed to recover magic or banish superstition completely. But 
European culture was not in fact as unique in this respect as these theorists 
believed. Modernity was a false paradigm. It was itself a myth.
*
The myth of disenchantment has two contradictory functions. On the one 
hand, it serves as a regime of truth, submerging the paradigm of modernity 

310 Conclusion
deeper into the core of the human sciences and producing various attempts 
(legal, pedagogical, colonial) to disabuse the other of superstitious thought. 
On the other hand, it is self- refuting, producing the very thing it describes as 
endangered, animating occult revivals, paranormal investigations, and new 
attempts to spiritualize the sciences. For this reason, it meets the needs of 
different constituencies, including those who want to banish magic and those 
who aspire to reinvigorate it.
Even within the sciences, disenchantment is repeatedly contravened as a 
regulative ideal. Physicists, anthropologists, and scholars of religion often try 
to reestablish spirits or magic in their respective disciplines, frequently as a 
way to heal the fissures between science and religion or humanity and nature. 
The anti- paganism or anti- superstition of the modern academy is only weakly 
or sporadically enforced, and while there have certainly been attempts to im-
plement disenchantment, there have been equally frequent counterforces and 
revivals. For every psychoanalyst bemoaning magical thinking as madness, 
another embraces psychical powers or attempts to recoup the shaman as the 
ideal therapist. Alterity was not merely at the periphery, but rather the center.
As regulative ideal, the myth of modernity often collapsed into descriptive 
modernization or prescriptive modernism. Evidence for widespread belief in 
spirits has not historically been used to refute “modernity” as a paradigm, but 
instead has generally been taken to mean that modernity had not yet been com-
pletely actualized. In this respect, modernization theorists often grant Latour’s 
idea that we have never been modern, to which they add the equivalent of 
Arthur Rimbaud’s ironic imperative: “one must be absolutely modern” (Il faut 
être absolument moderne). This move presumes the existence of the modern 
rupture, but locates it elsewhere, giving vent to an aspirational desire. This 
notion was not simply a view from the colonies, but as Fredric Jameson has 
shown, it was also common in the metropole.14 For instance, Germans looked 
to France for modernity, Parisians looked to London for the same, while the 
British were often looking to North America, which in turn often looked back 
to Europe. Modernity was everywhere and nowhere.
*
Enchantment is construed as a signifier of elsewhere or as an anachronism, 
a remainder of something lost. I mean this in several respects. Magic (Gr. 
mageia) has indicated foreignness since at least the fifth century BCE, when 
the term magician (magos) came into usage in Greek as a reference to a Persian 
ritualist or practitioner of a foreign mystery cult.15 For more than a thousand 

The Myth of Modernity 
311
years, spellbooks often claimed to be recovering the lost magical arts of Moses, 
King Solomon, Hermes Trismegistus, and even the biblical Adam.16 Moreover, 
the gods, spirits, or fairies have been disappearing since at least Chaucer and 
arguably since Plutarch.17 In this respect, magic is constantly vanishing, even 
as magicians have claimed to recover it. In sum, disenchantment is part of the 
trope of magic itself.
Closer to the chronology of our narrative, late eighteenth-  and early 
nineteenth- century German philosophical circles gave birth to a set of modern 
laments involving the death of God, the de- divination of nature, the myth- 
of- the- end- of- myth, and the onset of nihilism. These philosophers often de-
scribed these mythemes not in linear teleological terms, but as part of a spiral, 
whose final act has been generally overlooked. Nevertheless, one of the features 
of these mythemes— particularly after they took on canonical form— is that 
their genesis was projected backward and hung on various mythic epochs 
that soon came to be called the Enlightenment, the Renaissance, the scientific 
revolution, and the transition from mythos to logos in classical Greece.
Inheriting nineteenth- century myths alongside an influential occult re-
vival, philosophers of the 1920s through the 1940s revived the question of 
“the Enlightenment” as a fight over the meaning of the Weimar Republic, 
the First World War, and then the horrors of fascism. The Vienna positivists 
celebrated enlightenment and disenchantment as ideological critique, even as 
they engaged in psychical research and identified positivism with magic. The 
Frankfurt School criticized the overextension of enlightenment and attacked 
the disenchantment of the world, even as they made it their business to expel 
or suppress occult movements. The struggle between “the Enlightenment” 
and “counter- Enlightenment” is mainly a twentieth- century myth, projected 
backward.
In the wake of the Second World War, understanding the seeds of fascism 
and totalitarianism became an international priority. The problem is that Na-
zism could be positioned on either side of “the Enlightenment” / “counter- 
Enlightenment” divide. Similarly, in the 1940s the idea of the “occult Nazi,” or 
a sympathy between occultism and fascism appears as a theme, significantly 
in Lewis Spence, Occult Causes of the Present War (1940), which remobilized 
older anti- pagan rhetoric, and in the more philosophically sophisticated 
“Thesen gegen den Okkultismus” (Theses against occultism, 1951) by Theo-
dor Adorno.18 This idea that the occult was the cause of fascism only became 
more widespread in the ensuing decades.19 I am not suggesting we in any 
way forgive Nazi atrocities, but the “occult Nazi” trope worked to render the 
Nazis more “other,” and in some cases interrupted introspective endeavors to 

312 Conclusion
understand anti- Semitism within the Allied powers. It also provided a strong 
impetus for scholars to suppress their own occult beliefs lest they be branded 
fascist sympathizers. Given the Frankfurt School’s place in this trajectory, it 
is tempting to read the repression of enchantment and the criticism of the 
disenchantment of the world as continuous.
Indeed, as a disciplinary rule, disenchantment is not much in evidence 
before the critique of disenchantment. Indisputably, people hid their hetero-
dox beliefs earlier and lost jobs for attacking the established churches, and 
colonial officials often attacked “witchcraft” or stigmatized minority beliefs as 
“superstition”; but the repression of occult beliefs seems to have been incon-
sistently applied in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Our evidence 
for this is that as we have seen many earlier scholars who were largely open 
about their philosophy of magic, their practice of spiritualism, or their interest 
in theosophy and mysticism. The call to purge or hide occult beliefs appeared 
most strongly in the twentieth century, often in the context of the popular 
flourishing of those beliefs and often alongside a critique of modernization. 
Discipline founders were called on to either allay themselves with occult sci-
ences or distinguish their project from pseudosciences, and as we saw with 
Sigmund Freud, this provided a concrete rationale to hide one’s own occult 
beliefs. Nevertheless, they kept returning. In the 1960s and 1970s it seemed 
spirits, psychical powers, and even magic were back in the realm of the pos-
sible in different human sciences, even if only marginally so.20
In the Anglophone academy, the 1980s and 1990s saw the ascendancy of 
bodies of theory that had been influential in the preceding decades in France 
and Germany. Competing philosophical movements were merged under the 
heading of poststructuralism, French theory, and postmodernism. Starting in 
the French and German departments, these modes of inquiry came to promi-
nence in other fields, leading to an increase in cultural studies. In this context, 
“the Enlightenment” and “disenchantment” became increasingly important 
in the 1990s as anti- hegemonic theory became hegemonic, and a new set of 
occult revivals took place.
*
It might still seem that this debate is in the past. We have retired the savage and 
eliminated superstition from our disciplinary vocabularies, but as long as we 
hold to the contrasting terms, the occlusion remains. Let me give a concrete 
example. Anthropology has spent the last thirty years slowly purging itself of 
the notion of the primitive. But insofar as many anthropologists still hold to 

The Myth of Modernity 
313
the notion of modernity, they have inherited half of an assumed binary while 
merely occluding the missing term. Moreover, it was this very notion of dif-
ference between modern and traditional societies that gave the early field its 
reason for being (and which were the roots of its differentiation from sociology 
and other sibling fields). In this sense, anthropology is haunted by an occluded 
primitive both presumed and bracketed out.
*
Let me approach this differently. We have long been taught to read the history 
of modern science as the mechanization of the world picture and to see it in 
terms of the history of physics. It has often been suggested that the very act 
of producing a systematic image of the world has led toward the evacuation 
of meaning. But a closer look at the history of physics shows this image not 
to cohere.
To sketch this trajectory in broadest strokes, even as Descartes liberated an 
autonomous realm for the thinking subject, his mechanism denied action at 
a distance and rejected the concept of the void. But this form of corpuscular 
mechanism was disrupted by Newton’s emphases on occult forces like grav-
ity, which produced action at a distance and also in some versions required 
constant divine or angelic intervention. Later natural philosophers worked to 
eliminate these, but as soon as Pierre- Simon Laplace and company purged 
the angels, the discovery of electricity as a seeming bridge between matter, 
mind, and nature reproduced a lively cosmos. Indeed, it was this research on 
electricity and magnetism, in both physics and biology, that gave a boost to 
mesmerists and spiritualists.
Then, when James Clerk Maxwell described electromagnetism mathemati-
cally, the rise of radioactivity and invisible rays cast us into the dawn of a vibra-
tory atomic age. Again, pioneers of this science of the invisible like Edmund 
Fournier d’Albe argued that X- rays show not only the composition of the soul 
but also the reality of paranormal phenomena like ghosts. Just as quantum 
mechanics began to formalize the movement of fundamental particles, the 
Copenhagen interpretation marked out a limit on human knowledge and a 
position for subjectivity that we have still failed to overcome. Indeed, we can 
look to early proponents of the new physics like Wolfgang Pauli and J. Rob-
ert Oppenheimer for the turn to Oriental religion and mysticism that would 
later be popularized by New Age thinkers. Accordingly, we can repeatedly see 
in the realm of physics a dialectical alternation between disenchantment and 
enchantment.

314 Conclusion
*
Social theorists internalized an image of the scientific world picture quite inde-
pendent of what physicists actually believed. Human sciences came into being 
modeled on this viewpoint even as they revived human primacy. A particular 
scientific world picture was often presented as a universal “Real” against 
which other myths were shattered. The Real is first and foremost an aesthetic 
realism, which serves to drain the universe of metaphor and constrain what 
is supposed to exist in the realm of possibility. The Real is presented as the 
neutral background against which human activity takes place.
There is plenty of preexisting critique of this realism (aesthetic and also 
ontological) and of reality- thought in general that laments the triumph of 
“reality”— that wishes to undo it, to smash the modern world picture in order 
to spring us loose from the discursive constrictions of the Real. To this I say, 
however: the Real was always multiple. The modern world picture never com-
pleted. The tyranny of reason or instrumental rationality never occurred. We 
are not stranded in the “desolate time of the world’s night,” forced to scan the 
horizon for glimmers of the messianic dawn. This is not necessary. It is wasted 
effort, because it assumes a type of authority that was never universal. It is like 
continuing to bemoan the tyranny of a positivism that has long been over-
thrown. We are already free. Once the nonreality of this authority is granted, 
there is an entire terrain of struggle that more or less evaporates.
A ga in st  t h e  T id e  o f  D is e nch antme nt
I have been largely writing as a historian, albeit in the Foucauldian mode. But 
in the last few pages I want to gesture toward the political theory implied by 
my critique of the myth of disenchantment. In brief, I have been arguing that 
power in Euro- American societies has not belonged solely to the mode of 
disenchantment and that the critique of disenchantment appears to be part of 
the same power mechanism as the thing it criticizes.
It would be easier to be a partisan of either enchantment or enlightenment. 
To present the first as an emancipatory possibility, as so many have done, 
would be to describe enchantment as resistance “against the tide of moder-
nity.”21 This would be to suggest that reawakening a sense of wonder, estab-
lishing universal ethics, or bringing back belief in magic or animate nature 
would be the route to overcoming the depersonalizing structures of modern 
domination. By contrast, to promote enlightenment would be to emphasize 
the importance of science or political liberalism, and focus politics on the 

The Myth of Modernity 
315
stripping away of illusions. But neither being a magician or a disenchanter 
is necessarily redemptive. Power— both liberating and dominating, potentia 
and potestas— can be actualized by way of enchantment or disenchantment. 
Ideologies cloak themselves in both.
Take colonialism, for example. Scholars have shown that European colo-
nists often spoke “the language of disenchantment” and aimed to eliminate 
indigenous “superstitions.”22 Witchcraft often served to mark the dividing 
line between so- called civilization and savagery. But European explorers and 
imperialists also presented themselves as gods, aiming to enslave indigenous 
peoples by convincing them of the reality of “white men’s magic.”23 To further 
complicate the picture, there were figures like the British socialist Annie Be-
sant, Olcott’s successor as the leader of the Theosophical Society, who spent 
much of her later life promoting theosophy while championing the cause of 
Indian independence; or the British judge Sir John Woodroffe, who, when not 
serving as standing counsel to the colonial government of India, was publish-
ing Tantric texts and hymns to the Goddess under the name Arthur Avalon.24 
Moreover, indigenous anticolonial movements have been both disenchanting 
(e.g., Maoists) and enchanting (e.g., Yihetuan “Boxers”). Therefore we can 
see magic as either domination or resistance, either colonial or postcolonial.
Part of the problem is that having granted the notion of modernity as a 
unity, the assumption often becomes that enchantment represents a single 
solution to diverse ills. But there is plenty of evidence that there have been 
bureaucracies fully committed to magic and ritual, that capitalism has the ca-
pacity to absorb all the magic of the world, that mythopoesis can be constant 
and no less alienating, and that technology and enchantment can be inter-
twined. Magic and secularism are not opposites. Even disenchantment and 
enchantment can be found together in the same text. We know all this because 
North America and Western Europe have not lost their magic.25 One can find 
American presidents and their staff consulting with astrologers and psychics, 
the commercialization of esoteric traditions and books of magic, scholarship 
giving inadvertent birth to new occult movements, and even iPhone apps that 
let you consult the tarot.26 Indeed, one could be drawn to New Age religion 
while building the atom bomb.
The Frankfurt School embodies the contradictions of the crusade against 
disenchantment. Critical theory’s main message is often taken to be that en-
lightenment disenchantment has gone too far and transformed itself into the 
domination of nature and the dehumanization of humanity.27 Dialectic of En-
lightenment is one of the main contemporary touchstones for the critique of 
“the disenchantment of the world.” But then we have a conundrum, as Adorno 

316 Conclusion
and company attempted to distance themselves from the German occult re-
vival even as they drew inspiration from it, and in doing so they repeatedly 
condemned magic. In other words, Adorno and company are both a source 
of our unease with disenchantment and a source of disenchantment. Hence, 
they seem to have promoted the very thing they criticized.
The basic operating mode of critical theory is also one of unmasking myths. 
So it would look like a species of disenchantment, except that one of the main 
myths it wants to unmask is the enlightenment campaign to unmask myth. I do 
not want to fault Adorno and company for the very dialectical turns that make 
the movement so appealing to me, but merely to show the problems resulting 
from taking disenchantment and enlightenment to be in opposition.
From this vantage point, I too have been writing like a disenchanter. This 
project has been an attempt to undo the myth that there is no myth, which 
means that this project has also been demythologizing. I grant that this fact is 
interesting. As I have been arguing: thinking in terms of myth— and further, 
pursuing it, making a program of either re- enchantment or mythopoesis— is 
distorting. Thinking in terms of disenchantment— pursuing it, fetishizing 
the real, and aggressively demythologizing— is also distorting. What I think 
Adorno and company got right is that these two seeming opposites taken to 
the extreme ultimately converge.
Although this project has been rooted in its own kind of demythologizing, 
my allegiance is to neither side. Instead, I aim to repudiate the full extension of 
both. Indeed, my point is that the extreme of both modes transform into their 
opposite. By invoking the language of myth, it might seem that I have become 
a partisan of disenchantment, but my point is the reverse: that we can never 
fully escape myth. Criticism may imply demythologization, but we merely ex-
change one tale for another, albeit hopefully, a better one.28 By challenging this 
narrative, I have been aiming to take up modernity and postmodernity together 
and exit both. This will not be an exodus into a mythless future. Contra Lyo-
tard, I see no end to metanarratives. But I also see no reason to flee from them. 
Reason is historical. Thought is narrative.

N o t e s
Introduction
1. Jules Courtier, Rapport sur les séances d’Eusapia Palladino à L’Institut Général Psy-
chologiquee en 1905, 1906, 1907 et 1908, Paris (Mayenne: Institut Général Psychologique, 1908), 
415. For more on Eusapia, see Christine Blondel, “Eusapia Palladino: La méthod expérimentale 
et la ‘Diva des Savants,’ ” in Des Savants face à L’occulte: 1870– 1940, ed. Bernadette Bensaude- 
Vincent and Christine Blondel (Paris: La Découverte, 2002), 143– 71; and Carlos Alvarado, 
“Eusapia Palladino: An Autobiographical Essay,” Journal of Scientific Exploration 25, no. 1 
(2011): 77– 101.
2. Courtier, Rapport sur les séances, 477.
3. For significant examples, see Max Horkheimer and Theodor Adorno, Dialectic of En-
lightenment (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2002), 2; Zygmunt Bauman, Intimations 
of Postmodernity (London: Routledge, 1992), x– xi; Charles Taylor, A Secular Age, (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 2007), 25– 27; and Marcel Gauchet, The Disenchantment of the 
World (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997).
4. Marie Curie, “Fragments du journal tenu après la mort de Pierre (Avril 1906– Avril 1907),” 
Pierre et Marie Curie: Papiers: V— DOCUMENTS A CARACTERE PRIVE, Bibliothèque 
nationale de France.
5. At various times there were other scientists, diplomats, and philosophers in attendance. 
Jules Courtier, the chief assistant at the Laboratory of Physiological Psychology at the Sor-
bonne, transcribed the proceedings in Courtier, Rapport sur les séances.
6. As Carlos Alvarado has noted, Eusapia first came to the attention of an Italian spiritualist, 
Giovanni Damiani, in about 1872, who wrote a letter about a clairvoyant called “Sapia Padalino” 
to the Spiritual Magazine in that year. Alvarado, “Eusapia Palladino,” 81– 82.
7. For the history of psychical research in France, see Nicole Edelman, Voyantes, guéris-
seuses et visionnaires en France, 1785– 1914 (Paris: A. Michel, 1995); Régine Plas, Naissance 
d’une science humaine: La psychologie: Les psychologues et le “merveilleux psychique” (Paris: La 
Découverte, 2000); John Monroe, Laboratories of Faith: Mesmerism, Spiritism, and Occultism 
in Modern France (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2008); M. Brady Brower, Unruly Spir-

318 Notes to Pages 2–5
its: The Science of Psychic Phenomena in Modern France (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 
2010); and Sofie Lachapelle, Investigating the Supernatural: From Spiritism and Occultism to 
Psychical Research and Metapsychics in France (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 
2011).
8. For example, see Gérard Encausse (Papus), Les rayons invisibles et les dernieres expéri-
ences d’Eusapia devant l’occultisme (Tours: E. Arrault, 1896).
9. For a discussion, see Robert Grogin, The Bergsonian Controversy in France, 1900– 1914 
(Calgary: University of Calgary Press, 1988); and George William Barnard, Living Conscious-
ness: The Metaphysical Vision of Henri Bergson (Albany: State University of New York Press, 
2012), esp. 249– 56.
10. Pierre Curie: Correspondances, ed. Karin Blanc (Saint- Rémy- en- l’Eau: M. Hayot, 2009), 
644 (emphasis in the original). I have consulted Susan Quinn, Marie Curie: A Life (New York: 
Simon & Schuster, 1995), 226, while preparing my own translation. For Pierre Curie’s thoughts 
on these experiments, see Pierre Curie: Correspondances, esp. 575– 79, 584, 635– 36. See also 
Anna Hurwic, Pierre Curie (Paris: Flammarion, 1995), 247– 50.
11. Letter to Countess Élisabeth Greffulhe, reproduced in Pierre Curie: Correspondances, 
645.
12. Letter to Julian Ochorowicz, Marie Curie, Korespondencja Polska Marii Skłodowskiej- 
Curie 1881– 1934, ed. Krystyna Kabzińska (Warsaw: Wydawnictwa IHN PAN, 1994), 54.
13. William James, “An Estimate of Palladino,” Cosmopolitan Magazine, no. 48 (1910): 299 
(emphasis in the original). Although at times James had his doubts about Eusapia, in a letter to 
Eleanor Sidgwick, he stated, “The proof seems overwhelming, and it has been an enormous 
relief to my mind to quit the balancing attitude which I have voluntarily maintained for 15 
years, and come to a stable belief in the matter.” The Correspondence of William James, 12 vols. 
(Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1992– 2004), 11:405– 6. See also Andreas Sommer, 
“Psychical Research and the Origins of American Psychology,” History of the Human Sciences 
25, no. 2 (2012): 23– 44.
14. As Latour puts it, “Haven’t we shed enough tears over the disenchantment of the world? 
Haven’t we frightened ourselves enough with the poor European who is thrust into a cold soul-
less cosmos, wandering on an inert planet in a world devoid of meaning?” Bruno Latour, We 
Have Never Been Modern (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993), 115.
15. Charles Taylor, “Western Secularity,” in Rethinking Secularism, ed. Craig Calhoun, 
Mark Juergensmeyer, and Jonathan VanAntwerpen (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011), 
38. See also Morris Berman, The Reenchantment of the World (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press, 1988), 2.
16. See Encyclopedia of Religion, ed. Lindsay Jones, Mircea Eliade, and Charles Adams (De-
troit: Macmillan Reference, 2005), s.v. “Secularization,” by Bryan Wilson; and José Casanova, 
Public Religions in the Modern World (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994), 31.
17. See also Taylor, A Secular Age.
18. For examples of work both in and at the edge of new materialism, see: Stacy Alaimo, 
Bodily Natures: Science, Environment, and the Material Self (Bloomington: Indiana Univer-
sity Press, 2010); Karen Barad, Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the En-
tanglement of Matter and Meaning (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2007); Jane Bennett, 
Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2010); 

Notes to Pages 5–7 
319
William Connolly, A World of Becoming (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2010); Diana 
Coole and Samantha Frost, eds., New Materialisms: Ontology, Agency, and Politics. (Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 2010); Graham Harman, The Quadruple Object (Winchester: Zero 
Books, 2011); Eduardo Kohn, How Forests Think toward an Anthropology beyond the Human 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 2013); Quentin Meillassoux, Après la finitude: Essai 
sur la nécessité de la contingence (Paris: Seuil, 2006); and Manuel Vásquez, More Than Belief: A 
Materialist Theory of Religion (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011). Although not nor-
mally included in this movement, for a similar critique— albeit with a different conclusion— see 
Gilbert Germain, A Discourse on Disenchantment (Albany: State University of New York Press, 
1993).
19. See Barad, Meeting the Universe Halfway, for the first; for the second, see Jane Bennett, 
The Enchantment of Modern Life: Attachments, Crossings, and Ethics (Princeton, NJ: Prince-
ton University Press, 2001). Bennett’s work is especially interesting because she rejects the 
historical narrative of disenchantment, even as she calls for a revival of enchantment.
20. For example, see Edward Dolnick, The Clockwork Universe: Isaac Newton, the Royal 
Society, and the Birth of the Modern World (New York: HarperCollins, 2011).
21. By “world picture” (Ger. Weltbild), I mean to invoke a technical term, which I am taking 
from Dijksterhuis and Heidegger. See Eduard Jan Dijksterhuis, De Mechanisering Van Het 
Wereldbeeld (Amsterdam: J. M. Meulenhoff, 1950); and Martin Heidegger, “Die Zeit des Welt-
bildes” (1938), translated as “The Age of the World Picture” in Heidegger, Off the Beaten Track, 
trans. Julian Young and Kenneth Haynes (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002).
22. Despite my debt to Lacan, I’d like to distance my use of “the Real” from his account of 
a kind of unattainable being in itself. Jacques Lacan, Écrits (New York: W. W. Norton, 2006).
23. For this claim, see Robert Richards, The Tragic Sense of Life: Ernst Haeckel and the 
Struggle over Evolutionary Thought (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009), 344.
24. T. M. Luhrmann, Persuasions of the Witch’s Craft: Ritual Magic in Contemporary En-
gland (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1989), 8.
25. See, for example, Denise Buell, “The Afterlife Is Not Dead: Spiritualism, Postcolonial 
Theory, and Early Christian Studies,” Church History 78, no. 4 (2009): 862– 72.
26. I am mindful that by focusing so much attention on canonical figures, I risk structurally 
replicating Eurocentrism. But I think deconstructive work of this sort is needed especially as a 
complement to postcolonial and non- European- focused studies. Indeed, I intend this mono-
graph to supplement research I am doing on the Japanese case.
27. Indeed, an analogous move could be done from the perspective of gender studies by 
showing that the central figures of the supposedly heteronormative patriarchy, from Descartes 
to Rousseau to Kant to Schopenhauer to Freud, were themselves practitioners of alternate 
sexualities that don’t make it into the conventional narratives of the dominance of European 
modes of normativity.
28. For sociology as a component of secularization, see Guenther Roth and Wolfgang 
Schluchter, Max Weber’s Vision of History (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1979), 144.
29. For three very different accounts of modernity as mythless, see Georges Bataille, The 
Absence of Myth: Writings on Surrealism, trans. Michael Richardson (London: Verso, 1994); 
Jean- Lucy Nancy, La communauté désœuvrée, 2nd ed. (Paris: Bourgois, 1999), esp. 157– 58; 
and Sophia Heller, The Absence of Myth (Albany: State University of New York Press, 2006).

320 Notes to Pages 7–9
30. For an illuminating discussion of the term’s discursive function, see Bruce Lincoln, 
Theorizing Myth: Narrative, Ideology, and Scholarship (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1999), ix.
31. This project is thus partially an exercise in what Hans Blumenberg calls “metaphorol-
ogy.” While I differ from Blumenberg in not distinguishing between myth and absolute meta-
phor, I agree with his rejection of the old opposition between mythos and logos. Hans Blumen-
berg, Paradigms for a Metaphorology, trans. Robert Savage (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press, 2010), 77. In calling these “myths,” I aim to draw close to the early Greek meaning of 
μῦθος (mythos) as “story” or “narrative” while discarding the assumption that myths are nec-
essarily archaic. See R. S. P. Beekes and Lucien van Beek, Etymological Dictionary of Greek 
(Leiden: Brill, 2010), 2:976.
32. Hans Robert Jauss, “Modernity and Literary Tradition,” trans. Christian Thorne, 
Critical Inquiry 31, no. 2 (2005): 329– 64.
33. Saurabh Dube, “Modernity and Its Enchantments: An Introduction,” in Enchantments 
of Modernity: Empire, Nation, Globalization, ed. Saurabh Dube (New York: Routledge, 2009), 
1– 41.
34. Think of the equivalence of the words modern and novel.
35. Jauss, “Modernity and Literary Tradition.”
36. This “myth of modernity” and its legitimation of colonization and violence are forcefully 
articulated in Enrique Dussel, The Invention of the Americas: Eclipse of “the Other” and the 
Myth of Modernity, trans. Michael Barber (New York: Continuum, 1995). This function of the 
discourse of modernity has been well explored by postcolonial theorists, but they have tended 
to overlook the ambivalence of modernity’s major mythmakers.
37. Theodor Adorno, Negative Dialektik (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1966); Erich Fromm, Es-
cape from Freedom (New York: H. Holt, 1994); Max Horkheimer, Eclipse of Reason (New York: 
Continuum, 2004); Leo Löwenthal, “Das Dämonische,” in Gabe Herrn Rabbiner Dr. Nobel 
Zum 50. Geburtstag, ed. Martin Buber (Frankfurt: J. Kauffmann, 1921), 50– 62; Georg Lukács, 
The Destruction of Reason (Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press, 1981); and Herbert Mar-
cuse, One- Dimensional Man: Studies in the Ideology of Advanced Industrial Society, 2nd ed. 
(Boston: Beacon Press, 1991). See also Jürgen Habermas, The Theory of Communicative Action, 
2 vols. (Boston: Beacon Press, 1984); and Habermas, The Future of Human Nature (Malden, 
MA: Polity, 2003).
38. As Lukács phrased it in his most polemical work: What was “Germany’s path to Hitler 
in the sphere of philosophy”? Lukács, Destruction of Reason, 4.
39. Horkheimer and Adorno, Dialectic of Enlightenment, xiv.
40. Fromm, Escape from Freedom, 11– 12.
41. Horkheimer, Eclipse of Reason, v.
42. Marcuse, One- Dimensional Man, xlii, 20.
43. Horkheimer and Adorno, Dialectic of Enlightenment, 82. I capitalize Enlightenment 
when it refers to a time period and use lowercase when it refers to a project.
44. Ibid., xviii.
45. Löwenthal, “Das Dämonische,” 55.
46. Fromm, Escape from Freedom, 26.

Notes to Pages 9–14 
321
47. Horkheimer, Eclipse of Reason, 15, 66– 67.
48. Habermas, Future of Human Nature, 106.
49. Horkheimer and Adorno, Dialectic of Enlightenment, 2, 6.
50. Ibid., 9. Indeed, Dialectic’s original prospectus described the manuscript as exploring 
“the origins of the manifest crisis of modern culture in history and in the processes through 
which humankind established its rule over nature.” Quoted in Rolf Wiggershaus, The Frank-
furt School: Its History, Theories, and Political Significance (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2007), 334.
51. I mean to extend to Adorno and company Paget Henry’s critique of Habermas’s reliance 
on rationality/myth binaries. Paget Henry, “Myth, Language, and Habermasian Rationality: 
Another Africana Contribution,” in Perspectives on Habermas, ed. Lewis Hahn (Chicago: Open 
Court, 2000), 89– 112.
52. Outside critical theory, claims about the contemporary “flight from reason” were central 
to James Webb, The Occult Underground (LaSalle, IL: Open Court, 1974).
53. Ulrich Beck, Anthony Giddens, and Scott Lash, Reflexive Modernization: Politics, 
Tradition and Aesthetics in the Modern Social Order (Oxford: Polity Press, 1994).
54. Pierre Bourdieu and Loïc J. D. Wacquant, An Invitation to Reflexive Sociology (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1992).
55. For example, Povinelli has noted how Australian anthropologists have been called in 
to adjudicate what counts as authentically indigenous and, in the process, by authorizing or 
de- authorizing different traditions, have transformed that culture. Elizabeth A. Povinelli, The 
Cunning of Recognition (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2002).
56. Christian Thorne, “Empires of Theory” (unpublished manuscript, 2015).
57. For a good example of this sort of work, see Robert A. Orsi, Between Heaven and Earth: 
The Religious Worlds People Make and the Scholars Who Study Them (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 2005).
58. For a critique of “egological” versions of reflexivity, see Bourdieu and Wacquant, Invi-
tation to Reflexive Sociology, 40.
59. Carlos Castaneda’s work is a prime example because his neo- shamanic revival seems to 
have been largely cobbled together out of books from the UCLA library.
60. John Hedley Brooke, Science and Religion: Some Historical Perspectives (New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 1991), 45– 46.
61. Ronald Numbers, Galileo Goes to Jail: And Other Myths about Science and Religion 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009).
62. For a fuller survey of this argument, see Jason Ānanda Josephson, The Invention of 
Religion in Japan (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012), 2– 17.
63. For example, see Paul Feyerabend, Against Method (London: Verso, 2010); Sandra 
Harding, “Is Modern Science an Ethno- Science? Rethinking Epistemological Assumptions,” 
in Science and Technology in a Developing World, ed. Terry Shinn, Jack Spaapen, and Venni 
Krishna (Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 1997), 37– 64; and Thomas S. Kuhn, The Structure 
of Scientific Revolutions (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970).
64. I also put these two critiques together in Josephson, Invention of Religion in Japan. 
Also signicant in this regard is Andrew Jewett, “Science and Religion in Postwar America,” 

322 Notes to Pages 14–17
in The Worlds of American Intellectual History, eds. James T. Kloppenberg, Michael O’Brien,  
Joel Isaac, and Jennifer Ratner- Rosenhagen (New York: Oxford University Press, 2016),  
237–56.
65. Peter Harrison, The Territories of Science and Religion (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2015), 108.
66. Ibid., 173, 187.
67. Serge Margel, Superstition: L’anthropologie du religieux en terre de chrétienté (Paris: 
Galilée, 2005); Michel de Certeau, “What We Do When We Believe,” in On Signs, ed. Mar-
shall Blonsky (Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press, 1985). See also H. Floris Cohen, The 
Scientific Revolution (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994), 118.
68. Wouter Hanegraaff, Esotericism and the Academy: Rejected Knowledge in Western Cul-
ture (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012).
69. Even today, philosophers of science still debate the issue of the demarcation problem— 
namely, how to differentiate science from so- called pseudoscience or superstition. Interestingly, 
the paradigmatic case often seems to be astrology (which, it turns out, is harder to reject on 
philosophical grounds than one might at first suspect). See Massimo Pigliucci and Maarten 
Boudry, eds., Philosophy of Pseudoscience: Reconsidering the Demarcation Problem (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2013).
70. Michael Bergunder, “ ‘Religion’ and ‘Science’ within a Global Religious History,” Aries 
16, no. 1 (2016): 86– 141.
71. Jacques Derrida and Maurizio Ferraris, A Taste for the Secret (Malden: Blackwell, 2001), 5.
72. For a recent example, see Stephen Greenblatt, The Swerve: How the World Became 
Modern (New York: W. W. Norton, 2011). Note that his version of the myth of disenchantment 
occurs on p. 10.
73. Notably: Homi K. Bhabha, The Location of Culture (New York: Routledge, 1994); Gur-
minder Bhambra, Rethinking Modernity: Postcolonialism and the Sociological Imagination 
(New York: Palgrave, 2007); Dipesh Chakrabarty, Provincializing Europe: Postcolonial Thought 
and Historical Difference (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2000), especially 28; Paul 
Gilroy, The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1993); Kwame Gyekye, Tradition and Modernity: Philosophical Reflections 
on the African Experience (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011); Achille Mbembe, On the 
Postcolony (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001); V. Y. Mudimbe, The Invention of 
Africa: Gnosis, Philosophy, and the Order of Knowledge (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 
1988); and Edward Said, Orientalism (New York: Vintage Books, 1994). For more postcolonial 
critiques of disenchantment, see the following chapter.
74. Notably: Catherine L. Albanese, A Republic of Mind and Spirit: A Cultural History 
of American Metaphysical Religion (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2007); Courtney 
Bender, The New Metaphysicals: Spirituality and the American Religious Imagination (Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 2010); Jeffrey Kripal, Authors of the Impossible: The Paranor-
mal and the Sacred (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2010); Kripal, Mutants and Mystics: 
Science Fiction, Superhero Comics, and the Paranormal (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
2011); Kripal, Roads of Excess, Palaces of Wisdom: Eroticism and Reflexivity in the Study of 
Mysticism (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001); Joshua Landy and Michael Saler, eds., 
The Re- enchantment of the World: Secular Magic in a Rational Age (Stanford, CA: Stanford 

Notes to Pages 17–23 
323
University Press, 2009); John Lardas Modern, Secularism in Antebellum America (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2011); Alex Owen, The Place of Enchantment: British Occultism 
and the Culture of the Modern (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004); Christopher Par-
tridge, The Re- enchantment of the West, 2 vols. (New York: T & T Clark, 2004– 06); Randall 
Styers, Making Magic: Religion, Magic, and Science in the Modern World (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2004); Kocku von Stuckrad, The Scientification of Religion (Boston: De Gruy-
ter, 2014); and Hent de Vries, “Media Res: Global Religion, Public Spheres, and the Task of 
Contemporary Comparative Religious Studies,” in Religion and Media, ed. Hent de Vries and 
Samuel M. Weber (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2001), 3– 42. Finally, of direct rele-
vance is Egil Asprem, The Problem of Disenchantment: Scientific Naturalism and Esoteric Dis-
course, 1900– 1939 (Boston: Brill, 2014), which unfortunately only came to my attention during 
the in- press phase, and hence I do not have the space to fully engage with it in this manuscript.
75. Although my attention is on the discourse of the metropole rather than the colonial 
periphery, I see this project as an example of postcolonial theory and benefiting from the field’s 
major insights. For an example of relevant work on the colonial periphery, see Robert Yelle, The 
Language of Disenchantment: Protestant Literalism and Colonial Discourse in British India 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2013).
76. Michel Foucault, Histoire de la sexualité, 1: La volonté de savoir (Paris: Gallimard, 1976), 
18– 19.
Chapter One
1. For a history of this shrine, see Sarah Thal, Rearranging the Landscape of the Gods (Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press), 2005.
2. Jason Ānanda Josephson, “The Empowered World: Buddhist Medicine and the Potency 
of Prayer in Japan,” in Deus in Machina: Religion, Technology, and the Things in Between, ed. 
Jeremy Stolow (New York: Fordham University Press, 2012), 117– 41.
3. For more examples, see Ian Reader and George Tanabe, Practically Religious Worldly 
Benefits and the Common Religion of Japan (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1998). For 
anthropological accounts, see Honda Sōichirō, Nihon Shintō Nyūmon (Tokyo: Nihon Bungei-
sha, 1985), esp. 20; and Ikuo Takeuchi, Utsunomiya Kyōko, and Arakawa Toshihiko, Jujutsu 
Ishiki to Gendai Shakai (Tokyo: Seikyūsha, 2010).
4. For the examples above, see: Adam Ashforth, Witchcraft, Violence, and Democracy in 
South Africa (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005); Heike Behrend, Alice und Die Geis-
ter: Krieg im Norden Ugandas (München: Trickster Wissenschaft, 1993); Alexandra Boutros, 
“Virtual Vodou, Actual Practice: Transfiguring the Technological,” in Deus in Machina: Re-
ligion, Technology, and the Things in Between, ed. Jeremy Stolow (New York: Fordham Uni-
versity Press, 2012), 239– 59; Jean and John Comaroff, “Occult Economies and the Violence 
of Abstraction,” American Ethnologist 26, no. 2 (1999): 279– 303; Kirsten Endres, “Spirited 
Modernities: Mediumship and Ritual Performativity in Late Socialist Vietnam,” in Modernity 
and Re- enchantment: Religion in Post- revolutionary Vietnam, ed. Philip Taylor (Lexington 
Books, 2007), 194– 220; Peter Geschiere, The Modernity of Witchcraft: Politics and the Occult in 
Postcolonial Africa (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 1997); David Hess, Samba in 
the Night: Spiritism in Brazil (New York: Columbia University Press, 1994); David Lan, Guns 

324 Notes to Pages 23–24
and Rain: Guerillas and Spirit Mediums in Zimbabwe (Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1987); Birgit Meyer, “Commodities and the Power of Prayer: Pentecostalist Attitudes towards 
Consumption in Contemporary Ghana,” Development and Change 29 (1998): 751– 76; Aihwa 
Ong, Spirits of Resistance and Capitalist Discipline: Factory Women in Malaysia (Albany: State 
University of New York Press, 1987); James Siegel, Naming the Witch (Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press, 2006); Tulasi Srinivas, Winged Faith: Rethinking Globalization and Religious 
Pluralism through the Sathya Sai Movement (New York: Columbia University, 2010); and John 
Thompson, “Santísima Muerte: On the Origin and Development of a Mexican Occult Image,” 
Journal of the Southwest 40, no. 4 (1998): 405– 36.
See also Nils Bubandt, Democracy, Corruption and the Politics of Spirits in Contemporary 
Indonesia (London: Routledge, 2014); Erwan Dianteill, Des dieux et des signes: Initiation, écri-
ture et divination dans les religions afro- cubaines (Paris: Editions de l’École des hautes études, 
2000); Kirsten Endres and Andrea Lauser, eds., Engaging the Spirit World in Modern Southeast 
Asia (New York: Berghahn Books, 2011); Paul Johnson, Secrets, Gossip, and Gods: The Trans-
formation of Brazilian Candomblé (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002); Birgit Meyer 
and Peter Pels, eds., Magic and Modernity: Interfaces of Revelation and Concealment (Stanford, 
CA: Stanford University Press, 2003); Adam Mohr, Enchanted Calvinism: Labor Migration, 
Afflicting Spirits, and Christian Therapy in the Presbyterian Church of Ghana (Rochester, NY: 
University of Rochester Press, 2013); Henrietta Moore and Todd Sanders, eds., Magical In-
terpretations, Material Realities: Modernity, Witchcraft and the Occult in Postcolonial Africa 
(New York: Routledge, 2001); Todd Ramón Ochoa, Society of the Dead: Quita Manaquita 
and Palo Praise in Cuba (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2010); and Manuel Vásquez, 
The Brazilian Popular Church and the Crisis of Modernity (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2008).
5. Denis Byrne, “The Fortress of Rationality: Archaeology and Thai Popular Religion,” in 
Cosmopolitan Archaeologies, ed. L. Meskell (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2009), 73– 74.
6. Flyers on the wall of Dobrá Tea in Northampton, MA, June 30, 2014. Bender discusses 
flyers at the Harvest Cooperative Supermarket in Cambridge, MA, in Courtney Bender, The 
New Metaphysicals: Spirituality and the American Religious Imagination (Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 2010), 21– 22.
7. Catherine L. Albanese, A Republic of Mind and Spirit: A Cultural History of American 
Metaphysical Religion (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2007); and Bender, New Metaphys-
icals.
8. See Christopher Partridge, The Re- enchantment of the West, 2 vols. (New York: T & T 
Clark, 2004– 06); Jeffrey Kripal, Authors of the Impossible: The Paranormal and the Sacred (Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 2010); and Kripal, Mutants and Mystics: Science Fiction, Su-
perhero Comics, and the Paranormal (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2011). Kripal also 
uses “occulture” to signal the way that each culture “actualizes different potentials of human 
consciousness and energy” (Authors of the Impossible, 29).
9. Kripal, Authors of the Impossible, 6.
10. Karlyn Crowley, “New Age Feminism? Reading the Woman’s ‘New Age’ Nonfiction 
Best Seller in the United States,” in Print Culture History in Modern America: Religion and the 
Culture of Print in Modern America, ed. Charles Cohen and Paul Boyer (Madison: University 
of Wisconsin Press, 2009), 304– 5. Topics taken from the top 20 in Amazon’s “Best Sellers in 

Notes to Pages 24–25 
325
Books, accessed October 29, 2015, http:// www .amazon .com /best - sellers - books - Amazon /zgbs 
/books/.
11. Examples of television programs include: Most Haunted (Living TV, UK), Ghost Hunt-
ers (Syfy Channel), Celebrity Ghost Stories (Biography, UK and USA), Great British Ghosts 
(UKTV), Most Terrifying Places in America (Travel), Ghost Hunt (TVNZ, New Zealand), 
and Stalked by a Ghost (Biography); even Animal Planet had its own show, The Haunted (in 
Norway: Åndenes Makt [The power of spirits] on TVNorge, with a Danish spinoff on TV3 
Denmark); Destination Truth (Syfy) and MonsterQuest (History) hunt for cryptids like bigfoot 
and werewolves; while others like Cursed (Biography), America’s Psychic Challenge (Lifetime), 
Ancient Aliens (History), Britain’s Psychic Challenge (Channel 5, UK), Psychic Detectives (Court 
TV), and Битва экстрасенсов (Bitva ėkstrasensov, Battle of the Psychics [literally “those with 
extrasensory capabilities”], in Russia) focus on psychic powers. Not to mention the frequent 
testimonies to faith healing and other “miraculous gifts” on the Trinity Broadcasting Network 
and its Evangelical affiliates.
12. For psychic celebrities, think Derek Acorah, Theresa Caputo, John Edward, and James 
Van Praagh.
13. See Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life, “Many Americans Mix Multiple Faiths: 
Eastern, New Age Beliefs Widespread,” Pew Research Center, December 2009, accessed Sep-
tember 27, 2014, http:// www .pewforum .org /files /2009 /12 /multiplefaiths .pdf.
14. Combining “strongly agree” and “somewhat agree” in the above. YouGov Omnibus 
Research, “Tech and Skeptics,” January 21, 2015. See also Jenny Hall, “I Believe In . . .”, You-
Gov Omnibus Research, January 21, 2015, accessed October 17, 2015, https:// today .yougov .com 
/news /2015 /01 /21 /i - believe/.
15. The paranormal is the current preferred idiom for what used to be called “superstitions” 
insofar as it refers to putatively irrational beliefs. As the term paranormal is largely anachro-
nistic to the material I’m considering, I’ll be largely dropping it from the material I discuss in 
later chapters. Also to be clear, I am not taking as given the rationality or irrationality of any 
particular belief; rather, I am interested in the cultural characterization of certain beliefs as such.
16. They include in the paranormal: ESP, haunted houses, ghosts, telepathy, clairvoyance, 
astrology, communication with the dead, witches, reincarnation, and channeling.
17. This survey might sound like a quirky outlier, if not for an earlier Gallup survey from 
2001 which similarly concluded that 76 percent of Americans believed in at least one paranor-
mal category (and these numbers also showed a minor increase from Gallup surveys conducted 
in 1990). Frank Newport and Maura Strausberg, “Americans’ Belief in Psychic and Paranormal 
Phenomena Is Up over Last Decade,” Gallup News Service, June 8, 2001.
18. Baylor University, The Baylor Religion Survey, Wave 1 (Waco, TX: Baylor Institute for 
Studies of Religion, 2005) and The Baylor Religion Survey, Wave 2 (Waco, TX: Baylor Institute 
for Studies of Religion, 2007). The data is from 2005 unless marked. Combining “absolutely 
exist” and “probably exist” as well as “strongly agree” and “agree.”
19. Michael Cuneo, American Exorcism: Expelling Demons in the Land of Plenty (New York: 
Doubleday, 2001), 270.
20. Christopher D. Bader, F. Carson Mencken, and Joseph O. O. Baker, Paranormal 
America: Ghost Encounters, UFO Sightings, Bigfoot Hunts, and Other Curiosities in Religion 
and Culture (New York: New York University Press, 2010), 184.

326 Notes to Pages 25–29
21. For a more recent account of contemporary “spiritual warfare,” see Sean McCloud, 
American Possessions: Fighting Demons in the Contemporary United States (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2015).
22. Bader, Mencken, and Baker, 194 (emphasis added).
23. It should be noted that Bader, Mencken, and Baker construe the category of the paranor-
mal differently than the Gallup survey.
24. Bader, Mencken, and Baker, Paranormal America, 56– 58, 69. For fieldwork with one 
African American spiritualist community, see LeRhonda S. Manigault- Bryant, Talking to the 
Dead: Religion, Music, and Lived Memory among Gullah- Geechee Women (Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press, 2014).
25. Bader, Mencken, and Baker, Paranormal America, 74– 75.
26. Based on a 2006 survey of 439 college students. Robert Roy Britt, “Higher Educa-
tion Fuels Stronger Belief in Ghosts,” Live Science, accessed October 17, 2015, http:// www 
.livescience .com /564 - higher - education - fuels - stronger - belief - ghosts .html.
27. Loretta Orion, Never Again the Burning Times: Paganism Revived (Prospect Heights, 
IL: Waveland Press, 1995), 66– 69; see also T. M. Luhrmann, Persuasions of the Witch’s Craft: 
Ritual Magic in Contemporary England (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1989), 
esp. 6– 7, 99; and George Gmelch and Richard Felson, “Can a Lucky Charm Get You through 
Organic Chemistry?” Psychology Today (December 1980), 75–78.
28. Theodor Adorno, “Thesen gegen den Okkultismus,” in Adorno, Gesammelte Schriften 
(Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 2003) 4:273– 280.
29. See, for example, Clyde Wilcox, Linzey Sharon, and Ted G. Jelen, “Reluctant Warriors: 
Premillennialism and Politics in the Moral Majority,” Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 
30, no. 3 (1991): 245– 58.
30. See Ann Braude, Radical Spirits: Spiritualism and Women’s Rights in Nineteenth- 
Century America (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2001).
31. Achille Mbembe, On the Postcolony (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001), 4.
32. Owen Davies, America Bewitched: The Story of Witchcraft after Salem (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2013), 3, 203.
33. Ibid., 212, 225.
34. Ibid., 218.
35. See, for example, Antonia Blumberg, “Pat Robertson Blames ‘Witchcraft in the Family’ 
for Boy’s Stomach Pains,” Huffington Post, July 14, 2014, accessed October 17, 2015, http:// 
www .huffingtonpost .com /2014 /07 /14 /pat - robertson - witchcraft _n _5585736 .html; and Rich-
ard Hartley- Parkinson, “Witches ‘Are Putting Curses on Unborn Babies through Ultrasounds 
You Put on Facebook,” Metro UK, February 18, 2015, accessed October 17, 2015, http:// metro .co 
.uk /2015 /02 /18 /witches - are - putting - curses - on - unborn - babies - through - ultrasounds - you - put 
- on - facebook - 5068281/.
36. According to a Harris Poll survey of 2,250 adults conducted in November 2013, 26 
percent believe in witches. Larry Shannon- Missal, “Americans’ Belief in God, Miracles and 
Heaven Declines,” Harris Poll, December 16, 2013.
37. See, for example, William E. Burns, An Age of Wonders: Prodigies, Politics, and Provi-
dence in England, 1658– 1727 (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2002); and Stuart 

Notes to Pages 29–32 
327
Clark, Thinking with Demons: The Idea of Witchcraft in Early Modern Europe (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1997). For an account of the persistence of belief in miracles, see Jane 
Shaw, Miracles in Enlightenment England (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2006).
38. Combining “completely agree” with “mostly agree.” Pew Forum on Religion and Public 
Life, “U.S. Religious Landscape Survey: Religious Affiliation: Diverse and Dynamic,” Pew 
Research Center, February 2008, accessed September 7, 2016, http:// www .pewforum .org /files 
/2013 /05 /report - religious - landscape - study - full .pdf.
39. As Hall famously characterized seventeenth- century New England; see David D. Hall, 
Worlds of Wonder, Days of Judgment: Popular Religious Belief in Early New England (Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990).
40. The demographics least associated with paranormal belief are practicing Jews (62 per-
cent still believe in at least one paranormal category) and Evangelical Christians (64 percent still 
believe). Bader, Mencken, and Baker, Paranormal America, 93.
41. Ibid., 201.
42. Frank Newport, “In U.S., Four in 10 Report Attending Church in Last Week.” Gallup 
News Service (December 24 2013); while Gallup reports that 10– 15 percent are regular church-
goers in the UK. Robert Manchin, “Religion in Europe: Trust Not Filling the Pews,” Gallup 
News Service, September 21, 2004.
43. Frank Newport, “More Than 9 in 10 Americans Continue to Believe in God,” Gallup 
News Service, June 3, 2011.
44. TNS Opinion and Social, “Biotechnology Report,” Eurobarometer 73, no. 1 (2010): 204.
45. See Lyons, “Paranormal Beliefs Come (Super) Naturally to Some.” Belief in “God” 
has been taken from TNS Opinion and Social, “Biotechnology Report,” and Newport, “More 
Than 9 in 10 Americans Continue to Believe in God,” and should be taken as a very rough 
approximation only.
46. Fiona Macrae, “We’re More Likely to Believe in the Supernatural Than God?” Daily 
Mail Online, March 27, 2014, accessed October 18, 2015, http:// www .dailymail .co .uk /news 
/article - 2590349 /God - Were - likely - believe - supernatural - Number - people - think - sixth - sense 
- higher - regularly - attend - church .html. The source is a One Poll survey of British adults with a 
sample size of 2,000.
47. For example, a recent 2015 survey of belief in Sweden by the polling firm Demoskop 
(sample size 1,113) showed belief (from high to moderate) in paranormal phenomena (paranor-
mala fenomen) at 37 percent. Mikael Ingemyr, ed., “Vof- UndersöKningen 2015,” Föreningen 
Vetenskap och Folkbildning, October 29, 2015. There is anecdotal evidence of a similar pattern in 
Norway; see Andrew Higgins, “Norway Has a New Passion: Ghost Hunting,” New York Times, 
October 24, 2015, http:// www .nytimes .com /2015 /10 /25 /world /europe /for -  many -  norwegians 
- ghosts - fill - a - void .html.
48. Ina Schmied- Knittel, “Außergewöhnliche Erfahrungen: Repräsentative Studien und 
Aktuelle Befunde,” Zeitschrift für Anomalistik, no. 8 (2008): 107. They also included “Déjà 
Vu” in their questionnaire. Moreover, in their analysis of this data, the German sociologists 
Schmied- Knittel and Schetsche also reject the idea of contemporary Germany as disenchanted, 
emphasizing their larger conclusion that “postmodern people” often have magical experiences. 
Ina Schmied- Knittel and Michael Schetsche, “Everyday Miracles: Results of a Representa-

328 Notes to Pages 32–35
tive Survey in Germany,” European Journal of Parapsychology 20, no. 1 (2005): 3– 4. See also 
Schmied- Knittel and Schetsche, “Psi- Report Deutschland: Eine Repräsentative Bevölkerung-
sumfrage Zu Außergewöhnlichen Erfahrungen,” in Alltägliche Wunder: Erfahrungen mit dem 
Übersinnlichen- wissenschaftliche Befunde, ed. Eberhard Bauer and Michael Schetsche (Würz-
berg: Ergon, 2003).
49. Daniel Boy, “Les Français et les para- sciences: Vingt ans de mesures,” Revue française 
de sociologie 31, no. 1 (2002): 35– 45. For a classic ethnography of French witchcraft belief, see 
Jeanne Favret- Saada, Les mots, la mort, les sorts (Paris: Gallimard, 1977), translated as Deadly 
Words: Witchcraft in the Bocage (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1980).
50. Demyan Belyaev, “Opyt empiricheskogo issledovaniia geterodoksal’noi religioznosti v 
sovremennoi Rossii’ Опыт эмпирического исследования гетеродоксальной религиозности 
в современной России,” Sotsiologicheskiie issledovaniia 11 (2009), 88– 98.
51. Birgit Menzel, “The Occult Revival in Russia Today and Its Impact on Literature,” 
Harriman Review 16, no. 1 (2007), 1. For more scholarship on this subject, see Bernice Glatzer 
Rosenthal, ed., The Occult in Russian and Soviet Culture (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 
1997).
52. Bobby Duffy, “Supreme Being(s), the Afterlife and Evolution,” Ipsos Global @dvisory, 
April 25, 2011. The same study had God belief in the United States at 70 percent.
53. Gordon Gauchat, “Politicization of Science in the Public Sphere: A Study of Public 
Trust in the United States, 1974 to 2010,” American Sociological Review 77, no. 2 (April 1, 2012): 
167– 87.
54. “The Spirit of Things Unseen: Belief in Post- Religious Britain,” Theos, September 17, 
2013, 7.
55. Although fairies are missing from most of these surveys, scholars have emphasized con-
tinuities between fairy lore and UFO abduction narratives. Jacques Vallée, Passport to Magonia: 
From Folklore to Flying Saucers (Chicago: Regnery, 1969); and Kripal, Authors of the Impossible. 
While no pollster focused directly on “ancient prophecy,” in the 2005 Baylor survey, 28.2 per-
cent reported having researched “the prophecies of Nostradamus.” See Bader, Mencken, and 
Baker, Paranormal America, 107.
56. Scholars have also tracked various changes in the ontological status of spirits and magic 
in various law codes, which show how an attempt to eliminate the danger of witchcraft slowly 
evolved into an attempt to eliminate belief in witchcraft. See, for example, Edward Peters, The 
Magician, the Witch, and the Law (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1978). But 
one should be careful about reading this history unidirectionally, and also be careful not to too 
quickly conflate laws and popular beliefs.
57. David Hufford, “Visionary Spiritual Experiences in an Enchanted World,” Anthropology 
and Humanism 35, no. 2 (2010): 142– 58.
58. Ernest Gellner, Spectacles and Predicaments: Essays in Social Theory (New York: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1979), 61– 64.
59. Theodor Adorno, Minima Moralia: Reflections from Damaged Life, trans. Edmund 
Jephcott (New York: Verso, 2005), 239.
60. George Ritzer, Enchanting a Disenchanted World: Revolutionizing the Means of Con-
sumption (Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press, 1999).

Notes to Pages 36–42 
329
61. Geoffrey K. Nelson, Cults, New Religions and Religious Creativity (London: Routledge 
& Kegan Paul, 1987), 1– 2.
62. Partridge, Re- enchantment of the West, vol. 1, esp. 38– 70.
63. For further examples, see Robert Wuthnow, After Heaven: Spirituality in America since 
the 1950s (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998), esp. 2; and David Lyon, Jesus in Dis-
neyland: Religion in Postmodern Times (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2000), esp. 34. Although in 
very different terms, one might also think of Christof Schorsch, Die New- Age- Bewegung: Utopie 
und Mythos der Neuen Zeit (Gütersloh: Gütersloher Verlagshaus, 1988), esp. 154– 55.
64. Robert Ellwood, The Sixties Spiritual Awakening: American Religion Moving from 
Modern to Postmodern (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1994); and Hugh Mc-
Leod, The Religious Crisis of the 1960s (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007).
65. Pauline Rosenau, Post- Modernism and the Social Sciences: Insights, Inroads, and Intru-
sions (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1992), 148– 49.
66. Zygmunt Bauman, Postmodern Ethics (Cambridge: Blackwell, 1993), 33. See also Bau-
man, Intimations of Postmodernity (New York: Routledge, 1992).
67. David Lyon, “A Bit of a Circus: Notes on Postmodernity and New Age,” Religion, 23 
(1993): 120. See also Christopher H. Partridge, “Truth, Authority and Epistemological Indi-
vidualism in New Age Thought,” in Handbook of New Age, ed. Daren Kemp and Lewis James 
(Boston: Brill, 2007), 231– 54, which cites the same passage of Lyon.
68. Kripal, Authors of the Impossible, 16.
Chapter Two
1. Alexandre Koyré, From the Closed World to the Infinite Universe (Baltimore: Johns Hop-
kins University Press, 1957).
2. Gilbert Germain, A Discourse on Disenchantment (Albany: State University of New York 
Press, 1993), 1– 2; Manuel Vásquez, More Than Belief: A Materialist Theory of Religion (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 2011), esp. 39.
3. Dijksterhuis treats Newton as the culmination of the mechanization of the world pic-
ture. E. J. Dijksterhuis, De Mechanisering Van Het Wereldbeeld (Amsterdam: J. M. Meulenhoff, 
1950). See also Edward Dolnick, The Clockwork Universe: Isaac Newton, the Royal Society, and 
the Birth of the Modern World (New York: HarperCollins, 2011).
4. Max Horkheimer and Theodor Adorno, Dialectic of Enlightenment, trans. Edmund 
Jephcott (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2002).
5. For example, Koyré gives all three roles in his grand narrative, From the Closed World to 
the Infinite Universe.
6. Despite the pioneering status of the Hermetic tradition, Yates often overstates its co-
herence. Frances Yates, Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1964).
7. Koyré, From the Closed World, 39; Arthur Lovejoy, The Great Chain of Being: A Study of 
the History of an Idea (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1936), 116.
8. Hegel claims it was Jacobi who brought Bruno to philosophy by comparing him to Spi-
noza; G. W. F. Hegel, Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der Philosophie (Leiden: A. H. Adriani, 

330 Notes to Pages 42–43
1908), 777. Another key source for Bruno as a scientific martyr is Domenico Berti, Vita di Gior-
dano Bruno da Nola (Florence: Paravia, 1868); and more recently, Michael White, The Pope and 
the Heretic: A True Story of Giordano Bruno (New York: William Morrow, 2003).
9. Giordano Bruno, Cause, Principle and Unity: Essays on Magic (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1998).
10. For examples, see A. G. Molland, “Roger Bacon as Magician,” Traditio 30 (1974): 445– 
60; and Molland, “Roger Bacon and the Hermetic Tradition in Medieval Science,” Vivarium 
31, no. 1 (1993): 140– 60. Copernicus’s connection to Hermeticism is controversial. The main 
evidence for Hermetic influence is Copernicus’s phrase “Trismegistus visibilem deum” in De 
revolutionibus orbium coelestium. For Kepler, see Patrick Boner, Kepler’s Cosmological Syn-
thesis: Astrology, Mechanism and the Soul (Boston: Brill, 2013).
11. Specifically, Descartes read Agrippa, della Porta, and Ramon Lull. Desmond Clarke, 
Descartes: A Biography (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006), esp. 53– 58.
12. René Descartes, Oeuvres De Descartes, 12 vols. (Paris: Léopold Cerf, 1897– 1910), 6:9. 
See also Clarke, Descartes, 41.
13. Lynn Thorndike, “The Attitude of Francis Bacon and Descartes towards Magic and Oc-
cult Science,” in Science, Medicine, and History, ed. Ashworth Underwood (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1953), 454.
14. Descartes called this science mathesis universalis; see esp. “Rules for the Direction of 
the Mind” in René Descartes, The Philosophical Writings of Descartes, 3 vols. (New York: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1984), 1:18– 19. For the divine nature of mathematics in Descartes, see 
Morris Kline, Mathematics: The Loss of Certainty (New York: Oxford University Press, 1980), 
42– 43.
15. See, for example, Betty Dobbs, The Janus Faces of Genius: The Role of Alchemy in New-
ton’s Thought (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991).
16. Charles Webster, From Paracelsus to Newton: Magic and the Making of Modern Science 
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 1982), 68.
17. Isaac Newton, Newton: Philosophical Writings, ed. Janiak Andrew (New York: Cam-
bridge University Press, 2004), 112, 116.
18. Richard Westfall, Never at Rest: A Biography of Isaac Newton (New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 1980); see esp. 319– 20, 815– 17.
19. Edward Davis, “Newton’s Rejection of the ‘Newtonian World View’: The Role of Divine 
Will in Newton’s Natural Philosophy,” Science and Christian Belief 3, no. 2 (1991): 103– 17; 
David Kubrin, “Newton and the Cyclical Cosmos: Providence and the Mechanical Philos-
ophy,” Journal of the History of Ideas 28, no. 3 (1967): 325– 46; and Stephen D. Snobelen, 
“Cosmos and Apocalypse,” New Atlantis, no. 44 (2015), 76– 94.
20. John Maynard Keynes, “Newton, the Man,” in The Collected Writings of John Maynard 
Keynes, ed. Society Royal Economic, 30 vols. (New York: Macmillan, 1971– 89), 10:363– 64.
21. For Boyle, see Lawrence Principe, The Aspiring Adept: Robert Boyle and His Alchemical 
Quest (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1998). For Oppenheimer, see James Hijiya, 
“The Gita of J. Robert Oppenheimer,” Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 144, 
no. 2 (2000): 123– 67; and Isidor Isaac Rabi, Oppenheimer (New York: Scribner, 1969), 7.
Other examples: for Alfred Russel Wallace, see Robert Richards, Darwin and the Emer-
gence of Evolutionary Theories of Mind and Behavior (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 

Notes to Pages 43–45 
331
1987), 176– 84; for William James, see Deborah Blum, Ghost Hunters: William James and the 
Search for Scientific Proof of Life after Death (New York: Penguin Press, 2006); for Thomas 
Edison, see Neil Baldwin, Edison: Inventing the Century (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
2001), esp. 95– 96; for Arthur Stanley Eddington, see Matthew Stanley, Practical Mystic: Reli-
gion, Science, and A. S. Eddington (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007); for Wolfgang 
Pauli, see Suzanne Gieser, The Innermost Kernel: Depth Psychology and Quantum Physics (New 
York: Springer, 2005). See also Mark Morrisson, Modern Alchemy: Occultism and the Emergence 
of Atomic Theory (New York: Oxford University Press, 2007).
22. Harding summarizes: “One phenomenon feminist historians have focused on is the 
rape and torture metaphors in the writings of Sir Francis Bacon.” Sandra Harding, The Science 
Question in Feminism (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1986), 113; see also 115– 16. For an 
early example, see Ludwig Feuerbach, “Geschichte der neuern Philosophie von Bacon von 
Verulam bis Benidict Spinosa” (originally published 1833), reproduced in Ludwig Feuerbach, 
Sämmtliche Werke (Leipzig: Wigand, 1846– 90), vol. 4, esp. 66. See also Fritjof Capra, The 
Turning Point: Science, Society, and the Rising Culture (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1982), 
56; Carolyn Merchant, The Death of Nature: Women, Ecology, and the Scientific Revolution 
(New York: Harper, 1993), 33; and Norman Wirzba, The Paradise of God: Renewing Religion 
in an Ecological Age (New York: Oxford University Press, 2007), 67– 68, 81. Bacon plays an 
important role in Robert Yelle, The Language of Disenchantment: Protestant Literalism and 
Colonial Discourse in British India (New York: Oxford University Press, 2013), esp. 74, 88– 91. 
But in Yelle it is Bacon’s attempt to formulate a universal language, rather than to dominate 
nature, that is at stake.
23. Ernst Cassirer, The Platonic Renaissance in England (Austin: University of Texas Press, 
1953), 48. See also Peter Pesic, “Proteus Unbound: Francis Bacon’s Successors and the Defense 
of Experiment,” Studies in Philology 98, no. 4 (2001): 428– 56; and Carolyn Merchant, “ ‘The 
Violence of Impediments’: Francis Bacon and the Origins of Experimentation,” Isis 99, no. 4 
(2008): 731– 60.
24. Horkheimer and Adorno, Dialectic of Enlightenment, 2 (emphasis added).
25. For Foucault’s “knowledge- power” (Foucault sometimes reversed the terms as “power- 
knowledge” French pouvoir- savoir), see Michel Foucault, Histoire de la sexualité, 1: La volonté 
de savoir (Paris: Gallimard, 1976), esp. 93, 130– 31. For examples of Bacon and Foucault together, 
see Béatrice Han, Foucault’s Critical Project: Between the Transcendental and the Historical 
(Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2002), 112; and José María Rodríguez García, “Sci-
entia Potestas Est— Knowledge Is Power,” Neohelicon 28, no. 1 (2001): 109– 21.
26. William Leiss, The Domination of Nature (Buffalo, NY: McGill- Queen’s Univer-
sity Press, 1994), esp. 71; Merchant, Death of Nature, esp.164– 65. See also David Hawkin, 
“The Disenchantment of Nature and Christianity’s ‘Burden of Guilt,’ ” Laval Théologique et 
Philosophique 55, no. 1 (1999): 65– 71; Susanne Scholz, “The Mirror and the Womb: Concep-
tions of the Mind in Bacon’s Discourse of the Natural Sciences,” in Feminism and the Enlight-
enment, vol. 1 of Feminism, ed. Mary Evans (New York: Routledge, 2001), 173– 80; Pierre Hadot, 
The Veil of Isis (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2006), 93.
27. See Paolo Rossi, Francesco Bacone: Dalla magia alla scienza (Bari: Laterza, 1957); 
Charles Webster, The Great Instauration: Science, Medicine and Reform, 1626– 1660 (New 
York: Holmes & Meier, 1976); John Henry, Knowledge Is Power: How Magic, the Government 

332 Notes to Pages 45–48
and an Apocalyptic Vision Inspired Francis Bacon to Create Modern Science (Lanham, MD: Icon 
Books, 2003); Stephen McKnight, The Religious Foundations of Francis Bacon’s Thought (Co-
lumbia: University of Missouri Press, 2006); and Peter Harrison, The Fall of Man and the Foun-
dations of Science (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2007). Also, after the early drafts 
of this chapter and independently using the phrase “the Science of Magic,” I came across a 
dissertation by Sophie Weeks, “Francis Bacon’s Science of Magic” (University of Leeds, 2007), 
to which I find myself largely in agreement. Points of accord will be noted below.
28. Rossi, Francesco Bacone. For astrology, see also Webster, From Paracelsus to Newton, 31.
29. I am agreeing here with Weeks, “Bacon’s Science of Magic.”
30. Bacon, De augmentis. Reproduced in The Works of Francis Bacon, ed. James Spedding, 
Robert Ellis, and Douglas Heath, 14 vols. (London: Longmans, 1857– 74), 1:456– 57. My trans-
lation.
31. Latin in Works of Francis Bacon, 1:573, translated in ibid., 4:366– 67. See also 3:351.
32. Latin in Works of Francis Bacon, 1:573, I amended the translation appearing in 4: 366. 
See also Weeks, “Bacon’s Science of Magic,” 2.
33. To be sure, in Novum Organum (1620), Bacon does remark, “Scientia & Potentia hu-
mana in idem oincident, quia ignoratio causæ destituit effectum.” In English, “Human knowl-
edge and human power come to the same thing, for ignorance of cause puts the effect beyond 
reach.” Francis Bacon, The Instauratio Magna, Part 2: “Novum Organum” and Associated 
Texts, ed. Graham Rees (Oxford: Clarendon, 2004), 64– 65. But again, this is not the same as 
saying “knowledge is power,” and when scholars want that phrase they usually (incorrectly) 
cite Bacon’s meditations.
34. Reproduced in Francis Bacon, A Harmony of the Essays, ed. Edward Arber (London: 
Constable, 1871), 128.
35. Steven Matthews, “Francis Bacon and the Divine Hierarchy of Nature,” in The Inven-
tion of Discovery, 1500– 1700, ed. James Fleming (Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 2011), 42.
36. Francis Bacon, Sacred Meditations (1598), reproduced in Bacon, Harmony of the 
Essays, 129.
37. Bacon, The Instauratio Magna, Part 2, 19. See also Works of Francis Bacon, 4:493– 504.
38. See Peter Harrison, “The Book of Nature and Early Modem Science,” in The Book of 
Nature in Early Modern and Modern History, ed. Klaas van Berkel and Arjo Vanderjagt (Dud-
ley, MA: Peeters, 2006).
39. Serge Margel, Superstition: L’anthropologie du religieux en terre de chrétienté (Paris: 
Galilée, 2005).
40. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica (Westminster: Christian Classics, 1981), 3:1585.
41. Pedro Ciruelo, Reprouación de las supersticiones y hechizerias (Valencia: Ediciones Al-
batros, 1978), 39, translated in Stuart Clark, Thinking with Demons: The Idea of Witchcraft in 
Early Modern Europe (New York: Oxford University Press, 1997), 478.
42. Both the Latin superstitio and the German Aberglaube were used. See, for example, Mar-
tin Luther, D. Martin Luthers Werke: Kritische Gesammtausgabe (Graz: Akademische Druck-  
und Verlagsanstalt, 1964), 6:539.
43. Ibid., 54:195– 299. It is worth noting that Luther started not as a schismatic but a re-
former within the institution of the church, and it was only in later works such as this that his 
critique of the pope as Antichrist took shape.

Notes to Pages 48–51 
333
44. Translated in Euan Cameron, Enchanted Europe: Superstition, Reason, and Religion, 
1250– 1750 (New York: Oxford University Press, 2010), 166.
45. Ibid., 169.
46. See ibid., which is a fuller study of the concept of superstition in the period from 1250– 
1750.
47. Ulinka Rublack, Reformation Europe (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005), 
10– 11.
48. See, for example, Works of Francis Bacon, 3:251.
49. Ibid., 6:416.
50. Ibid., 3:245
51. Ibid., 4:53– 64.
52. Ibid., 4:432.
53. Ibid., 4:56.
54. Ibid., 4:88.
55. Ibid., 4:87– 89.
56. Ibid., 6:416.
57. Ibid., 4:172– 73 (emphasis added).
58. Think: Sylva sylvarum (1627).
59. See Merchant, “Violence of Impediments.”
60. See Alan Soble, “In Defense of Bacon,” in A House Built on Sand, ed. Noretta Koertge 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2000), 195– 254. Perhaps Bacon’s most damning phrase 
is from Temporis Partus Masculus, which states, “I am come in very truth leading to you Nature 
with all her children to bind her to your service and make her your slave.” Cited and translated 
in Benjamin Farrington, “Temporis Partus Masculus: An Untranslated Writing of Francis Ba-
con,” Centaurus 1, no. 3 (1951): 197.
61. Robert Darnton, The Great Cat Massacre and Other Episodes in French Cultural His-
tory (New York: Basic Books, 1984), 194; Denis Diderot, ‘Prospectus de l’Encyclopédie,” (1750) 
reprinted in Encyclopédie; ou, Dictionnaire raisonné des sciences, des arts et des métiers, ed. 
Denis Diderot and Jean le Rond d’Alembert, 28 vols. (1751– 72), 5:635, in ARTFL Encyclopédie 
Project, accessed January 7, 2011, http:// encyclopedie .uchicago .edu. Hereafter, Encyclopédie 
references will be cited by their volume and page number. Different variations of the Corberon 
quote above appear in Antoine Faivre, “Un familier des sociétés ésotériques au dix- huitième 
siècle: Bourrée de Corberon,” Revue des sciences humaines, no. 126 (1967): 268; and Auguste 
Viatte, Les sources occultes du Romantisme: Illuminisme— théosophie, 1770– 1820 (Paris: Cham-
pion, 1965), 1:247– 48. I’ve followed Faivre. See also Encyclopedia of the Enlightenment, ed. 
Michel Delon (Chicago: Fitzroy Dearborn, 2001), s.v. “Alchemy,” by Didier Kahn, 1:50– 55.
62. Darnton, Great Cat Massacre, 191– 209.
63. Ibid., 211.
64. For example, Denis Diderot, De la suffisance de la religion naturelle (1770). Diderot 
moved from deism to atheism to pantheism (and perhaps back).
65. The Système Figuré did have a separate heading for a “Pneumatology of Knowledge of 
the Spirit” that was closer to this other meaning. In his chart Bacon also had a place for the 
“magical,” as a subheading under “Natural Prudence.”
66. To be sure, they lived after a legal shift in the status of witches, discussed below.

334 Notes to Pages 52–54
67. Wolfgang Behringer, Witchcraft Persecutions in Bavaria (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2002), 353.
68. Henri Beaune, Les sorciers de Lyon: Épisode judiciaire du XVIIIe siècle (Dijon: Rabutot, 
1868), 30– 67. Admittedly, Guillaudot and company were executed under the charge of sacri-
lege, but the issue was his possession of magical books. While this is often regarded as the last 
of its kind in France, other executions of murder by poisoning in the years that followed were 
often directed at witches, and it would take more research to uncover when physical poisoning 
and magical poisoning became fully differentiated.
69. Bernard Traimond, Le pouvoir de la maladie: Magie et politique dans les Landes de 
Gascogne, 1750– 1826 (Bordeaux: Université de Bordeaux, 1988).
70. See Diderot and d’Alembert, Encyclopédie, 9:853.
71. Cassirer argues that “the gravest obstacle” to the Enlightenment conception of truth was 
“those divergences from truth which do not arise from a mere insufficiency of knowledge but 
from a perverted direction of knowledge.” Ernst Cassirer, The Philosophy of the Enlightenment 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1951), 160– 61.
72. Voltaire cited in Cameron, Enchanted Europe, 308.
73. One might also think of Bernard Le Bouyer de Fontenelle, Histoire des oracles (1687).
74. Immanuel Kant, Kritik Der Urteilskraft, ed. Klemme Heiner and Giordanetti Piero 
(Hamburg: F. Meiner, 2006), 175.
75. Encyclopédie, 15:669– 70. I’ve translated traits invincibles as “irresistible bonds,” but an 
even more literal translation would be “invincible lines” or “traits.”
76. See Jean- Baptiste Thiers, Traité des superstitions, 1679.
77. For the philosophes, this was an asymmetrical disenchantment insofar as they committed 
themselves to a theology that denied the reality of an active agent of evil and hence aimed pri-
marily to define the diabolical out of existence. See Nadia Minerva, Il Diavolo: Eclissi e meta-
morfosi nel Secolo dei Lumi (Ravenna: Longo, 1990). This is a thread that goes back significantly 
to Balthasar Bekker’s De betoverde weereld. See, for example, “Incubes” in Collection complette 
des oeuvres de M. de Voltaire (Genève, Cramer, 1768– 77), 23:500– 502.
78. Des oeuvres de Voltaire, 28:429.
79. Wouter Hanegraaff, Esotericism and the Academy: Rejected Knowledge in Western Cul-
ture (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012), 163 (emphasis in the original).
80. Encyclopédie, 16:253– 61. Fabre has shown that much of Diderot’s entry is basically trans-
lated from Johann Jakob Brucker. See Jean Fabre, “Diderot et les Théosophes,” Cahiers de 
l’Association internationale des études francaises 13 (1961): 203– 22.
81. Encyclopédie, 16:253.
82. Paracelsus, Paracelsus: Essential Theoretical Writings (Leiden: Brill, 2008).
83. See, for example, Paracelsus, Liber de nymphis, sylphis, pygmaeis et salamandris et de 
caeteris spiritibus (1566). The seeming contradiction of his commitment to medicine, magic, 
and Christian faith is addressed in Andrew Weeks, Paracelsus: Speculative Theory and the 
Crisis of the Early Reformation (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1997); and Charles 
Webster, Paracelsus: Medicine, Magic and Mission at the End of Time (New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press, 2008).
84. Webster, From Paracelsus to Newton, 4.
85. Later the main representative for theosophy and Böhme’s thought in France was Louis 

Notes to Pages 54–56 
335
Claude de Saint- Martin (1743– 1803), discussed in greater detail in David Allen Harvey, Beyond 
Enlightenment: Occultism and Politics in Modern France (DeKalb: Northern Illinois University 
Press, 2005). Voltaire and other philosophes would ultimately attack Saint- Martin and his work 
(ibid., 18).
86. Ariel Hessayon, “Boehme’s Life and Times,” in An Introduction to Jacob Boehme: Four 
Centuries of Thought and Reception, ed. Hessayon (New York: Taylor & Francis, 2013), 14; 
Andrew Weeks, Boehme: An Intellectual Biography of the Seventeenth- Century Philosopher and 
Mystic (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1992).
87. Weeks, Boehme: An Intellectual Biography, 151.
88. Cyril O’Regan, Gnostic Apocalypse Jacob Boehme’s Haunted Narrative (Albany: State 
University of New York Press, 2002), 3.
89. Antoine Faivre, L’ésotérisme, 4th ed. (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2007); 
Joscelyn Godwin, The Theosophical Enlightenment (Albany: State University of New York 
Press, 1994).
90. Encyclopédie, 16:253– 54.
91. Ibid., 16:253.
92. Ibid., 16:254– 55. See also Fabre, “Diderot et les Théosophes.”
93. Encyclopédie, 1:57.
94. For example, Diderot makes reference to Gerolamo Cardano and Martín del Río. Ibid., 
4:1070– 71.
95. Ibid., 3:410.
96. Ibid., 9:852– 54.
97. The discussion of divine magic is consistent with a similar tension in the entry on “mir-
acles”; see ibid., 10:560– 62.
98. See Jon Ruthven, On the Cessation of the Charismata: The Protestant Polemic on Post-
biblical Miracles (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1997); and D. P. Walker, “The Cessation 
of Miracles,” in Hermeticism and the Renaissance: Intellectual History and the Occult in Early 
Modern Europe, ed. Ingrid Merkel and Allen Debus (Washington, DC: Folger Books, 1988), 
111– 24.
99. Encyclopédie, 9:853– 54.
100. See Thomas Aquinas, Compendium Theologiae (ca. 1273); see also Robert Bartlett, 
The Natural and the Supernatural in the Middle Ages (New York: Cambridge University Press, 
2008).
101. For instance, in 1682, after the “Affair of the Poisons” (L’affaire des poisons), the gov-
ernment of Louis XIV issued an edict that effectively defined the issue of witchcraft in terms 
of pretended magic. But it did not deny the existence of magic; indeed, it left the execution of 
witches for diabolical pacts in place (which continued to be enforced). See Brian Levack, “The 
Decline and End of Witchcraft Prosecutions,” in The Oxford Handbook of Witchcraft in Early 
Modern Europe and Colonial America, ed. Levack (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013), 433.
102. See Clark, Thinking with Demons, 1997.
103. The Witchcraft Act of 1735 was replaced in 1951 with the Fraudulent Mediums Act, 
directed at those who make money by fraudulently claiming to be a psychic or spiritualist me-
dium. Interestingly, the main champion of the 1951 act was Labour MP Thomas Brooks, himself 
an ardent spiritualist, who was aiming to protect genuine mediums from frauds. This later 

336 Notes to Pages 56–58
act was only replaced in 2008 with an EU consumer protection regulation focusing on unfair 
marketing practices.
104. Encyclopédie, 9:852. A description with plenty of precedents, including Francis Bacon.
105. See ibid., 3:420; see also the original Système Figuré, which lists “magie naturalle” as 
a subbranch of chemistry.
106. James Van Horn Melton, The Rise of the Public in Enlightenment Europe (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2008), 88.
107. Owen Davies, Grimoires: A History of Magic Books (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2009), 98– 100.
108. Albertus Parvus Lucius (pseud.), Secrets merveilleux de la Magie naturelle et càbalis-
tique du Petit Albert (Lyton: N.p., 1752), 10, 61.
109. Hanegraaff, Esotericism and the Academy, 177. See also Graziella Federici- Vescovini, 
Le Moyen Âge magique: La magie entre religion et science du XIIIe au XIVe siècle (Paris: J. Vrin, 
2011).
110. As Kant argued in his critique of Emmanuel Swedenborg’s mystical visions, if even a 
few spirit tales were true, it would call the whole basis of natural philosophy into question. Im-
manuel Kant, Träume eines Geistersehers, erläutert durch Träume der Metaphysik (Königsberg: 
Kanter, 1766). This is discussed in greater detail in chapter 5.
111. For example, Descartes suggested esprits animaux (“animal spirits”) as a way to ex-
plain the interface between mind and body. René Descartes, Les passions de l’âme (Paris: N.p., 
1728), 51f.
112. Many encyclopedists were Freemasons; see Frank Kafker and Serena Kafker, The Ency-
clopedists as Individuals: A Biographical Dictionary of the Authors of the Encyclopèdie (Oxford: 
Voltaire Foundation, 1988); and Margaret Jacob, Living the Enlightenment: Freemasonry and 
Politics in Eighteenth- Century Europe (New York: Oxford University Press, 1991). Regard-
ing alchemists: Jean- Jacques Rousseau’s interest in alchemy can be seen in his Institutions 
chimiques. The adventurer and alchemist Giacomo Casanova knew d’Alembert (at least, ac-
cording to Casanova’s memoirs). Paul- Jacques Malouin was likely an alchemist; see his entry 
on “Alchimie,” Encyclopédie, 1:248– 49. For others, see Kafker and Kafker, Encyclopedists as 
Individuals, 400– 401. For one magician, see ibid., 289.
113. Michael Buckley, At the Origins of Modern Atheism (New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press, 1987), 249.
114. Diderot notes that his chemistry teacher Guillaume François Rouelle believed in al-
chemy and taught it as part of his course. Denis Diderot, Oeuvres complètes de Diderot, ed. Jules 
Assézat (Paris: Garnier frères, 1875– 77) 6:409.
115. See Jean Ehrard, “Matérialisme et naturalisme: Les sources occultistes de la pensée 
de Diderot,” Cahiers de l’Association internationale des études francaises (1961): 189– 201; and 
Jacques Proust, “Diderot et la physiognomonie,” Cahiers de l’Association internationale des 
études francaises (1961): 317– 29. I think the jury is out on Diderot’s Paracelsianism, but see 
Ehrard’s “Matérialisme et naturalism.”
116. Jean- Paul Jouary, Diderot et la matière vivante (Paris: Messidor/Editions sociales, 1992).
117. See Buckley, Origins of Modern Atheism, 249– 50.
118. Some conservative Catholics were suspicious that the philosophes were covertly Protes-
tant. See Darrin McMahon, Enemies of the Enlightenment: The French Counter- Enlightenment 

Notes to Pages 58–61 
337
and the Making of Modernity (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002); Graeme Garrad, 
Counter- Enlightenments: From the Eighteenth Century to the Present (New York: Routledge, 
2006).
119. Augustin Barruel, Mémoires pour servir à l’histoire du jacobinisme, 1798. See Garrard, 
Counter- Enlightenments, esp. 8, 43– 48.
120. Paul Kléber Monod, Solomon’s Secret Arts: The Occult in the Age of Enlightenment (New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2013), 263.
121. To be fair, the messiness of the Enlightenment in general has been a central feature of 
recent Enlightenment studies; for example, Dorinda Outram, The Enlightenment (New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 1995).
122. A key text was the English translation of Ernst Cassirer’s Die Philosophie der Aufklärung 
(1932) into The Philosophy of the Enlightenment (1951), although there were scattered usages of 
the phrase in English earlier. Garrard, Counter- Enlightenments, 6.
123. Even today the French scholarship does not use the term l’Éclaircissement (lit. “the 
Enlightenment”) to talk about any period at all, and the revival of the Siècle des Lumières (age 
of lights) as an analogue to the Enlightenment similarly took off in the 1950s. Garrard, Counter- 
Enlightenments, 6.
124. A key milestone in this debate was, again, Cassirer’s Die Philosophie der Aufklärung.
125. Not that anachronism is a cardinal sin, but it should be used self- consciously.
126. Foucault’s famous “Qu’est- ce que les lumières?” is less about an era than an attitude, and 
when Foucault touches on periodization, he uses “modernity.”
127. Robert Sinnerbrink, Understanding Hegelianism (Stocksfield: Acumen, 2007), 89.
128. Steven Shapin, The Scientific Revolution (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996), 
2. See also Bernard Cohen, Revolution in Science (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1985), 396– 403.
129. Sydney Ross, “Scientist: The Story of a Word,” Annals of Science 18, no. 2 (1962): 
66– 67.
130. Ibid., 69– 70. Also, the term scientist was coined by William Whewell in 1834 in a review 
article bemoaning the fragmentation of the sciences.
131. Johann Christoph Adelung, Grammatisch- kritisches Wörterbuch der hochdeutschen 
Mundart (Vienna: Pichler, 1808), 4:1582– 83, translated in Frederick Gregory, “Hans Christian 
Ørsted’s Spiritual Interpretation of Natural Science,” in Hans Christian Ørsted and the Roman-
tic Legacy in Science, ed. Robert Michael Brain, R. S. Cohen, and Ole Knudsen (Dordrecht: 
Springer, 2007), 403– 4.
132. See Bas van Bommel, Classical Humanism and the Challenge of Modernity: Debates on 
Classical Education in 19th- Century Germany (Berlin: De Gruyter, 2015), 80– 107.
133. To be clear, biblical philology often was undertaken by Protestant scholars who had 
explicitly theological aims in mind. It was particularly in the nineteenth century that historical 
criticism was deployed by thinkers like David Strauß in ways that were interpreted as antireli-
gious and thus contributing to the sense that scientific philology and Christian revelation might 
be in opposition.
134. Peter Harrison, The Territories of Science and Religion (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2015), 119.
135. See Hanegraaff, Esotericism and the Academy, for a version of this argument.

338 Notes to Pages 62–65
136. The occultists and magicians often understood themselves to be Christians. See, for 
example, Jean Pierre Laurant, L’ésotérisme Chrétien en France au XIXe siècle (Lausanne: L’Age 
d’Homme, 1992).
Chapter Three
1. David Krell, The Tragic Absolute: German Idealism and the Languishing of God (Bloom-
ington: Indiana University Press, 2005), 19.
2. See ibid., 16– 17; Ernst Behler, Philosophy of German Idealism (New York: Continuum, 
1987), xvi– xvii; and Christoph Jamme and Helmut Schneider, eds., Mythologie der Vernunft: 
Hegels “Altestes Systemprogramm des deutschen Idealismus” (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1984).
3. An early popular source was Antoine Banier, La mythologie et les fables expliquées par 
l’histoire, 3rd ed. (1738– 40). See also Jean Seznec, The Survival of the Pagan Gods (New York: 
Pantheon Books, 1953); and Burton Feldman and Robert Richardson, The Rise of Modern My-
thology, 1680– 1860 (Bloomington: Indiana University Press), 1972.
4. For the formulation “longing for myth,” see George S. Williamson, The Longing for Myth 
in Germany: Religion and Aesthetic Culture from Romanticism to Nietzsche (Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 2004), 3. See also George Mosse, The Nationalization of the Masses: 
Political Symbolism and Mass Movements in Germany (New York: Fertig, 1975), 6; Philippe 
Lacoue- Labarthe, Heidegger: La politique du poème (Paris: Galilée, 2002); and Dieter Sturma, 
“Politics and the New Mythology: The Turn to Late Romanticism,” in The Cambridge Com-
panion to German Idealism, ed. Karl Ameriks (New York: Cambridge, 2000), 219– 38.
5. The call for the construction of a modern mythology was significantly foreshadowed 
in a 1767 fragment from Herder. Johann Gottfried Herder: Selected Early Works, 1764– 1767 
(University Park: Pennsylvania State, 1992), 228– 29. Friedrich Schlegel’s discussion of “new 
mythology” is the most famous, but his brother August Wilhelm also occasionally made similar 
gestures. See Ralph W. Ewton, The Literary Theories of August Wilhelm Schlegel (The Hague: 
Mouton, 1972), 31– 38.
6. Friedrich Schelling, System des transzendentalen Idealismus (Tübingen: Cottaschen 
Buchhandlung, 1800), 477– 78.While preparing my own, I consulted the translation in F. W. J. 
Schelling, System of Transcendental Idealism (1800), trans. Peter Heath, (Charlottesville: Uni-
versity Press of Virginia, 1978), 232– 33. See also Friedrich Schlegel, “Rede über die Mythol-
ogie” (1800), in Kritische Friedrich- Schlegel- Ausgabe, ed. Ernst Behler (Munich: Schöningh, 
1967), 2:284– 351.
7. See Wolfgang Müller- Funk. The Architecture of Modern Culture: Towards a Narrative 
Cultural Theory (Berlin: De Gruyter, 2012), 75; see also Williamson, Longing for Myth in Ger-
many.
8. As Christian Thorne has observed, the sheer repetitiveness of Europe’s story of its own 
turn to rationality implies “less the triumphant emergence of reason than an embarrassing in-
tellectual fitfulness, less a scholarly awakening than a philosophical narcolepsy, so that we must 
imagine Europe dozing off, repeatedly, only to jog itself freshly awake after each new nodding.” 
Christian Thorne, The Dialectic of Counter- Enlightenment. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 2009), 4.

Notes to Pages 67–70 
339
9. Friedrich Nietzsche, The Gay Science (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2001), 
199.
10. Ibid., 120.
11. See, for example, Peter Fritzsche, ed., Nietzsche and the Death of God: Selected Writings 
(Boston: Bedford, 2007); and Roy Jackson, Nietzsche and Islam (London: Routledge, 2007), 17.
12. Johann von Rist, Dichtung von Johann Rist (Leipzig: Brockhaus, 1885), 215. For this 
hymn as the possible origin of Nietzsche’s phrase, see Eric von der Luft, “Sources of Nietz-
sche’s ‘God Is Dead’ and Its Meaning for Heidegger,” Journal of the History of Ideas 45, no. 2 
(1984): 263– 76. See also Eugen Biser, “Die Proklamation von Gottes Tod,” Das Hochland 56 
(1963): 137– 52.
13. Jean Paul, Siebenkäs, Flegeljahre, ed. Norbert Miller and Wilhelm Schmidt- Biggemann 
(Frankfurt: Zweitausendeins, 1996, 273). I have amended the translation appearing in Jean Paul, 
Flower, Fruit and Thorn Pieces, trans. Edward Henry Noel (Leipzig: Bernhard Tauchnitz, 
1871), 281– 82.
14. G. W. F. Hegel, Werke (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1969– 71; hereafter cited as GHW), 17:291. 
I consulted the translation in Carlos João Correia, “Schelling and the Death of God,” in Nietz-
sche, German Idealism and Its Critics, ed. Katia Hay (Boston: De Gruyter, 2015), 157.
15. GHW, 2:432 (emphasis added). Hegel uses almost the same phrase in the Phänomenol-
ogie.
16. Deland Anderson, “The Death of God and Hegel’s System of Philosophy,” Sophia 35, 
no. 1 (1996): 36– 37.
17. For another reference to the end of myth, see G. W. F. Hegel, Lectures on the Philos-
ophy of History (London: Bell, 1894), 2:20. For Herder’s anticipation of this theme, see note 
5 above.
18. Alexander Altmann, “Lessing und Jacobi: Das Gespräch über den Spinozismus,” Les-
sing Yearbook, no. 3 (1971): 25– 70; Frederick Beiser, The Fate of Reason: German Philosophy 
from Kant to Fichte (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1987); and Eckart Förster, 
The Twenty- Five Years of Philosophy: A Systematic Reconstruction (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 2012), esp. 75– 99.
19. Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi, Werke (Leipzig: Fleischer, 1819). 3:55. I have consulted the 
translation in Förster, Twenty- Five Years of Philosophy, 76.
20. Assmann argues that in their use of “Hen kai pan,” Jacobi and Lessing— both 
Freemasons— were gesturing at what they saw as Egyptian mysteries about the unity of God 
and cosmos. Jan Assmann, “ ‘Hen kai pan’: Ralph Cudworth und die Rehabilitierung der her-
metischen Tradition,” in Aufklärung und Esoterik, ed. Monika Neugebauer- Wölk (Hamburg: 
Felix Meiner, 1999), 38– 52. Yasukata Toshimasa, however, has argued that this expression 
may have come from Jacobi and that Lessing may have actually written “hen ego kai panta”(I am 
one and all) Yasukata Toshimasa, Resshingu to doitsu keimō: Resshingu shūkyō tetsugaku no 
kenkyū (Tokyo: Sōbunsha, 1998).
21. Jacobi, Werke, 3:55.
22. Beiser, Fate of Reason, 44.
23. Jonathan Israel, Radical Enlightenment: Philosophy and the Making of Modernity, 1650– 
1750 (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001).

340 Notes to Pages 70–74
24. Abraham Anderson, The Treatise of the Three Impostors and the Problem of Enlighten-
ment (Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield, 1997).
25. Johann Georg Wachter, Spinozismus im Jüdenthumb; oder, Die von dem heutigen Jüden-
thumb und dessen Geheimen Kabbala Vergötterte Welt (Spinoza in Judaism; or, Contemporary 
Judaism and its secret Kabbalistic deification of the world, 1699); Daniel Schwartz, The First 
Modern Jew: Spinoza and the History of an Image (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
2012), esp. 30.
26. Pierre Bayle, Dictionnaire historique et critique, 5th ed. (Amsterdam: P. Brunel, 1740), 
4:254.
27. Ibid.
28. Lucien Febvre, The Problem of Unbelief in the Sixteenth Century (Cambridge, MA: Har-
vard University Press, 1982), 132– 35; Alan Kors, Atheism in France, 1650– 1729 (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1990), 10– 11.
29. See also Michael Buckley, At the Origins of Modern Atheism (New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press, 1987), 10.
30. Kors, Atheism in France, 39.
31. Buckley, Origins of Modern Atheism, 355.
32. Beiser, Fate of Reason, 46.
33. Horst Stuke, “Aufklärung,” Geschichtliche Grundbegriffe 1 (1972): 243– 342, esp. 246.
34. James Schmidt, What Is Enlightenment? Eighteenth- Century Answers and Twentieth- 
Century Questions (Berkeley: University of California, 1996), 2.
35. Stuke, “Aufklärung,” 246, 267.
36. Schmidt, What Is Enlightenment?, 2.
37. Beiser, Fate of Reason; Hermann Timm, Gott und die Freiheit: Studien zur Religion-
sphilosophie der Goethezeit (Frankfurt: Vittorio Klostermann, 1974), 22– 23.
38. Beiser, Fate of Reason, 83.
39. Jacobi translated in ibid., 84.
40. Ibid., 81. In roughly the same period, Jacob Obereit also used the term nihilism in 
Der Wiederkommende Lebensgesit der verzweifelten Metaphysik (1787). Scholars debate whether 
Jacobi or Obereit were the first to use it in this sense. For more on Obereit, see Timm, Gott und 
die Freiheit, 348– 59. For more on Jacobi and nihilism, see Theobald Süß, “Der Nihilismus Bei 
F. H. Jacobi,” Theologische Literaturzeitung 4, no. 76 (1951): 193– 200.
41. For example, see Jacobi’s “Concerning the Doctrine of Spinoza,” in Friedrich Heinrich 
Jacobi, The Main Philosophical Writings and the Novel “Allwill” (Buffalo, NY: McGill- Queen’s 
University Press, 1995), esp. 205.
42. Jacobi, “Concerning the Doctrine of Spinoza,” 519.
43. See also Jacobi’s “David Hume on Faith” (1815), in Jacobi, Main Philosophical Writings, 
esp. 583.
44. Kant became popular because it was thought he could resolve the pantheism dispute. 
Beiser, Fate of Reason, 45.
45. Johann Gottfried Herder, God: Some Conversations (Indianapolis: Bobbs- Merrill, 1963).
46. See Assmann, “Hen kai pan,”; Beiser, Fate of Reason, 44.
47. For Hegel, Schelling, and Hölderlin, see Terry Pinkard, Hegel: A Biography (New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 2000), 31– 33. For Schlegel, see Elizabeth Millán- Zaibert, Frie-

Notes to Pages 74–79 
341
drich Schlegel and the Emergence of Romantic Philosophy (Albany: State University of New 
York Press, 2007), 54– 62. For Jean Paul and Jacobi, see Josef Müller, “Jean Paul und Jacobi,” 
Zeitschrift für Philosophie und philosophische Kritik, no. 140 (1910): 108– 10.
48. Timm, Gott und die Freiheit, 22– 23.
49. See, for example, Klaus- Peter Schroeder, Das alte Reich und seine Städte: Untergang 
und Neubeginn, die Mediatisierung der oberdeutschen Reichsstädte im Gefolge des Reichsdepu-
tationshauptschlusses, 1802/03 (Munich: Beck, 1991).
50. Matthew Levinger, Enlightened Nationalism: The Transformation of Prussian Political 
Culture, 1806– 1848 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002), 131.
51. See Joachim Whaley, Germany and the Holy Roman Empire (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2012), 2:580, 623– 24.
52. Heinrich Heine, Samtliche Schriften (Munich: C. Hanser, 1968), 3:473– 74; Bruno Bauer, 
The Trumpet of the Last Judgement against Hegel the Atheist and Antichrist (Lewiston, NY: 
Mellen Press, 1989), 97, 122.
53. Max Stirner, Der Einzige und sein Eigentum (Berlin: Dreigliederungsverlag, 2002), 81. I 
slightly amended the translation in Stirner, The Ego and Its Own. trans. Steven Byington (New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 1995), 138. For Stirner’s influence on Nietzsche, see Thomas 
Brobjer, “Philologia: A Possible Solution to the Stirner- Nietzsche Question,” Journal of Nietz-
sche Studies 25 (2003), 109– 44.
54. Martin Heidegger, Gesamtausgabe (Frankfurt: Vittorio Klostermann, 1976– 2011), 5:248.
55. In some respects, the seeds of the idea of secularization can be found in Hegel.
56. Ian Hunter, “Secularization: The Birth of a Modern Combat Concept,” Modern Intellec-
tual History 12 (2015): 1– 32, esp. 30. For Rothe’s theosophy, see Richard Rothe, Stille Stunden 
(1872).
57. Novalis, Hymns to the Night and Spiritual Songs, trans. George MacDonald (London: 
Temple Lodge, 1992), 46.
58. Novalis, The Birth of Novalis: Friedrich Von Hardenberg’s Journal of 1797, with Selected 
Letters and Documents (Albany: State University of New York, 2007).
59. 1800: “When poetry’s enchanting shroud.” For the German text, I have used Friedrich 
Schiller, Sämtliche Werke, 2nd ed. (Munich: Hanser, 2006), 1:163– 73.
60. 1800: “Never aware of the spirit that guides her / Never glorified (Sel’ger) through my 
saintliness (seligkeit).”
61. This line occurs only in the first edition.
62. Representative works include: Eliza Butler, The Tyranny of Greece over Germany (New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 1935); Henry Hatfield, Aesthetic Paganism in German Lit-
erature (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1964); Suzanne Marchand, Down from 
Olympus: Archaeology and Philhellenism in Germany, 1750– 1970 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1996); Walther Rehm, Griechentum und Goethezeit: Geschichte eines Glaubens 
(Bern: Francke, 1952); Ludwig Uhlig, ed., Griechenland Als Ideal: Winckelmann Und Seine 
Rezeption in Deutschland (Tübingen: Narr, 1988); and Damian Valdez, German Philhellenism 
(New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014).
63. Hatfield, Aesthetic Paganism, 21, 74.
64. Johann Joachim Winckelmann, Kleine Schriften und Briefe (Weimar: H. Böhlaus Nach-
folger, 1960), 31.

342 Notes to Pages 79–81
65. See chapter 5.
66. Think: Hölderlin, Hyperion; oder, Der Eremit in Griechenland (1797– 99).
67. Schiller, Sämtliche Werke, 5:709– 10.
68. Friedrich Schiller, “Some Thoughts on the First Human Society Following the Guiding 
Thread of the Mosaic Documents,” Fidelio 5, no. 3 (1996): 74– 81. See also Walter Grossmann, 
“Schiller’s Philosophy of History in His Jena Lectures of 1789– 90,” PMLA 69, no. 1 (1954): 
156– 72.
69. The expression “dark abyss of time” is from Buffon and then Paolo Rossi, The Dark 
Abyss of Time (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984). For shifts in the sense of tempo-
rality, see Edward Thompson, “Time, Work- Discipline, and Industrial Capitalism,” Past and 
Present (1967): 56– 97; and Reinhart Koselleck, Vergangene Zukunft: Zur Semantik geschichtli-
cher Zeiten (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 2006). See also Karl Löwith, Meaning in History: The Theo-
logical Implications of the Philosophy of History (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1949).
70. Think of Kant, Idee zu einer allgemeinen Geschichte in weltbürgerlicher Absicht.
71. “Die vier Weltalter” described four ages: the golden age of the gods, the age of pastoral 
culture, the age of labor and heroes, and then finally the rise of Christianity, but it explicitly 
anticipated entering a fifth (post- Christian) age. Schiller, Sämtliche Werke, 1:417– 19.
72. To be clear, Schiller occasionally suggests the Greeks were exceptional compared to 
other primitive peoples.
73. Schiller, Sämtliche Werke, 5:707– 8.
74. Ibid., 5:728.
75. Ibid., 1:418.
76. See Benno Zuiddam, “Plutarch and God- Eclipse in Christian Theology,” Ploutarchos, 
no. 6 (2009): 83– 100.
77. For biblical precedents, think Luke 4:41 and Mark 3:11– 15.
78. While preparing my own, I consulted the translation in Novalis, Philosophical Writings, 
trans. Margaret Mahony Stoljar (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1997), 148.
79. One of the first attacks on Schiller for being anti- Christian was Friedrich Leopold Graf 
zu Stolberg, “Gedanken über Herrn Schillers Gedicht: Die Götter Griechenlandes,” Deutsches 
Museum 8 (1788): 97– 105.
80. See W. H. Carruth, “The Religion of Friedrich Schiller” PMLA 19, no. 4 (1904): 496– 
582; and Jeffrey High, “Friedrich Schiller, Secular Virtue, and the ‘The Gods of Ancient 
Greece,’ ” in Enlightenment and Secularism, ed. Christopher Nadon, (Lanham, MD: Lexington 
Books, 2013), 315– 24.
81. Schiller, Sämtliche Werke, 5:344– 58. For the background on Schiller’s theosophy, Riedel 
emphasizes Friedrich Christoph Oetinger and Jakob Hermann Obereit. Wolfgang Riedel, Die 
Anthropologie des jungen Schiller (Würzburg: Königshausen und Neuman, 1985). Schiller was 
likely also influenced by his teacher Jakob Friedrich Abel, author of Philosophische Untersu-
chungen über die Verbindung der Menschen mit höheren Geistern (1791).
82. See Ernst Benz, Les sources mystiques de la philosophie romantique allemande (Paris: 
Vrin, 1968). Franz von Baader’s role in this process will be discussed in chapter 7.
83. When Böhme was largely forgotten in Germany, he retained followers in England. 
Wouter Hanegraaff, Swedenborg, Oetinger, Kant: Three Perspectives on the Secrets of Heaven 
(West Chester, PA: Swedenborg Foundation, 2007), 67. See also Martin Weyer- Menkhoff, The 

Notes to Pages 81–85 
343
Pietist Theologians: An Introduction to Theology in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries 
(Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2005).
84. Glenn Magee, Hegel and the Hermetic Tradition (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 
2001); and Stefan Andriopoulos, “Occult Conspiracies: Spirits and Secret Societies in Schil-
ler’s ‘Ghost Seer,’ ” New German Critique, no. 103 (2008): 65– 81. As Mayer has argued, this 
recovery was messy insofar as many philosophers referred to Böhme without having really read 
him. Paola Mayer, Jena Romanticism and Its Appropriation of Jakob Böhme (Montreal: McGill- 
Queen’s University Press, 1999), 80, 216.
85. For Schlegel’s juxtaposition of Spinoza and Böhme, see Jochen Schulte- Sasse, Theory 
as Practice: A Critical Anthology of Early German Romantic Writings (Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press, 1997), 190.
86. Schiller, Sämtliche Werke, 5:352. I follow most Schiller scholarship in reading Julius as 
Schiller’s proxy.
87. Ibid., 5:344.
88. The language of hieroglyphics occurs again in “Die Sendung Moses” (1789), but here 
as the symbols of an Egyptian secret or Hermetic monotheism hidden behind the apparent 
polytheism of the pharaohs. Ibid., 4:789– 95. Interestingly, Schiller reads early Judaism in terms 
of Freemasonry.
89. Friedrich Schiller and Christian Gottfried Körner, Schillers Briefwechsel mit Körner 
(Leipzig: Veit, 1892), 1: 396– 97.
90. Hatfield, Aesthetic Paganism, 121.
91. Ibid.
92. Friedrich Schiller, On the Aesthetic Education of Man: In a Series of Letters (New York: 
Ungar, 1965); Frederick Beiser, Schiller as Philosopher: A Re- examination (New York: Claren-
don Press, 2005), 3– 4.
93. Beiser, Schiller as Philosopher; Steven Martinson, Harmonious Tensions: The Writings 
of Friedrich Schiller (Newark: University of Delaware Press, 1996).
94. The pendulum likely refers to Huygens’s famous planetary pendulum. For the damna-
tion of Newton in German philosophical circles, see Thomas Ahnert, “Newtonianism in Early 
Enlightenment Germany, C. 1720 to 1750,” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part 
A 35, no. 3 (2004): 471– 91; and Frederick Burwick, The Damnation of Newton: Goethe’s Color 
Theory and Romantic Perception (Berlin: De Gruyter, 1986).
95. Schiller also attacked the medical materialisms of La Mettrie and Helvétius; see Roland 
Krebs, “Le jeune Schiller face au matérialisme français,” Revue germanique internationale, no. 
22 (2004): 25– 42.
96. Friedrich Schiller, Nachlese zu Schillers Werken nebst Variantensammlung (Stuttgart: 
Cotta, 1840), 1:274.
97. See Hans- Dietrich Dahnke, “Die Debatte um die Götter Griechenlandes,” in Debatten 
und Kontroversen: Literarische Auseinandersetzungen in Deutschland am Ende des 18: Jahrhun-
derts, ed. Hans- Dietrich Dahnke and Bernd Leistner (Berlin: Aufbau- Verlag, 1989), 193– 269.
98. Novalis is discussed above; Hölderlin, Hegel below. Heine wrote an homage titled “Die 
Götter Griechenlands” (1827). For Feurbach, see Das Wesen der Religion (1846). For Dittnar, 
see Zur Charakterisirung der nordischen Mythologie im Verhältniss zu andern Naturreligionen 
(Eine Skizze, 1848). Oehlenschläger’s Hakon Jarl (1808– 09) dramatizes this in theatrical form, 

344 Notes to Pages 85–90
but it can also be found in Nordiske Digte (1807). For Procter, see (under the pseudonym Barry 
Cornwall) The Flood of Thessaly (1823). Elizabeth Barrett Browning’s response was critical: 
“The Dead Pan” (1844).
99. GHW, 1:231.
100. In Vorlesungen über die Ästhetik, Hegel praises “The Gods of Greece” in terms of its 
imagery, rhythm, and pathos. GHW, 14:113– 15.
101. GHW, 1:197, translated in G. W. F. Hegel, Early Theological Writings (Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1961), 146.
102. Michael Forster, Hegel’s Idea of a Phenomenology of Spirit (Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press, 1998). Forster also notes that Schiller’s “Gods of Greece” was an inspiration for the 
project of Hegel’s phenomenology. Ibid., 23.
103. GHW, 12:242, translated in G. W. F. Hegel, Lectures on the Philosophy of History (New 
York: Prometheus, 1991), 215.
104. GHW, 12:243; Hegel, Philosophy of History, 215.
105. GHW, 12:244; Hegel, Philosophy of History, 216. Compare Hegel’s “Natur ist entgöt-
tert” with Schiller’s “Die entgötterte Natur.”
106. Schiller, Sämtliche Werke, 4:768.
107. M. H. Abrams, Natural Supernaturalism: Tradition and Revolution in Romantic Lit-
erature (New York: Norton, 1971).
108. I’m broadly sympathetic to Lovejoy’s critique of Romanticism as a meaningless term, 
but less interested in his attempt to recoup it as a periodization. See Arthur Lovejoy, “The 
Meaning of Romanticism for the Historian of Ideas,” Journal of the History of Ideas 2, no. 3 
(1941): 257– 78.
109. Friedrich Hölderlin, Sämtliche Werke (Berlin: Propyläen, 1922), 3:236 (emphasis 
added). I consulted the translation in Abrams, Natural Supernaturalism, 237 while preparing 
my own.
110. Schiller, Sämtliche Werke, 5:645– 51.
111. Schelling translated in Abrams, Natural Supernaturalism, 182.
112. Adam Oehlenschläger, Oehlenschlägers digterværker og prosaiske skrifter (Copenhagen: 
A. F. Host, 1851– 54), 25:147– 48.
113. Olivier Schefer, “L’idéalisme magique de Novalis,” Critique 673– 74, no. 6– 7 (2003): 
514– 27.
114. Novalis, Die Werke Friedrich von Hardenbergs: Historische- kritische Ausgabe (Stuttgart: 
Kohlhammer Verlag, 1960– 2006), 2:761, 3:297, 2:547; see also 2:546, esp. “Magie ist = Kunst, 
die Sinnenwelt willkührlich zu gebrauchen.” See also Novalis, Notes for a Romantic Encyclo-
paedia (Albany: State University of New York Press, 2007), xxiv.
115. Hölderlin, Sämtliche Werke, 1:310.
116. For the reference to Schiller, see Jacob Burckhardt, Griechische Kulturgeschichte (Ber-
lin: Spemann, 1898– 1902), 2:384. For Jacobi, Burckhardt, Geschichte des Revolutionszeitalters 
(Munich: Beck, 2009), 69, 962. For Herder, Burckhardt, Reflections on History (London: Al-
len & Unwin, 1943), 67. Burckhardt mentions Hegel repeatedly, if critically, and Burckhardt 
was likely influenced by Hegel’s staging of history in terms of a series of ruptures. Burckhardt 
attended Schelling’s lectures, see Burckhardt, Briefe, ed. Max Burckhardt (Wiesbaden: Insel- 
Verlag, 1952), 1:202– 3.

Notes to Pages 90–94 
345
117. Burckhardt, Griechische Kulturgeschichte, 4:270.
118. Jules Michelet, La Sorcière: The Witch of the Middle Ages, trans. Lionel Trotter (Lon-
don: Simpkin, 1863), 19– 21. Michelet frequently refers to Schiller. Jules Michelet, Précis de l’his-
toire modern (Paris: Colas, 1827), 130– 38.
119. Notably, Georg Conrad Horst, Dämonomagie, oder Geschichte des Glaubens an Zau-
berei und dämonische Wunder (Frankfurt: Wilmans, 1818); and Wilhelm Gottlieb Soldan, Ges-
chichte der Hexenprozesse (Stuttgart: Cotta, 1843).
120. Jules Michelet, Histoire de France (Paris: Librairie Internationale, 1871– 76), vol. 7, La 
Renaissance.
121. Jacob Burckhardt, The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy (New York: Penguin 
Books, 1990), 98.
122. John Hinde, Jacob Burckhardt and the Crisis of Modernity (Ithaca, NY: McGill- Queen’s 
University Press, 2000), 222. See also Jacob Burckhardt, Judgements on History and Historians 
(New York: Routledge, 2007), 84; and Lionel Gossman, Basel in the Age of Burckhardt (Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 2000).
123. Burckhardt, Civilization of the Renaissance, 187– 88.
124. Howard argues that Burckhardt’s thesis in turn was a partial secularization of his notion 
of the biblical Fall. Thomas Howard, Religion and the Rise of Historicism: W. M. L. De Wette, 
Jacob Burckhardt, and the Theological Origins of Nineteenth- Century Historical Consciousness 
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 2000).
125. Wilhelm Windelband, Die Geschichte der neueren Philosophie: In ihrem Zusammen-
hange mit der allgemeinen Cultur und den besonderen Wissenschaften dargestellt (Leipzig: Bre-
itkopf und Härtel, 1878), vol. 1. Tellingly, the title of that volume was “Von der Renaissance bis 
Kant,” and Windelband cites Burckhardt within, although he was also gesturing toward Kant’s 
famous reference to the “Zeitalter der Aufklärung.” For Windelband as the originator of the 
Enlightenment periodization, see Stuke, “Aufklärung,” 340– 41.
126. Wilhelm Nestle, Vom Mythos zum Logos: die Selbstentfaltung des griechischen Denkens 
von Homer bis auf die Sophistik und Sokrates (Stuttgart: Kröner, 1942). Nestle discusses Burck-
hardt in his earlier Euripides, der dichter der griechischen aufklärung (Stuttgart: Kohlhammer, 
1901). Heidegger makes frequent references to Burckhardt; for example, Martin Heidegger, The 
Essence of Truth on Plato’s Cave Allegory and Theaetetus (New York: Continuum, 2002), 46.
127. For Koyré’s reading of Burckhardt, see Alexandre Koyré, Místicos, espirituales y alqui-
mistas del siglo XVI alemán (Madrid: Akal, 1981), 53.
128. Weber cites Burckhardt repeatedly, and the Weber archive contains Burckhardt, 
Griechische Kulturgeschichte, annotated in Weber’s hand. See Max Weber Archive, Mü Ordner 
2 + 3, Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Chapter Four
1. Talal Asad, Genealogies of Religion: Discipline and Reasons of Power in Christianity and 
Islam (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1993); Jonathan Z. Smith, Imagining Reli-
gion: From Babylon to Jonestown (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982).
2. Michel Despland, L’émergence des sciences de la religion (Paris: L’Harmattan, 1999); Daniel 
Dubuisson, L’Occident et la religion: Mythes, science et idéologie (Brussels: Complexe, 1998); 

346 Notes to Pages 94–96
Tomoko Masuzawa, The Invention of World Religions (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
2005); Arie Molendijk, The Emergence of the Science of Religion in the Netherlands (Leiden: 
Brill, 2005); Eric Sharpe, Comparative Religion: A History (New York: Scribner’s, 1975).
3. Peter Harrison, “Religion” and the Religions in the English Enlightenment (New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 1990); Lynn Hunt, Margaret Jacob, and Wijnand Mijnhardt, The 
Book That Changed Europe (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2010).
4. Philippe Borgeaud, L’histoire des religions (Gollion: Infolio, 2013); and Guy Stroumsa, 
A New Science: The Discovery of Religion in the Age of Reason (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 2010).
5. Fitzgerald’s account of religious studies as liberal ecumenical theology straddles these 
positions: Timothy Fitzgerald, The Ideology of Religious Studies (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2000).
6. Hans Thomas Hakl, Eranos: An Alternative Intellectual History of the Twentieth Century 
(Ithaca, NY: McGill- Queen’s University Press, 2013); Jeffrey Kripal, Roads of Excess, Palaces of 
Wisdom: Eroticism and Reflexivity in the Study of Mysticism (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2001); Steven Wasserstrom, Religion after Religion: Gershom Scholem, Mircea Eliade, 
and Henry Corbin at Eranos (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1999). Similarly, Styers 
has demonstrated the importance of “magic” as a contrasting object in the formation of religion 
as a scholarly category, while Kippenberg has noted that the field guarded cultural resources 
that would have otherwise been marginalized by Enlightenment rationalism. Randall Styers, 
Making Magic: Religion, Magic, and Science in the Modern World (New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2004); Hans Kippenberg, Die Entdeckung der Religionsgeschichte (München: Verlag 
C. H. Beck, 1997).
7. Georg Simmel, Gesamtausgabe (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1989), 17:274– 75. Translated by 
Mark Ritter and David Frisby in Georg Simmel, Simmel on Culture (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Press, 2000), 288– 89 (emphasis added).
8. In the Anglophone world, the key works that promoted the notion of a conflict between 
religion and science were Andrew Dickson White, “The Battle- Fields of Science” (1869), and 
John William Draper, History of the Conflict between Religion and Science (1874). In German, 
the notion of a conflict occurred a few decades earlier, with the “materialism controversy” 
(Materialismusstreit) kicking off in 1854 with the publication of Rudolph Wagner, Menschen-
schöpfung und Seelensubstanz (The creation of man and the substance of the soul, 1854) and 
the response by Carl Vogt, Köhlerglaube und Wissenschaft (Blind faith and science, 1855). For 
more about the materialism controversy, see Frederick Beiser, After Hegel: German philosophy, 
1840– 1900 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2014), 53– 96. See also Michael Bergun-
der, “ ‘Religion’ and ‘Science’ within a Global Religious History,” Aries 16, no. 1 (2016): 88– 89.
9. As Larsen has shown, the idea that the Victorians actually lost faith was largely a myth, 
but one that emerged in the period itself. Timothy Larsen, Crisis of Doubt: Honest Faith in 
Nineteenth- Century England (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008).
10. Simmel, Simmel on Culture, 289.
11. There are many “hauntologies” of the nineteenth century, but see especially: Ann 
Braude, Radical Spirits: Spiritualism and Women’s Rights in Nineteenth- Century America 
(Boston: Beacon Press, 1989); John Kucich, Ghostly Communion: Cross- cultural Spiritualism 
in Nineteenth- Century American Literature (Hanover, NH: University Press of New England, 

Notes to Pages 96–100 
347
2004); Alex Owen, The Place of Enchantment: British Occultism and the Culture of the Modern 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004); John Lardas Modern, Secularism in Antebellum 
America (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2011); and Ann Taves, Fits, Trances, and Vi-
sions: Experiencing Religion and Explaining Experience from Wesley to James (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1999). The number of adherents comes from Geoffrey Nelson, 
Spiritualism and Society (New York: Routledge, 1969), 259, but estimates vary. Nelson also 
argues that the peak of spiritualism in Great Britain was not 1870 but 1954. Ibid., 269.
12. For example, the Shakers widely reported encounters with spirits from 1841 to 1845.
13. Jean Claude Schmitt, Les revenants: Les vivants et les morts dans la société médiévale 
(Paris: Gallimard, 1994).
14. Before 1875, the term theosophy was generally associated with Böhme. See Jean- Pierre 
Laurant, L’ésotérisme chrétien en France au XIXe siècle (Lausanne: L’Age d’Homme, 1992), 55.
15. This claim is made explicit in H. P. Blavatsky, Isis Unveiled, 2 vols. (New York: Bouton, 
1892), 1:x– xi.
16. For debates on the relationship between spiritualism and scientific accounts of causation, 
see Alfred Russel Wallace, On Miracles and Modern Spiritualism (London: James Burns, 1875).
17. See, for example, Allan Kardec, Le livre des esprits (Montréal: Presses Sélect, 1979).
18. Rudolf Otto, Das Heilige: Über das Irrationale in der Idee des Göttlichen und sein Ver-
hältnis zum Rationalen (München: Beck, 2004), 31; Bronislaw Malinowski, Magic, Science and 
Religion, and Other Essays (Garden City: Doubleday, 1954), 50. For a discussion of Marcel 
Mauss, Durkheim, and his followers’ relationship to spiritualism, see Ivan Strenski, “Durkheim, 
Judaism, and the Afterlife,” in Reappraising Durkheim for the Study and Teaching of Religion 
Today, ed. Thomas A. Idinopulos and Brian Wilson (Leiden: Brill, 2002), 111– 43.
19. Edward B. Tylor, Primitive Culture, 2 vols. (London: Murray, 1891), 1:424– 25.
20. In parallel, many American spiritualists appropriated the Quakers into their lineage. Bret 
Carroll, Spiritualism in Antebellum America (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1997).
21. I follow Segal, not Kippenberg, in interpreting Tylor’s concept of “survival” as a negative 
term. Robert Segal, “Tylor: A Test Case of Kippenberg’s Thesis,” in Religion im kulturellen 
Diskurs: Festschrift für Hans G. Kippenberg, ed. Brigitte Luchesi and Kocku von Stuckrad 
(Berlin: de Gruyter, 2004), 17– 31.
22. Tylor, Primitive Culture, 2:253.
23. Ibid., 1:101.
24. Ibid., 101.
25. Ibid., 106– 7, 122.
26. Ibid., 106.
27. Ibid., 121.
28. Ibid., 111– 112.
29. Ibid., 116– 131.
30. Ibid., 122.
31. Ibid., 125– 28.
32. See especially ibid., 141.
33. Robert Segal, “Tylor’s Anthropomorphic Theory of Religion,” Religion 25 (1995): 
23– 30.
34. Tylor, Primitive Culture, 1:129.

348 Notes to Pages 101–104
35. For example, see ibid., 424– 26.
36. Tylor’s account is reproduced in George Stocking Jr., “Animism in Theory and Practice: 
E. B. Tylor’s Unpublished ‘Notes on ‘Spiritualism,’ ” Man 6 (1971): 88– 104.
37. Andrew Lang, “Protest of a Psycho- Folklorist,” Folklore 6, no. 3 (1895): 241.
38. Andrew Lang, The Making of Religion (New York: Longmans, 1909); this is discussed 
in greater detail in the next chapter.
39. For a discussion of the French occultism and politics more broadly, see David Allen 
Harvey, Beyond Enlightenment: Occultism and Politics in Modern France (DeKalb: Northern 
Illinois University Press, 2005).
40. For the twists and turns of Éliphas Lévi’s biography, see Paul Chacornac, Éliphas Lévi, 
rénovateur de l’occultisme en France (1810– 1875), (Paris: Chacornac frères, 1926); and Christo-
pher McIntosh, Eliphas Lévi and the French Occult Revival (London: Rider, 1972).
41. For how Lévi’s project initially emerged in neo- Catholic and socialist contexts, see Ju-
lian Strube, “Socialist Religion and the Emergence of Occultism: A Genealogical Approach 
to Socialism and Secularization in 19th- Century France,” Religion 46, no. 3 (2016): 359– 388.
42. Éliphas Lévi (as Abbé Constant), La Bible de la liberté (Paris: Le Gallois, 1841), 17– 19, 93.
43. Chacornac, Éliphas Lévi, 59– 60.
44. For Lévi’s use of théosophie, see Éliphas Lévi, Histoire de la magie (Paris: G. Baillière, 
1860), 142. For a discussion of Lévi’s contribution to esoteric terminology, see Antoine Faivre, 
Access to Western Esotericism (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1994), 34. I have 
consulted both French editions and English translations of Lévi’s more famous works. For 
convenience, references in what follows will be to the English translation when possible and to 
the French only when my translation substantially differs.
45. See Éliphas Lévi, The History of Magic (London: Rider, 1922), 3;, and Lévi, Transcen-
dental Magic (New York: William Rider & Son, 1923), 3, 4, 23.
46. Lévi, History of Magic, 158.
47. Lévi, History of Magic, 159 (emphasis added). Lévi follows Cornelius Agrippa in recov-
ering folk rituals as forms of lost magic. See Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa, De occulta philosophia 
libri tres (New York: Brill, 1992), esp. 409. Agrippa’s De occulta philosophia was also one of 
Tylor’s main sources for theorizing magic in Primitive Culture.
48. See also Éliphas Lévi, Le grand arcane; ou, L’occultisme dévoilé (Paris: Chamuel, 1898).
49. Levi, History of Magic, 2.
50. See, for example, Lévi, Transcendental Magic, 3, 4, 23.
51. See also Éliphas Lévi, The Key of the Mysteries, trans. Aleister Crowley (London: Rider, 
1969), 37. For the background to Lévi’s famous image of the Sabbatic goat, see Youri Volokh-
ine, “Pan en Egypte et le bouc de Mendès,” in Dans le laboratoire de l’historien des religions: 
Mélanges offerts à Philippe Borgeaud, ed. Francesca Prescendi and Youri Volokhine (Geneva: 
Labor, 2011), 627– 50.
52. For Lévi’s complex and often contradictory ideas of Luficer and the devil and for his 
position in the history of “Romantic Satanism” more broadly, see Ruben van Luijk, Children 
of Lucifer: The Origins of Modern Religious Satanism (New York: Oxford University Press, 
2016), esp.127– 144.
53. Indeed, Helena Blavatsky would be dogged by charges that she had in some sense pla-

Notes to Pages 104–107 
349
giarized Éliphas Lévi, or at the very least adopted his project wholesale. See Jeffrey D. Lavoie, 
The Theosophical Society: The History of a Spiritualist Movement (Boca Raton, FL: Brown-
Walker Press, 2012), esp. 256– 58.
54. Éliphas Lévi, Dogme et rituel de la haute magie, 2 vols. (Paris: G. Baillère, 1861), 1:99. 
For Lévi’s interlocators, see Joscelyn Godwin, The Theosophical Enlightenment (Albany: State 
University of New York Press, 1994), 28– 40.
55. Lévi, Transcendental Magic, 180, 267.
56. Ronald Decker, Thierry Depaulis, and Michael Dummett, A Wicked Pack of Cards: The 
Origins of the Occult Tarot (New York: St. Martin’s, 1996).
57. The other important figure in this regard is Jean- Baptiste Alliette, known as Etteilla.
58. Lévi, Transcendental Magic, 43.
59. Ibid., 95– 96. He also describes the tarot as simultaneously Hermetic, Kabbalistic, mag-
ical, and theosophical (ibid., 278). For Lévi’s position in the history of Kabbalah, see Wouter 
J. Hanegraaff, “The Beginnings of Occultist Kabbalah: Adolphe Franck and Eliphas Lévi,” 
in Kabbalah and Modernity: Interpretations, Transformations, Adaptations, ed. Boaz Huss, 
(Boston: Brill, 2010), 107– 128.
60. Lévi, Transcendental Magic, 42, 349, 373.
61. Lévi, Key of the Mysteries, 14.
62. Éliphas Lévi, La clef des grands mystères suivant Hénoch, Abraham, Hermès Trismégiste 
et Salomon (Paris: Félix Alcan, 1897), i.
63. Friedrich Max Müller, Natural Religion: The Gifford Lectures Delivered before the Uni-
versity of Glasgow in 1888 (New York: Longmans, Green, 1898), 57– 58; Herbert Spencer, Ec-
clesiastical Institutions (New York: D. Appleton, 1886), 827f.
64. Lévi, Key of the Mysteries, 9.
65. Ibid., 66.
66. Ibid., 9, 16. In this term “absurd,” Lévi evokes a kind of Kierkegaardian fideism.
67. Ibid., 16.
68. Ibid., 9.
69. Ibid., 24.
70. Lévi, Le grand arcane, 94.
71. Jane Bennett, Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things (Durham, NC: Duke Uni-
versity Press, 2010). Lévi’s magnetic vitalism was clearly drawing on Franz Mesmer’s “animal 
magnetism.”
72. See especially Éliphas Lévi, La science des esprits (Paris: G. Baillière, 1865), 181, 266; and 
Lévi, Dogme et rituel de la haute magie, 1:167, 171– 175, 205, 236.
73. Lévi, Transcendental Magic, 62.
74. For example, see Lévi, Dogme et rituel de la haute magie, 1:182.
75. Ibid.
76. Lévi, La science des esprits, 52, 161– 62.
77. At the very least, one might argue that religious studies initially suggested a point of 
overlap between Protestant triumphalists and esotericists.
78. For examples, see Masuzawa, Invention of World Religions, 207; and Bruce Lincoln, 
Theorizing Myth (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999), 67.

350 Notes to Pages 107–111
79. Müller attacked materialism explicitly in an attempt to revalorize a lost subjectivity as 
an explanatory mechanism and postulated instead a complementarity between a subjective 
spirit and objective matter. Friedrich Max Müller, Three Introductory Lectures on the Science of 
Thought (Chicago: Open Court, 1888).
80. See Friedrich Max Müller, Chips from a German Workshop, 5 vols. (New York: C. Scrib-
ner’s Sons, 1869– 81), 3:74– 99.
81. The title makes sense if one notes that Müller was using “psychological” the way our 
contemporaries might use “spiritual.” See Friedrich Max Müller, Theosophy; or, Psychological 
Religion: The Gifford Lectures Delivered before the University of Glasgow in 1892 (New York: 
Longmans, 1893; hereafter cited as MMT), esp. xvi.
82. For Müller as a Lutheran, see G. Beckerlegge, “Professor Friedrich Max Müller and 
the Missionary Cause,” in Religion in Victorian Britain: Culture and Empire, ed. John Wolffe 
(Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1997), esp. 189.
83. Thomas McCormack, “Friedrich Max Müller, 1823– 1900,” Open Court 535 (1900): 743.
84. MMT, viii– ix. In particular, he describes his lectures on the “Logos,” “Alexandrian 
Christianity,” “Dionysius the Areopagite,” and “Christian Theosophy” as the most important.
85. For religious studies as text- based philology, see ibid., esp. 27– 28.
86. Ibid., 23 (emphasis added).
87. Müller, however, argued for a deist reading of miracle as rooted in a rational sense of 
wonder. Ibid., 25.
88. Friedrich Max Müller, Lectures on the Science of Religion (New York: Scribner, 1872), 11.
89. Friedrich Max Müller, Selected Essays on Language, Mythology and Religion (New York: 
Longmans, 1881), 1:23.
90. In some respects Müller’s program is less a classical version of prisca theologia and more 
closely evokes a later New Age verison of philosophia perennis.
91. Müller, MMT, 24.
92. Friedrich Max Müller, Physical Religion (New York: Longmans, 1891), 5– 7.
93. MMT, 89.
94. Ibid.
95. Ibid. Where we today use the word culture, Müller tends to use the term nation, but we 
might imagine nation as standing in for the German volk.
96. Ibid., 90.
97. Ibid., 93.
98. Ibid., 91 (italics in the original).
99. Ibid. Müller alternates “theosophy” and “Psychological Religion” as synonyms. For the 
sake of consistency in what follows, I will use “theosophy” except in direct quotes.
100. Ibid., 93.
101. As Müller states, “It should be known once for all that one may call oneself a theoso-
phist, without being suspected of believing in spirit- rappings [sic], table- turnings, or any other 
occult sciences and black arts.” Ibid., xvi.
102. Ibid., 95, 311.
103. Ibid., 474.
104. Müller had previously described the Veda as both “natural revelation” and the epitome 
of “Physical Religion.” Ibid., 8, 95.

Notes to Pages 111–116 
351
105. Ibid., 95. Contemporary scholars generally refer to Vedas in plural, but Müller instead 
preferred the singular Veda.
106. Ibid., 112.
107. Ibid., 142– 43.
108. Ibid., 91.
109. Ibid., 423, 526.
110. Ibid., 72– 86. It is interesting that Müller makes the case for common Aryan origins, 
given that a shared historical basis would have seemed unnecessary. He also discounts the 
“Semitic” history of Christianity.
111. Ibid., 446– 7.
112. Ibid., 423.
113. Ibid., 447.
114. Ibid., 380– 81, 422– 23.
115. Ibid., 381.
116. Ibid., 384.
117. Ibid., 385.
118. Gottfried Leibniz, Nouveaux essais sur l’entendement humain, ed. Jacques Brunschwig 
(Paris: Flammarion, 1990); John Locke, An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, ed. P. H. 
Nidditch (New York: Oxford University Press, 1979), 402.
119. MMT, 388.
120. Ibid., 382.
121. Ibid., 388. See also Elizabeth Knoll, “The Science of Language and the Evolution of 
Mind: Max Müller’s Quarrel with Darwinism,” Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences 
22 (1986): 3– 22.
122. MMT, 388.
123. Ibid., 521.
124. Ibid., 417.
125. Ibid., 538.
126. Ibid.
127. Ibid., 541– 42.
128. Some scholars have noticed the uncanny parallels between the Theosophical Society 
and religious studies; for example, David Chidester, Empire of Religion: Imperialism and Com-
parative Religion (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2014); and Kocku von Stuckrad, The 
Scientification of Religion (Boston: De Gruyter, 2014).
129. See Steven Sutcliffe, “The Origins of New Age Religion between the Two World Wars,” 
in Handbook of New Age, ed. Daren Kemp and Lewis James (Boston: Brill, 2007), 61. Corrected 
membership figures are from Gregory Tillett, “Charles Webster Leadbeater 1854– 1934: A Bi-
ographical Study” (PhD diss., University of Sydney, 1986), 944.
130. Olav Hammer, “Theosophical Elements in New Age Religion,” in Handbook of the 
Theosophical Current, ed. Olav Hammer and Mikael Rothstein (Boston: Brill, 2013), 237– 59; 
Suzanne Newcombe, “Magic and Yoga: The Role of Subcultures in Transcultural Exchange,” 
in Yoga Traveling: Bodily Practice in Transcultural Perspective, ed. Beatrix Hauser (New York: 
Springer, 2013), 57– 79; and Stephen Prothero, The White Buddhist: The Asian Odyssey of Henry 
Steel Olcott (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1996).

352 Notes to Pages 116–120
131. Wouter Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and Western Culture: Esotericism in the Mirror of 
Secular Thought (Albany: State University of New York, 1998), 95.
132. William Emmette Coleman, “Appendix C: The Sources of Madame Blavatsky’s Writ-
ings,” in A Modern Priestess of Isis, by Vesvelod Sergteevich Solovyoff [Всеволод Соловьёв, 
Vsevolod Solov’ev] (New York: Arno Press, 1976).
133. Boris De Zirkoff, “Helena Petrovna Blavatsky: General Outline of Her Life Prior to 
Her Public Work,” in H. P. Blavatsky: Collected Writings, ed. Boris De Zirkoff (Wheaton, IL: 
Theosophical Press, 1950), xxv– lii.
134. Joscelyn Godwin, “Blavatsky and the First Generation of Theosophy,” in Handbook of 
the Theosophical Current, ed. Olav Hammer and Mikael Rothstein (Boston: Brill, 2013), 20– 21.
135. De Zirkoff, Blavatsky: Collected Writings, 1:141.
136. Ibid.
137. Lévi, Transcendental Magic, 3– 5.
138. Blavatsky, Isis Unveiled, 1:ix.
139. De Zirkoff, Blavatsky: Collected Writings, 1:142; see also 1:116; and Christopher Par-
tridge, “Lost Horizon: H. P. Blavatsky and Theosophical Orientalism,” in Handbook of the 
Theosophical Current, ed. Olav Hammer and Mikael Rothstein (Boston: Brill, 2013), 309– 34.
140. Blavatsky, Isis Unveiled, 2:635– 36.
141. Blavatsky also expressed occasional anti- Semitism. For a contemporary critique of the 
“magical negro” trope, see Matthew Hughey, “Cinethetic Racism: White Redemption and 
Black Stereotypes in ‘Magical Negro’ Films,” Social Problems 56, no. 3 (2009): 543– 77.
142. Blavatsky, Isis Unveiled, 1:25.
143. Ibid., 1:5.
144. Ibid., 1:38 (emphasis added).
145. Ibid., 2:639.
146. Christopher Hutton and John Joseph, “Back to Blavatsky: The Impact of Theosophy 
on Modern Linguistics,” Language & Communication, no. 18 (1998): 184.
147. Ibid., 184– 86; Helena Petrovna Blavatsky, The Secret Doctrine: The Synthesis of Science, 
Religion, and Philosophy, 2 vol. (London: Theosophical Press, 1888), 2:198– 200, 661– 62.
148. Théodore Flournoy, Des Indes à la planète Mars: Étude sur un cas de somnambulisme 
avec glossolalia (Paris: F. Alcan, 1900).
149. An exception is Hutton and Joseph, “Back to Blavatsky.”
150. Benjamin Lee Whorf, Language, Thought, and Reality: Selected Writings, ed. John 
Carroll (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1956), 249, 252, 269.
151. Émile Burnouf, “Le Bouddhisme en Occident,” Revue des Deux Mondes, July 1888, 
840– 72. We’ve understandably excised Burnouf because of his racism.
152. Donald Lopez, Prisoners of Shangri- La: Tibetan Buddhism and the West (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1998), 49– 54.
153. Ibid., 52; Adele Algeo, “Beatrice Lane Suzuki and Theosophy in Japan,” Theosophical 
History 11, no. 3– 16 (2005); and Yoshinaga Shin’ichi, “Suzuki Daisetsu and Swedenborg: A 
Historical Background,” in Modern Buddhism in Japan, ed. Hayashi Makoto, Ōtani Eiichi 
and Paul Swanson, (Nagoya: Nanzan, 2014), 112– 43.
154. Other notable scholars who were members of the Theosophical Society include Ed-
ward Conze, Alexandra David- Néel, and G. R. S. Mead.

Notes to Pages 120–124 
353
155. For example, for the history of Theosophy in Japan, see Yoshinaga Shin’ichi, “Kindai 
Nihon ni okeru Shinchigaku shisō no rekishi,” Shūkyō Kenkyū 84, no. 2 (2010): 375– 96.
156. The crisis was caused by Krishnamurti refusing the mantel of World Teacher in 1929.
157. Regarding the term subtle body, see Geoffrey Samuel and Jay Johnston, eds., Religion 
and the Subtle Body in Asia and the West (New York: Routledge, 2013), 2.
158. Denis Diderot and Jean le Rond d’Alembert, eds., Encyclopédie; ou, Dictionnaire rai-
sonné des sciences, des arts et des métiers, 28 vols. (1751– 72), 14:78, in ARTFL Encyclopédie 
Project, accessed January 7, 2011, http:// encyclopedie .uchicago .edu.
159. For examples, see Jason Ānanda Josephson, The Invention of Religion in Japan (Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 2012), 8– 11.
160. My friend Sarah Hammerschlag taught a course with this title.
161. For more on “academic gnosticism,” see Kripal, Roads of Excess, 1– 15; and Kripal, The 
Serpent’s Gift: Gnostic Reflections on the Study of Religion (University of Chicago Press, 2007). 
Jeffrey Kripal has also recently laid out an esoteric genealogy for the comparative study of reli-
gion— in a textbook, no less— via the Hermetic revival of the Renaissance, Müller, theosophy, 
spiritualism, transcendentalism, and, above all, the American counterculture and the paranor-
mal. See Kripal, Comparing Religions: Coming to Terms (Wiley- Blackwell, 2014).
162. I will argue for an option that is neither re- Christianization, re- universalization, nor the 
balkanization of increasing particularism. For this, see Jason Ā. Josephson- Storm, “Absolute 
Disruption: The Future of Theory after Postmodernism,” work in progress.
163. For example, see Carroll, Spiritualism in Antebellum America.
164. See The Life and Letters of the Right Honourable Friedrich Max Müller (New York: 
Longmans, 1902), 1:306, 315.
165. The Oxford Bodleian Library holds a set of letters that Bulwer- Lytton and Müller ex-
changed during the years 1885– 90. Bulwer- Lytton also dedicated The Coming Race to Müller. 
Edward Bulwer- Lytton, The Coming Race (Middletown, VT: Wesleyan University Press, 
2005), xxvi. Bulwer- Lytton’s association with Lévi is recounted in several places, including 
Waite’s introduction to Lévi, Transcendental Magic.
166. See Blavatsky, Isis Unveiled, 2:246– 48.
167. Life and Letters of Müller, 2:313.
168. For a different interpretation of Olcott’s encounter with Müller, see Donald Lopez, 
Buddhism and Science: A Guide for the Perplexed (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008), 
155– 59.
169. Henry Olcott, Old Diary Leaves (Adyar: Theosophical Publishing, 1904), 3:164– 65.
170. Ibid., 4:57– 58.
171. P. D. Ouspensky, Tertium Organum (New York: Vintage Books, 1970), 271– 72.
172. For one survey of this theoretical terrain, see José Casanova, Public Religions in the 
Modern World (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994), 11– 39. For the Enlightenment as 
the beginning of radical disenchantment, see Keith Thomas, Religion and the Decline of Magic 
(New York: Scribner, 1971); and Michel Vovelle, Piété baroque et déchristianisation en Provence 
au XVIIIe siècle (Paris: Plon, 1973).
173. For this in early Christian studies, see Denise Buell, “The Afterlife Is Not Dead: 
 Spiritualism, Postcolonial Theory, and Early Christian Studies,” Church History 78 (2009): 
862– 72.

354 Notes to Pages 125–129
Chapter Five
1. Reproduced in Angela Bourke, “Reading a Woman’s Death: Colonial Text and Oral 
Tradition in Nineteenth- Century Ireland,” Feminist Studies 21, no. 3 (1995): 553– 86.
2. Ibid. See also Angela Bourke, The Burning of Bridget Cleary (New York: Viking, 2000); 
and Joan Hoff and Marian Yeates, The Cooper’s Wife Is Missing: The Trials of Bridget Cleary 
(New York: Basic Books, 2000).
3. See esp. Hoff and Yeates, The Cooper’s Wife Is Missing.
4. Bourke, Burning of Bridget Cleqry, esp. 164.
5. Richard Dorson, The British Folklorists: A History (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1968). See also Anonymous, “The Witch- Burning at Clonmel;” Folklore 6, no. 4 (1895): 373– 
384; and Leland Duncan, “Fairy Beliefs and Other Folklore Notes from County Leitrim,” Folk-
lore 7, no. 2 (1896): 161– 83.
6. John Morley, The Struggle for National Education (London: Chapman and Hall,  
1873), 63.
7. Cited in Alex Owen, The Place of Enchantment: British Occultism and the Culture of the 
Modern (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004), 17.
8. For this list, see Frank Turner, Contesting Cultural Authority: Essays in Victorian Intel-
lectual Life (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1993), 192– 93; supplemented by David 
Bebbington, Victorian Religious Revivals (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012); David 
Blackbourn, Marpingen: Apparitions of the Virgin Mary in Bismarckian Germany (New York: 
Knopf, 1994); and Marie Vernet, La Vierge à Pellevoisin (Paris: Téqui, 1979).
9. See Stephen Sharot, “Magic, Religion, Science, and Secularization,” in Religion, Science, 
and Magic, ed. Jacob Neusner, Ernest Frerichs, and Paul Flesher (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1989), 261– 84.
10. See Ivan Strenski, Understanding Theories of Religion (Walden: Wiley Blackwell, 2015), 
66, 71. See also Robert Ackerman, “Anthropology and the Classics,” in A New History of An-
thropology, ed. Henrika Kuklick (Malden: Blackwell, 2008), 149; and Daniel Pals, Eight Theories 
of Religion (New York: Oxford University Press, 2006), 32.
11. Pals, Eight Theories of Religion.
12. For example, see Gilbert Germain, A Discourse on Disenchantment (Albany: State Uni-
versity of New York Press, 1993).
13. Henrika Kuklick, The Savage Within: The Social History of British Anthropology (New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 1991), 26.
14. Talal Asad, ed., Anthropology & the Colonial Encounter (New York: Humanities Press, 
1973), esp. 16– 17. See also Eric R. Wolf, Europe and the People without History (Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press, 1997); Adam Kuper, The Reinvention of Primitive Society (New 
York: Routledge, 2005); and George Stocking, Victorian Anthropology (New York: Free Press, 
1987).
15. German Volkskunde has received some critical attention; for example, Hannjost Lixfeld, 
Folklore and Fascism: The Reich Institute for German Volkskunde (Bloomington: Indiana Uni-
versity Press, 1994).
16. Andrew Lang, Custom and Myth (London: Longmans Green, 1884), 11. See also Alan 
Dundes, Interpreting Folklore (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1980), 3.

Notes to Pages 129–135 
355
17. Marjorie Morgan, National Identities and Travel in Victorian Britain (New York: Pal-
grave, 2001).
18. Richard Dorson, Peasant Customs and Savage Myths (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1968).
19. Alan O’Day, Irish Home Rule, 1867– 1921 (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1998).
20. They debated whether to understand these systems as evidence for evolutionism or 
diffusionism. See Dorson, Peasant Customs and Savage Myths, esp. 265.
21. For example, Lewis Henry Morgan, Ancient Society (London: Macmillan, 1877). Morgan 
does recognize some cultural “survivals.”
22. James Augustus St. John, The Education of the People (London: Chapman and Hall, 
1859), 32.
23. James Farrer, Primitive Manners and Customs (New York: H. Holt, 1879), 279.
24. Ronald Hutton, Blood and Mistletoe: The History of the Druids in Britain (New Haven, 
CT: Yale University Press, 2009), 339– 41.
25. See, for example, Dorson, Peasant Customs and Savage Myths, 63.
26. Farrer, Primitive Manners and Customs, 280.
27. James Frazer, The Golden Bough: A Study in Comparative Religion, 1st ed. (London: 
Macmillan, 1890), 1:viii– ix. Hereafter The Golden Bough will be abbreviated GB and followed 
by edition, volume, and page numbers.
28. One significant passage describes a historical progression including different ages of 
superstition, with one marked by the distinction between religion and magic. GB, 1E 1:32.
29. Robert Ackerman, J. G. Frazer: His Life and Work (New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 1987), 81– 82.
30. GB 1E, 1:348; Ackerman, Frazer: Life and Work, 110.
31. Here Frazer would be agreeing with Hegel, who had argued in Vorlesungen über die 
Philosophie der Religion that “magic” (Zauberei) was the first form of religion. G. W. F. Hegel, 
Werke (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1969– 71), 16:278.
32. For example, see GB 1E, 1:174– 75.
33. We can see behind this charge a whole history of Protestant anti- Catholicism. One can 
also hear echoes of David Strauß, Das Leben Jesu, kritisch bearbeitet (1835).
34. GB 1E, 2:370.
35. Ibid., 2:371.
36. James Frazer, Selected Letters of Sir J. G. Frazer, ed. Robert Ackerman (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2005), 63.
37. Ibid., 137– 38.
38. It is telling that Frazer did not make a distinction between religion and magic in an ear-
lier letter to Baldwin Spencer (September 15, 1898). While it could mean that Frazer developed 
his signature schema sometime between September and November, it is more likely that Frazer 
came to idea earlier but cautiously refrained from expressing it. Ibid., 126.
39. Ackerman, Frazer: Life and Work, 110; Peter Baker, “The Mild Anthropologist and the 
Mission of Primitive Man” (PhD diss., University of Cambridge, 1980); and Robert Fraser, The 
Making of “The Golden Bough” (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1990), 120– 21.
40. Jevons insisted on a basic division in the primitive psyche between magic, which refers 
to a world that humans can control and which they identify as natural; and religion, which refers 

356 Notes to Pages 135–138
to a world that that humans cannot control and which they identify as supernatural. But he also 
explicitly rejected the view that “all religion has been developed out of magic.” Frank Jevons, 
An Introduction to the History of Religion (New York: Macmillan, 1896), 24– 25.
41. Hermann Oldenberg, Die Religion des Veda (Berlin: W. Hertz, 1894), 58– 59; see also 
476– 79.
42. Frazer Collection 20:1, Trinity College, University of Cambridge.
43. Pausanias, Pausanias’s Description of Greece, trans. James Frazer (London: Macmillan, 
1913), 5:264.
44. GB 2E, 1:xvi.
45. Another likely influence was William Edward Hartpole Lecky, History of the Rise and 
Influence of the Spirit of Rationalism in Europe (1882), cited in GB 3E, 11:42.
46. For influential early works of this sort, see John Aubrey, Remaines of Gentilisme and Ju-
daisme (1687– 1689); John Brand, Observations on Popular Antiquities (1813); Thomas Crofton 
Croker, Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland (1825– 28); and Madame d’Aulnoy, 
Les Contes des Fées (1698, translated into English as Fairy Tales, 1699).
47. According to the OED, the first meaning of fairy is “enchantment, magic,” and its first 
usage in this sense in English dates from about 1330. For example, the “Fayrie knight” of Ger-
ileon of Englande (1592) was a magical human knight, not a fairy. See also Noel Williams, “The 
Semantics of the Word Fairy,” in The Good People, ed. Peter Narváez (Lexington: University 
Press of Kentucky, 1997), 457– 78.
48. For the idea of the winged fairy, see Nicola Bown, Fairies in Nineteenth- Century Art and 
Literature (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2001), 45– 47.
49. William Wilde, Irish Popular Superstitions (Dublin: McGlashan, 1852), 120– 21.
50. Classification according to the Aarne- Thompson motif- index.
51. Quotation from Carole Silver, Strange and Secret Peoples: Fairies and Victorian Con-
sciousness (New York: Oxford University Press, 2000), 192. See also Linda- May Ballard, “Fair-
ies and the Supernatural on Reachrai,” in The Good People, ed. Peter Narváez (Lexington: Uni-
versity Press of Kentucky, 1997), 47– 93; and Barbara Rieti, Strange Terrain: The Fairy World in 
Newfoundland (St. John’s: Memorial University of Newfoundland, 1991), 1– 14.
52. Hugh Miller, The Old Red Sandstone (Boston: Gould and Lincoln, 1851), 260.
53. Geoffrey Chaucer, The Riverside Chaucer, ed. Larry Benson (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1988), 116.
54. Marjorie Johnson, Seeing Fairies: From the Lost Archives of the Fairy Investigation 
Society (San Antonio: Anomalist Books, 2014); Rieti, Strange Terrain.
55. See: Bulwer- Lytton, “Complaint of the Last Faun” (1834); Brontë, Shirley (1849); 
Graves, Fairies and Fusiliers (1918); Kipling, Puck of Pook’s Hill (1906); and Yeats, Fairy and 
Folk Tales of the Irish (1888).
56. John Aubrey, Three Prose Works: Miscellanies, Remaines of Gentilisme and Judaisme, 
Observations (Carbondale: Southern Illinois University, 1972), 290.
57. For example, ibid., 204.
58. Robert Cromek, Remains of Nithsdale and Galloway Song (London: Alexander Gard-
ner, 1880), 248.
59. Ibid., 248. Also cited in Lizanne Henderson and Edward Cowan, Scottish Fairy Belief: 
A History (East Linton: Tuckwell Press, 2001), 28.

Notes to Pages 139–142 
357
60. See Andrew Cheviot, Proverbs, Proverbial Expressions, and Popular Rhymes of Scotland 
(Detroit: Gale, 1969), 398; Henderson and Cowan, Scottish Fairy Belief, 87– 88; and W. Jenkyn 
Thomas, The Welsh Fairy Book (Mineola: Dover, 2001), 12– 17.
61. Henderson and Cowan, Scottish Fairy Belief, 28. See also John Selden, Table Talk (Ed-
inburgh: Fairbairn, 1819): “There never was a merry world since the fairies left dancing, and 
the parson left conjuring” (124).
62. Richard Corbet, The Poems of Richard Corbet (London: Longman, 1807), 215.
63. Discussed in chapter 2, but see especially D. P. Walker, “The Cessation of Miracles,” in 
Hermeticism and the Renaissance: Intellectual History and the Occult in Early Modern Europe, 
ed. Ingrid Merkel and Allen Debus (Washington, DC: Folger Books, 1988).
64. See Silver, Strange and Secret Peoples, 193, 198.
65. Lady Archibald Campbell, “The Men of Peace: Faerie Scotland,” Occult Review, Jan-
uary 1909, 25– 39.
66. See GB 2E, 1:74– 75, 3E, 10: 323– 24. Also in James Frazer, Psyche’s Task (London: Mac-
millan, 1913), 166.
67. James Frazer, The Gorgon’s Head, and Other Literary Pieces (London: Macmillan, 1927).
68. Frazer’s library contained at least the following accounts of fairy farewell: Aubrey, Re-
mains of Gentilism; Campbell, Superstitions of the Highlands; Chaucer, The Canterbury Tales; 
Hartland, The Science of Fairy Tales; Johnson, A Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland 
(partial version). Frazer Collection 20:1, Trinity College, University of Cambridge.
69. “The Trows in Shetland,” Scotsman, January 19, 1893, Frazer Collection 21:1, Trinity 
College, University of Cambridge.
70. GB 2E, 1:xvi, 3:459.
71. See Pals, Eight Theories of Religion, 11; John Vickery, The Literary Impact of the Golden 
Bough (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1976), 13.; and Ackerman, Frazer: Life and 
Work , 304.
72. Auguste Comte, Opuscules de philosophie sociale, 1819– 1828 (Paris: E. Leroux, 1883), 
100.
73. A detailed discussion appears in an article I am currently preparing for publication, 
with the working title “Faith in Society: August Comte, Henri de Saint- Simon, and Sociology 
as Politics and Post- Religion.”
74. GB 2E, 1:63.
75. Ibid., 1:73.
76. See, for example, Herbert Spencer, The Principles of Sociology (New York: D. Appleton, 
1900), vol. 1.
77. Andrew Lang, The Making of Religion (London: Longmans, 1898). This debate is dis-
cussed in Randall Styers, Making Magic: Religion, Magic, and Science in the Modern World 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2004), 81– 84.
78. Richard Broome, Aboriginal Australians: A History since 1788 (Crows Nest: Allen & 
Unwin, 2010), 100– 121.
79. Probably the most important of these accounts was Baldwin Spencer and Francis James 
Gillen, The Native Tribes of Central Australia (1899).
80. Contemporary scholars have noted that European colonists often claimed to have dis-
covered such indigenous peoples. See David Chidester, Savage Systems: Colonialism and Com-

358 Notes to Pages 142–150
parative Religion in Southern Africa (Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1996); and 
J. Z. Smith, “Religion, Religions, Religious,” in Critical Terms for Religious Studies, ed. Mark 
Taylor (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998), 269– 84.
81. George Angas, Savage Life and Scenes in Australia and New Zealand (London: Smith, 
Elder, 1847), 1:88, cited in GB 3E, 12:5.
82. See especially GB 2E, 1:72– 73.
83. Even the Encyclopedia Britannica of 1875 repeated the claim that Aboriginal people had 
“no religion.” Cited in Richard Broome, Aboriginal Victorians: A History since 1800 (Crows 
Nest: Allen & Unwin, 2005), 101.
84. See Patrick Dove, The Science of Politics (London: Johnstone, 1850), 1:128.
85. GB 2E, 1:71.
86. Ibid., 74.
87. Ibid., 63.
88. Ibid., 61 (emphasis added).
89. See ibid., 63– 64; see also 45.
90. Quoted in ibid., 66.
91. Ibid., 66.
92. Ibid., 61.
93. Ibid., 63.
94. Kurt Vonnegut, Cat’s Cradle (New York: Dial Press Edition, 2010), 218.
95. GB 2E, 1:61– 62.
96. Edward B. Tylor, Primitive Culture, 2 vols. (London: Murray, 1891), 1:121– 22.
97. GB 2E, 1:62.
98. Ibid., 9– 12.
99. Ibid., 28– 34 (header). Expanded into “magical telepathy,” GB 3E, 1:119– 34.
100. GB 3E, 3:459.
101. GB 2E, 1:130. This also appears in GB 1E, 1:32.
102. GB 2E, 1:74– 75.
103. See James Frazer, The Worship of Nature (New York: Macmillan, 1926), 10– 11.
104. GB 2E, 3:460.
105. Ackerman, Frazer: Life and Work, 25– 26.
106. Frazer, Gorgon’s Head, 316.
107. GB 2E, 3:459.
108. Frazer, Worship of Nature, 1.
109. Ibid., 2– 3.
110. Ibid.
111. Ibid., 3.
112. Ibid., 9.
113. Ibid., 10.
114. Ibid., 10.
115. Ibid.
116. Ibid., 8.
117. Ibid., 8.
118. Ibid., 4

Notes to Pages 150–156 
359
119. Ibid., 4.
120. C. E. Montague, Disenchantment (London: Chatto & Windus, 1922), 278.
121. As will be shown in chapter 10, Weber came to disenchantment in 1913.
122. “Three Forms of Thought,” New York Times, November 29, 1897.
123. Roger Luckhurst, The Invention of Telepathy (New York: Oxford University Press, 
2007), 160– 67.
124. George R. R. Martin, A Clash of Kings (New York: Bantam Books, 1999), 442.
Chapter Six
1. Aleister Crowley, “Liber 73:The Urn: The Diary of a Magus” (unpublished manuscript, 
ed. Hymenaeus Beta [William Breeze], n.d.), accessed July 7, 2013, http:// www .rahoorkhuit .net 
/library /libers /pdf /lib _0073 .pdf. The strange book and the dying lion occurred in a dream that 
Crowley had on February 15, which he reflected on in July 12, 1916. Ibid., 23, 33.
2. Ibid., 33– 34. The sobriquet came from Crowley’s condemnation in an editorial, “The 
Wickedest Man in the World,” John Bull, March 24, 1923.
3. Richard Kaczynski, Perdurabo: The Life of Aleister Crowley, 2nd ed. (Berkeley, CA: North 
Atlantic Books, 2010), 277– 78.
4. Jean Fuller. The Magical Dilemma of Victor Neuburg. London: W. H. Allen, 1965, 223– 
224.
5. Crowley, “The Urn,” 23.
6. Ibid., 33.
7. Ibid., 35.
8. Aleister Crowley, The Confessions of Aleister Crowley: An Autohagiography (London: 
Arkana, 1989), 808– 9. Note the reference to “Dying God,” which Crowley drew from Frazer.
9. Michel Foucault, Histoire de la folie à l’âge classique (Paris: Gallimard, 1972), 296– 315; 
and Mark Micale, “On the ‘Disappearance’ of Hysteria: A Study in the Clinical Deconstruction 
of a Diagnosis,” Isis 84 (1993): 496– 526.
10. Karl Popper, The Poverty of Historicism (New York: Basic Books, 1957), 13– 16, quotation 
on 13. See also Robert Merton, Social Theory and Social Structure, 3rd ed. (New York: Free 
Press, 1968), 475– 79.
11. I generally avoid the formulation “Western esotericism.” The expression is useful inso-
far as it evokes European appropriations of South and East Asian thought, but the excessive 
emphasis on “Western” presents an Orientalized East- West binary and ignores esotericism’s 
global impact.
12. Perdurabo was written by a follower of Crowley’s new religion, but it is a solid schol-
arly biography. Marco Pasi’s Aleister Crowley e la tentazione della politica (Milan: FranoAngeli, 
1999) was updated, translated, and reissued as Marco Pasi, Aleister Crowley and the Temptation 
of Politics (Durham, NC: Acumen, 2014).
13. The biographical summary that follows is primarily based on Kaczynski, Perdurabo, and 
a skeptical reading of Crowley’s Confessions, supplemented with John Symonds, The Great 
Beast: The Life and Magick of Aleister Crowley (London: Mayflower Books, 1973), 237– 39.
14. Kaczynski, Perdurabo, 4, 14.
15. Ibid., 16.

360 Notes to Pages 156–160
16. See, for example, Aleister Crowley, The Law Is for All: The Authorized Popular Commen-
tary to the Book of the Law- Liber AL vel Legis (Tempe, AZ: New Falcon Publications, 1996), 99; 
and Aleister Crowley, Crowley on Christ, ed. Francis King (London: Daniel, 1974), 157.
17. Kaczynski, Perdurabo, 31– 32. Crowley left Trinity without graduating in 1897.
18. For Crowley’s admiration for Shelley see Kaczynski, Perdurabo, 33– 34.
19. Even before Crowley met members of the order in person, he had read their work. See 
Aleister Crowley, Magick: Liber ABA (San Francisco: Weiser Books, 1997), xxxi.
20. Ellic Howe, The Magicians of the Golden Dawn: A Documentary History of a Magical 
Order 1887– 1923 (London: Routledge, 1972).
21. Crowley, Confessions, 393. See also Kaczynski, Perdurabo, 123– 29.
22. Crowley, Confessions, 393.
23. Ibid., 394.
24. Aleister Crowley, The Equinox of the Gods (New York: New Falcon, 1991), 117– 18.
25. Many of the themes that would define The Book of the Law appear in Crowley’s earlier 
diaries and writings. For example, in a June 1903, diary entry, he already stated “My Gods were 
those of Egypt, interpreted on lines closely akin to those of Greece.” Crowley, Magick: Liber 
ABA, xxxv.
26. See Crowley, Law Is for All.
27. Kaczynski, Perdurabo, 127– 29.
28. Crowley, Magick: Liber ABA, 63.
29. Kaczynski, Perdurabo, 151.
30. Pasi sees Crowley’s life as divided into two different phases: an individualistic mystical 
phase and a later prophetic mission. Marco Pasi, Crowley and the Temptation of Politics, 25.
31. Kaczynski, Perdurabo, 205– 8, 231– 34, 472– 81.
32. Ibid., 548.
33. Ibid., 344.
34. See Ronald Hutton, “Crowley and Wicca,” in Aleister Crowley and Western Esotericism, 
ed. Henrik Bogdan and Martin Starr (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012), 285– 306.
35. See also in Bodgen and Starr, Aleister Crowley and Western Esotericism: Hugh Urban, 
“The Occult Roots of Scientology? L. Ron Hubbard, Aleister Crowley, and the Origins of a 
Controversial New Religion,” 335– 68; and Asbjørn Dyrendal, “Satan and the Beast: The Influ-
ence of Aleister Crowley on Modern Satanism,” 369– 94.
36. See Hugh Urban, Magia Sexualis: Sex, Magic, and Liberation in Modern Western Eso-
tericism (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2008), esp. 109– 39.
37. Crowley appears on the cover of the Beatles’ Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band 
(1967), and he is mentioned or quoted in numerous songs, including: David Bowie’s “Quick-
sand” (1971), Raul Seixas’s “Sociedade Alternativa” (1974), Ozzy Osborne’s “Mr. Crowley” 
(1980_, Marilyn Manson’s “Diary of a Dope Fiend” (1995), and the Klaxons’ “Magick” (2006).
38. The full title of the spell text is “Liber LXX -  Σταυρος Βατραχου, the Ceremonies proper 
to obtaining a familiar spirit of a Mercurial nature as described in the Apocalypse of St. John the 
Divine from a frog or toad.” Reproduced in Symonds, Great Beast, 237– 39.
39. Ibid., 238.
40. Crowley, Confessions, 808.

Notes to Pages 160–165 
361
41. Aleister Crowley, “The Temple of Solomon the King (Continued),” Equinox 1, no. 7 
(1912): 362. See also Crowley, Confessions, 360; Crowley, Golden Twigs, ed. Martin Starr (Chi-
cago: Teitan Press, 1988), viii; and Kaczynski, Perdurabo, 119.
42. The Works of Aleister Crowley, 3 vols. (Foyers, Scotland: Society for the Propagation of 
Religious Truth, 1905– 07), 2:130– 39.
43. Crowley, Confessions, 360.
44. Works of Crowley, 2:133– 34.
45. Aleister Crowley, “A∴A∴ Curriculum,” Equinox 3, no. 1 (1919): 13– 20; and Crowley, 
Confessions, 190.
46. Works of Crowley, 2:233.
47. Aleister Crowley, “The Attainment of Happiness: A Restatement of the Purpose of Mys-
tical Teachings,” Vanity Fair (November 1916): 55, 134.
48. Ibid.
49. Crowley, Confessions, 244.
50. See, for example, Aleister Crowley, “Liber Astarté vel Berylli (Liber 175),” Equinox 1, 
no. 7 (1912): 23– 32.
51. Later Crowley refined his terminology, arguing: “Magick is getting into communication 
with individuals who exist on an higher plane than ours. Mysticism is the raising of oneself to 
their level.” Crowley, Magick: Liber ABA, xxiii.
52. Aleister Crowley, Liber 777 and Other Qabalistic Writings, ed. Israel Regardie (York 
Beach: Weiser, 1986), ix.
53. Ibid., 3– 14.
54. Crowley refers to his debt to Blavatsky in ibid., x.
55. “The only man worthy of our notice is Frazer of the Golden Bough.” Ibid.
56. Crowley, Confessions, 513.
57. For all of these but Nietzsche, see Henrik Bogdan, “Envisioning the Birth of a New 
Aeon,” in Aleister Crowley and Western Esotericism, ed. Henrik Bogdan and Martin Starr (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 2012), 89– 106.
58. The Plymouth Brethren preached that the world would go through seven ages before 
the Rapture and Christ’s return. See Bogdan, “Envisioning a New Aeon,” 99– 100.
59. Crowley may have discovered Bachofen through his reading of Frazer.
60. Aleister Crowley, “Liber Legis [the Old Commentary],” Equinox 1, no. 7 (1912): 400. 
Cited in Bogdan, “Envisioning a New Aeon,” 90.
61. Aleister Crowley, Magick without Tears (Las Vegas: Falcon Press, 1989), 303.
62. Crowley, “Liber Legis,” 303; Crowley, Confessions, 370.
63. Crowley, Magick: Liber ABA, 163.
64. Crowley, “Liber Legis,” 400.
65. Especially vol. 4, The Dying God, and vols. 5– 6, Adonis, Attis, Osiris.
66. Quoted in Bogdan, “Envisioning a New Aeon,” 92.
67. Crowley is likely gesturing here toward Müller’s theory of solar mythology. Müller’s 
theory is rooted in his philological reconstruction of the names of various deities, which he 
suggested proved their origins in various early Aryan words originating in the context of the 
diurnal motion of sun and moon. For instance, he claimed that Daphne originally meant the 

362 Notes to Pages 165–171
dawn and Apollo meant the sun. So the myth in which Apollo pursued Daphne was originally 
a metaphopr for the sun following the dawn. Müller and company’s ability to read anything as a 
solar myth was quickly satirized. Already in 1870 the Anglo- Irish clergyman Richard Littledale 
had joked that “the story of Max Müller” must itself be a solar myth, as Müller’s name could be 
reconstructed as a (very tennous) reference to the sun and his own relocation from Germany to 
England was cleary a metaphor for the East- West solar movement. So Müller himself must be 
nothing more than a myth. See Michael Carroll, “Some Third Thoughts on Max Müller and 
Solar Mythology,” Archives Européennes de Sociologie 26, no. 2 (1985): 262– 90.
68. Crowley also wanted magick also to reject “charlatanism” and “obscurantism” and em-
brace carefully recorded magical experiments.
69. Crowley, Magick: Liber ABA, 135; Egil Asprem, “Magic Naturalized? Negotiating 
Science and Occult Experience in Aleister Crowley’s Scientific Illuminism,” Aries 8, no. 2 
(2008): 150.
70. Crowley, Magick: Liber ABA, 123.
71. Crowley, Magick without Tears, 218– 19.
72. James Frazer, The Golden Bough: A Study in Comparative Religion, 3rd ed. (London: 
Macmillan, 1906), 1:218– 19, cited in Crowley, Magick: Liber ABA, 124 (emphasis in the original).
73. Frazer, Golden Bough, 1:52– 53.
74. For Crowley, the magician does not beg spirits; she compels them. Crowley, Magick: 
Liber ABA, 216.
75. Wouter Hanegraaff, “How Magic Survived the Disenchantment of the World,” Religion, 
no. 33 (2003): 361.
76. Crowley, Magick: Liber ABA, 215.
77. Aleister Crowley, Moonchild (New York: Weiser, 1970), 42. Although the work is fiction, 
it also relies on Crowley’s system of magic.
78. Crowley, Magick: Liber ABA, 216– 17.
79. Ibid., 224.
80. Crowley and Frazer were not in complete agreement about magic. One significant dif-
ference was in that while they shared an antipathy toward spiritualism, Crowley argued that 
communication with spirits and other supernatural beings was a crucial component of the ma-
gician’s repertoire.
81. This was a continuation of the schema Crowley had worked in Liber 777.
82. Richard Kaczynski, “The Crowley- Harris Thoth Tarot: Collaboration and Innovation,” 
in Tarot in Culture, ed. Emily E. Auger (Clifford, ON: Valleyhome Books, 2014), 147, 164.
83. Brian Vickers, introduction to Occult and Scientific Mentalities in the Renaissance, ed. 
Vickers (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1984), 17. Cited in Hanegraaff, “How Magic 
Survived,” 359.
84. Hanegraaff, “How Magic Survived,” 377.
85. Ibid., 370– 71.
86. Egil Asprem, “Magic Naturalized? Negotiating Science and Occult Experience in Aleis-
ter Crowley’s Scientific Illuminism,” Aries 8, no. 2 (2008): 139– 65.
87. Aleister Crowley, The and Other Essays (Tempe, AZ: New Falcon, 1998), 19, 15.
88. Ibid.

Notes to Pages 171–176 
363
89. Ibid., 20.
90. Ibid., 19.
91. Aleister Crowley, The Scrutinies of Simon Iff (Chicago: Teitan Press, 1987), 27.
92. Crowley, 20.
93. Ibid., 20– 21.
94. Ibid., 37.
95. Aleister Crowley, editorial, Equinox 1, no. 1 (1909): 1– 6.
96. Aleister Crowley, “Liber Exercitiorum,” Equinox 1, no. 1 (1909): 25– 36.
97. E.g., Crowley, Confessions, 224.
98. Crowley, Magick: Liber ABA, 126. As Crowley put it elsewhere: “Magick is the science 
and art of causing change to occur in conformity with the Will. In other words, it is Science, 
Pure and Applied. This thesis has been worked out at great length by Dr. Sir J. G. Frazer.” 
Aleister Crowley, The Book of Thoth (New York: Weiser, 1969), 40.
99. Crowley, Magick: Liber ABA, 126.
100. Ibid., 128 (“Science . . . comprehension,” emphasis in the original; “For instance . . . 
expressions,” emphasis added).
101. Ibid., 194.
102. Ibid., 129.
103. Aleister Crowley, “The Worst Man in the World Tells the Astounding Story of His 
Life,” Sunday Dispatch, June 18, 1933.
104. Crowley, Magick without Tears, 64.
105. Asprem, “Magic Naturalized?”, 149– 50
106. See Crowley, Magick: Liber ABA, 215.
107. Kaczynski, Perdurabo, 547.
108. Crowley, Golden Twigs.
109. I have been unable to confirm Ackerman’s assertion that Jessie Weston was a mem-
ber of the Order of the Golden Dawn. See Robert Ackerman, The Myth and Ritual School: 
J. G. Frazer and the Cambridge Ritualists (New York: Garland, 1991), 219. Regardless, Weston 
claimed to know initiates of lost Grail rites, stating: “No inconsiderable part of the information 
at my disposal depended upon personal testimony, the testimony of those who knew of the 
continued existence of such a ritual and had actually been initiated into its mysteries.” Jessie 
Weston, From Ritual to Romance (New York: Doubleday, 1957), 4– 5. Margaret Alice Murray 
(The Witch- Cult in Western Europe, 1921) argued that witches were practitioners of a pagan 
religion that had been transmitted from pre- Christian times. This was more than an academic 
interest, and Murray was not above casting the occasional spell herself. Gerald Gardner, one of 
the founders of modern Wicca, not only borrowed from Crowley, but also followed his lead in 
turning toward The Golden Bough as a source of pagan rites and spells. For Murray and Gard-
ner, see Ronald Hutton, The Triumph of the Moon: A History of Modern Pagan Witchcraft (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1999), 200– 201, 205– 40. For Crowley’s influence on modern 
Wicca, see Leo Ruickbie, Witchcraft out of the Shadows: A Complete History (London: Robert 
Hale, 2004), esp. 104– 5.
110. Israel Regardie, The Golden Dawn: A Complete Course in Ceremonial Magic. (St. Paul, 
MN: Llewellyn Publications), 1989.

364 Notes to Pages 179–184
Chapter Seven
1. For the recension history of Die Traumdeutung, see Lydia Marinelli and Andreas Mayer, 
Dreaming By the Book: Freud’s the Interpretation of Dreams and the History of the Psychoana-
lytic Movement (New York: Other Press, 2003).
2. Sigmund Freud, Die Traumdeutung, 4th ed. (Leipzig: Franz Deuticke, 1914), 48n2.
3. Carl du Prel, Die Philosophie der Mystik (Leipzig: Günther, 1885), 306. Quoted in Freud, 
Die Traumdeutung, 474n1.
4. Freud, Die Traumdeutung, 474n1.
5. Freud had first used Unbewußte in his coauthored monograph Studien über Hysterie 
(1895) but had not yet begun to theorize it significantly. The term Unbewußte had a long history 
prior to both du Prel and Freud. It was coined with a slightly different spelling (Unbewußtseyn) 
by Ernst Platner in 1776. See Elke Völmicke, Das Unbewußte im Deutschen Idealismus (Würz-
burg: Königshausen & Neumann, 2005), 11– 12.
6. Freud could also have found a very similar idea in Hartmann, Philosophie des Unbe-
wussten (1869).
7. Freud, Die Traumdeutung, 416– 17n1. For the influence of Hartmann on Freud, see Marcel 
Zentner, “Nineteenth- Century Precursors of Freud,” in The Freud Encyclopedia (New York: 
Routledge, 2002), 370– 83; and Yvon Brès, “Home, Carus, Hartmann- histoire de l’inconscient,” 
Revue Philosophique de la France et de l’Étranger 2, no. 194 (2004): 225– 30, esp 228.
8. Corinna Treitel, A Science for the Soul: Occultism and the Genesis of the German Modern 
(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2004), 40.
9. Frazer may be an exception, as he either had no occult interests or was able to hide them 
so well that they have been lost.
10. Freud attacked the concept of degeneration. Sigmund Freud, Drei Abhandlungen zur 
Sexualtheorie (Leipzig: F. Deuticke, 1905).
11. Daniel Pick, Faces of Degeneration: A European Disorder (New York: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1989); and Sander Gilman, Difference and Pathology (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press, 1985).
12. Max Nordau, Entartung (Berlin: Duncker, 1892), translated in Max Nordau, Degenera-
tion (New York: Appleton, 1895), 537; see also 209.
13. Nordau, Degeneration, 22.
14. Ibid., 45. I modified very slightly the translation in Nordeau, Entartung, 1:86.
15. Nordau, Degeneration, 214.
16. Ibid., 215– 16.
17. Ibid., 217.
18. See Treitel, Science for the Soul; and Moritz Bassler and Hildegard Châtellier, Mystique, 
mysticisme et modernité en Allemagne autour de 1900 (Strasbourg: Presses Universitaires de 
Strasbourg, 1998); Nicholas Goodrick- Clarke, The Occult Roots of Nazism (New York: New York 
University Press, 1992); Hans- Jürgen Glowka, Deutsche Okkultgruppen, 1875– 1937 (Munich: 
Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Religions-  und Weltanschauungsfragen, 1981); Arthur Magida, The 
Nazi Séance (New York: Palgrave, 2011); Andreas Sommer, “Normalizing the Supernomal: The 
Formation of the Gesselschaft Für Psychologische Furshung,” Journal of the History of the Be-
havioral Sciences 49, no. 1 (2013): 18– 44; Klaus Vondung, Magie und Manipulation: Ideologischer 

Notes to Pages 184–189 
365
Kult und politische Religion des Nationalsozialismus (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck, 1971); Barbara 
Wolf- Braun, Medizin, Okkultismus und Parapsychologie im 19. und frühen 20. Jahrhundert 
(Wetzlar: GWAB- Verlag, 2009); and Heather Wolffram, The Stepchildren of Science: Psychical 
Research and Parapsychology in Germany, c. 1870– 1939 (New York: Rodopi, 2009).
19. Immanuel Kant, Theoretical Philosophy, 1755– 1770 (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2002), 336 (italics in the original).
20. Wouter Hanegraaff, Swedenborg, Oetinger, Kant (West Chester: Swedenborg Founda-
tion, 2007); Gregory Johnson, introduction to Kant on Swedenborg: Dreams of a Spirit- Seer and 
Other Writings, by Immanuel Kant (West Chester: Swedenborg Foundation, 2002); and Alison 
Laywine, Kant’s Early Metaphysics and the Origins of the Critical Philosophy (Atascadero, CA: 
Ridgeview, 1993).
21. For example, René Descartes, Les Passions de l’Ame (Paris: N.p., 1728), 51– 52.
22. Kant, Kant on Swedenborg, 309
23. Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1996), 303.
24. Nietzsche argued, “God became the ‘thing- in- itself.’ ” Friedrich Nietzsche, The Anti- 
Christ, Ecce Homo, Twilight of the Idols, and Other Writings (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 2005), 18.
25. Descartes’s idea of “passions” somewhat complicates this picture insofar as they parallel 
what would later be regarded as emotions or unconscious drives.
26. Immanuel Kant, Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2006), 23– 26.
27. Ibid., 24.
28. Ludger Lütkehaus, Dieses wahre innere Afrika: Texte zur Entdeckung des Unbewussten 
vor Freud (Frankfurt: Fischer Taschenbuch Verlag, 1989), 20– 22. As Lütkenhaus observes, 
European thinkers produced parallel imagery of a racialized black Africa alongside a dark un-
conscious.
29. For resonances between Kant and gothic literature, see Marshall Brown, The Gothic Text 
(Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2005).
30. G.W.F. Hegel, Werke, ed. Eva Moldenhauer and Karl Markus Michel, 20 vols. (Frank-
furt: Suhrkamp, 1971), 8:178– 79, translated in Hegel, The Logic of Hegel (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1874), 131.
31. Ibid. Thanks are due to Christian Thorne for this observation.
32. For Hegel’s reading in mysticism, see Glenn Magee, Hegel and the Hermetic Tradition 
(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2001).
33. Arthur Schopenhauer, On the Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason and 
Other Writings (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2012), 411.
34. Ibid., 415.
35. Ibid., 412.
36. Ibid., 416.
37. Ibid., 413.
38. Karl Ludwig August Friedrich Maximilian Alfred, Freiherr von Prel is usually referred 
to as Baron Carl du Prel. For a more extensive discussion of du Prel and his work, see Tomas 
Kaiser, “Zwischen Philosophie und Spiritismus: Quellen zum Leben und Werk des Carl du 
Prel” (PhD diss., Lüneburg University, 2006).

366 Notes to Pages 189–193
39. See Treitel, Science for the Soul, 42.
40. Andrew Weeks, German Mysticism from Hildegard of Bingen to Ludwig Wittgenstein 
(Albany: State University of New York Press, 1993), which despite its title is a wonderful and 
nuanced work.
41. Bernard McGinn, The Mystical Thought of Meister Eckhart: The Man from Whom God 
Hid Nothing (New York: Crossroad Pub, 2001), 1– 2; Ernst Benz, Les sources mystiques de la 
philosophie romantique allemande (Paris: Vrin, 1968), 1; Roland Pietsch, “Franz von Baader’s 
Criticism of Modern Rationalism,” Sophia Perennis 2, no. 2 (2010): 15– 29.
42. For the two semantic fields and the debate, see Volkhard Krech, “Mystik,” in Max Webers 
“Religionssystematik” (Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2001), 242– 44. See also William James, Varie-
ties of Religious Experience (New York: Routledge, 2002), esp. 330.
43. Carl du Prel, Die Philosophie der Mystik (Leipzig: Günther, 1885), 1:119. I have largely fol-
lowed the translation in du Prel, Philosophy of Mysticism, trans. C. C. Massey. (London: George 
Redway, 1889), 1:142.
44. Du Prel, Philosophy of Mysticism, 1:78.
45. For debates about du Prel’s portrayal of Kant, see Robert Hoar, “Ein unaufgeklärtes 
Moment in der Kantian Philosophie,” Philosophische Monastshefte 29 (1893): 278– 91.
46. Karl Joel, Der Ursprung der Naturphilosophie aus dem Geiste der Mystik (Jena: Died-
erichs, 1906). Pfleiderer argued that the religious philosophy of Plato has demonstrated “higher 
unity of the mystery religions and philosophical thought.” Otto Pfleiderer, Religion und Reli-
gionen (Munich: Lehmanus Verlag, 1911), 2:170.
47. For du Prel’s occult readership, see Arthur Waite, Studies in Mysticism and Certain 
Aspects of the Secret Tradition (London: Hodder, 1906); and Carl Kiesewetter, Geschichte des 
neueren Occultismus: Geheimwissenschaftliche Systeme von Agrippa von Nettesheim bis zu Karl 
du Prel (Leipzig: Friedrich, 1891).
48. For examples, see Richard Noll, The Jung Cult: Origins of a Charismatic Movement 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1994); and John Kerr, A Most Dangerous Method: 
The Story of Jung, Freud, and Sabina Spielrein (New York: Knopf, 1993).
49. The work was dictated by Jung to Aniela Jaffé. Deirdre Bair, Jung: A Biography (Boston: 
Little, Brown, 2003), esp. 626.
50. C. G. Jung, Erinnerungen, Träume, Gedanken von C. G. Jung (Zürich: Rascher, 1962), 
esp. 155, 159.
51. C. G. Jung Memories, Dreams, Reflections (New York: Pantheon Books, 1989), 150– 51.
52. Jung, Erinnerungen, Träume, Gedanken, 160.
53. See C. G. Jung, The Gnostic Jung, ed. Robert Segal (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 1992).
54. Peter Gay, A Godless Jew: Freud, Atheism, and the Making of Psychoanalysis (London: 
Yale University Press, 1987), 30– 31.
55. Jean- Luc Nancy, Adoration: The Deconstruction of Christianity II (New York: Fordham 
University Press, 2013), 95, 100– 101; see also 49. To be clear, Nancy argues that Freud is also 
skeptical toward science.
56. Harold Bloom, Ruin the Sacred Truths (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1989), esp. 150, 161.
57. Paul Ricoeur, Freud and Philosophy: An Essay on Interpretation (New Haven, CT: Yale 

Notes to Pages 193–197 
367
University Press, 1986), 32– 33. Broadly put, Ricoeur sees Freud as capable of purifying reli-
gion. For an attempt to recover a theological Freud, see Eric Santner, On the Psychotheology of 
Everyday Life: Reflections on Freud and Rosenzweig (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001).
58. Sigmund Freud, Psychopathology of Everyday Life (New York: Macmillan, 1914), 309 
(italics in the original).
59. Ibid., 310.
60. For example, Freud, “Zwangshandlungen und Religionsübungen” (Obsessive actions 
and religious practices, 1907).
61. Sigmund Freud, Totem and Taboo: Some Points of Agreement between the Mental Lives of 
Savages and Neurotics (New York: Routledge, 2001), 91.
62. Ibid., 99.
63. Ibid., 94.
64. Ibid., 102.
65. Ibid., 90– 91.
66. Ibid., 105.
67. See also ibid., 97. For Haeckel’s famous biogenetic law, see Ernst Haeckel, Generelle 
Morphologie der Organismen (Berlin: G. Reimer, 1866), 2:7.
68. Sigmund Freud, The Future of an Illusion (New York: Norton, 1975), 30. See also Mary 
Kay O’Neil and Salman Akhtar, On Freud’s The Future of an Illusion (London: International 
Psychoanalytical Association), 2009.
69. Freud, Future of an Illusion, 43.
70. Ibid., 51.
71. For Rolland’s theory of mysticism and the longer back- and- forth that followed, see Wil-
liam Parsons, The Enigma of the Oceanic Feeling (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999).
72. Sigmund Freud, Civilization and Its Discontents (New York: Norton, 1962), 19.
73. Sigmund Freud, New Introductory Lectures on Psycho- Analysis and Other Works (Lon-
don: Hogarth, 1964), 42. As discussed below, in the next pages, Freud turned around and advo-
cated occult investigations.
74. Freud referred to “our predecessors in psycho- analysis, the Catholic fathers” in a 1909 
letter to Oskar Pfister; see Psychoanalysis and Faith: The Letters of Freud and Pfister (New 
York: Basic Books, 1964), 21. For psychoanalysis as exorcism, see Luisa de Urtubey, Freud et 
le diable (Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 1983); and H. C. Erik Midelfort, “Charcot, 
Freud, and the Demons,” in Werewolves, Witches, and Wandering Spirits, ed. Kathryn A. Ed-
wards (Kirksville, MO: Truman State University Press, 2002), 199– 215. For another account of 
the intertwined relationship between psychology and spiritualism, see Janet Oppenheim, The 
Other World: Spiritualism and Psychical Research in England, 1850– 1914 (New York: Cam-
bridge University Press).
75. Sigmund Freud and C. G. Jung, Briefwechsel (Frankfurt: Fischer, 1974), 241– 42. I have 
slightly amended the translation from Sigmund Freud and C. G. Jung, The Freud- Jung Letters 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1974), 218; see also 215– 16.
76. Freud and Jung, Briefwechsel, 243; Freud and Jung, Letters, 220. This was likely a ges-
ture toward gematria in particular.
77. Ernest Jones, The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud (New York: Basic Books, 1953– 57), 
3:382.

368 Notes to Pages 198–202
78. Ibid., 3:381 (emphasis added).
79. Thomas Rabeyron and Renaud Evrard, “Perspectives historiques et contemporaines 
sur l’occulte dans la correspondance Freud– Ferenczi,” Recherches en psychanalyse 13, no. 1 
(2012): 97– 111.
80. Ibid., 99– 102.
81. F. X. Charet, Spiritualism and the Foundations of C. G. Jung’s Psychology (Albany: State 
University of New York Press, 1993), 199.
82. Ibid.; Paul Roazen, Freud and His Followers (New York: Knopf, 1974), 233.
83. Jones, Sigmund Freud, 3: 397.
84. Freud and Jung, Letters, 429 (emphasis added). Freud also warned Jung to be cautious.
85. Sigmund Freud and Sándor Ferenczi, The Correspondence of Sigmund Freud and Sán-
dor Ferenczi (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1993– 2000), 1:274.
86. Jones, Sigmund Freud, 3: 393.
87. Sigmund Freud and Karl Abraham, The Complete Correspondence of Sigmund Freud and 
Karl Abraham, 1907– 1925 (New York: Karnac, 2002), 550.
88. E. James Lieberman and Robert Kramer, The Letters of Sigmund Freud & Otto Rank 
(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2012), 136– 42.
89. Sigmund Freud, Letters of Sigmund Freud (New York: Basic Books, 1960), 334.
90. Translated in Sigmund Freud, The Interpretation of Dreams (New York: Basic Books 
2010), 617– 19.
91. Freud’s “Das Unheimliche” (The Uncanny, 1919) also touched on his own uncanny ex-
periences. It is also worth noting that in this text, Freud lists animistic belief in magic, a world 
of spirits, and “the ominipotence of thought” as paradigmatic of the uncanny. Sigmund Freud, 
The Uncanny, trans. David McLintock (New York: Penguin Books, 2003), 144, 147.
92. Phyllis Grosskurth, “The Idyll in the Harz Mountains: Freud’s Secret Committee,” 
in Freud and the History of Psychoanalysis, ed. Toby Gelfand and John Kerr (Hillsdale, NJ: 
Analytic Press, 1992), 347.
93. Jones, Sigmund Freud, 3:392.
94. Sigmund Freud, Beyond the Pleasure Principle, Group Psychology and Other Works 
(London: Hogarth Press, 1975), 193.
95. Sigmund Freud, Psychopathology of Everyday Life (New York: Norton, 1990), 334.
96. Sigmund Freud, “Some Additional Notes on Dream- Interpretation as a Whole,” in The 
Ego and the Id and Other Works (London: Hogarth, 1975), 135– 36.
97. Jones, Sigmund Freud, 3:394.
98. Ibid.
99. Ibid., 3:394– 395.
100. Freud, Letters, 334. Not to mislead, Freud was describing his own scientific prejudices 
against spirits in particular.
101. Freud, Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 178.
102. Freud, New Introductory Lectures on Psycho- Analysis, 33.
103. Freud, Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 178 (emphasis added).
104. Jones, Sigmund Freud, 3:395.
105. Ibid., 395– 96 (emphasis added).
106. Freud referred to thought transference as a fact in a letter to Weiss in 1935; see Edoardo 

Notes to Pages 202–210 
369
Weiss, Sigmund Freud as a Consultant: Recollections of a Pioneer in Psychoanalysis (New York: 
Intercontinental Medical Book Corp., 1970), 69.
107. Freud, New Introductory Lectures on Psycho- Analysis, 54– 55.
108. Ibid.
109. Freud, Totem and Taboo, 34.
110. See ibid., 35.
111. Ibid., 34– 35.
112. Ibid., 71.
113. Ibid., 71– 73.
114. Ibid., 107.
115. Ibid., 23– 24.
116. Freud 1974, 218. See also Jones, Sigmund Freud, 3:390.
117. Jones, Sigmund Freud, 3:301, 391.
118. Jones recounted that under certain instances of intense stress, Freud engaged in sym-
bolic gestures to ward off misfortune, and Freud was bothered by his own clairvoyant dreams. 
See ibid., 3:382, 389.
119. Freud, Totem and Taboo, 103.
120. By way of exceptions, see Roger Luckhurst, The Invention of Telepathy (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2007). Derrida also carried on Freud’s telepathy.
121. For example, see Frank Sulloway, Freud, Biologist of the Mind: Beyond the Psychoana-
lytic Legend (New York: Basic Books, 1979).
122. For example, George Devereux, Psychoanalysis and the Occult (New York: International 
Universities Press, 1970).
123. D. J. Bem, “Feeling the Future: Experimental Evidence for Anomalous Retroactive 
Influences on Cognition and Affect,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 100 (2011): 
407– 25.
124. Ludwig Binswanger, Sigmund Freud: Reminiscences of a Friendship (New York: Grune 
& Stratton, 1957), 8.
125. Maurice Blanchot, “La fin de la philosophie,” Nouvelle Revue Française, 81 (1959): 286– 
98; Leszek Kołakowski, Metaphysical Horror (New York: Blackwell, 1988), 7.
126. Theodor Adorno, Kants Kritik der reinen Vernunft (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1995), 168. 
While preparing my own translation, I consulted Theodor Adorno, Kant’s Critique of Pure 
Reason (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2001), 110– 11.
Chapter Eight
1. See Roderich Huch, Alfred Schuler, Ludwig Klages und Stefan George: Erinnerungen 
an Kreise und Krisen der Jahrhundertwende in München- Schwabing (Amsterdam: Castrum- 
Peregrini, 1973); Franz Wegener, Alfred Schuler, der letzte deutsche Katharer: Gnosis, National-
sozialismus und mystische Blutleuchte (Gladbeck: KFVR, 2003); and Friedrich Wolters, Stefan 
George und Die Blätter für die Kunst (Berlin: Bondi, 1930), 240– 73. For psychical research, 
see Albert von Schrenck- Notzing, Physikalische Phänomene des Mediumismus (Munich: 
Reinhardt, 1920), 104– 9; and Schrenck- Notzing, Experimente der Fernbewegung (Telekinese) 
(Stuttgart: Union Deutsche Verlagsgesellschaft, 1924), 190– 93. For their connection to other 

370 Notes to Pages 210–213
occult thinkers, see: Wegener, Alfred Schuler, 31– 32; George L. Mosse, “The Mystical Origins 
of National Socialism,” Journal of the History of Ideas 22, no. 1 (1961): 81– 96; Robert Norton, 
Secret Germany: Stefan George and His Circle (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2002), 115– 
16; and Alfred Schuler, Cosmogonische Augen (Paderborn: Igel, 1997), 21, 35– 36. The Kosmikers 
were especially influenced by Papus (Gérard Encausse), Joséphin Péladan, and Éliphas Lévi, 
even as they disparaged Helena Blavatsky and theosophy.
2. Ludwig Klages, Rhythmen und Runen (Leipzig: Barth, 1944), 332. For their attempt to 
magically heal Nietzsche, see Huch, Alfred Schuler, Ludwig Klages und Stefan George, 29– 30.
3. Wolters, Stefan George, 241– 43.
4. Elke- Vera Kotowski and Gert Mattenklott, eds., “O dürft ich Stimme sein, das Volk zu 
rütteln!”: Leben und Werk von Karl Wolfskehl, 1869– 1948 (Hildesheim: Olms, 2007).
5. For Derleth’s relation to the Eranos Circle, see Hans Thomas Hakl, Eranos: An Alter-
native Intellectual History of the Twentieth Century (Ithaca, NY: McGill- Queen’s University 
Press, 2013), 17– 25.
6. Norton, Secret Germany, 305– 10.
7. Wegener, Alfred Schuler, 9. See also Alfred Schuler, Alfred Schuler: Fragmente und Vor-
träge aus dem Nachlass, ed. Ludwig Klages (Leipzig: Barth, 1940), 159– 60.
8. Franziska zu Reventlow, Herrn Dames Aufzeichnungen (Munich: Langen, 1913), 68– 69, 
138; Theodor Lessing, Einmal und nie wieder: Lebenserinnerungen (Gütersloh: Bertelsmann, 
1969) , 325; and Norton, Secret Germany, 152.
9. Schuler, Fragmente und Vorträge, 159– 268.
10. Ibid., 159– 160.
11. Ibid., 33, 95, 160. See also Schuler, Cosmogonische Augen, 41.
12. Klages, Rhythmen und Runen, 270.
13. See Reventlow, Herrn Dames Aufzeichnungen, 74– 75.
14. See, for example, Norton, Secret Germany, 119– 20; and Schuler, Fragmente und Vorträge, 
152.
15. Schuler’s symbol for this queer paganism was the Hakenkreuz, or swastika; and he seems 
to have been partially responsible for introducing this terrible sign into German life. But for 
Schuler, the swastika represented not the hypermasculinity of the Third Reich, but a phallic 
homosexuality.
16. Reventlow, Herrn Dames Aufzeichnungen, 142– 43.
17. Ibid., 71.
18. For a contemporary political account of “thing- power,” see Jane Bennett, Vibrant Mat-
ter: A Political Ecology of Things (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2010).
19. Klages quoted in Hans Eggert Schröder, Ludwig Klages: Die Geschichte seines Lebens 
(Bonn: Bouvier, 1966), 1:22. The biography here is largely summarized from Reinhard Falter, 
Ludwig Klages: Lebensphilosophie als Zivilisationskritik (Munich: Telesma- Verlag, 2003), 14– 
28.
20. Klages quoted in Schröder, Ludwig Klages, 1:89.
21. Alfred Rosenberg, Gestalt und Leben (Halle: M. Niemeyer, 1938); and Rosenberg, Der 
mythus des 20. Jahrhunderts (Munich: Hoheneichen- verlag, 1943), 137. See also Falter, Ludwig 
Klages, 107. Klages’s own anti- Semitism will be discussed below.
22. Klages, Rhythmen und Runen, 312.

Notes to Pages 213–215 
371
23. For examples of where these claims appear in Klages’s work, see Ludwig Klages, Sämtli-
che Werke, ed. Ernst Frauchiger, 12 vols. (Bonn: H. Bouvier, 1964– 92). There are many ex-
amples, but see 1:109, 3:648, 4:212, 6:539.
24. Ibid., 1:122, 757– 58, 814.
25. Ibid., 3:614.
26. “Herrschaft über die Natur,” passim; see, for example, ibid., 3:4, 393.
27. Ibid., 3:614– 15.
28. Ibid., 3:475– 82, 614– 15.
29. Ibid., 4:575– 77.
30. “Logocentric” (logozentrischen); see, for example, ibid., 3:720.
31. Ibid., 2:907, 4:494.
32. Ibid., 5:221– 22.
33. Ibid., 3:353– 498.
34. Ibid., 6:254.
35. See ibid., 1:80, 542.
36. Ibid., 3:614– 26.
37. Ibid., 3:67, 390.
38. See ibid., vols. 7 and 8; and 3:614– 36.
39. The Institut für Sozialforschung was first established in 1923, but Horkeimer took over 
only in 1930.
40. Benjamin is discussed below. For other examples, see: Theodor Adorno, Negative Di-
alektik (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1966), 111; and Max Horkheimer and Theodor Adorno, Dialectic 
of Enlightenment, trans. Edmund Jephcott (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2002), 
42, 194, 260, 263; Ernst Cassirer, The Philosophy of Symbolic Forms (New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press, 1996), 4:23– 41; Jürgen Habermas, Wahrheit und Rechtfertigung (Frankfurt: 
Suhrkamp, 1999), 178; Martin Heidegger, Uberlegungen XII– XV (Schwarze Hefte 1939– 1941) 
(Frankfurt: Klostermann, 2014), 21; Karl Löwith, Nietzsches Philosophie der Ewigen Wiederkehr 
des Gleichen (Hamburg: Meiner Verlag, 1986), 199; and Georg Lukács, The Destruction of Rea-
son (Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press, 1981), 522– 39.
41. Giorgio Agamben. Opus Dei: An Archaeology of Duty (Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press, 2013), 40; Georges Bataille, Oeuvres Complètes, ed. Michel Foucault (Paris: Gallimard, 
1970– 88), 1:458; Michel Foucault, Dits et écrits I, 1954– 1969 (Paris: Gallimard, 1994), 133; Félix 
Guattari, Lines of Flight: For Another World of Possibilities (New York: Bloomsbury, 2016), 
217– 18; Jacques Lacan, De la psychose paranoïaque dans ses rapports avec la personnalité (Paris: 
Éditions du Seuil, 1975), 44, 48, 50, 315; Paul de Man, The Post- romantic Predicament (Edin-
burgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2012), 169.
42. Historians of German intellectual history will want to know that Klages’s first significant 
philosophical work, Mensch und Erde (discussed below) also preceeded Oswald Spengler’s 
famous Der Untergang des Abendlandes (1918; The Decline of the West). Moreover, Spengler was 
clearly well read in Klages’s writings, as Spengler refers to multiple works. See, for example, Os-
wald Spengler, Urfragen: Fragmente aus dem Nachlass, ed. Anton Mirko Koktanek. (Munich: 
Beck, 1965), 7– 8, 29, 48, 73, 174, 190– 93, 204– 8.
43. Important scholarly treatments in German include: Michael Großheim, Ludwig Klages 
und die Phänomenologie (Berlin: Akademie- Verlag, 1994); and Hans Kunz, Martin Heideg-

372 Notes to Pages 215–219
ger und Ludwig Klages: Daseinsanalytik und Metaphysik (Munich: Kindler, 1976). Since the 
initial draft of this chapter in late 2012, the first significant English monograph on Klages has 
appeared: Nitzan Lebovic, The Philosophy of Life and Death: Ludwig Klages and the Rise of a 
Nazi Biopolitics (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013). Also Joseph Pryce has now translated 
some of Klages’s shorter works into English; see Ludwig Klages, The Biocentric Worldview: 
Selected Essays and Poems of Ludwig Klages, trans. Joseph Pryce (London: Arktos, 2013); and 
Klages, Cosmogonic Reflections: Selected Aphorisms from Ludwig Klages, trans. Pryce (London: 
Arktos, 2015); where we overlap, I have retrospectively compared my translations to his and 
occasionally fixed them where appropriate.
44. Reventlow, Herrn Dames Aufzeichnungen, 61, 75.
45. Schuler, Cosmogonische Augen, 114, 220. Schuler described disenchantment in terms of 
a loss of blood- light.
46. See, for example, ibid., 113– 14, 120.
47. For example, KSW, 1:451, 3:479– 82, 580.
48. Mensch und Erde is one of Klages’s few major works translated into English, and I’ve 
consulted Pryce’s translation while preparing my own.
49. KSW, 3:614.
50. Ibid., 614– 15.
51. Ibid., esp. 619– 23.
52. Ibid., 621. See also Klages, Biocentric Worldview, 34.
53. First quote: Klages, Biocentric Worldview, 32; KSW, 3:618. Second: Klages, Biocentric 
Worldview, 42; KSW 3:628.
54. Klages, Biocentric Worldview, 42; KSW, 3:628.
55. Klages, Biocentric Worldview, 32; KSW, 3:619.
56. KSW, 3:615– 22.
57. Ibid., 627.
58. Ibid., 626– 27. See also Klages, Biocentric Worldview, 39– 40.
59. Klages’s anticapitalism might be a surprise for readers who are tempted to see any cri-
tique of capitalism as Marxist.
60. KSW, 3:627; Klages, Biocentric Worldview, 41.
61. KSW, 2:815.
62. Ibid., 1:673.
63. For example, Walter Sokel, The Writer in Extremis: Expressionism in Twentieth- Century 
German Literature (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1959), 95.
64. KSW, 2:1119– 20.
65. Ibid., 2:1116– 42.
66. Ibid., 1:7.
67. Ibid., 2:1330– 1400.
68. For Klages, Geist is iconoclastic and therefore against the gods. It is the monotheist atti-
tude in the action of the philosopher. Klages, Rhythmen und Runen, 306.
69. Cited in KSW, 6:xvii. As you might expect, Klages sees Heraclitus as being derailed 
by his conception of logos. Ibid., xviii. An obvious likely inspiration for Klages’s ontology is 
Nietzsche. See, for example, Friedrich Nietzsche, Writings from the Late Notebooks, ed. Rüdiger 

Notes to Pages 219–223 
373
Bittner (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005), esp. 26; and Jean Granier, “La pensée 
nietzschéene du chaos,” Revue de Métaphysique et du Morale 76, no. 2 (1971): 132– 39.
70. T. M. Luhrmann, Persuasions of the Witch’s Craft: Ritual Magic in Contemporary En-
gland (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1989), 118.
71. Following Klages, Cosmogonic Reflections, 102. KSW, 2:1367.
72. KSW, 3:479.
73. Ibid., 6:652.
74. Reification entered common English use as translation for the German Verdinglichung, 
which also means literally “transforming something into a thing.” Also, compare to the ontology 
in Engel’s Dialektik der Natur (1883).
75. As Klages put it in GWS : “We have counted, weighed, and measured that which could 
be counted, weighed, and measured. We have quantified the world in width, height, and 
depth . . . We have by means of these things obtained the famous ‘dominion over nature.’ ” 
KSW, 1:2. See alongside 4:699.
76. Horkheimer and Adorno, Dialectic of Enlightenment, 260n6.
77. Ibid., 194. Klages is discussed alongside Nietzsche, Gauguin, and Stefan George.
78. Ibid.
79. See Theodor Adorno, Minima Moralia: Reflections from Damaged Life, trans. Edmund 
Jephcott (New York: Verso, 2005), 239.
80. For an account of the influence of Klages and Lebensphilosophie on Adorno, see Axel 
Honneth, “L’esprit et son objet: Parentés anthropologiques entre la dialectique de la raison 
et la critique de la civilisation dans la philosophie de la vie,” in Weimar; ou, L’explosion de la 
modernité, ed. Gérard Raulet (Paris: Anthropos, 1984), 97– 112.
81. Logozentrischen first appears in sections of Klages’s Nachlaß, dating from 1900. Klages, 
Rhythmen und Runen, 304– 5. For anthropozentrische, see ibid., 256. The expanded term logo-
centrism (Logozenstrismus) first appears in writings about Klages in the 1930s; see, for example, 
Martin Ninck, “Zur Philosophie von Ludwig Klages,” Kant Sudien 36, no. 1– 2 (1931): 148– 57.
82. See, for example, Jacques Derrida, De la grammatologie (Paris: Édtions de Minuit, 
1967), 11. For an attempt to draw the connection between Klages and Derrida, see Jean Pierre 
Faye, La raison narrative (Paris: Éditions Balland, 1990), esp. 192– 93.
83. KSW, 3:720. See also Klages, Biocentric Worldview, 56– 57.
84. KSW, 1:571.
85. Ibid., 4:575– 77.
86. Biozentrismus, or more commonly, biozentrische.
87. KSW, 6:203, 312.
88. Ibid., 1:768
89. Ibid., 3:623, 628; Klages, Biocentric Worldview, 36, 42.
90. KSW, 3:482 (emphasis added). The term rendered “difference” above is more literally 
“distance,” but the dialectic between proximity and distance is Klages’s way of addressing dif-
ference.
91. Ibid., 363– 64.
92. Ibid., 355– 56.
93. See ibid., 390– 441, esp. 397.

374 Notes to Pages 223–227
94. Moreover, Klages argued: “The solution of the so- called riddle of the world is the ec-
static internalizing of the mystery of the world.” Ibid., 410.
95. Ibid., 393.
96. Ibid., 398.
97. Ibid., 398– 99. Think also of Goethe’s Vorbeirauschenden Freude.
98. Ibid., 398.
99. Ibid., 399– 400.
100. Klages, Rhythmen und Runen, 261; Klages, Cosmogonic Reflections, 73.
101. KSW 3: 628– 29; Klages, Biocentric Worldview, 42.
102. Reventlow, Herrn Dames Aufzeichnungen, 61, 71.
103. For example, Klages, Rhythmen und Runen, 289, 330. Note that the emphasis on “life” 
was crucial to Nazi biopolitics.
104. For how the Nazis co- opted Klages and his openness to their efforts, see Lebovic, Phi-
losophy of Life and Death: Klages and Nazi Biopolitics, 162– 64.
105. See Lisa Fittko, “The Story of Old Benjamin,” in The Arcades Project, ed. Rolf Tiede-
mann (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999), 946– 54.
106. Michael Löwy, Walter Benjamin: Aviso de incendio: Una lectura de las tesis “Sobre el 
concepto de historia” (Buenos Aires: Fondo de Cultura Económica, 2003), 41.
107. Terry Eagleton, Walter Benjamin; or, Towards a Revolutionary Criticism (London: 
Verso Editions, 1981), 81. See also Jürgen Habermas, “Consciousness- Raising or Redemptive 
Criticism: The Contemporaneity of Walter Benjamin,” New German Critique, no. 17 (1979): 
30– 59; and John Fekete, “Benjamin’s Ambivalence,” Telos, no. 35 (1978): 192– 98.
108. See, for example, Stéphane Mosès, L’ange de l’histoire: Rosenzweig, Benjamin, Scholem 
(Paris: Seuil, 1992).
109. For instance, these terms all occur frequently in the occult journal Zentralblatt für 
Okkultismus: Monatsschrift zur Erforschung der gesamten Geheimwissenschaften (1907– 33).
110. For example: Theodor Adorno, Prismen: Kulturkritik und Gesellschaft (Berlin: 
Suhrkamp Verlag, 1955), esp. 238– 39; and James McBride, “Marooned in the Realm of the 
Profane: Walter Benjamin’s Synthesis of Kabbalah and Communism,” Journal of the American 
Academy of Religion 57, no. 2 (1989): 241– 66.
111. See, for example, Bram Mertens, Dark Images, Secret Hints: Benjamin, Scholem, Moli-
tor and the Jewish Tradition (New York: P. Lang, 2007).
112. Gershom Scholem, Walter Benjamin: The Story of a Friendship (New York: Schocken, 
1981), 38. See also Howard Eiland and Michael Jennings, Walter Benjamin: A Critical Life 
(Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2014), 93– 94; and Mertens, Dark 
Images, Secret Hints. For Pulver and his connection to esotericism, see Hakl, Eranos, 123.
113. Franz Joseph Molitor, Philosophie der Geschichte oder über die Tradition, 4 vols (Frank-
furt/Munster: Hermann/Theissing, 1827– 53).
114. See Walter Benjamin, Briefe, ed. Gershom Scholem and Theodor Adorno (Frank-
furt: Suhrkamp, 1966), 1:112. See also Werner Fuld, “Walter Benjamins Beziehung zu Ludwig 
Klages,” Akzente, no. 28 (1981): 274– 87; Eiland and Jennings, Benjamin: A Critical Life, 63, 
80– 81; and Scholem, Benjamin: Story of a Friendship, 19.
115. Benjamin, Briefe, 1:515. Benjamin did mention his doubts about the work, but this is 
compatible with his sense that Klages was being picked up by unsavory elements. Hence Ben-

Notes to Pages 227–229 
375
jamin’s reference to the proto- Fascists who “carry volumes of Klages in their packs.” Walter 
Benjamin: Selected Writings (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 
2004– 06), vol. 2, part 1, 321.
116. See Walter Benjamin, Gesammelte Schriften, ed. Rolf Tiedemann and Hermann 
Schweppenhäuser (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1972– 89).
117. See Theodor W. Adorno and Walter Benjamin, The Complete Correspondence, 1928– 
1940, ed. Henri Lonitz (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999), 182– 83.
118. Ibid., 61.
119. Lorenz Jäger, Adorno: A Political Biography (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 
2004), 199.
120. For examples, see Habermas, “Consciousness- Raising or Redemptive Criticism”; and 
Kathleen Kerr- Koch, Romancing Fascism: Modernity and Allegory in Benjamin, de Man, Shel-
ley (New York: Bloomsbury, 2013), 47– 50; and for a nuanced treatment, see Lebovic, Philosophy 
of Life and Death.
121. Georg Stauth and Bryan S. Turner, “Ludwig Klages (1872– 1956) and the Origins of 
Critical Theory,” Theory, Culture & Society 9 (1992): 45– 63.
122. In reference to Stauth and Turner, Stirk argues, “There have been attempts to claim that 
Adorno and Horkheimer were influenced by Klages . . . [but] the argument never gets beyond 
analogies.” Peter Stirk, Critical Theory, Politics and Society (London: Continuum, 2005), 199.
123. Eiland and Jennings, Benjamin: A Critical Life, 80– 81.
124. Benjamin, Gesammelte Schriften, 4:366.
125. Benjamin, Briefe, 1:516– 17.
126. Eiland and Jennings, Benjamin: A Critical Life, 3, 71, 101– 2; Benjamin, Briefe, 1:15.
127. Steven Wasserstrom, Religion after Religion: Gershom Scholem, Mircea Eliade, and 
Henry Corbin at Eranos (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1999).
128. See, for example, Gershom Scholem, Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism (New York: 
Schocken Books, 1961), 2.
129. Benjamin, Briefe, 1:282, 637. See Gary Smith, “Die Zauberjuden: Walter Benjamin, 
Gershom Scholem, and Other German- Jewish Esoterics between the World Wars,” Journal 
of Jewish Thought and Philosophy 4, no. 2 (1995): 227– 43; Jacob Taubes, From Cult to Culture 
(Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2010), 235– 47; and Manfred Voigts, Oskar Goldberg: 
Der Mythische Experimentalwissenschaftler (Berlin: Agora- Verlag, 1992).
130. Oskar Goldberg, Die Wirklichkeit der Hebräer (Berlin: David, 1925), esp. 15– 18.
131. Benjamin, Briefe, 1:253.
132. See Esther Ehrman, “Erich Unger’s ‘The Natural Order of Miracles,’ ” parts 1 and 2, 
Journal of Jewish Thought and Philosophy 11, no. 2 (2002): 135– 89; and Margarete Kohlenbach, 
“Religion, Experience, Politics: On Erich Unger and Walter Benjamin,” in The Early Frankfurt 
School and Religion, ed. Kohlenbach and Raymond Geuss (London: Palgrave, 2005), 64– 84.
133. Eiland and Jennings, Benjamin: A Critical Life, 81, 124.
134. Gershom Scholem, On Jews and Judaism in Crisis (New York: Schocken, 1976), 275.
135. Erich Gutkind, Siderische Geburt: Seraphische Wanderung vom Tode der Welt zur Taufe 
der Tat. PDF edition digitized and edited by Peter Godzik, March 2013, http:// www .pkgodzik 
.de /fileadmin /user _upload /Gutkind /Erich _Gutkind _ _Siderische _Geburt .pdf, 58– 59.
136. Ibid., 3.

376 Notes to Pages 230–234
137. Ibid., 32– 33.
138. Ibid., 33.
139. Mitrinović writing under the pseudonym M. M. Cosmoi, “World Affairs,” New Age 29, 
no. 8 (June 23, 1921): 87– 88; and “World Affairs,” New Age 29, no. 12 (July 21, 1921): 135– 36.
140. Shulamith Behr, “Wassily Kandinsky and Dimitrije Mitrinovic,” Oxford Art Journal 
15, no. 1 (January 1, 1992): 81– 88; and Andrew Rigby, Initiation and Initiative: An Exploration 
of the Life and Ideas of Dimitrije Mitrinović (New York: Columbia University Press, 1984).
141. Erich Gutkind, The Body of God (New York: Horizon Press, 1969), 15.
142. See Susan Buck- Morss, The Origin of Negative Dialectics: Theodor W. Adorno, Walter 
Benjamin and the Frankfurt Institute (New York: Free Press, 1977), 90– 95.
143. Sean Carney, Brecht and Critical Theory: Dialectics and Contemporary Aesthetics (Lon-
don; New York: Routledge, 2005), 50– 51.
144. See Benjamin, Gesammelte Schriften, 2:206.
145. Ibid., 204.
146. Ibid., 209.
147. Esther Leslie, Walter Benjamin: Critical Lives (London: Reaktion Books, 2007), 89, 
91, 160.
148. Benjamin, Gesammelte Schriften, 6:192– 94. Admittedly, he suggested that excluding 
“magical” energy would be necessary to legitimate this new form of astrology.
149. Walter Benjamin, On Hashish (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard Univeristy 
Press, 2006), 58.
150. Julian Roberts, Walter Benjamin (London: Macmillan Press, 1982), 178.
151. Schuler, Fragmente und Vorträge, 167.
152. See Benjamin, Gesammelte Schriften, 4:366– 67; Karl Wolfskehl, Gesammelte Werke 
(Hamburg: Claassen, 1960), 2:419– 22.
153. Benjamin: Selected Writings, 3:18– 19.
154. See also Benjamin, Gesammelte Schriften, 3:44.
155. Klages was drawing on Goethe’s Urbild, but nevertheless, for Benjamin, Klages was the 
key figure in reinterpreting the term.
156. See Max Pensky, “Geheimmittel: Advertising and Dialectical Images in Benjamin’s 
Arcades Project,” in Walter Benjamin and The Arcades Project, ed. Beatrice Hanssen (New 
York: Continuum, 2006), 113– 31.
157. Walter Benjamin, The Arcades Project (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 1999), 473.
158. Adorno and Benjamin, Complete Correspondence, 61.
159. Benjamin: Selected Writings, 1:427.
160. Eiland and Jennings, Benjamin: A Critical Life, 163, 696.
161. For all their interest in esotericism, Scholem and Benjamin shared a rejection of the 
neo- paganism of the Klages circle. See Benjamin, Briefe, 1:409– 10.
162. Benjamin: Selected Writings, 1:486 (emphasis added).
163. Ibid., 486.
164. Ibid., 487.
165. Ibid.
166. Walter Benjamin, The Correspondence of Walter Benjamin, 1910– 1940, ed. Gershom 

Notes to Pages 234–238 
377
Scholem and Theodor Adorno (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994), 84 (emphasis 
added).
167. Benjamin, Gesammelte Schriften, 1:125. See alongside Anson Rabinbach, “Critique and 
Commentary/Alchemy and Chemistry: Some Remarks on Walter Benjamin and This Issue,” 
New German Critique, no. 17 (1979): 3– 14.
168. Benjamin, Gesammelte Schriften, 1:126. Benjamin is playing with Scheitern (failures) 
and Scheit (piece of wood).
169. Benjamin: Selected Writings, 2:216.
170. The Kosmikers often saw themselves as above the vulgar occult milieu of their day. So 
while they often praised specific spiritualists and occults, they often distanced themselves from 
the Theosophists and other popular forms of esotericism that they saw as merely commercial 
charlatanism.
171. For an alternate reading of Benjamin as primarily a disenchanter, see Richard Wolin, 
Walter Benjamin: An Aesthetic of Redemption (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1994), 
esp. xliii.
172. See, for examples, Benjamin: Selected Writings, 2:184, 804, and 4:154– 55.
173. Letter to Patrick Waldberg, translated in Georges Bataille, Encyclopaedia Acephalica: 
Comprising the Critical Dictionary & Related Texts, ed. Robert Lebel and Isabelle Waldberg 
(London: Atlas Press, 1995), 14.
174. Georges Bataille, Œuvres Complètes, ed. Michel Foucault (Paris: Gallimard, 1970– 88), 
2:278.
175. Ibid., 2:273.
176. Bataille, Encyclopaedia Acephalica, 15– 16.
177. See, for example, Georges Bataille, Visions of Excess: Selected Writings, 1927– 1939, ed. 
Allan Stoekl (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1985), 199.
178. Stuart Kendall, Georges Bataille: Critical Lives (London: Reaktion, 2007), 8.
179. References to mysticism, magic, and occult themes occur throughout Bataille’s pub-
lished work; see especially Georges Bataille, L’Apprenti Sorcier du cercle communiste démo-
cratique à Acéphale: Textes, lettres et documents, 1932– 1939 (Paris: Editions de la Différence, 
1999). For scholarly commentary, see Peter Connor, Georges Bataille and the Mysticism of Sin 
(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2000); Amy Hollywood, Sensible Ecstasy: Mysti-
cism, Sexual Difference, and the Demands of History (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
2002); and Andrew Hussey, The Inner Scar: The Mysticism of Georges Bataille (Atlanta: Ro-
dopi, 2000), esp. 2.
180. For a structural comparison of both thinkers, see Thomas Rolf, “Das Subjekt auf dem 
Siedepunkt: Zur Phänomenologie der Ekstase bei Ludwig Klages und Georges Bataille,” in 
Georges Bataille: Vorreden zur Überschreitung, ed. Andreas Hetzel and Peter Wiechens (Würz-
burg: Königshausen & Neumann, 1999), 113– 31.
181. Bataille, Œuvres Complètes, 1:458. Bataille was referring to Ernest Baron de Seillière, De 
la déesse nature à la déesse vie (Paris: F. Alcan, 1931), 133.
182. Théodore Flournoy, Des Indes à la planète Mars: Étude sur un cas de somnambulisme 
avec glossolalia (Paris: F. Alcan, 1900).
183. Deleuze wrote an introduction to Mathesis; or, Studies on the Anarchy and Hierarchy 

378 Notes to Pages 238–241
of Knowledge, by Johann Malfatti de Montereggio; to give a sense of the work, the first chapter 
is titled “Mathesis as Hieroglyph or Symbolism of the Triple Life of the Universe; or, The 
Mystical Organon of the Ancient Indians.” See Christian Kerslake, “The Somnambulist and 
the Hermaphrodite,” in Culture Machine 9, no.1 (2007).
184. Giorgio Agamben, The Signature of All Things (Cambridge, MA: Zone Books, 2009).
185. Peter Sloterdijk, Philosophical Temperaments: From Plato to Foucault (New York: Co-
lumbia University Press, 2013), ix.
186. Roy Bhaskar, From East to West: Odyssey of a Soul (New York: Routledge, 2000).
187. See Luce Irigaray, Between East and West: From Singularity to Community (New Delhi: 
New Age Books, 2005); and Hollywood, Sensible Ecstacy.
188. I have in mind “La pharmacie de Platon” (Plato’s pharmacy) in Jacques Derrida, La 
dissémination (Paris: Editions du Seuil, 1972). For Derrida and telepathy, see Nicholas Royle, 
Telepathy and Literature (Cambridge: Blackwell, 1991), 1– 15.
189. For example, Theodor Adorno, Gesammelte Schriften (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 2003), 
1:196, 341, 4:273– 80, 5:60, 6:113, 7: 132, 219, 10:217, 11:220, 20:216– 17.
Chapter Nine
1. Friedrich Stadler, Der Wiener Kreis Ursprung, Entwicklung und Wirkung des Logischen 
Empirismus im Kontext (Vienna: Springer, 2015), 615– 45.
2. For scholarship on Moritz Schlick, see Stationen: Dem Philosophen und Physiker Moritz 
Schlick zum 125. Geburtstag, ed. Friedrich Stadler and Fynn Ole Engler (New York: Springer, 
2009). The Vienna Circle was also referred to as “logical empiricism,” but in what follows I 
generally use “logical positivism” because the main subject of the chapter is the antipositivist 
criticisms that polemically entangles Comte’s sociology, Ernst Mach’s empiriocriticism, the 
Vienna Circle, and a so- called positivist attitude.
3. Nelböck’s thesis was “Die Bedeutung der Logik im Empirismus und Positivismus,” 1930.
4. Stadler, Der Wiener Kreis Ursprung, 633.
5. Joey Sprague and Diane Kobrynowicz, “A Feminist Epistemology,” in Handbook of the 
Sociology of Gender, ed. Janet Chafetz (New York: Springer, 1999), 25– 43; for “faith in reason,” 
Jürgen Habermas, “The Analytical Theory of Science and Dialectics,” in The Positivist Dispute 
in German Sociology, by Theodor W. Adorno et al. (London: Heinemann, 1976), 147.
6. The role of positivism as a contemporary philosophical scapegoat has not escaped notice. 
See Michael Friedman, Reconsidering Logical Positivism (New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 1999), xiii; and Michael LeMahieu, Fictions of Fact and Value: The Erasure of Logical 
Positivism in American Literature (New York: Oxford University Press, 2013), 15.
7. For examples, Helen Malson, The Thin Woman: Feminism, Post- Structuralism, and the 
Social Psychology of Anorexia Nervosa (New York: Routledge, 1998), 45– 36; Nozaki Yoshiko, 
Struggles over Difference: Curriculum, Texts, and Pedagogy in the Asia- Pacific (Albany: State 
University of New York Press, 2005), 222– 23; and Elisabeth Schüssler Fiorenza, Democratizing 
Biblical Studies (Louisville, KY: Westminster Press, 2009), 68.
8. In order: E. Sreedharan, A Textbook of Historiography (New Delhi: Orient Longman, 
2004), 194; Patrick O’Sullivan, Economic Methodology and Freedom to Choose (New York: Rout-

Notes to Pages 241–244 
379
ledge, 2012), 20; Kwame Anthony Appiah, Cosmopolitanism: Ethics in a World of Strangers 
(New York: Norton, 2006), 17– 22; and Encyclopedia of Rhetoric and Composition (New York: 
Garland, 1996), s.v. “Logical Positivism,” by Arabella Lyon, 406– 7.
9. Ernst Cassirer’s neo- Kantianism is sometimes described as the path not taken. See 
Michael Friedman, A Parting of the Ways: Carnap, Cassirer, and Heidegger (Chicago: Open 
Court, 2000); and, to a lesser extent, Peter Gordon, Continental Divide: Heidegger, Cassirer, 
Davos (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2010).
10. Jean- François Lyotard, The Inhuman: Reflections on Time (Stanford, CA: Stanford Uni-
versity Press, 1991), 71.
11. Charles Jencks, What Is Post- modernism? (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1986), 6; omit-
ted from later editions. See also Michael LeMahieu, Fictions of Fact and Value: The Erasure of 
Logical Positivism in American Literature, 1945– 1975 (New York: Oxford University Press, 
2013), 195.
12. Ben Agger, “Critical Theory, Poststructuralism, Postmodernism: Their Sociological 
Relevance,” Annual Review of Sociology 17 (1991): 105– 31; Richard Kearney, introduction to 
Continental Philosophy in the 20th Century, ed. Kearney (New York: Routledge, 2003), 2; and 
Dominick LaCapra, “Criticism Today,” in Jean François Lyotard: Critical Evaluations in Cul-
tural Theory, vol. 2, ed. Victor E. Taylor and Gregg Lambert (New York: Routledge, 2006), 279.
13. Glock suggests that there is a “common consent” that the positivists were “the most 
influential philosophical school of the last one hundred years.” Hans- Johann Glock, What Is 
Analytic Philosophy? (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2008), 68.
14. Robert Scharff, Comte after Positivism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995), 1.
15. Hans- Joachim Dahms, Positivismusstreit: Die Auseinandersetzungen der Frankfurter 
Schule mit dem logischen Positivismus, dem amerikanischen Pragmatismus und dem kritischen 
Rationalismus (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1994).
16. Max Horkheimer, Gesammelte Schriften (Frankfurt: Fischer, 1988) 9:399– 400.
17. Ibid., 3:25– 27.
18. Ibid., 4:155.
19. See also ibid., 4:162– 216.
20. For example, Theodor Adorno, Minima Moralia: Reflections from Damaged Life, trans. 
Edmund Jephcott (New York: Verso, 2005), 70.
21. Theodor Adorno, Critical Models: Interventions and Catchwords (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 2005), 8.
22. Theodor W. Adorno et al., The Positivist Dispute in German Sociology (London: Heine-
mann, 1976), 55– 56.
23. LeMahieu, Fictions of Fact and Value, 24– 37.
24. Theodor Adorno, Hegel: Three Studies (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1999), 101; and 
LeMahieu, Fictions of Fact and Value, 33.
25. Theodor Adorno, Negative Dialectics (New York: Continuum, 2007), 9; LeMahieu, Fic-
tions of Fact and Value, 33.
26. Adorno, Negative Dialectics, e.g., 86– 87, 99, 112– 13, 403.
27. Max Horkheimer, Eclipse of Reason (New York: Continuum, 2004), 4.
28. Ibid., 15, 66– 67.

380 Notes to Pages 244–248
29. Ibid., 41. (emphasis added).
30. Max Horkheimer, “The End of Reason,” Studies in Philosophy and Social Science 9 
(1941): 379
31. Horkheimer, Eclipse of Reason, 51.
32. Max Horkheimer and Theodor Adorno, Dialectic of Enlightenment, trans. Edmund 
Jephcott (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2002), 11.
33. Ibid., 19.
34. Ibid., 4– 5.
35. Ibid., 13.
36. Martin Heidegger, Gesamtausgabe (Frankfurt: Vittorio Klostermann, 1976– 2011), 40:228 
(emphasis in the original). I have only slightly modified the translation from Friedman, Parting 
of the Ways, 22.
37. They were assisted by Schlick’s students Friedrich Waismann and Herbert Feigl.
38. Herbert Feigl, Inquiries and Provocations: Selected Writings, 1929– 1974 (Hingham: Klu-
wer 1981), 70.
39. Ibid., 57.
40. The Philosophy of Rudolf Carnap (Chicago: Open Court, 1963), 57. See also Thomas 
Uebel, “Carnap, the Left Vienna Circle, and Neopositivist Antimetaphysics,” in Carnap 
Brought Home, ed. Steve Awodey and Carsten Klein (Chicago: Open Court, 2004), 247– 78.
41. For the manifesto, see Otto Neurath, Empiricism and Sociology (Boston: Reidel, 1973), 
301, 303. See also George Reisch, “Planning Science: Otto Neurath and the International Ency-
clopedia of Unified Science,” British Journal for the History of Science 27, no. 2 (1994): 153– 75; 
and Philipp Frank, Modern Science and Its Philosophy (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1949), 17– 18, 72– 78.
42. See Frank, Modern Science, 77; Neurath, Empiricism and Sociology, 315.
43. Otto Neurath, Philosophical Papers, 1913– 1946 (Boston: Kluwer Boston, 1983), 92. For 
the evolving boat metaphor, see Nancy Cartwright, Jordi Cat, Lola Fleck, and Thomas Uebel, 
Otto Neurath: Philosophy between Science and Politics (New York: Cambridge University Press, 
1996), 89– 166.
44. Cartwright et al., Otto Neurath, 188.
45. Rudolf Carnap, “Überwindung der Metaphysik durch logische Analyse der Sprache,” 
Erkenntnis 2, no. 1 (1931): 219– 41, translated in Carnap, “The Elimination of Metaphysics 
through Logical Analysis of Language,” in Logical Empiricism at Its Peak, ed. Sahotra Sarkar 
(New York: Garland, 1996), 60– 81.
46. Carnap, “Elimination of Metaphysics,” 68.
47. It is easy to spot problems with this theory; for example, “all crows are black” would be 
meaningless because one could never empirically examine all crows.
48. Carnap, “Elimination of Metaphysics,” 78.
49. Ibid.
50. Carnap was hinting at a specific aesthetic philosophy and even art. As I argue in a post 
on my blog, there are some historical grounds for thinking of an elective affinity between log-
ical positivism and magical realism. See Jason Ā. Josephson- Storm, “Positivism and Magical 
Realism,” Absolute Disruption: Theory after Postmodernism (blog), {1/17/2017}, https:// absolute 
- disruption .com /2017 /1 /17 /positivism - and - magical - realism/.

Notes to Pages 248–253 
381
51. Carnap, “Elimination of Metaphysics,” 80.
52. Neurath, Empiricism and Sociology, 327; Feigl, Inquiries and Provocations, 372.
53. Reproduced in Stadler, Der Wiener Kreis Ursprung, 153. See also Peter Galison. “Auf-
bau/Bauhaus: Logical Positivism and Architectural Modernism,” Critical Inquiry 16, no. 4 
(1990): 709– 52.
54. Later continued as the Neue Metaphysische Rundschau. Nicholas Goodrick- Clarke, The 
Occult Roots of Nazism (New York: New York University Press, 1992), 25– 26; and Corinna Tre-
itel, A Science for the Soul: Occultism and the Genesis of the German Modern (Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 2004), 175.
55. Neurath, Empiricism and Sociology, 301; Rudolf Carnap, The Logical Structure of the 
World; and Pseudoproblems in Philosophy (Chicago: Open Court, 2003), xvii.
56. Robert Ammerman, Classics of Analytic Philosophy (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1990), 8– 9.
57. Carnap, “Überwindung der Metaphysik,” 65– 66.
58. Philosophy of Rudolf Carnap, 10. See also Uebel, “Carnap, the Vienna Circle, and An-
timetaphysics.”
59. Rudolph Carnap Papers, 025– 75– 10, Special Collections, University of Pittsburgh Li-
brary.
60. Philosophy of Rudolf Carnap, 33– 34.
61. Neurath, Empiricism and Sociology, xiii.
62. Allan Mitchell, Revolution in Bavaria, 1918– 1919 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 1965).
63. Cartwright et al., Otto Neurath, 21. For more on Neurath’s directorship at the German 
War Economy Museum, see Nader Vossoughian, “The War Economy and the War Museum: 
Otto Neurath and the Museum of War Economy in Leipzig, c. 1918,” in Otto Neurath’s Econom-
ics in Context, ed. Elisabeth Nemeth, Stefan W. Schmitz and Thomas E. Uebel (Dordrecht: 
Springer Netherlands, 2007), 131– 39.
64. Goodrick- Clarke, Occult Roots of Nazism, 148.
65. Cartwright et al., Otto Neurath, 47.
66. Neurath, Empiricism and Sociology, 17.
67. Cartwright et al., Otto Neurath, 60.
68. Neurath, Empiricism and Sociology, 252.
69. Ibid., esp. 278.
70. Ibid., 297.
71. Neurath, Philosophical Papers, 240.
72. Neurath, Empiricism and Sociology, 305.
73. Ibid., 292.
74. Ibid., 292.
75. Ibid., 269– 70.
76. Ibid., 295.
77. Ibid., 356.
78. Hans Hahn, Empiricism, Logic, and Mathematics (Boston: Kluwer Boston, 1980), 19.
79. Ibid., 5.
80. Neurath, Philosophical Papers, 237.
81. Ibid., 242.

382 Notes to Pages 253–259
82. Dahms, Positivismusstreit, 69– 181.
83. Neurath, Philosophical Papers, 242.
84. Wiener Kreis: Texte sur Wissenschaftlichen Weltauffassung, ed. Michael Stöltzner and 
Thomas Uebel (Hamburg: Meiner, 2006), 26 (emphasis added). I’ve largely followed the trans-
lation in Neurath, Empiricism and Sociology, 317.
85. Carnap in Greg Frost- Arnold, Carnap, Tarski, and Quine at Harvard: Conversations on 
Logic, Mathematics, and Science (Chicago: Open Court, 2013), 142, 194: “Magik ist kognitiv . . . 
Ein Tier kann Magie haben, aber keine Metaphysik!”
86. Von Mises praised modern atomic physics for recovering “the questions of ancient al-
chemists” and embracing positions reminiscent of Pythagoreans and Kabbalists. Richard von 
Mises, Naturwissenschaft und Technik der Gegenwart (Leipzig: Teubner, 1922), 16.
87. Otto Neurath, “Wege der wissenschaftlichen Weltauffassung,” Erkenntnis 1 (1930): 107. 
I have largely followed the translation in Neurath, Philosophical Papers, 33. See also Otto Neu-
rath, “Magie und Technik,” Erkenntnis 2 (1931): 82– 84.
88. Neurath, “Wissenschaftlichen Weltauffassung,” 108. I have largely followed the transla-
tion in Neurath, Philosophical Papers, 33.
89. Ibid.
90. Otto Neurath. Empirische Soziologie. Vienna: Springer, 1931, 6. I have only slightly 
amended the translation appearing in Neurath, Empiricism and Sociology, 321.
91. Neurath, Philosophical Papers, 33– 34 (emphasis added).
92. Ibid., 35.
93. Ibid., 34.
94. Ibid., 34– 36.
95. Ibid., 36.
96. Neurath argued that modern psychology has discovered the truth of a range of ideas 
previously worked out in the magical domain. Ibid.
97. Ibid., 34– 35.
98. Neurath, Empiricism and Sociology, 322.
99. Neurath, Philosophical Papers, 35– 37.
100. Ibid., 35.
101. Neurath, Empiricism and Sociology, 322.
102. Neurath, Philosophical Papers, 39.
103. Ibid.
104. Neurath, Empiricism and Sociology, 329 (emphasis added).
105. Eleonora Zugun’s name is also sometimes written “Eleonore,” and occasionally her 
family name is given with an umlaut as Zügun. See “Fata care are în ea pe diavolul,” Unirea 
Poporului, January 30, 1927, 5; Peter Mulacz, “Historical Profiles in Poltergeist Research,” in 
From Shaman to Scientist, ed. James Houran (Lanham: Scarecrow Press, 2004), 127– 90; Harry 
Price, Leaves from a Psychist’s Case- Book (London: Gollancz, 1933), 227– 49; Hans Rosenbusch, 
“Aus der Zugun- Literatur,” Zeitschrift für kritischen Okkultismus 3, no. 1 (1927): 45– 55; and 
Zoë Countess Wassilko- Serecki, “The Early History and Phenomena of Eleonore Zügun,” 
British Journal of Psychical Research 1, no. 5 (1927): 134.
106. Wassilko- Serecki, “Eleonore Zügun ,” 134.

Notes to Pages 259–264 
383
107. Kubi Klein, “Das verhexte Dorf,” reprinted in Revalobund Monatschrift 1, no. 5 (1925): 
129– 40.
108. Hans Hahn, Richard Hoffmann, Hans Thirring, Karl Wolf, Alfred Winterstein, and 
Michael Dumba, “Die Phänomene der Eleonore Zugun: Wiener Gelehrte für Gräfin Zoe Was-
silko,” Zeitschrift für Parapsychologie 3 (1927): 189.
109. Steven Beller, Vienna and the Jews, 1867– 1938 (New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 1989), 15– 16.
110. Hans Hahn, Gesammelte Abhandlungen (Vienna: Springer, 1995).
111. For Hahn’s intellectual impact, see ibid., 1:16.
112. One exception was the short- lived Viennese Wissenschaftlicher Verein für Okkultismus 
(Scientific Society for Occultism).
113. Anita Gregory, The Strange Case of Rudi Schneider (Metuchen: Scarecrow Press, 1985), 
10.
114. Schrenck- Notzing published this research as Experimente der Fernbewegung (Teleki-
nese) im Psychologischen Institut der Münchener Universität und im Laboratorium des Verfass-
ers, 1924.
115. Thomas Mann, Okkulte Erlebnisse (Berlin: Alf Häger Verlag, 1924).
116. Harry Price, Stefan Meyer, and Karl Przibram, Rudi Schneider: The Vienna Experiments 
of Professors Meyer and Przibram (London: National Laboratory of Psychical Research, 1933).
117. Karl Menger, Reminiscences of the Vienna Circle and the Mathematical Colloquium 
(Boston: Kluwer, 1994), 15.
118. While these investigations gradually became less important for Wagner- Jauregg and 
Schlick, for Thirring and Hahn they became something of an obsession.
119. Menger in Hahn, Empiricism, Logic, and Mathematics, xv– xvi.
120. See Mulacz, “Historical Profiles in Poltergeist Research.”
121. University of Vienna Archive, B35– 1461/3.
122. Zoë Countess Wassilko- Serecki, “Observations on Eleonore Zugun: 1,” Journal of the 
American Society for Psychical Research 20, no. 9 (1926): 513– 523.
123. Zoë Countess Wassilko- Serecki, “Observations on Eleonore Zugun: 2,” Journal of the 
American Society for Psychical Research 20, no. 10 (1926): 599.
124. Wassilko, “Eleonore Zugun 2,” 600– 601.
125. Although not credited on YouTube, the film was probably made by the Emelka- Kultur- 
Gesellschaft in Munich in 1927. “Eleonore Zugun,” YouTube video, 9:55, posted by “cienciasp-
siquicas,” Decmber 5, 2013, accessed June 5, 2014, http:// youtu .be /MIiB5ck20s8.
126. Wassilko, “Eleonore Zugun 2,” 595; Hahn, et al., “Die Phänomene der Eleonore Zugun.
127. Menger in Hahn, Empiricism, Logic, and Mathematics, xvii (emphasis in the original).
128. Ibid., xvi.
129. Menger, Reminiscences of the Vienna Circle, 15– 16.
130. Ibid.
131. Feigl, Inquiries and Provocations, 303.
132. Ibid., 314.
133. William James on Psychical Research (Clifton, NJ: Kelley, 1973), 41. The psychic me-
dium Leonora Piper was James’s white crow.

384 Notes to Pages 264–267
134. Richard von Mises, Probability, Statistics and Truth (New York: Macmillan, 1957), 74. 
For his other paranormal research, see Richard von Mises, Kleines Lehrbuch des Positivismus 
(The Hague: Stockum, 1939), 216– 19; and von Mises, Selected Papers of Richard von Mises 
(Providence: American Mathematical Society, 1964), 2:527, 530– 36, 544– 45.
135. Von Mises, Selected Papers, 2:536.
136. Hao Wang, Reflections on Kurt Gödel (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995), 18; and John 
Dawson, Logical Dilemmas: The Life and Work of Kurt Gödel (Wellesley, MA: Peters, 1997), 30.
137. Georg Kreisel, “Kurt Gödel, 28 April 1906– 14 January 1978,” Biographical Memoirs of 
Fellows of the Royal Society 26 (1980): 148– 224, esp. 155, 218.
138. Dawson, Logical Dilemmas: Life of Gödel, 153; see also 165.
139. Robert Tragesser and Mark van Atten, “Mysticism and Mathematics: Brouwer, Gödel, 
and the Common Core Thesis,” in Essays on Gödel’s Reception of Leibniz, Husserl, and Brou-
wer, ed. Mark van Atten, (Springer, 2015) 180.
140. Dawson, Logical Dilemmas, 30.
141. Ibid.
142. Ibid.
143. A. W. Carus, Carnap and Twentieth- Century Thought (New York: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 2007), 50.
144. Gary Stark, Entrepreneurs of Ideology (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 
1981), 103– 6. For more on Diederichs, see George Mosse, The Crisis of German Ideology (New 
York: Grosset, 1964), 52– 63.
145. Carus, Carnap and Twentieth- Century Thought, 55.
146. Cited in ibid., 55– 56.
147. Cited in ibid., 56.
148. Rudolph Carnap Papers, 025– 72– 05, Special Collections, University of Pittsburgh 
Library.
149. Carnap, Philosophy, 23.
150. Heinrich Neider, Rudolf Haller, and Heiner Rutte, “Gespräch mit Heinrich Neider: 
Persönliche Erinnerungen an den Wiener Kreis,” Conceptus, no. 28– 30 (1977): 23.
151. Carnap, Philosophy, 25.
152. Ibid., 26.
153. Ray Monk, Ludwig Wittgenstein: The Duty of Genius (New York: Free Press, 1990), 
182– 83.
154. Bertrand Russell, “Obituary: Ludwig Wittgenstein,” Mind 60, no. 239 (1951): 297– 98.
155. Ludwig Wittgenstein, Tractatus Logico- Philosophicus (New York: Routledge, 2001), 89.
156. The relevant thinkers of Jewish descent included, in the Frankfurt School: Theodor 
Adorno, Walter Benjamin, Erich Fromm, Max Horkheimer, Leo Löwenthal, Herbert Marcuse, 
and Friedrich Pollock; and in the Vienna Circle: Herbert Feigl, Philipp Frank, Hans Hahn, 
Olga Hahn, Felix Kaufmann, Richard von Mises, Otto Neurath, Friedrich Waismann, and Ed-
gar Zilsel. Many of these thinkers were the children of Jewish converts or had only one Jewish 
parent.
157. Ralf Dahrendorf, “Remarks on the Discussion,” in The Positivist Dispute in German 
Sociology, by Theodor Adorno et al. (London: Heinemann, 1976), 125.

Notes to Pages 267–270 
385
158. Cited in David Frisby, introduction to the English translation of Adorno et al., The 
Positivist Dispute in German Sociology, ix.
159. For the Vienna Circle’s writings on ethics, see Ethics and the Will: Essays, ed. Brian 
McGuinness and Joachim Schulte (Boston: Kluwer, 1994).
160. “Remarks on Frazer’s Golden Bough,” trans. John Beversluis, in Ludwig Wittgenstein, 
Philosophical Occasions, 1912– 1951, ed. James Klagge and Alfred Nordmann (Indianapolis: 
Hacket, 1993), 116. Next to these words, Wittgenstein wrote S for schlecht (bad).
Chapter Ten
1. Francis King, ed., The Secret Rituals of the O.T.O. (London: Daniel, 1973), 7.
2. Ellic Howe, “Theodor Reuss: Irregular Freemasonry in Germany, 1900– 23,” Ars Quatuor 
Coronati 91 (1978): 28– 46. For more on Reuß’s sex magic, see Hugh Urban, Magia Sexualis: 
Sex, Magic, and Liberation in Modern Western Esotericism (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 2008), 96– 108; for his influence on the Eranos Circle of Ascona, see Hans Thomas 
Hakl, Eranos: An Alternative Intellectual History of the Twentieth Century (Ithaca, NY: McGill- 
Queen’s University Press, 2013), 37.
3. See Peter König, Der Grosse Theodor- Reuss- Reader (Munich: Arbeitsgemeinschaft für 
Religions-  und Weltanschauungsfragen, 1997), 245.
4. Max Weber, “Science as Vocation” (Wissenschaft als Beruf), originally a speech delivered 
at Munich University, translated in H. H. Gerth and C. Wright Mills, From Max Weber: Essays 
in Sociology (New York: Oxford University Press, 1946), 194, 155 (emphasis added).
5. Talcott Parsons, “Max Weber, 1864– 1964,” American Sociological Review (1965): 171– 
75; and Stephen Kalberg, Max Weber’s Comparative- Historical Sociology (Cambridge: Polity, 
1994).
6. Wolfgang Mommsen, Max Weber und die deutsche Politik (Tübingen: Mohr, 1959); and 
Raymond Aron, “Max Weber and Power Politics,” in Max Weber and Sociology Today, ed. Otto 
Stammer, trans. Kathleen Morris (New York: Harper, 1971), 83– 100.
7. Anthony Giddens, Capitalism and Modern Social Theory: An Analysis of the Writings of 
Marx, Durkheim and Max Weber (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1971); John Love, 
Antiquity and Capitalism: Max Weber and the Sociological Foundations of Roman Civilization 
(New York: Routledge, 1991); and Karl Löwith, Max Weber and Karl Marx (New York: Rout-
ledge, 1993).
8. Kieran Allen, Max Weber: A Critical Introduction (Ann Arbor, MI: Pluto Press, 2004); 
and Andrew Zimmerman, “Decolonizing Weber,” Postcolonial Studies 9, no. 1 (2006): 53– 79.
9. Lawrence Scaff, Fleeing the Iron Cage: Culture, Politics, and Modernity in the Thought of 
Max Weber (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1989); Árpád Szakolczai, Max Weber and 
Michel Foucault: Parallel Life- Works (New York: Routledge, 1998); Nicholas Gane, Max Weber 
and Postmodern Theory: Rationalization versus Re- enchantment (New York: Palgrave, 2002); 
and Andrew Koch, Romance and Reason: Ontological and Social Sources of Alienation in the 
Writings of Max Weber (Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2006).
10. Paul Honigsheim, “Max Weber: His Religious and Ethical Background and Develop-
ment,” in The Unknown Max Weber, ed. Alan Sica (New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction, 2003); 

386 Notes to Pages 270–272
and Anthony Carroll, Protestant Modernity: Weber, Secularisation, and Protestantism (Scran-
ton, PA: University of Scranton Press, 2007).
11. Wolfgang Schluchter, “Die Paradoxie der Rationalisierung” Zeitschrift für Soziologie 
5, no. 3 (1976): 256– 84; Schluchter, The Rise of Western Rationalism: Max Weber’s Develop-
mental History (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981); Ann Swidler, “The Concept 
of Rationality in the Work of Max Weber,” Sociological Inquiry 43, no. 1 (1973): 35– 42. Hennis 
argues that the central theme in Weber is not rationalization as such, but the rationalization of 
“Lebensführung.” Wilhelm Hennis, Max Weber: Essays in Reconstruction (London: Allen & 
Unwin, 1988).
12. Richard Jenkins, “Disenchantment, Enchantment and Re- enchantment: Max Weber at 
the Millennium,” Max Weber Studies 1 (2000): 11.
13. For example, Weber quotes Schiller’s Der Geisterseher in his own Max Weber Gesam-
tausgabe, I/10, 279 (see note 14).
14. Max Weber Gesamtausgabe (Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 1984– 2012; hereafter cited as 
MWG.), abteilung I: band 19, 103– 4. The MWG is divided into sections (indicated by roman 
numeral) and bands (sometime subdivided into volumes). In what follows, the first number 
refers to the section, then band (then volume if appropriate), then page (e.g., MWG, I/22– 2, 75).
15. Jakob Friedrich Fries, Die Geschichte der Philosophie dargestellt nach den Fortschritten 
ihrer wissenschaftlichen Entwickelung (Halle: Waisenhauses, 1837), 1:307.
16. A second suggestive “Entzauberung der Welt” occurs in Edmund Pfleiderer, Gottfried 
Wilhelm Leibniz als Patriot, Staatsmann und Sildungsträger (Leipzig: Fues, 1870), 479. But 
there is no direct connection to Weber.
17. Friedrich Tenbruck, “The Problem of Thematic Unity in the Works of Max Weber,” 
British Journal of Sociology 31, no. 3 (1980): 321. A close read of even Weber’s most quoted 
sentence on disenchantment (cited above) suggests that intellectualization and rationalization 
are related to be not identical to disenchantment.
18. Weber, Protestant Ethic, 140n9.
19. For example: Roger Brubaker described sixteen meanings of the rational. Hennis sug-
gested that for Weber, rationalization could mean anything. Schluchter partitioned Weber’s 
rationalism (Rationalismus) into three forms: (1) scientific- technical, (2) metaphysical- ethical, 
and (3) practical. Walter Wallace argued that behind the apparent disorder there was a single 
meaning of rationality— namely, “consciously rule- bound comparison and choice among alterna-
tive means to a given end.” See Rogers Brubaker, The Limits of Rationality (London: Allen & 
Unwin, 1984), 2; Wilhelm Hennis, “Max Weber’s Central Question,” Economy and Society 12, 
no. 2 (1983): 157; Wolfgang Schluchter, “Die Paradoxie der Rationalisierung: Zum Verhältnis 
von Ethik und Welt bei Max Weber,” Zeitschrift für Soziologie 3, no. 5 (1976): 256– 84; and Wal-
ter Wallace, “Rationality, Human Nature, and Society in Weber’s Theory,” Theory and Society 
19, no. 2 (1990): 206 (italics in the original).
20. Stephen Kalberg, “Max Weber’s Types of Rationality: Cornerstones for the Analysis of 
Rationalization Processes in History,” American Journal of Sociology 85, no. 5 (1980): 1145– 79. 
I disagree with Kalberg’s conflation of substantive and value rationality and other points that 
will be noted. A similar scheme was also put forth by Levine, who adds a distinction between 
subjective and objective rationality I find somewhat persuasive, but not as relevant to the issues 

Notes to Pages 272–276 
387
of this chapter. Donald Levine, “Rationality and Freedom: Weber and Beyond.” Sociological 
Inquiry 51, no. 1 (1981): 5– 25.
21. Kalberg, “Max Weber’s Types.”
22. MWG, I/23: 176, translated in Max Weber, Economy and Society (Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1978), 26.
23. Ibid. Kalberg collapses value and substantive rationality. But I think Weber’s substantive 
(materiale) rationalization is closer to his formalized rationality, not his value rationality.
24. Max Weber, Gesammelte Aufsätze zur Religionssoziologie (Tübingen: Mohr, 1922), 1:266.
25. MWG, I/22– 2, 272.
26. Ibid.
27. Weber, Economy and Society, 37, 107– 8, 226, 818.
28. Kalberg lumps substantive and value rationality together; I see it as an institutionalized 
evolution of value rationality.
29. MWG, I/23, 251.
30. Weber called this “traditional” irrationality, but as his definition makes clear, he was 
referring to a kind of habitus. Weber, Economy and Society, 25; MWG, I/23, 175.
31. Weber, Economy and Society, 25. MWG, I/23, 175.
32. MWG, I/19, 484– 514.
33. Weber, Protestant Ethic, xxxviii– xxxix.
34. This is especially clear in Weber’s writings about music, which discuss the advent of 
musical scales and the standardization of musical notation as examples of rationalization. Max 
Weber, The Rational and Social Foundations of Music (Carbondale: Southern Illinois Univer-
sity Press, 1969).
35. Weber, Protestant Ethic, xxxviii.
36. Peter Ghosh, Max Weber and the Protestant Ethic: Twin Histories (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2014), 259, 264.
37. Kalberg, “Max Weber’s Types,” 1152. The closest Weber came to this sentiment is in the 
lectures that make up “General Economic History,” where he described prophecy as releasing 
the world from magic.
38. Stefan Breuer, “Magie, Zauber, Entzauberung,” in Max Webers “Religionssystematik” 
(Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2001), 119– 30.
39. Weber remarked that the section of the text including the reference to disenchantment 
was originally written earlier. Schluchter argued that this means that disenchantment was 
something that Weber had in place for some time. Wolfgang Schluchter, Rationalism, Religion, 
and Domination: A Weberian Perspective (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1989), 417, 
523n34. But it seems more plausible to me that Weber inserted the reference to disenchantment 
in the essay in 1913, just as Weber inserted the references to disenchantment into the later edi-
tion of The Protestant Ethic. See also Schluchter, Die Entzauberung der Welt: Sechs Studien zu 
Max Weber (Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2009), esp. 1– 17.
40. Martin Green, Mountain of Truth: The Counterculture Begins, Ascona, 1900– 1920 (Han-
over, NH: University Press of New England, 1986), 176.
41. Most important, Else and Frieda von Richthofen. MWG, II/8, 147– 203, 571– 72, 575– 611.
42. Ibid., 8, 181.

388 Notes to Pages 276–280
43. For disenchantment, see Franziska zu Reventlow, Herrn Dames Aufzeichnungen (Mu-
nich: Langen, 1913), 61– 75.
44. MWG, II/8, 181.
45. Martin Green, The Von Richthofen Sisters (New York: Basic Books, 1974), 235.
46. Common acquaintances of Max Weber and Ludwig Klages included Else Jaffe, Revent-
low, and the ex- fellow Kosmikers Stefan George and Karl Wolfskehl. See MWG, II/8, 660.
47. Green, Von Richthofen Sisters, 352.
48. E.g., Weber, Protestant Ethic, 130n10.
49. Weber, Religionssoziologie, 1:530.
50. MWG, II/8, 605. Glücksbegier is hard to render in English (literally “desire for happi-
ness” or fortune; but it also evokes Glücksbringer, meaning “lucky charm” or “talisman”).
51. Weber, “Science as Vocation.” 155
52. Johannes Winckelmann, “Die Herkunft von Max Webers Entzauberungs- Konzeption.” 
Kölner Zeitschrift für Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie 32, no. 1 (1980): 12– 53.
53. Max Weber, Gesammelte Aufsätze zur Wissenschaftslehre (Tübingen: Mohr, 1922), 409 
(emphasis added).
54. MWG, I/19, 175.
55. Ibid., 483– 484.
56. I agree with Stefan Breuer that Magie and Zauberei are functionally synonymous in 
Weber’s writings. Breuer, “Magie, Zauber, Entzauberung.”
57. For a fascinating theorization of magic and technology, see Richard Stivers, Technology 
as Magic: The Triumph of the Irrational (New York: Continuum, 1999). To be fair, Weber 
did occasionally portray magic and technology as opposed. In a late lecture, Weber remarked: 
“Prophecies have released the world from magic and in so doing created the basis for [Occiden-
tal] modern science and technology, and capitalism.” Max Weber, General Economic History 
(New York: Collier Books, 1961), 205
58. See MWG, I/19, 403– 7. It should be noted that Weber especially associated the coinci-
dence of magic and science/technology with China, and sometimes suggested that it held Asia 
back from the same kind of rationalization that unfolded in the West.
59. MWG, I/22– 2, 121– 22.
60. Ibid., 122.
61. Ibid.
62. Ibid., 122– 23.
63. This is also likely a reference to Robert Ranulph Marett’s conception of pre- animism.
64. For Weber’s reading of Frazer, see MWG, I/22– 2, 46– 50, and esp. 132.
65. Ibid., 123– 24.
66. Ibid., 125– 26.
67. Ibid., 128– 29.
68. Ibid., 157– 58.
69. Ibid., I/19, 407.
70. I have restored “the disenchantment of the world” but otherwise reproduced Parsons’s 
translation. Max Weber, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, trans. Talcott Par-
sons (New York: Routledge, 1992), 61.
71. For example, MWG, I/19, 349, 450.

Notes to Pages 280–287 
389
72. Weber, Protestant Ethic, 57.
73. For example, Weber argued that Jesus was “above all a magician.” MWG, I/22– 2, 441.
74. For an appraisal of the Weberian orthodox of disenchantment and its obvious flaws, see 
Jenkins, “Disenchantment, Enchantment and Re- enchantment.”
75. Weber, Protestant Ethic, 61.
76. Weber, “Science as Vocation,” 139.
77. Weber, Wissenschaftslehre, 449.
78. Weber, “Science as Vocation,” 139; Weber, Wissenschaftslehre, 448– 449.
79. Weber, “Science as Vocation,” 139.
80. Ibid. In the Kategorien essay, Weber described this idea as what gives the civilized world 
its “rational tone” (rationale Note). Weber, Wissenschaftslehre, 449.
81. MWG, I/17, 87. I have slightly amended the translation from Weber, “Science as Voca-
tion,” 139.
82. Literally “functionally irrational” in Weber, but I read it with the same meaning as the 
“Science as Vocation” lecture; namely, focused on unpredictability. Weber, Wissenschaftslehre, 
449.
83. MWG, I/22– 2, 273 (emphasis added).
84. Ibid., I/19, 512 (emphasis added).
85. Ibid., I/22– 2, 334– 36.
86. Ibid.
87. Weber, Protestant Ethic, 124.
88. Stephen Kalberg translator’s note in Max Weber, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of 
Capitalism (Chicago: Fitzroy Dearborn, 2001), 246n132.
89. It is not uncommon to find scholars attributing the quotation to either Nietzsche or 
Goethe. For example, see Marcel Hoogenboom and Ringo Ossewaarde, “From Iron Cage to 
Pigeon House: The Birth of Reflexive Authority,” Organization Studies 26, no. 4 (2005): 601; 
Anthony Giddens, In Defence of Sociology: Essays, Interpretations, and Rejoinders (Cambridge: 
Polity Press, 1996), 22.
90. Gustav von Schmoller, Grundriss der allgemeinen volkswirtschaftslehre (Leipzig, 
Duncker & Humblot, 1900), 1:225.
91. It is possible Schmoller’s technocrat reflects some more distant source, but this seems 
to be the proximate origin of Weber’s argument.
92. MWG, I/22– 5, 71.
93. Weber, Protestant Ethic, 72.
94. Ibid., 123.
95. For a different way to parse Weber’s notion of disenchantment, see Egil Asprem, The 
Problem of Disenchantment: Scientific Naturalism and Esoteric Discourse, 1900– 1939 (Boston: 
Brill, 2014), 32.
96. Disenchantment and the iron cage do share an opposition to charisma. Weber often 
suggests that magicians are charismatic figures and that charisma has a tendency to overturn 
bureaucracy, at least until it is routinized.
97. Weber, Religionssoziologie, 1:311.
98. See, for example, Koch, Romance and Reason.
99. Marianne Weber, Max Weber: A Biography (New York: Wiley, 1975), 324.

390 Notes to Pages 287–291
100. The main exception is Mommsen, Max Weber und die deutsche Politik.
101. Joachim Radkau, Max Weber: Die Leidenschaft des Denkens (München: Hanser, 2005), 
translated (and somewhat abridged) as Joachim Radkau, Max Weber: A Biography (Malden, 
MA: Polity, 2011).
102. MWG, II/6, 65; Radkau, Max Weber: Die Leidenschaft, 807.
103. MWG, II/6, 70 (emphasis added).
104. See ibid., I/22– 2, 323– 24.
105. Radkau, Max Weber: Die Leidenschaft, 808.
106. Marianne Weber, Max Weber, 599; Radkau, Max Weber: Die Leidenschaft, 806.
107. For the death of Max Weber’s father as a psychological trigger, see Arthur Mitzman, The 
Iron Cage: An Historical Interpretation of Max Weber (New York: Knopf, 1970), 148- 163. For 
Jasper’s interpretation, see Radkau, Max Weber: Die Leidenschaft, 312.
108. Eduard Baumgarten, Max Weber: Werk und Person (Tübingen: Mohr, 1964), 658– 59.
109. Ibid., 677;. Radkau, Max Weber: Die Leidenschaft, 812.
110. Paul Honigsheim, “Erinnerungen an Max Weber,” in Max Weber zum Gedächtnis: 
Materialien und Dokumente zur Bewertung von Werk und Persönlichkeit, ed. René König and 
Johannes Winckelmann (Cologne: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1963), 270.
111. Radkau, Max Weber: Die Leidenschaft, 813; Honigsheim, “Erinnerungen an Max We-
ber,” 268.
112. Robert Edward Norton, Secret Germany: Stefan George and His Circle (Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press, 2002).
113. Although George was openly homosexual and had a number of Jewish disciplines, his 
fans also included the Nazi propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels (who named a literary prize 
after him) and Claus von Stauffenberg, the German Wehrmacht officer who tried to assassinate 
Hitler and who, rumor has it, referred to George’s “occult Germany” when he was shot before 
the firing squad. Thomas Karlauf, “Stauffenberg: The Search for a Motive,” in A Poet’s Reich: 
Politics and Culture in the George Circle, ed. Melissa S. Lane and Martin A. Ruehl (Rochester, 
NY: Camden House, 2010), 327.
114. Wolf Lepenies, Between Literature and Science: The Rise of Sociology (New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 1988), 280– 81. See also Michael Landmann, “Georg Simmel und 
Stefan George,” in Georg Simmel und Die Moderne, ed. Heinz- Jürgen Dahme and Otthein 
Rammstedt (Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1984), 147– 73.
115. David Frisby, Georg Simmel (New York: Routledge, 2002), 23.
116. Parsons studied under Edgar Salin. Lepenies, Between Literature and Science, 286.
117. Ibid., 258, 265.
118. Stefan George, Das Neue Reich (Berlin: Georg Bondi, 1928).
119. Norton, Secret Germany; and Bernd Johannsen, Reich des Geistes, Stefan George und 
das Geheime Deutschland (Munich: Verlag Dr. Hut, 2008), 1.
120. The Works of Stefan George (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1974),  
427.
121. Friedrich Gundolf, George (Berlin: Georg Bondi, 1920), 1.
122. Marianne Weber, Max Weber, 455.
123. Joshua Derman, Max Weber in Politics and Social Thought: From Charisma to Canon-
ization (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2012), 53.

Notes to Pages 291–296 
391
124. Lepenies, Between Literature and Science, 292.
125. Marianne Weber, Max Weber, 461 (Marianne’s paraphrase).
126. Ibid., 457– 59; Marianne Weber, Max Weber: Ein Lebensbild (Tübingen: Mohr, 1984), 
465– 67.
127. Marianne Weber, Max Weber, 460– 462.
128. Norton, Secret Germany, 478.
129. Marianne Weber, Max Weber, 595.
130. Wolters, Stefan George, 471.
131. Ibid., 474.
132. Ibid., 477.
133. Thomas Karlauf, Stefan George: Die Entdeckung des Charisma (Munich: Blessing, 
2007), 412. See also Thomas Kroll, “Max Webers Idealtypus der charismatischen Herrschaft 
und die zeitgenössische Charisma- Debatte,” in Max Webers Herrschaftssoziologie: Studien zu 
Entstehung und Wirkung, ed. Edith Hanke and Wolfgang Mommsen (Tübingen: Mohr Sie-
beck, 2001), 47– 72.
134. MWG, I/23, 497. He also likely had in mind notions of apostolic charismata.
135. For the Swiss Eranos Circle, see Hakl, Eranos; Steven Wasserstrom, Religion after Re-
ligion: Gershom Scholem, Mircea Eliade, and Henry Corbin at Eranos (Princeton, NJ: Prince-
ton University Press, 1999); and Pioniere, Poeten, Professoren: Eranos und Monte Verità in 
der Zivilisationsgeschichte des 20. Jahrhunderts, ed. Elisabetta Barone, Matthias Ridel, and 
Alexandra Tischel (Würzburg: Königshausen, 2004). It is likely that Rudolf Otto was inspired 
by the then- defunct Heidelberg group when he suggested the name Eranos to Olga Fröbe- 
Kapteyn.
136. Radkau, Max Weber: Die Leidenschaft, 455– 58.
137. Gertrud von le Fort, Hälfte des Lebens: Erinnerungen (Munich: Ehrenwirth, 1965), 89.
138. Weber had been thinking about Protestantism and capitalism since 1898. We can also 
see the influence of William James, whom Weber read.
139. Weber, Protestant Ethic, 49.
140. Ibid., 67.
141. Ibid., 193n66.
142. Ibid., 189n49.
143. Ibid., 39.
144. Ibid., 165n8.
145. Ibid., 45. I omitted the phrase “wie bei Besprechung der mittelalterlichen religiösen 
Ethik,” which appears only in the second edition.
146. Ibid., 40. Weber expressed less confidence about this claim in an early note; see 159n3.
147. Johannes Tauler, The Inner Way: Being Thirty- Six Sermons for Festivals (Memphis: 
General Books, 2010).
148. Hans Kippenberg, Die Entdeckung der Religionsgeschichte (München: Verlag C. H. 
Beck, 1997), 237.
149. Weber, Protestant Ethic, 67– 68.
150. Volkhard Krech, “Mystik,” in Max Webers “Religionssystematik”, ed. Hans Kippen-
berg and Martin Riesebrodt (Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2001), 241– 62. Krech has observed that 
there was a lively debate among Weber’s contemporaries in about 1900 concerning the meaning 

392 Notes to Pages 296–303
of mysticism and its universality as a category, with Weber’s colleagues Simmel and Troelsch 
weighing on the issue.
151. Ibid., 252.
152. Ibid., 258.
153. Ibid., 261.
154. Ibid., 254– 56.
155. Ibid., 255.
156. Krech largely argues— not without good reason— that the mystic, for Weber, is a typo-
logical and basically negative category.
157. MWG, I/19, 103
158. Weber, “Science as Vocation,” 155.
159. MWG, II/22– 2, 333.
160. Weber, “Science as Vocation,” 148; see also 149: “Many old gods ascend from their 
graves; they are disenchanted and hence take the form of impersonal forces.”
161. Indeed, in a particularly tantalizing passage in the Zwischenbetrachtung, Weber does 
speak for the power of the aesthetic in terms that would have appealed to Schiller, and he sug-
gests that art is capable of carrying “magical effects” (magischer Wirkungen) and thus might 
be able to function as a source of this- wordly meaning and perhaps even salvation. MWG I/19, 
499– 501.
162. Weber cautioned against attempts to intellectually form new religions without “new 
and genuine prophecy” (“Science as Vocation,” 155). But this implies that a genuine prophecy 
might exist.
163. These newspaper reports come from the Berliner Volkszeitung, Berliner Tageblatt, and 
Neue Hamburger Zeitung. And there are many more examples just from that three- year period.
164. See Robert Bartlett, The Natural and the Supernatural in the Middle Age (New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 2008); Gregory Dawes, “The Rationality of Renaissance Magic,” 
Parergon 30, no. 2 (2013): 33– 58; and Carlo Ginzburg, The Cheese and the Worms: The Cosmos 
of a Sixteenth- Century Miller (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1980).
Conclusion
1. Felicitas Goodman’s representative works include: Speaking in Tongues: A Cross- cultural 
Study of Glossolalia (1972), The Exorcism of Anneliese Michel (1980), Ekstase, Besessenheit, 
Dämonen: Die geheimnisvolle Seite der Religion (1991); and Maya Apocalypse: Seventeen Years 
with the Women of a Yucatan Village (2001).
2. Published first as Felicitas Goodman, Wo die Geister auf den Winden reiten (Freiburg im 
Breisgau: Bauer, 1989).
3. Felicitas Goodman’s reply in Michael Winkelman, “Magic: A Theoretical Reassessment 
and Comments and Replies,” Current Anthropology 23, no. 1 (1982): 47 (emphasis added).
4. Felicitas Goodman, Where the Spirits Ride the Wind: Trance Journeys and Other Ecstatic 
Experiences (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1990), 219– 20.
5. Ibid., 223.
6. Ibid.

Notes to Pages 304–312 
393
7. My grandmother had no interest in Western esotericism, but read many of the theorists 
discussed in this volume, including James Frazer, E. B. Tylor, Sigmund Freud, and Max Weber.
8. Cynthia Eller, Living in the Lap of the Goddess: The Feminist Spirituality Movement in 
America (New York: Crossroad, 1993); Wendy Griffin, “The Embodied Goddess: Feminist 
Witchcraft and Female Divinity,” Sociology of Religion 56, no. 1 (1995): 35– 48; Chris Klassen, 
ed., Feminist Spirituality: The Next Generation (Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2009).
9. Jon Woodson, To Make a New Race: Gurdjieff, Toomer, and the Harlem Renaissance. 
(Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 1999; Nadia Choucha, Surrealism and the Occult: 
Shamanism, Magic, Alchemy, and the Birth of the Artistic Movement (Rochester, NY: Destiny 
Books, 2009).
10. For this list of panpsychists, see David Skrbina, Panpsychism in the West, (Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 2005). Not to say that all these thinkers were part of the establishment when 
they wrote, but rather that many have been (retroactively) canonized.
11. For another take on the history of “secular magic,” see Simon During, Modern Enchant-
ments: The Cultural Power of Secular Magic (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2004).
12. Rudolf Pannwitz, Die Krisis der europäischen Kultur (Nuremberg: Hans Carl, 1917), 64.
13. It is often claimed that John Watkins Chapman was the first to use the expression post-
modern in 1870. For this claim, scholars usually cite Steven Best and Douglas Kellner, Postmod-
ern Theory: Critical Interrogations (New York: Guilford Press, 1991), 5. But Best and Kellner’s 
source for this is Higgins, which only identifies the painter as “Chapman” and places the date 
as around 1880. Dick Higgins, A Dialectic of Centuries (New York: Printed Editions, 1978), 7. 
So barring further evidence, I think this attribution is likely specious. One of the first examples 
I’ve verified is: J. M. Thompson, “Post- Modernism,” Hibbert Journal 12, no. 4 (1914): 733– 
45. In the Spanish- speaking world, there are provocative appearances of postmodernista in 
the Uruguayan poetry scene by at least as early as 1931. Carlos Reyles, Historia sintética de la 
literatura uruguaya (Montevideo: A. Vila, 1931), 2:1.
14. Fredric Jameson, A Singular Modernity: Essay on the Ontology of the Present (London: 
Verso, 2002), 211.
15. Fritz Graf, Magic in the Ancient World (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1997), 20. See also Richard Kieckhefer, Magic in the Middle Ages (New York: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1989), 10– 12, although variations of the term magic really came into vogue in 
Roman usage.
16. For examples, see Owen Davies, Grimoires: A History of Magic Books (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2009), esp. 6– 43.
17. See chapters 3 and 5.
18. To be clear, I’m not debating to what extent the occult was or was not an influence on 
Nazism, but rather the emergence of “occult Nazis” as a trope that was later used to discredit 
occultism.
19. See Monica Black and Eric Kurlander, eds., Revisiting the “Nazi Occult” (Rochester, 
NY: Camden House, 2015).
20. In anthropology, for instance, debates about psychical research returned to the fore. 
Margaret Mead was a believer in psi powers and a member of the American Society for Psy-
chical Research. In print she asserted that scientists and occultists should work together to 

394 Notes to Pages 312–316
provide “new insight into the powers attributed to seers and clairvoyants, to those who have 
the power to ‘see’ auras, to communicate with plants, to dream or visualize events outside the 
bounds of time.” Reprinted in Margaret Mead and Rhoda Mètraux, Aspects of the Present (New 
York: Morrow, 1980), 52– 53.
21. Michael Löwy and Robert Sayre, Romanticism against the Tide of Modernity (Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press, 2001).
22. Robert Yelle, The Language of Disenchantment: Protestant Literalism and Colonial Dis-
course in British India (New York: Oxford University Press, 2013); David Chidester, Savage 
Systems: Colonialism and Comparative Religion in Southern Africa (Charlottesville: University 
Press of Virginia, 1996).
23. Gananath Obeyesekere, The Apotheosis of Captain Cook: European Mythmaking in 
the Pacific (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1992); Vincent Wimbush, White Men’s 
Magic: Scripturalization as Slavery (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012).
24. Hugh Urban, Tantra: Sex, Secrecy Politics, and Power in the Study of Religions (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 2003), 134– 64.
25. Indeed, the attack on disenchantment might seem misdirected insofar as magic is not 
gone, just repressed.
26. For example: Ronald and Nancy Reagan’s well- known connection to astrologers (esp. 
Joan Quigley), Woodrow Wilson’s consultation of the “prophet” Edgar Cayce, and Abraham 
and Mary Lincoln’s spiritualist séances; Richard Nixon is also reported to have consulted the 
psychic Jeane Dixon. This list is far from exhaustive.
27. Martin Jay, The Dialectical Imagination: A History of the Frankfurt School and the Insti-
tute of Social Research, 1923– 1950 (London: Heinemann, 1973).
28. Theodor Adorno, The Positivist Dispute in German Sociology (London: Heinemann, 
1976), 121.

I n d e x
A∴A∴, 153, 158, 162, 172
Abbey of Thelema, 158
aboriginal peoples. See indigenous peoples
Abraham, Karl, 199
Abrams, M. H., 86
Acéphale, 237
Ackerman, Robert, 135
Adorno, Theodor: Bacon and, 47; Benjamin 
and, 228, 230, 233, 239; and capitalism, 35; 
and dialectics, 187; and disenchantment, 
206, 304, 316; and enlightenment, 8, 10, 41, 
59, 214, 239; Kant and, 208; Klages and, 
215, 220, 228, 233, 238, 239; and occultism, 
28, 311, 315; and positivism, 242– 45. See 
also Dialectic of Enlightenment
aesthetic theory, 79, 82– 83, 232
Africa, 23, 28, 62, 99. See also names of 
specific countries
Agamben, Giorgio, 215, 238
Agrippa von Nettesheim, Heinrich Corne-
lius, 45, 50, 188, 299
Albanese, Catherine, 23
alchemy, 43, 45– 46, 57, 117, 145, 157. See also 
chemistry
Alembert, Jean le Rond d’, 51, 246. See also 
Encyclopédie
Alexander, Samuel, 305
alienation, 66, 75– 76, 297
aliens. See extraterrestrials
Allen, Grant, 161
America. See Latin America; North America; 
United States
analytic philosophy, 21, 225, 242
Angas, George, 142
angels, 24, 25, 27, 30– 31, 33, 43, 58
animal magnetism, 32, 100, 106, 187, 349. See 
also mesmerism
animism, 98– 101, 141, 149; Freud and, 193– 
94, 196, 204– 5; Klages and, 219; Neurath 
and, 255– 56; rejection of, 1, 10, 85; Weber 
and, 278
anthropology, 12, 18, 98, 124, 128– 30, 312
antifoundationalism, 209
anti- Semitism, 211, 225, 227, 273, 311, 252n141. 
See also Nazism
apocalypse, 43, 45
Aquinas, Thomas, 47
Arco auf Valley, Anton Graf von, 250
Arsonval, Jacques- Arsène d’, 2
artistic movements, 8, 66, 305
Aryan religion, 132, 133, 134
Ascona (commune). See Monte Verità

396 Index
Asia, 22, 23, 62, 73, 117, 118, 120, 301. See 
also Asian religions; and names of specific 
countries
Asian religions, 36, 70, 265, 275, 284, 293. See 
also names of specific religions
Asprem, Egil, 170, 362n69, 362n86, 363n105, 
389n95
astral light, 106, 168. See also projection: astral
astrology, 49, 157, 220, 224, 231, 239, 248, 
322n69; contemporary belief in, 25– 27, 
31– 33
astronomy, 42, 45
atheism, 31, 51, 57, 70– 73, 93
Aubrey, John, 138
aura, the, 20, 226, 232
Australia, 6, 99, 142, 143
Austria. See Austrian Society for Psychical 
Research; Vienna Circle
Austrian Society for Psychical Research, 262
Avalon, Arthur (Sir. John Woodroffe), 315
Baader, Franz von, 189, 227
Bachofen, Johann, 164, 210
Bacon, Francis, 18, 41, 43– 53, 61, 123, 173, 
181, 304
Bacon, Roger, 42
Bader, Christopher D., 26, 27, 29– 30
Bailey, Alice, 116
Baker, Joseph O. O., 26, 27, 29– 30
Baker, Peter, 135
Ballet, Gilbert, 2
Barad, Karen, 5
Barruel, Augustin, 58
Barthes, Roland, 237
Bataille, Georges, 161, 176, 215, 226, 237, 238, 
377nn179– 81
Bateson, Gregory, 305
Baudelaire, Charles, 91
Baudrillard, Jean, 237
Bauer, Bruno, 75
Bauman, Zygmunt, 1, 36
Baumgarten, Eduard, 289
Bayle, Peter, 70– 71, 73
Baylor University Religion Survey, 25– 27
Beck, Ulrich, 11, 12
Beiser, Frederick, 72
Bekker, Balthasar, 271
Belmore, Herbert, 234
Bender, Courtney, 23
Benjamin, Walter, 20, 209, 215, 226– 36, 238, 
239
Bennett, Jane, 5, 106, 214
Benz, Ernst, 81
Bergson, Henri, 2, 157, 305
Bergson, Mina. See Mathers, Moina
Berkeley, George, 171
Besant, Annie, 315
Bhaskar, Roy, 238
Bigfoot, 26, 27
bimodal concept, 57, 70, 268, 306
Binswanger, Ludwig, 206
biocentrism, 221, 222, 239
Black, Max, 240
Blake, William, 121
Blanchot, Maurice, 237
Blavatsky, Helena Petrovna, 19, 97, 115– 20, 
123, 163
Bloch, Ernst, 238
Bloom, Harold, 193
Blumenberg, Hans 320n31
Blumenthal, Herbert. See Belmore, Herbert
Boehme, Jakob. See Böhme, Jakob
Boehringer, Robert, 290
Bogdan, Henrik, 165
Böhme, Jakob, 54, 55, 81, 82, 180, 189, 230, 
293. See also theosophy
Bourdieu, Pierre, 11
Boyle, Robert, 43
Brazil, 23
Breuer, Stefan, 275
Breysig, Kurt, 290
Britain. See England; United Kingdom
British Folklore Society, 126
British Society for Psychical Research, 2, 
159, 190
Brontë, Charlotte, 138

Index 
397
Brothers Grimm, 63
Browning, Elizabeth Barrett, 85
Bruno, Giordano, 18, 41, 42, 61
Buber, Martin, 230
Buddhism, 22, 36, 70, 115, 119– 20, 123, 158
Bulwer- Lytton, Edward, 122, 138, 172
Burckhardt, Jacob, 19, 89– 92, 93
bureaucracy, 4, 273, 284, 286, 297– 98, 301
Burnouf, Émile, 119
Butler, Eliza, 79
Byrne, Denis, 23
Calvinism, 139, 281, 294, 295. See also Prot-
estantism
Campbell, Archibald, 139
capitalism, 4, 35– 36, 214, 216, 221, 270, 306, 
315; Weber on, 285, 286, 291, 293– 94, 298, 
301
Carnap, Rudolf, 21, 243, 245– 50, 252, 254, 
260, 265– 68, 304. See also positivism
Carrington, Hereward, 199, 201
Cassirer, Ernst, 44, 47, 215
Castaneda, Carlos, 321n59
Castilhon, Jean, 53
Catholicism: anti- , 14, 47– 48, 58, 61, 273; 
folklore studies and, 129, 139; Lévi and, 
103, 105, 107, 348n41; mysticism and, 107; 
occultism and, 103; paganism and, 133, 134; 
psychoanalysis and, 367n74
Cavendish, Margaret, 305
Certeau, Michel de, 14, 238
Cessationism. See cessation of miracles
cessation of charismatic gifts. See cessation 
of miracles
cessation of miracles, 55, 139, 151, 335n98, 
357n63. See also fairies: departure of
Chakrabarty, Dipesh, 16, 17
channeling, 25– 26
Chaos Magic, 154
Charcot, Jean- Martin, 184
Chardin, Pierre Teilhard de, 305
charisma, 279– 80, 292, 292– 93, 297– 301, 
389n96
charismata, cessation of. See cessation of 
miracles
charms, 57, 131. See also spells
Chaucer, Geoffrey, 137– 38, 310
chemistry, 1, 55, 145, 210, 212, 336n105. See 
also alchemy
China, 73, 280, 286
Christianity: Bacon and, 47; Crowley and, 
156, 160, 162– 67, 171; death of God and, 
76; death of gods and, 88, 215, 216; eso-
teric, 106– 8; Evangelical, 28, 29, 65; Frazer 
and, 141, 152, 165, 169; Klages and, 216– 17; 
magic and, 117, 257– 58; Müller and, 109– 
14; mysticism and, 108, 111, 112, 114, 269; 
nature and, 80, 84, 216; Neurath and, 257– 
58; Nietzsche and, 67– 68, 164, 225; occult-
ism and, 103; paganism and, 14, 53, 58, 61, 
80– 81, 85, 90, 131, 133, 169; Paracelsus and, 
54; religious studies and, 121; witchcraft 
and, 139. See also Calvinism; Catholicism; 
cessation of miracles; Christian Science; 
Lutheranism; Protestantism; Puritanism; 
secularization
Christian Science, 200– 201
Church of Satan, 154, 159
Ciruelo, Pedro, 48
Cixous, Hélène, 214
clairvoyance, 25– 26, 211, 231, 263
Clarke, Samuel, 71
class, 9, 146, 184, 250– 53, 255
Cleary, Bridget, 125– 26, 135, 140, 151
clockwork universe, 5, 43, 72, 74, 83
Codrington, R. H., 144
colonialism, 7– 8, 62, 214, 309, 314– 15; 
folklorists and, 130; Frazer and, 142, 147; 
Klages and, 217; theosophy and, 28. See 
also postcolonialism
communication with the dead. See spiritu-
alism
communism, 229
Comte, Auguste, 141, 241, 248, 254– 55
Connolly, William, 5
Constant, Alphonse- Louis. See Lévi, Éliphas

398 Index
constellations (concept of), 230– 31
continental philosophy, 225, 226, 238, 242, 
268
Copernicus, Nicolaus, 42, 54
Corberon, Marie- Daniel Bourrée de, 51
Cornelius Agrippa. See Agrippa von 
Nettesheim, Heinrich Cornelius
correspondences, 45, 168, 169, 230– 31
Cosmic Circle, 172, 210– 12, 215; anti- 
Semitism of, 225; Benjamin and, 228, 
232– 33; George and, 290, 291; Weber and, 
269, 276
cosmic rush, 233– 34
Court de Gébelin, Antoine, 104
critical theory, 8– 10, 20, 89, 209, 213, 215, 221, 
225– 28, 235– 39, 315; and positivism, 241, 
243, 267
Cromek, Robert Hartley, 138
Crowley, Aleister, 153– 76; on Christianity, 
156, 160, 162– 67, 171; Golden Dawn and, 
157; Frazer and, 19, 152, 154– 56, 159– 72, 
174– 76; Lévi and, 161– 62, 168– 69, 172; 
magic and, 153– 55, 159– 60, 162, 166– 67, 
170– 76, 202, 257; magick and, 19, 166, 
171, 172– 74, 176; matriarchy and, 164, 210; 
paganism and, 165, 166, 175; religion and, 
160– 63, 166, 169, 171, 172; Scholem and, 
229; Schopenhauer and, 188; science and, 
166– 67, 170– 76, 202, 257
Cult of the Supreme Being, 51
cults, 36, 176, 214
cultural evolution, 123, 130; Frazer and, 127, 
132, 134, 141, 145– 47, 166, 167, 169; Freud 
and, 194; Tylor and, 99
Cuneo, Michael, 25
Curie, Marie, 1– 2, 3, 5, 305
Curie, Pierre, 2, 3
curses, 24, 29, 33
Dahms, Hans- Joachim, 253
Dahrendorf, Ralf, 267
d’Alembert, Jean le Rond, 51, 246
Darwin, Charles, 76, 113, 117, 182
Däubler, Theodor, 230
Davies, Owen, 28, 56
Dawson, John, 264– 65
dead, communication with. See spiritualism
deconstruction, 209, 222, 226, 302. See also 
postmodernism
Dee, John, 154
degeneration, 20, 182– 84
dehumanization, 9, 215, 239, 244, 315
deism, 51, 71, 72
Deissmann, Gustav Adolf, 293
Deleuze, Gilles, 214, 219, 238
de Man, Paul, 215, 225
demarcation problem, 322n69
demographics, 26– 30
demonic possession, 25, 27, 259– 60
demons, 29, 33, 42, 50, 56, 80, 143– 44. See 
also demonic possession
Derleth, Ludwig, 210
Derrida, Jacques, 16, 207, 214, 221, 222, 237, 
238, 299, 373n82
Descartes, René, 41– 43, 83, 127, 186, 247, 313
desire, 214
despiritualization, 1, 2, 6, 19, 41, 66, 77, 86, 
89, 96, 148– 50, 197; of astronomy, 42; of 
magic, 145; of nature, 5, 45, 50– 51, 88, 182
destruction, 9
devil, 47, 48, 53, 56, 103, 144, 196, 217. See also 
Lucifer
Dewey, John, 305
dialectical images, 20, 232– 33
Dialectic of Enlightenment (Horkheimer and 
Adorno), 4, 8– 11, 45, 53, 59, 220, 231, 239, 
241, 242, 244, 315
Diderot, Denis, 51– 55, 57– 58, 81, 97, 246. See 
also Encyclopédie
Diederichs, Eugen, 265
Dilthey, Wilhelm, 60
disenchantment: as affect, 150– 51; concept 
of, 4– 8, 10– 11, 16– 21, 36– 37, 124, 126– 27, 
181, 215, 222, 239, 304, 306, 308, 315– 16, 
318n14; critique of, 17, 18, 61, 311, 314; posi-
tivism and, 245. See also under Weber, Max

Index 
399
Dittmar, Louise, 85
divination, 22, 33, 52, 106, 169, 173, 280, 303, 
309
domination. See under humanity; nature
dreams, 20, 179– 80, 193, 199, 200
dualism, 41, 218
Duncan, Helen, 56
du Prel, Carl, 20, 177, 179– 81, 189– 91, 203, 
205, 206, 208, 260
Durkheim, Émile, 98, 142, 347n18
Eastern religions. See Asian religions
Eckhart, Meister, 189
ecstasy, 190, 223– 24, 234, 292, 302
Edison, Thomas, 22, 305
education, 27– 28, 34, 154, 304
Egypt, 157– 58, 160, 162, 163, 164– 66, 169,  
224
eighteenth century, 49, 56, 58; Europe, 79; 
France, 71; Germany, 60, 63– 64, 66, 71, 
79, 310
Eisner, Kurt, 249– 50
Eissler, Max, 262
Eliade, Mircea, 95, 121
empiricism, 61, 71, 73, 99, 201, 253, 256, 258
enchantment, 4, 13, 17, 21, 22, 23, 28, 29, 31, 
32, 35, 41, 43, 44, 45, 48, 53, 54, 87, 89, 
93, 124, 127, 131, 136, 137, 139, 150, 154– 55, 
160, 170, 171, 181, 185, 189, 208, 212, 225, 
236, 241, 254, 258, 267– 68, 271, 275– 78, 
291, 298, 301, 304, 305– 7, 310, 311, 313, 
314– 15, 319n19. See also disenchantment; 
re- enchantment
Encyclopédie (Diderot and Alembert), 18, 44, 
51– 58, 120, 246
England, 2, 8, 60, 131, 137
enlightenment, 41, 53, 57, 62, 92, 214, 316; 
concept of, 71– 72; critique of, 10, 101, 214; 
distinction from “the Enlightenment,” 
320n43; spiritualism and, 100
Enlightenment, the (myth of), 4, 11, 18, 19, 
20, 36, 44, 52– 53, 58– 59, 61, 65, 66, 67, 
71, 91, 92, 311; anthropocentrism and, 97; 
positivism and, 241, 242; religious studies 
and, 94– 95, 123. See also Dialectic of 
Enlightenment
Eranos Circle, 95, 228, 293
Erasmus, Desiderius, 13
erotic, the, 223– 24
esotericism, 6, 15, 61, 95– 97, 162; Bacon 
and, 45; Benjamin and, 226– 28, 230– 31, 
239; Christian, 106– 7, 108; Jung and, 
192; Klages and, 212; Müller and, 108; 
Schopenhauer and, 188; Theosophical 
Society and, 96, 120; Western, 359
ESP (extrasensory perception), 24– 26, 263, 
264
ethics, 72, 73, 76, 100, 268, 283– 86, 297, 299, 
300, 301, 306– 7
Eurocentrism, 6, 17
Europe, 4– 5, 7– 8, 14, 16– 18, 23, 29– 34, 62, 
84, 92, 308– 10, 314– 15; exchange with 
Asia, 120; magic in, 117; religion in, 36, 47– 
48, 94, 107; revolutions in, 76; spiritualism 
in, 96, 184; witchcraft in, 52, 90. See also 
names of specific countries
Evans- Wentz, Walter, 120
evil eye, 33, 45
existentialism, 66, 242
exorcism, 22, 25, 196, 259
experience, mystical, 55, 163, 189– 90, 195, 
223, 234, 278, 287– 88, 291– 94, 296– 97. See 
also mysticism
extrasensory perception. See ESP
extraterrestrials, 24, 25, 27, 29, 32
fairies, 19, 33, 125– 27, 131, 135– 40, 151; depar-
ture of, 19, 127, 135– 40, 151, 310, 357n68. 
See also cessation of miracles
fairy tales. See folktales
Farrer, James, 131
fascism, 28, 253, 311. See also Nazism; totali-
tarianism
fatalism, 72
Fechner, Gustav, 305
Feigl, Herbert, 246, 248, 263, 265

400 Index
feminism, 102, 196, 213, 214, 218, 225, 305
Ferenczi, Sándor, 198– 99, 203
Fergusson, Robert, 136
Feuerbach, Ludwig, 75, 85
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb, 73, 189
fifteenth century, 48
First World War, 150– 51, 249, 269, 290, 298, 
311
Fludd, Robert, 54
flux, 219, 238
folklore studies, 19, 124, 126– 33, 136, 139– 40, 
151– 52, 175
folktales, 34, 127, 130, 136, 137– 38, 140, 
356n46, 357n68
Fotland, Roar, 30
Foucault, Michel, 17, 45, 59, 154– 55, 215, 237, 
270
Fournier d’Albe, Edmund, 313
Fox sisters, 96. See also spiritualism
France, 1– 3, 7, 8, 18, 32– 33, 52, 58, 60, 74– 75, 
131, 209, 310, 312; spiritualism in, 184
Frankfurt School, 8– 9, 20, 45, 59, 127, 215, 
221, 239, 311, 315; critique of positivism, 
240– 45; Vienna Circle and, 253, 267. See  
also Adorno, Theodore; Benjamin, Walter;  
Fromm, Erich; Horkheimer, Max; Löwen-
thal, Leo; Lukács, Georg; Marcuse, 
Herbert
Fraser, Robert, 135
Frazer, James George (J. G.): anti- 
Christianity and, 147, 167; Crowley and, 
19, 152, 154– 56, 159– 72, 174– 76; cultural 
evolution and, 127, 132, 134, 141, 145– 47, 
166, 167, 169; disenchantment narrative 
and, 126– 28; Freud and, 20, 127, 152, 180, 
193; God and, 149; magic and, 127, 133, 
134, 140– 41, 143– 47, 152, 154, 167– 68, 169, 
172, 175, 255– 57; paganism and, 147, 165, 
169; positivism and, 248; religion and, 133, 
134, 140– 41, 143, 145– 47, 150, 152, 154, 169; 
Schiller and, 77, 150; science and, 140– 41, 
148, 154, 166, 167, 169, 172, 175, 256– 57; 
skepticism and, 150; Weber and, 152, 279; 
Worship of Nature, The, 148– 50. See also 
Golden Bough, The
Freemasons, 57, 58
Frege, Gottlob, 225
French Revolution, 74, 76, 77, 90
Freud, Sigmund: animism and, 193– 94, 204– 
5; disenchantment and, 21; dreams and, 
20, 179– 80, 193, 199, 200; du Prel and, 
20, 179– 81, 191, 203, 205, 206, 208; Fichte 
and, 189; Frazer and, 20, 127, 152, 180, 193; 
Hartmann and, 189; Judaism and, 197, 
202, 205; Jung and, 179, 191– 93, 196– 99; 
Kant and, 189, 208; magic and, 193– 95; 
mysticism and, 191, 197– 98, 201, 203, 205; 
Nordau and, 20; occultism and, 199– 201, 
203, 205, 207, 312; positivism and, 248; 
psychoanalysis and, 201– 2; religion and, 
161, 193, 195– 96; the savage/primitive and, 
84, 94, 142, 181, 203– 5; Schiller and, 77; 
Schopenhauer and, 189, 208; science and, 
201– 3, 205; skepticism and, 191– 93, 199; 
sorcery and, 193– 94; spiritualism and, 
197– 99, 201, 203; telepathy and, 194, 199– 
203, 205; Tylor and, 193; the unconscious 
and, 180, 205, 208
Fries, Jakob Friedrich, 271
Fromm, Erich, 8, 9
Galen, 54
Galilei, Galileo, 84
Gardner, Gerald, 159, 176
Gaster, Moses, 129
Gauchet, Marcel, 317n3
Gay, Peter, 193
Geisteswissenschaften. See human sciences
Gellner, Ernest, 35
gender, 211, 218; studies, 7
George, Stefan, 89, 210– 11, 228, 276, 290– 93, 
298
George Circle, 233, 290– 91
Germany, 2, 7, 8, 20, 32– 33, 58, 60, 61, 63, 65, 
67, 310, 312, 315; critical theory and, 209; 
folklore studies in, 131; philhellenism in, 

Index 
401
79; philosophy in, 19, 63– 64, 66, 69,  
70, 73, 74, 76, 81, 88, 241, 310; relations 
with France, 74– 75; spiritualism in, 184, 
201
German Youth Movement, 265, 276
Ghana, 23
Ghosh, Peter, 274
ghosts, 18, 21, 24– 27, 29– 33, 96, 126, 141, 151, 
264. See also spirits
ghost theory of religion, 141
Giddens, Anthony, 11, 12, 267
globalization, 8, 37, 214, 306
Global South, 22
Gnosticism, 229– 30
Goblin. See fairies
God: Bacon and, 47; belief in, 30– 33, 34, 
70– 71; death of, 4, 16, 18, 19, 31, 35, 39, 58, 
66, 67– 69, 74, 75, 76, 77, 80, 86, 92, 94, 
96, 161– 62, 310; Diderot and, 57; Frazer 
and, 149; Lévi and, 105– 6; Newton and, 
43; philosophes and, 51– 52, 55, 56, 66, 71, 
72, 121; religious studies and, 120– 21, 162; 
Tylor and, 99
Gödel, Kurt, 21, 260, 264– 65
gods: death of, 67, 76– 77, 80– 81, 84– 86, 
88– 90, 93, 215
“Gods of Greece, The” (Schiller), 77– 89, 93
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 74, 284, 305
Goldberg, Oskar, 229, 236
Golden Bough, The (Frazer), 19, 125, 127, 132– 
35, 140– 48, 152, 154– 55, 159– 61, 163– 69, 
175– 76, 268
Golden Dawn. See Hermetic Order of the 
Golden Dawn
Gonne, Maud, 157
Goodman, Felicitas, 302– 3
Gramont, Arnaud de, Count, 2
Gräser, Gusto, 275
Graves, Robert, 138
Great Britain. See England; United Kingdom
Greece, 63, 65, 78– 81, 90, 92, 311. See also 
“Gods of Greece, The”
Grimm, Brothers, 63
grimoires, 56– 57
Gross, Otto, 275
Guattari, Félix, 214, 215
Guénon, René, 305
Gundolf, Friedrich, 290, 291
Gurdjieff, G. I., 123
Gutkind, Erich, 229– 30, 236
Guyau, Jean- Marie, 177
Habermas, Jürgen, 8, 9– 10, 215
Haeckel, Ernst, 194
Hahn, Hans, 21, 243, 246, 258, 260– 65
Haiti, 23
Hakl, Hans Thomas, 122
Hamann, J. G., 207
Hanegraaff, Wouter, 14, 53, 168, 170, 322n68, 
334n79, 336n109, 337n135, 342n83, 
349n59, 352n131, 362n75, 362nn83– 84, 
365n20
Hardenberg, Friedrich Baron von. See 
Novalis
Harlem Renaissance 305
Harris, Frieda, 169
Harrison, Peter, 14, 322n65, 332n27, 337n134, 
346n3
Hartmann, Eduard von, 180, 189, 191
Hartshorne, Charles, 305
haunted houses, 25– 27, 31– 32
healing, 22, 23, 25, 32, 33
Hegel, G. W. F., 19; Böhme and, 81; Burck-
hardt and, 90; on death of gods, 69, 75, 
77, 84– 86; on dialectic, 87, 187, 217; on 
Geist, 96, 187, 214, 217; Hölderlin and, 87; 
mysticism and, 187, 189; mythology and, 
63; pantheism and, 74
Heidegger, Martin: Burckhardt and, 91; on 
death of God, 75; mythology and, 63; 
positivism and, 241– 42, 245, 247, 248; 
racism and, 225; reification and, 220; on 
technology, 214– 15
Heine, Heinrich, 74, 75, 85
Helmont, Jan Baptista van, 54
Henry, Paget, 321n51

402 Index
Heraclitus, 219
Herder, Johann, 63, 74, 90
Hermes Trismegistus, 109, 310
Hermetic Brotherhood of Light, 269. See also 
Ordo Templi Orientis
Hermeticism, 57, 143, 147, 209; comparative 
theology and, 104, 105, 109, 114, 163. See 
also Hermetic Order of the Golden  
Dawn
Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, 2– 3, 5, 
156– 57, 158, 163, 172, 176, 363n109
heroic, the, 223– 24
Hertz, Heinrich, 22
Hinduism, 36, 108, 109, 111– 12, 123. See also 
Vedas
Hofmannsthal, Hugo von, 86
Hohenheim, Philippus Aureolus Theophras-
tus Bombast von. See Paracelsus
Holbach, Baron d’ (Paul Henri Thiry), 73
Holbrook Jackson, George, 126
Hölderlin, Friedrich, 19, 63, 74, 84– 85, 86– 
89, 93, 291
Honigsheim, Paul, 289
Horkheimer, Max: Benjamin and, 228; on en-
lightenment, 8, 41, 59, 214, 239; Frankfurt 
School and, 9, 215; Klages and, 215, 220; 
on positivism, 242– 45, 253. See also Dia-
lectic of Enlightenment
Houdini, Harry, 305
Hubbard, L. Ron, 159. See also Scientology
Hugo, Victor, 305
humanism, 13
humanities, 33, 206. See also human sciences
humanity: domination of, 9, 10, 18, 216, 220, 
239, 315. See also colonialism; dehumani-
zation
human sciences, 5– 7, 17– 18, 33, 56, 59– 60, 
62, 96, 119, 174, 207, 270, 304, 308– 9,  
312
Hume, David, 123, 141, 171, 186, 297, 299
Huygens, Christiaan, 83
Hyde, Douglas, 129– 30
hypnotism, 184. See also mesmerism
idealism, 73, 171, 189, 221
ideology, 45, 128, 142, 147, 170, 216– 17; posi-
tivist critique of, 245, 250– 53
idolatry, 48– 49, 53, 71, 145
imperialism, 97, 128– 30, 146, 216, 217, 241, 314
India, 6, 23, 102, 111, 115– 19, 135; theosophy 
and, 123, 275; Weber on, 280
indigenous peoples, 128, 130, 176, 216, 314– 15; 
of Africa, 99; of America, 99; of Australia, 
6, 99, 142, 143
Indonesia, 23
industrialization, 4, 8, 151, 154, 183, 306
instrumental reason. See rationality: instru-
mental
International Psycho- Analytic Association, 
199
introjection, 204– 5, 207
Iran. See Persians
Ireland, 125– 26, 129, 130. See also Northern 
Ireland
Irigaray, Luce, 238
irrationality, 20, 215, 278– 79, 285; affectual, 
274; habitual, 273– 74
Islam, 36
Israel, Jonathan, 70
Italy, 2, 132
Jacobi, Friedrich (F. H.), 19, 67, 69– 74, 83, 
90, 97, 189
Jacobs, Joseph, 129
James, William, 3, 98, 162, 175, 190, 191, 205, 
264, 305
Jameson, Fredric, 310
Japan, 22
Jaspers, Karl, 289
Jaucourt, Louis de, 53
Jauss, Hans Robert, 7
Jean Paul, 68, 69, 74, 75
Jellinek, Dora, 293
Jena Romantics, 63, 287
Jevons, Frank Byron, 135
Jews, 20, 63, 70, 129, 153, 182, 193, 209, 210, 
225, 227, 229, 233, 249, 250, 259, 260, 264, 

Index 
403
267, 280, 290, 305, 384n156; Jewishness, 
197, 202, 205; and paranormal belief, 
327n40. See also anti- Semitism; Judaism
Joel, Karl, 191
Jones, Ernest, 197– 203, 205
Jones, George Cecil, 153
Josephson, Brian, 305
Judaism: Benjamin and, 226– 30; Cosmic 
Circle and, 210; de- divination and, 85– 86; 
folklore studies and, 129; Freud and, 193; 
Hegel and, 85– 86; mysticism and, 228; 
Spinoza and, 70; Weber and, 280. See also 
anti- Semitism; Kabbalah
Jung, Carl, 104, 179, 191– 93, 196– 99, 293
Kabbalah, 42, 43, 81– 82, 104, 163, 227, 228, 
230
Kafka, Franz, 270
Kalberg, Stephan, 272, 275
Kandinsky, Wassily, 230, 305
Kant, Immanuel, 20, 73, 74, 171, 184, 207– 8, 
247; Adorno and, 208; du Prel and, 189– 
91; enlightenment and, 53, 72; Freud and, 
189, 208; ghosts/spirits and, 185; magic 
and, 185; on the phenomenal/noumenal, 
186, 190, 206; Schopenhauer and, 188– 89; 
skepticism and, 299; Swedenborg and, 
185, 191; unconscious mind and, 186
Kantorowicz, Ernst, 290
Keightley, Thomas, 130
Kepler, Johannes, 42
Keynes, John Maynard, 43
Kipling, Rudyard, 138
Kippenberg, Hans, 295
Klages, Ludwig, 20, 209– 25, 260; Adorno 
and, 215, 220, 228, 233, 238, 239; animism 
and, 219; anti- Semitism and, 225; Bataille 
and, 237, 238; Benjamin and, 20, 209, 215, 
227– 28, 230– 34, 236, 238, 239; Cosmic 
Circle and, 210– 11, 212– 13, 276, 290; 
cosmic eros/rush and, 221– 24; disenchant-
ment and, 216, 220; esotericism and, 212; 
Geist and, 217– 20; Horkheimer and, 215, 
220; magical philosophy and, 209, 213– 15; 
Schiller and, 77, 216; Schuler and, 212; 
science and, 216; Weber and, 216, 276, 285, 
297, 299
Koestler, Arthur, 305
Kohn, Eduardo, 5
Körner, Christian Gottfried, 82
Kosmikers. See Cosmic Circle
Koyré, Alexandre, 42, 59, 92
Krech, Volkhard, 296
Kreisel, Georg, 264
Kripal, Jeffrey, 23– 24, 37, 122, 322n74, 
324nn8– 9, 328n55, 329n68, 346n6, 
353n161
Kristeva, Julia, 237
Lacan, Jacques, 206, 215, 238
Landauer, Gustav, 230
Lang, Andrew, 98, 101, 128– 29, 135, 141, 151
language: philosophy of, 105, 112– 13. See also 
linguistics
Laplace, Pierre- Simon, 313
Lash, Scott, 11
Latin America, 23. See also names of specific 
countries
Latour, Bruno, 3, 6, 41, 308, 310
LaVey, Anton, 159
Le Fort, Gertrud von, 293
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 43, 81, 112, 305
Leiss, William, 45
LeMahieu, Michael, 243
Lepenies, Wolf, 290
Lessing, Gotthold, 69– 70, 72, 73
Lessing, Theodor, 225
Lévi, Éliphas, 19, 101– 11, 113– 16, 120, 122– 23, 
152; Crowley and, 161– 62, 168– 69, 172; 
Scholem and, 229
Lévi- Strauss, Claude, 176
Lévy- Bruhl, Lucien, 255
libertinism, 58, 158
Liebstökl, Hans, 236
linguistics, 116, 118– 19. See also language: 
philosophy of

404 Index
literature, 12, 96, 305
Locke, John, 112
logical positivism. See under positivism
logocentrism, 214, 221, 222– 23, 238
logos, 104– 5, 112– 14, 158, 225, 311
Lovejoy, Arthur, 42
Löwenthal, Leo, 8, 9
Löwith, Karl, 215
Lucifer, 102. See also devil
Luhrmann, Tanya, 6, 219, 319n24
Lukács, Georg, 8, 215
Luther, Martin, 48, 295
Lutheranism, 48, 54, 67, 71, 108, 264, 294, 295
Lyon, David, 36
Lyotard, Jean- François, 22, 237, 241, 242, 316
Mach, Ernst, 241, 305
Machen, Arthur, 157
magi. See Zoroastrian Magi
magic: Bacon and, 44– 46, 50; belief in, 52, 
126, 302; black, 52, 188; Blavatsky and, 
117; Cosmic Circle and, 212– 13; decline of, 
4, 11, 18, 19, 32, 41; du Prel and, 190; Lévi 
and, 102– 3, 106, 108; natural, 56– 57, 61, 
268; opposition to, 49, 53; philosophes 
on, 55– 56; positivist, 254– 58; revivals, 6, 
16, 18, 20, 100, 152, 154; Schopenhauer 
on, 187– 88; as a term, 15, 50, 61, 99, 140; 
theosophy and, 115. See also magician; 
religion- science- magic trinary; and under 
Crowley, Aleister; Frazer, James George; 
Freud, Sigmund; Kant, Immanuel
magician, 3, 6, 19, 20, 24, 27, 41– 46, 50, 57, 
61, 104, 107, 109, 112, 114, 120, 127, 143– 44, 
153– 60, 166, 170, 172, 174– 76, 192, 219, 224, 
238, 256– 57, 260, 269, 280, 282, 295, 296, 
301, 305– 6, 308, 310, 314. See also Agrippa 
von Nettesheim, Heinrich Cornelius; 
Bacon, Francis; Bruno, Giordano; Crow-
ley, Aleister; Dee, John; Houdini, Harry; 
Klages, Ludwig; Lévi, Éliphas; Neuburg, 
Victor; Newton, Isaac
magick. See under Crowley, Aleister
Malaysia, 23
Malebranche, Nicolas, 71
Malinowski, Bronislaw, 98
Mann, Thomas, 261
Marcus, Greil, 23
Marcuse, Herbert, 8, 9
Margel, Serge, 14
Marx, Karl, 75, 96, 193, 246, 301
Marxism, 226, 230, 237, 238, 246, 249, 251– 
52, 255, 268
materialism, 5, 70, 73, 97, 100– 101, 103, 106, 
117, 143, 146, 201, 212, 221, 237, 304, 309; 
Cosmic Circle’s criticism of, 210; Frazer 
and, 148– 50
mathematics, 76, 213, 245, 252, 260, 283, 
330n14
Mathers, Moina, 2, 157
Mathers, S. L. MacGregor, 157, 158
matriarchy, 164, 210, 218, 224, 239
matter: despiritualized, 5, 41, 76, 83, 106, 149, 
171, 216, 229
Maugham, W. Somerset, 158
Mauss, Marcel, 6, 98
Maxwell, James Clerk, 313
Mbembe, Achille, 28, 302
McCormack, Thomas, 108
mechanism, 3, 43, 50, 51, 57, 58, 71, 74, 83, 85, 
92, 106, 201, 268, 304, 313
medicine, 54, 83, 184
mediums (psychic), 1– 3, 22, 23, 24, 56, 95, 
106, 116, 119, 189, 198– 99, 261– 63, 383n133
Mencken, F. Carson, 26, 27, 29– 30
Mendelssohn, Moses, 69
Menger, Karl, 258, 261, 262, 263
Merchant, Carolyn, 45
mesmerism, 190, 260, 313, 349n71. See also 
animal magnetism
metaphysical religion, 23
metaphysics, 21, 65, 113, 177, 242, 243; anti- , 
209, 213, 244– 54, 255
Mettrie, Julien Offrey de La, 305
Mexico, 23
Meyer, Stefan, 261

Index 
405
Michelet, Jules, 90
Miller, Hugh, 136, 137
mind- body- soul triad, 217– 18, 222
miracles, 24, 29, 55– 56, 72, 97, 127, 305; 
cessation of, 139, 151
Mitrinović, Dimitrije, 230
modernity: concept of, 3– 5, 7, 8, 11, 16, 17, 
61– 62, 91, 92, 124, 128, 304, 306– 7, 309– 10, 
312, 316; critique of, 214– 16, 239, 308, 309; 
disenchantment narrative of, 1, 4– 8, 13, 
17– 19, 36– 37, 215; mysticism and, 182– 83; 
as a term, 7, 91, 306
Molitor, Franz Joseph, 227, 229
monotheism, 16, 80, 86, 99, 120– 21, 141, 149, 
150, 165, 284, 286, 303
monsters, 24, 186, 207, 213– 15, 325n11
Montague, Charles Edwart, 150– 51
Monte Verità, 21, 269, 275– 76, 289, 293, 298
Montorgueil, Georges, 1
Morgenstern, Oskar, 264
Morley, John, 126
Mountain of Truth. See Monte Verità
Müller, Friedrich Max, 6, 19, 101– 3, 105, 
107– 18, 120, 122– 23, 141, 181, 304; attack on 
materialism, 350n79; Crowley and, 161– 62, 
169, 175; theory of solar mythology, 361n67. 
See also under religious studies; theosophy
Müller, Max. See Müller, Friedrich Max
Münchener psychologische Gesellschaft 
(Munich Psychological Society), 190
Murray, Margaret Alice, 176
mysticism, 19, 20, 121, 162, 175, 190– 91, 312; 
Benjamin and, 229; Christianity and, 108, 
111, 112, 114, 269; in Europe, 209; in Ger-
many, 189, 265, 294– 95; Jacobi and, 189; 
Judaism and, 228; modernity and, 182– 83; 
rational, 111– 12. See also experience, mysti-
cal. See also under Freud, Sigmund; Hegel, 
G. W. F.; Schelling, F. W. J.; Weber, Max
myth: as a term, 61, 63, 320n31; of the end of 
myth, 19, 66, 69, 74, 76, 80, 88– 90, 310. See 
also mythology
mythology, 63– 66, 90, 361n67
Nancy, Jean- Luc, 193
nationalism, 64, 251, 253, 270, 306
National Socialism. See Nazism
Native Americans, 99
natural philosophy, 14, 46, 48– 50, 54, 56, 59, 
72, 80, 83, 93, 308, 313
natural sciences, 5, 6, 60, 95. See also science
nature: alienation from, 4, 79– 80, 83– 84, 
85, 87, 92, 93, 215; animation of, 50, 54; 
Christianity and, 80, 84, 216; de- animation 
of, 3, 89, 92, 216; de- deification of, 39, 
84, 85, 310; de- spiritualization of, 5, 19, 
45, 50– 51, 88, 182; Diderot on, 55– 57; 
disenchantment of, 18, 61; domination of, 
9– 10, 11, 20, 41, 43, 44– 45, 50– 51, 88, 214, 
216, 217, 219, 220, 221, 234, 239, 245, 315; 
mother, 218– 19; objectification of, 10, 219; 
technology and, 234
Nazism, 59, 213, 225, 249, 253, 390n113; and 
the occult, 28, 311, 393nn18– 19
necromancy, 23, 24, 25, 27, 31– 32. See also 
spiritualism
Neider, Heinrich, 266
Nelböck, Johann, 240
Nelson, Geoffrey, 36
Neoplatonism, 104, 112– 14, 117, 147
Nestle, Wilhelm, 91
Neuburg, Victor, 153
Neurath, Otto, 20, 243, 245– 58, 260, 266, 
268; and animism, 255– 56; and science, 
257
New Age, 24, 29, 36, 37, 116, 229, 230, 313, 315
new religious movements, 36, 175
Newton, Isaac, 18, 41, 43, 59, 83, 84, 313
Nietzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm, 19, 42, 63, 
67, 68, 69, 75, 94, 97, 176, 214, 270, 284; 
Christianity and, 164, 225; Cosmic Circle 
and, 210, 238; myth and, 92; skepticism 
and, 193; Übermensch and, 265; Vienna 
Circle and, 246
nihilism, 19, 66, 68, 69, 73, 74, 76, 83, 93, 
95, 306– 7, 310; postwar, 151; spiritualism 
and, 97

406 Index
nineteenth century, 6, 13, 14, 16, 37, 58, 60, 61, 
93, 126, 206, 311; Anglophone world, 95; 
Europe, 76, 79, 84, 90, 94, 96; Germany, 
63, 65, 67, 68, 75, 88, 95, 209, 210, 310; 
spiritualism in, 96– 97, 151
Noeggerath, Felix, 228
Nordau, Max, 20, 182– 84, 208
North America, 4– 5, 17– 18, 36, 60, 304, 310, 
314– 15. See also names of specific countries
Northern Ireland, 30
Nostradamus, 154
Novalis, 74, 76– 77, 81, 84, 88
Occult. See occultism
occultism: movements, 96; revivals, 7, 20, 33, 
159, 179, 182, 184, 206, 208, 249, 270, 309, 
311, 312, 315; as a term, 61, 97, 99, 102, 103, 
192. See also under Freud, Sigmund
occult sciences. See occultism
occulture, 23, 324n8
Oehlenschläger, Adam, 85, 88
Oetinger, Friedrich Christoph, 81
Olcott, Henry, 116, 122– 23, 315
Oldenberg, Hermann, 135
Oppenheimer, J. Robert, 43, 313
Ordo Templi Orientis, 154, 159, 269
Orientalism, 19, 22, 70, 97, 104, 117, 123, 176, 
301, 359n11
Österreichische Gesellschaft für Psychische 
Forschung (ASPR). See Austrian Society 
for Psychical Research
Otto, Rudolf, 98
Ouspensky, P. D., 123
paganism, 109, 209; anti- , 14, 48– 49, 53, 54, 
58, 61, 62, 80– 81, 85, 88, 90, 99, 276, 310, 
311; Catholicism and, 133; Christianity 
and, 169; folklore studies and, 129, 131; 
idolatry and, 48– 49; neo- , 7, 21, 36, 165, 
211, 265, 269, 276, 305. See also under 
Crowley, Aleister; Frazer, James George
Palágyi, Menyhért, 225
Palladino, Eusapia, 1, 2– 3
Pannwitz, Rudolf, 306– 7
panpsychism. See pantheism
pantheism, 34, 69, 72, 74, 76, 85, 102, 297, 
305; controversy, 69– 77, 81, 92
Paracelsus, 54, 55, 57, 238
paranormal: as a term, 24, 34, 325n15. See also 
names of specific categories
paranormal research. See psychical research
Parsons, Jack, 159
Parsons, Talcott, 287, 290
Partridge, Christopher, 23, 36
patriarchy, 164– 65, 214, 239, 241
Paul, Jean. See Jean Paul
Pauli, Wolfgang, 313
Peirce, Charles Sanders, 305
Perrin, Jean Baptiste, 2, 305
Persians, 44, 46, 310
Pfleiderer, Otto, 191
philology, 60, 95, 107, 115, 116, 123. See also 
linguistics
philosophes, 18, 19, 51– 58, 62, 92, 246; God 
and, 51– 52, 55, 56, 66, 71, 72, 121; natural 
magic and, 268; religious studies and, 124; 
science and, 96, 106; superstition and, 61, 
124; theosophy and, 123. See also d’Alem-
bert, Jean le Rond; Diderot, Denis
philosophy: as a term, 51, 59, 60, 61. See also 
analytic philosophy; continental philos-
ophy; natural philosophy
physics, 2, 5, 41, 43, 59, 71, 74, 312
Plato, 248, 252, 253
Plutarch, 80, 310
Poiret, Pierre, 54
Poland, 2
politics: in Europe, 76; in folklore studies, 
130; in Germany, 69, 74– 76; and logical 
positivists, 246– 53, 268; and paranormal 
beliefs, 28; and science, 33. See also fas-
cism; Nazism; totalitarianism
polytheism, 99, 141, 149, 283. See also pagan-
ism

Index 
407
Popper, Karl, 155, 267
positivism, 20– 21, 65, 86, 254– 55, 258, 263– 
64, 266, 267– 68, 311, 314; critique of, 240– 
45; dispute, 267; logical, 20, 207, 240– 43, 
246– 49, 251, 253, 254, 268; politics and, 
250. See also Vienna Circle; and under 
Adorno, Theodor; Frazer, James George; 
Freud, Sigmund; Horkheimer, Max
postcolonialism, 16– 17, 79, 307, 315
postmodernism, 35, 36, 44, 59, 66, 91, 209, 
226, 306– 7, 312, 316
poststructuralism, 5, 176, 209, 213, 215, 221– 
22, 225, 238, 242, 312
precognition, 24, 263, 265. See also psychic 
ability
Price, Harry, 261
primitive (concept of), 17, 79– 80, 83, 84, 94, 
98– 101, 104, 128, 129, 181, 203– 5, 207, 214, 
216, 255, 312; in folklore studies, 132– 33, 
141– 43, 147. See also savage (concept of)
Procter, Bryan, 85
projection: astral, 20; psychological, 158, 193, 
203– 5, 207
prophecy, 22, 33, 42, 43, 109, 155, 184, 256, 
291, 297– 98, 301
Protestantism, 4, 14, 29, 47– 48, 58, 61, 67– 68, 
129, 139, 257– 58; anti- paganism and, 276; 
religious studies and, 95, 107; Weber on, 
270– 71, 280, 291, 296. See also cessation of 
miracles; Protestant Reformation
Protestant Reformation, 13, 48, 65, 92, 137, 
293– 94, 303. See also Protestantism; 
secularization
Przibram, Karl, 261
pseudoscience, 15, 145, 201, 312, 322n69. See 
also demarcation problem
psychic ability, 24, 29. See also precognition; 
telekinesis; telepathy
psychical research, 2, 16, 19, 151, 159, 183, 
190, 200– 201, 309; in Austria, 260– 63; by 
Carnap, 265– 66; by James, 264; by logical 
positivists, 268, 311
psychics, 1, 24, 26– 27, 29, 56, 119, 189, 198
psychoanalysis, 20, 96, 179, 180, 181– 82, 184, 
191, 193, 194, 196, 199, 200– 202, 206
Ptolemy, 54
Pulver, Max, 227
Puritanism, 49, 270– 71, 280, 283, 285, 286, 
300. See also Protestantism
Putnam, Hilary, 242
queer theory, 12
Quine, W. V. O., 242
Rabelais, François, 158
racialism, 117, 129, 184
racism. See anti- Semitism
Radkau, Joachim, 287, 288
Rang, Florens Christian, 230
Rank, Otto, 179, 199
rationalism, 6, 8, 11, 61, 73, 81, 94– 95, 123, 
189, 216, 291, 306. See also irrationality; 
rationality
rationality, 5, 8, 9, 65, 66, 91, 92, 95, 99, 154, 
215, 221, 298, 386nn19– 20; formalized or 
institutionalized, 273– 74, 284, 301; instru-
mental, 4, 18, 47, 214, 239, 244– 45, 272– 73, 
275, 277– 78, 280, 282, 304, 306, 314; 
technological, 9; theoretical or intellectual, 
272– 73, 281– 84, 286, 299, 301. See also 
irrationality; rationalism
realism: aesthetic, 313– 14; agential, 5
reason, instrumental. See rationality: instru-
mental
re- enchantment, 87, 93, 106, 150, 172, 175, 176, 
183, 236, 239, 270, 286, 291, 298, 301, 316. 
See also disenchantment; enchantment
Regardie, Israel, 159, 175, 176
regulative ideal, 3, 16, 308– 10
reification, 219– 20, 222, 238
reincarnation, 25– 26
religion: as category, 12– 14, 60, 99, 121, 124; 
comparative, 94– 95, 104, 105, 107, 109, 
119, 154; Crowley and, 160– 63, 166, 169, 

408 Index
171, 172; Frazer and, 133, 134, 140– 41, 143, 
145– 47, 150, 152, 154, 169; Freud and, 161, 
193, 195– 96; in Système Figuré, 51; revivals 
of, 4, 18, 37, 66, 95, 124. See also religious 
studies
religion- science binary, 4, 13– 16, 18, 19, 60– 
62, 92, 95, 97, 134, 143, 186, 196, 249, 309, 
320n64
religion- science- magic trinary, 13– 16, 19, 100, 
103, 154, 166– 67, 281
religion- science- superstition trinary, 13– 16
religion- superstition binary, 14– 15, 47, 49, 
124, 309
religious studies, 6, 11– 13, 14, 19, 51, 94, 98, 
115, 119; and concept of God, 120– 21, 162; 
Crowley and, 160– 63, 169; discipline of, 
120, 122, 124, 175; Lévi and, 115; Müller 
and, 101– 3, 107– 11, 115; mysticism and, 122; 
reflexive, 11– 13
Renaissance (myth of), 19, 65, 67, 90– 92, 
93, 311
repression, 17, 35, 100, 147, 179, 181, 245
Reuß, Theodor, 159, 269
Reventlow, Franziska zu, 211– 12, 276, 298
Rhŷs, John, 129
Richet, Charles, 2
Richter, Johann Paul Friedrich. See Jean Paul
Rimbaud, Arthur, 310
Rist, Johann von, 67
Ritzer, George, 35
Rolland, Romain, 195
Romanticism, 67, 86– 88, 107, 123. See also 
Jena Romantics
Romantic Spiral, 86– 88, 145
Rorty, Richard, 207
Rosenau, Pauline, 34, 36
Rosenzweig, Franz, 63
Rosicrucianism, 42, 156
Ross, Sydney, 59
Rossi, Paolo, 46
Rothe, Richard, 76
Royce, Josiah, 305
Russell, Bertrand, 267
Russia, 2, 33
Salin, Edgar, 290
Satan. See Church of Satan; devil; Lucifer
Saussure, Ferdinand de, 115, 119, 238
savage (concept of), 20, 79, 84, 94, 98– 99, 
101, 128– 31, 141– 45, 181, 203– 5, 281– 82, 
312. See also primitive (concept of)
Scharff, Robert, 242
Schelling, F. W. J., 63, 64, 74, 81, 87, 88, 90; 
and mysticism, 189
Schiller, Friedrich, 19, 67, 69, 74, 76– 93, 181; 
Frazer and, 77, 150; Freud and, 77; “The 
Gods of Greece,” 77– 89, 93; Hegel and, 
85; Klages and, 77, 216; Müller and, 107; 
nature and, 80– 81; Weber and, 67, 150, 
271, 298
Schlegel, Friedrich, 63, 64, 69, 74
Schlick, Moritz, 240, 245, 246, 262, 263, 265, 
266
Schmitt, Carl, 228
Schmoller, Gustav von, 284– 85
Schneider, Rudi, 260– 61
Schneider, Willi, 260– 61
Scholem, Gershom, 228– 29, 293
Schopenhauer, Arthur, 20, 187– 89, 208, 305
Schrenck- Notzing, Albert von, 260, 266
Schuler, Alfred, 210, 211, 212, 215, 228, 232, 
260– 61
Schweitzer, Albert, 305
science: as a term, 59– 60, 61, 93; spiritual-
ization of, 16, 309; studies, 14; supernat-
ural, 61. See also under Crowley, Aleister; 
Frazer, James George; Freud, Sigmund; 
Klages, Ludwig; Neurath, Otto; philoso-
phes; politics; Weber, Max; and see also 
human sciences; natural sciences; religion- 
science binary; religion- science- magic tri-
nary; religion- science- superstition trinary; 
science- magic binary; science- superstition 
binary; sociology
science- magic binary, 43, 61, 62, 65, 257
religion (continued)

Index 
409
science- superstition binary, 14– 15, 49, 309
scientific method, 14, 18, 43, 46, 59, 60, 173
Scientific Revolution (myth of), 5, 8, 14, 18, 
54, 59, 61, 65, 66, 92, 137, 308, 311
Scientology, 159
Scotland, 96, 129, 137, 139
séances, 1– 3, 5, 97, 101, 119, 151, 198, 238, 261, 
263, 265, 266
Second World War, 58, 311
secularization, 4, 7, 18, 30– 31, 33– 36, 61, 66– 
67, 70, 76, 90, 93, 94, 103, 123– 24, 304, 315; 
distinction from disenchantment, 4, 18, 30, 
33– 35, 123– 24, 280, 304; Frazer on, 134, 
147, 152; in Germany, 75; logical positivism 
and, 249; of religious studies, 107, 121
Segal, Robert, 100
Sera Circle, 265
sexuality, 211, 214
shamanism, 7, 13, 302– 3
Simmel, Georg, 95– 96, 290
skepticism, 34, 95, 171– 72, 174, 181, 186, 190, 
238, 299, 300. See also under Frazer, James 
George; Freud, Sigmund
Sloterdijk, Peter, 238
socialism, 102, 246, 249– 50
social sciences. See sociology
social theory, 6, 17, 237, 243, 307, 313. See also 
sociology
Society for Psychical Research. See British 
Society for Psychical Research
sociology, 5– 8, 11– 13, 17– 18, 29, 65, 128– 29, 
151, 174, 308, 312; reflexive, 11– 12. See also 
social theory
Socrates, 207
sorcery, 32, 48, 193– 94, 258. See also magic
South Africa, 23
Soviet Union, 34. See also Russia
spellbooks, 50, 56, 154, 155, 167, 227, 310
spells, 30, 32, 33, 42, 57, 159, 163, 169, 184, 
213, 252, 275, 278, 280. See also charms
Spence, Lewis, 311
Spencer, Herbert, 96, 105, 141, 160, 161
Spencer, Walter Baldwin, 134
Spengler, Oswald, 371n42
Spinoza, Baruch, 66, 69, 70, 72, 74, 149,  
305
Spinozism, 70, 81, 268
spirits, 18, 19, 33, 34, 42, 49, 50, 55, 89, 141; 
belief in, 95; evil, 52– 53, 58; and magic, 
143– 44; nineteenth century interest in, 
96; science of, 52– 58. See also ghosts; 
spiritualism
spiritualism, 1– 3, 5, 6, 19, 23, 26– 27, 29, 
31, 37, 62, 89, 95, 305, 312, 313, 347n16; 
in Europe, 96, 209, 346n11; Freud and, 
197– 99, 201, 203, 367n74; Golden Dawn 
and, 157; Lévi and, 106; nineteenth century 
rise of, 96– 98, 100– 101, 122, 126, 144, 151; 
Nordau and, 183– 84; in United States, 96
Sprengel, Fräulein, 157
Stauth, Georg, 228, 375nn121– 22
Steiger, Isabelle de, 157
Stirner, Max, 75
St. John, James Augustus, 128
Strauss, Leo, 228
Strong, Charles, 305
supernatural: as a term, 33– 34
superstition: Frazer and, 133, 143; rational-
ization of, 6; as a term, 15, 34, 44, 47– 50, 
52– 53, 61, 62, 102– 3, 124, 308, 312; Tylor 
and, 99. See also religion- science- magic 
trinary; religion- superstition binary; 
science- superstition binary
Suzuki, D. T., 120
swastika, 370n15
Swedenborg, Emanuel, 96, 102, 185, 191, 211
Switzerland. See Monte Verità
Tantra, 159, 315
Taoism, 275
tarot cards, 104– 5, 115, 169, 173
Tauler, Johannes, 294– 95
Taylor, Charles, 4
technology, 4, 9, 22, 214, 217, 257, 315. See also 
rationality: technological
telekinesis, 261– 62. See also psychic ability

410 Index
telepathy, 24– 26, 30– 31, 231, 238, 263, 265. 
See also psychic ability
television, 24, 38
theology: comparative, 104, 107, 114; disci-
pline of, 94, 104
théosophes, 53– 55, 57, 124
Theosophical Society, 54, 110, 115– 16, 118, 
119– 20, 122– 23, 159, 172, 315, 377n170; 
popularity of, 96
theosophy, 6, 28, 37, 54– 55, 61, 67, 76, 95, 98, 
115– 16, 118, 305, 312; Christian mysticism 
and, 114; comparative theology and, 104, 
110– 11; India and, 123, 315; Lévi and, 
122– 23; linguistics and, 119; Müller and, 
122– 23; nineteenth century rise of, 151; 
religious studies, 119– 20; Schiller and, 
77, 81– 82; as a term, 97, 102, 110. See also 
théosophes; Theosophical Society
Thirring, Hans, 261– 62, 266
Thomas, Keith, 22, 33
Thoreau, Henry David, 305
Thorne, Christian, 12
Thule Society, 250
time: conceptions of, 79– 80
Timm, Hermann, 72
Tinker Bell, 136
Tomczyk, Stanisława, 3
Tönnies, Ferdinand, 287, 288, 289
totalitarianism, 9, 253, 311. See also fascism; 
Nazism
trance. See ecstasy
Troeltsch, Ernst, 293
Turing, Alan, 305
Turner, Bryan S., 228, 375nn121– 22
twentieth century, 36, 37, 56, 58, 176, 311– 12; 
spiritualism in, 96, 151
Tylor, E. B. (Edward Burnett), 19, 98– 101, 
118, 120, 141, 144; Freud and, 193; on God, 
99; magic and, 152; Müller and, 122– 23; 
religion and, 152
UFOs (unidentified flying objects), 27, 31
Uganda, 23
unconscious, the, 20, 180, 186, 190, 196, 201, 
204, 206
Unger, Erich, 229
United Kingdom, 7, 24, 30– 33, 129– 30, 136– 37, 
142, 310; spiritualism in, 184. See also En-
gland; Ireland; Northern Ireland; Scotland
United States, 2, 23– 33, 34– 35, 96, 176. See 
also North America
urbanization, 8, 128, 131, 137, 138, 151, 154, 183, 
184, 306
Ur- images. See dialectical images
Vásquez, Manuel, 5
Vedas, 101, 107, 108, 111– 12, 132, 135, 180. See 
also Hinduism
Venel, Gabriel François, 55
Vienna Circle, 20, 127, 176, 239– 43, 245– 49, 
251– 54, 260– 61, 263– 68, 311; and Frank-
furt School, 253, 267; Vienna Psychoana-
lytic Society, 198
Vienna School. See Vienna Circle
Vietnam, 23
vitalism, 3, 83, 84, 101, 106, 211, 212, 214, 218, 
268. See also animism
Voltaire, 53
von Mises, Richard, 254, 264, 265
Vonnegut, Kurt, 144
Wachter, Johann, 70
Wacquant, Loïc, 11
Wagner, Richard, 63
Wagner- Jauregg, Julius, 261
Waismann, Friedrich, 246
Waite, Arthur Edward (A. E.), 157, 229
Wales, 129
Wallace, Alfred Russel, 305
Wasserstrom, Steven, 122, 228
Wassilko von Serecki, Zoë, 262
Weber, Alfred, 276, 291, 293
Weber, Marianne, 276, 287, 288– 89, 290, 
291– 92
Weber, Max: animism and, 278; on capi-
talism and, 285, 286, 291, 293– 94, 298, 

Index 
411
301; charisma and, 279, 292– 93, 297– 301; 
disenchantment and, 4, 19, 21, 33, 35, 86, 
92, 127, 149, 151, 154, 208, 222, 257, 269– 84, 
286– 87, 293, 296, 298– 301, 305; ethics 
and, 283– 86, 295, 297, 299– 301; Frazer 
and, 152; George and, 290– 93, 298; iron 
cage and, 21, 284– 86, 301; Klages and, 216, 
276, 285, 297, 299; magic and, 270– 71, 
274– 75, 278– 81, 286, 296, 299; Monte Ver-
ità and, 269, 275– 77; mysticism and, 269, 
270, 287, 289, 292– 98, 301; Neurath and, 
250; positivism and, 248; The Protestant 
Ethic, 92, 151, 275, 280– 81, 285, 293– 96; 
rationality and, 11, 21, 35, 270– 75, 277– 85, 
295– 301, 302; religion and, 21, 270, 278– 81, 
286, 287– 89, 293– 96; Schiller and, 67, 77, 
149– 50, 271; science and, 297; social action 
and, 272; technology and, 278
Webster, Charles, 43, 54
Weigel, Valentin, 54
Weissl, Frieda, 263
West, the, 108, 301, 302, 305. See also names of 
specific continents and countries
Westcott, William Wynn, 156– 57
Weston, Jessie, 176, 363n109
Whitehead, Alfred North, 219, 305
Whorf, Benjamin Lee, 119
Wicca, 23, 28, 154, 159, 305
Winckelmann, Johannes, 275, 388n52, 
390n110
Winckelmann, Johann Joachim, 78, 79
Windelband, Wilhelm, 91
Winterstein, Alfred, 262
witchcraft, 24– 29, 31– 33, 36, 48, 52, 56, 
90, 131– 32, 144, 176, 259, 314, 363n109; 
modern, 23; persecution of, 29, 48, 52, 
56, 90, 125– 26, 139, 271, 280, 300; the 
repressed and, 100. See also Wicca
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 189, 207, 243– 44, 247, 
266– 67; interpretation of Frazer, 268
Wolff, Christian, 81
Wolfskehl, Karl, 210, 211, 225, 228, 232, 290
Wolters, Friedrich Wilhelm, 210, 290, 292
Woodman, William Robert, 157
World War. See First World War; Second 
World War
Yates, Frances, 42
Yeats, W. B. (William Butler), 138, 157, 305
yoga, 23, 115, 119, 162, 238
Young, Ella, 130
Žižek, Slavoj, 206
Zöllner, Johann Friedrich, 72
Zoroastrian Magi, 102, 105, 310
Zugun, Eleonora, 258– 60, 262

